Pastoral CTH 622 Theology Course GuideCTH622 PASTORAL THEOLOGY COURSE GUIDE CTH622 PASTORAL THEOLOGY Course Developer Rev.
Fr.
Dr. Anthony Iffen Umoren, MSP National Missionary Seminary of St. Paul Gwagwalada, Abuja Course Writer Rev.
Fr.
Dr. Anthony Iffen Umoren, MSP National Missionary Seminary of St. Paul Gwagwalada, Abuja Course Editor Dr. A. O. Dairo Olabisi Onabanjo University Ago Iwoye Course Coordinator Dr. Jacob A. Owolabi National Open University of Nigeria Lagos Programme Leader Dr. Olubiyi A. Adewale National Open University of Nigeria Lagos NATIONAL OPEN UNIVERSITY OF NIGERIA iiCTH622 PASTORAL THEOLOGY National Open University of Nigeria Headquarters: 14/16 Ahmadu Bello Way Victoria Island Lagos Abuja Office: NOUN Building No.5 Dar es Salaam Street Off Aminu Kano Crescent Wuse II Abuja, Nigeria e-mail: centralinfo@nou.edu.ng URL: www.nou.edu.ng National Open University of Nigeria 2007 First Printed 2007 ISBN: 978-058-640-7 All Rights Reserved Printed by For National Open University of Nigeria iiiCTH622 PASTORAL THEOLOGY TABLE OF CONTENT PAGES Introduction …………………………………………… 1 What you will learn in this course …………………….. 1-2 Course Aims …………………………………………... 2 Course Objectives …………………………………….. 2-3 Working through this course ………………………….. 3 Course Materials ……………………………….……… 3-4 Study Units …………………………………………….
4 Set Textbooks ………………………………………… 5 Assignment File ………………..................................... 5 Presentation Schedule ………………………………… 5 Assessment …………………………………………….
6 Tutor Marked Assignments …………………………… 6 Final Examination and Grading ……………………….
6 Course Marking Scheme ……………………………… 7 Course Overview............................................................. 7 How to get the most from this course …….................... 8 Reading Section ……………………………………….
8-9 Tutors and Tutorials ………………………................... 10 Summary ……………………………………………… 10 ivCTH622 PASTORAL THEOLOGY Introduction CTH 622 ‘Pastoral Theology’ is a one semester, two units Post graduate (PG) level course.
Presently, it is a requirement for those who wish to obtain a post graduate diploma in Christian theology.
The course will consist of fifteen units, divided into three modules.
Module one discusses Notion and Nature of Pastoral Theology.
Module two discusses Biblical Foundations for Pastoral Ministry, while Module three discusses Issues in Pastoral Theology.
The materials have been developed to suit a Nigerian studying at a distance.
This course guide tells you briefly what the course is about, what course materials you will be using and how you are to use them.
It provides some general guidelines for the amount of time you might be spending in order to successfully complete each unit of the course.
It also gives you some guidance on your tutor-marked assignments, details of which are to be found in a separate ‘Assignment file’.
The course involves regular tutorials and you are advised to attend the sessions.
What you Will Learn in this Course This course does not presume that you have a pre-knowledge of pastoral theology.
As a result, you are going to be assisted to build up a repertoire of knowledge on what pastoral theology is all about.
You will come to realize that pastoral theology is not just an academic discipline, but necessary for daily living and spiritual life.
You will come to appreciate that even your little Christian contributions towards changing the life of another for the better are part and parcel of pastoral ministry, which is the responsibility of every Christian.
The course will be ecumenical in its approach.
In this approach, it will not seek to adopt the theology or pastoral practice of any particular Church or denomination.
Neither will it use the official documents on pastoral ministry of any particular Church or denomination.
Emphasis will also not be laid on pastoral issues that appear to have a singular appeal to any particular Christian Church or denomination, except by way of illustration.
Rather, the course will seek to take a centrist approach, emphasizing issues and areas of common pastoral interest to the generality of Christians.
The course content will take you first through the definition and general notion of pastoral theology, then through its methodology and specific nature as a study in the principles of pastoral ministry.
Your understanding of the expected qualities and role of the pastoral minister will also increase, especially in relation to the demands of pastoral leadership.
The course will go on to explore the biblical foundations for pastoral ministry.
Beginning with a study of the pastoral ministry of Old 1CTH622 PASTORAL THEOLOGY Testament priests and prophets, it will go into a deep analysis of pastoral ministry in the New Testament, with particular reference to the ministry of Jesus, and ministry in the early Christian community.
The aim of the study of the biblical foundations is to securely situate pastoral ministry, which is the major goal of pastoral theology, in its biblical context as a revealed reality.
God cares for his people in different ways and it is also God’s will that his people should minister to one another in the name of God.
Further in the course, you will come to study certain theological and practical principles that will enable you to exercise pastoral ministry on your own.
In this regard, you will come to learn about the theory and practice of ministering through the word, prayer and sacrament.
Other areas of pastoral study will include pastoral administration, pastoral counseling, crisis ministry, and ministry to the wider society.
You, therefore, have an exciting course in pastoral theology ahead of you!
Try and complement what you will learn in this course with your personal reflections, and take time to put what you study and reflect on into practice.
A general bibliography of all the reference works used in preparing the course is given towards the end of this course guide.
Hopefully, your use of these will enable you to deepen your knowledge in certain areas of your interest, which the course content may barely treat.
Again, you will notice that there are many biblical references and quotations given in the course.
Please note that all the biblical quotations used in this course are taken from: (1990) The New Revised Standard Version (NRSV), Nashville: Thomas Nelson Publishers.
Course Aims The aim of the course can be summarized as follow: The general aim of the course is to acquaint you with an academic and practical understanding of pastoral theology Course Objectives In order to achieve the aim listed above, the course sets overall objectives.
In addition, each unit has its own specific objectives, which are always outlined at the beginning of that unit.
You should read them before you start working through the unit.
It is necessary to refer to them during your study of the unit, to check on your progress.
Also, after completing a unit, you should glance through the unit objectives.
This will enable you to be sure that you have done what was required of you by the unit.
Listed below are the wider objectives of the course as a whole.
By meeting these objectives, you will have achieved the aims of the course as a whole.
On successful completion of the course, you should be able to: 2CTH622 PASTORAL THEOLOGY • Define pastoral theology.
• Discuss the nature of pastoral theology • State the methods used in doing pastoral theology.
• Explain the vocation and role of the pastoral minister.
• Appreciate the importance of the pastoral minister as leader.
• Discuss the pastoral ministry of Old Testament priests and prophets.
• Highlight the practice of pastoral ministry by Jesus and the early Christian community.
• Itemize the process of ministering through the word, prayer and sacrament.
• Practicalize the skills in pastoral administration, pastoral counseling, crisis ministry and ministry in the wider society.
Working through this course To complete this course, you are required to read the study units, read the recommended books and read other materials provided by the National Open University of Nigeria (NOUN), which will help you achieve the objectives of the course.
Each unit contains some self- assessment exercises, and at points in the course, you are required to submit assignments for assessment purposes.
At the end of this course there is a final examination.
Stated below are the components of the course and what you have to do.
The course should take about fifteen weeks to cover.
Course Materials Major components of the course are: 1.
Course Guide 2.
Study Units 3.
Textbooks 4.
Assignments File 5.
Presentation Schedule In addition, you must obtain the materials.
Obtain your copy.
You may contact your tutor if you have problems in obtaining the text materials.
Study Units There are fifteen study units in this course broken into 3 modules of 5 units each.
They are as follows: 3CTH622 PASTORAL THEOLOGY Module 1 Notion and Nature of Pastoral Theology Unit 1 General notion of pastoral theology Unit 2 Method in pastoral theology Unit 3 The nature of pastoral ministry Unit 4 The pastoral minister: vocation and role Unit 5 The pastoral minister as leader Module 2 Biblical Foundations for Pastoral Ministry Unit 1 Priestly ministry in the Old Testament Unit 2 Prophetic ministry in the Old Testament Unit 3 The ministry of Jesus Unit 4 Apostolic ministry in the New Testament Unit 5 Aspects of Christian ministry in the New Testament Module 3 Issues in Pastoral Theology Unit 1 Ministering through word, prayer and sacrament Unit 2 Pastoral administration Unit 3 Pastoral counseling Unit 4 Crisis ministry Unit 5 Ministry to the wider society Each unit includes a table of contents, introduction, specific objectives, recommended textbooks and summaries of key issues and ideas.
At intervals in each unit, you will be provided with a number of exercises or self-assessment questions.
These are to help you test yourself on the material you have just covered or to apply it in some way.
The value of these self-tests is to help you gauge your progress and to reinforce your understanding of the material.
At least one tutor-marked assignment will be provided at the end of each unit.
The exercises and the tutor-marked assignments will help you in achieving the stated learning objectives of the individual units and of the course.
Set Textbooks Bernier, P. (1992) Ministry in the Church: A Historical and Pastoral Approach, Mystic, Connecticut: Twenty-Third Publications.
Capps, D. (1981) Biblical Approaches to Pastoral Counseling, Philadelphia: The Westminster Press.
Clebsch, W. A. and C. R. Jaeckle (1964), Pastoral Care in Historical Perspective, New York: Harper Torchbooks.
4CTH622 PASTORAL THEOLOGY Ekot, B.
(2005) The Church of Ministers, Uyo: Last Century Press.
Godin.
A.
(1965) The Pastor as Counselor, New York: Holt, Rinehart and Winston.
O’Meara, T. F. (1983) Theology of Ministry, New York: Paulist Press.
Oden, T. C. (1983) Pastoral Theology: Essentials of Ministry, San Francisco: Harper & Row.
Pfliegler, M. (1966) A Handbook of Pastoral Theology, Cork: The Mercier Press.
Thornton, E. E. (1967) Theology and Pastoral Counseling, Philadelphia: Fortress Press.
Umoren, A. I.
(2007) Leadership Styles and Skills for Christian Service, Abuja: Ugwu Printing and Publishing.
Assignment File In this file, you will find all the details of the work you must submit to your tutor for marking.
The marks you obtain from these assignments will count towards the final mark you obtain for this course.
Further information on assignments will be found in the Assignment File itself and later in this Course Guide in the section on assessment.
Presentation Schedule The Presentation Schedule included in your course materials gives you the important dates for the completion of tutor-marked assignments and attending tutorials.
Remember, you are required to submit all your assignments by the due date.
You should guard against falling behind in your work.
Assessment There are two aspects to the assessment of the course.
First are the tutor-marked assignments; second, there is a written examination.
In tackling the assignments, you are expected to apply information and knowledge acquired during this course.
The assignments must be submitted to your tutor for formal assessment in accordance with the deadlines stated in the Assignment File.
The work you submit to your tutor for assessment will count for 30% of your total course mark.
At the end of the course, you will need to sit for a 5CTH622 PASTORAL THEOLOGY final three-hour examination.
This will also count for 70% of your total course mark.
Tutor-Marked Assignments There are fifteen tutor-marked assignments in this course.
You need to submit all the assignments.
The best four (i.e.
the highest four of the fifteen marks) will be counted.
The total marks for the best four (4) assignments will be 30% of your total course mark.
Assignment questions for the units in this course are contained in the Assignment File.
You should be able to complete your assignments from the information and materials contained in your set textbooks, reading and study units.
However, you are advised to use other references to broaden your viewpoint and provide a deeper understanding of the subject.
When you have completed each assignment, send it, together with TMA (tutor-marked assignment) form to your tutor.
Make sure that each assignment reaches your tutor on or before the deadline given in the Assignment File.
If, however, you cannot complete your work on time, contact your tutor before the assignment is due to discuss the possibility of an extension.
Final Examination and Grading The final examination of CTH622 will be of two hours’ duration and have a value of 70% of the total course grade.
The examination will consist of questions which reflect the type of self-testing, practice exercises and tutor–marked problems you have come across.
All areas of the course will be assessed.
You are advised to revise the entire course after studying the last unit before you sit for the examination.
You will find it useful to review your tutor-marked assignments and the comments of your tutor on them before the final examination.
Course Marking Scheme This table shows how the actual course marking is broken down.
Assessment Marks Assignment 1-4 Four assignments, best three marks of the four count at 30% of course marks Final Examination 70% of overall course marks Total 100% of course marks Table 1: Course Marking Scheme 6CTH622 PASTORAL THEOLOGY Course Overview This table brings together the units, the number of weeks you should take to complete them, and the assignments that follow them.
Module 1 Title of work Week’s Assessment Activity (end of unit) Unit Course Guide 1 Module 1 Notion and Nature of Pastoral Theology 1 General notion of pastoral 1 Assignement1 theology 2 Method in pastoral theology 2 Assignment 2 3 The nature of pastoral 3 Assignment 3 ministry 4 The pastoral minister: 4 Assignment 4 vocation and role 5 The pastoral minister as 5 Assignment 5 leader Module 2 Biblical Foundations for 6 Assignment 6 Unit Pastoral Ministry 1 Priestly ministry in the Old Testament 2 Prophetic ministry in the Old 7 Assignment 7 Testament 3 The ministry of Jesus 8 Assignment 8 4 Apostolic ministry in the New 9 Assignment 9 Testament 5 Aspects of Christian ministry 10 Assignment10 in the New Testament Module 3 Issues in Pastoral Theology Unit 1 Ministering through word, 11 Assignment 11 prayer and sacrament 2 Pastoral administration 12 Assignment12 3 Pastoral counseling 13 Assignment13 4.
Crisis ministry 14 Assignment14 5 Ministry to the wider society 15 Assignment15 16 Revision 16 17 Examination 17 Table 2: Course Overview 7CTH622 PASTORAL THEOLOGY How to Get the Most from this Course In distance learning the study units replace the university lecturer.
This is one of the great advantages of distance learning; you can read and work through specially designed study materials at your own pace, and at a time and place that suit you best.
Think of it as reading the lecture instead of listening to a lecturer.
In the same way that a lecturer might set you some reading to do, the study units tell you when to read your set books or other material.
Just as a lecturer might give you an in-class exercise, your study units provide exercises for you to do at appropriate points.
Each of the study units follows a common format.
The first item is an introduction to the subject matter of the unit and how a particular unit is integrated with the other units and the course as a whole.
Next is a set of learning objectives.
These objectives let you know what you should be able to do by the time you have completed the unit.
You should use these objectives to guide your study.
When you have finished the units you must go back and check whether you have achieved the objectives.
If you make a habit of doing this you will significantly improve your chances of passing the course.
The main body of the unit guides you through the required reading from other sources.
This will usually be either from your set books or from a internet resources.
Reading Section Remember that your tutor’s job is to help you.
When you need help, don’t hesitate to call and ask your tutor to provide it.
1.
Read this Course Guide thoroughly.
2.
Organize a study schedule.
Refer to the ‘Course overview’ for more details.
Note the time you are expected to spend on each unit and how the assignments relate to the units.
Whatever method you chose to use, you should decide on and write in your own dates for working on each unit.
3.
Once you have created your own study schedule, do everything you can to stick to it.
The major reason that students fail is that they get behind with their course work.
If you get into difficulties with your schedule, please let your tutor know before it is too late for help.
4.
Turn to Unit 1 and read the introduction and the objectives for the unit.
5.
Assemble the study materials.
Information about what you need for a unit is given in the ‘Overview’ at the beginning of each unit.
You 8CTH622 PASTORAL THEOLOGY will almost always need both the study unit you are working on and one of your set books on your desk at the same time.
6.
Work through the unit.
The content of the unit itself has been arranged to provide a sequence for you to follow.
As you work through the unit you will be instructed to read sections from your set books or other articles.
Use the unit to guide your reading.
7. Review the objectives for each study unit to confirm that you have achieved them.
If you feel unsure about any of the objectives, review the study material or consult your tutor.
8.
When you are confident that you have achieved a unit’s objectives, you can then start on the next unit.
Proceed unit by unit through the course and try to pace your study so that you keep yourself on schedule.
9.
When you have submitted an assignment to your tutor for marking, do not wait for its return before starting on the next unit.
Keep to your schedule.
When the assignment is returned, pay particular attention to your tutor’s comments, both on the tutor-marked assignment form and also on what is written on the assignment.
Consult your tutor as soon as possible if you have any questions or problems.
10.After completing the last unit, review the course and prepare yourself for the final examination.
Check that you have achieved the unit objectives (listed at the beginning of each unit) and the course objectives (listed in this Course Guide).
Tutors and Tutorials There are eight hours of tutorials provided in support of this course.
You will be notified of the dates, times and location of these tutorials, together with the name and phone number of your tutor, as soon as you are allocated a tutorial group.
Your tutor will mark and comment on your assignments, keep a close watch on your progress and on any difficulties you might encounter and provide assistance to you during the course.
You must mail your tutor- marked assignments to your tutor well before the due date (at least two working days are required).
They will be marked by your tutor and returned to you as soon as possible.
Do not hesitate to contact your tutor by telephone, e-mail, or discussion board if you need help.
The following might be circumstances in which you would find help necessary.
Contact your tutor if: 9CTH622 PASTORAL THEOLOGY • you do not understand any part of the study units or the assigned readings, • you have difficulty with the self-tests or exercises, • you have a question or problem with an assignment, with your tutor’s comments on an assignment or with the grading of an assignment.
You should try your best to attend the tutorials.
This is the only chance to have face to face contact with your tutor and to ask questions which are answered instantly.
You can raise any problem encountered in the course of your study.
To gain the maximum benefit from course tutorials, prepare a question list before attending them.
You will learn a lot from participating in discussions actively.
Summary CTH622 intends to introduce you to the basic issues in the formulation of Theology.
Upon completing this course, you will be able to answer questions such as: • What is pastoral theology?
• Identify the biblical models of pastoral theology.
• Discuss the function of pastoral theology using Jesus’ ministry as a paradigm.
• What are the aspects of pastoral ministry?
• Discuss the historical development of pastoral ministry.
• What are the methods used in pastoral theology?
• How would you minister to someone living with HIV/AIDS?
Of course, the questions you will be able to answer are not limited to the above list.
Types of Theology are an exciting study.
We wish you success with the course and hope that you will find it both interesting and useful.
10
