THEOLOGY OF AFRICAN CTH 692 TRADITIONAL RELIGION Course GuideCTH 692 COURSE GUIDE COURSE GUIDE CTH692 THEOLOGY OF AFRICAN TRADITIONAL RELIGION Course Developer/ Writers Dr. Oyeronke Olademo University of Ilorin Ilorin, Kwara State Course Coordinator Revd.
(Dr.) Jacob A. Owolabi National Open University of Nigeria Lagos Programme Leader Dr. O.
A. Adewale National Open University of Nigeria, Victoria Island, Lagos NATIONAL OPEN UNIVERSITY OF NIGERIA iiCTH 692 COURSE GUIDE National Open University of Nigeria Headquarters 14/16 Ahmadu Bello Way Victoria Island Lagos Abuja Office: NOUN Building No.
5, Dar es Sallam Street Off Aminu Kano Crescent Wuse II Abuja, Lagos e-mail: centralinfo@nou.edu.ng URL: www.nou.edu.ng National Open University of Nigeria 2008 First Printed 2008 ISBN: 978-058-652-0 All Rights Reserved Printed by For National Open University of Nigeria iiiCTH 692 COURSE GUIDE TABLE OF CONTENTS PAGE Introduction.............................................................................. 1 What you will learn in this Course.......................................... 1 Course Aims............................................................................... 1 Course Objectives...................................................................... 2 Working through this Course.................................................... 2 Course Materials........................................................................ 3 Study Units ............................................................................... 3 - 4 Textbooks and References........................................................ 4 Assignment File........................................................................ 4 Presentation Schedule............................................................... 4 Assessment................................................................................ 5 Tutor Marked Assignments (TMAs) ....................................... 5 Final Examination and Grading................................................. 5 - 6 Course Marking Scheme............................................................ 6 Course Overview…………………………………………….… 6 - 7 How to Get the Best from the Course......................................... 7 - 8 Facilitators/Tutors and Tutorials................................................. 9 Summary..................................................................................... 9 - 10 ivCOURSE GUIDE CTH692 Introduction CTH692: Theology of African Traditional Religion is a one-semester, 2- credit unit course.
It’s available to all students as a course in Post- Graduate Diploma in Theology.
The course is also suitable for anybody who is interested in the Theological study of Christian faith.
The course consists of 14 units which include; Definitions of African Traditional Religion and theology of African Traditional Religion.
Other topics are: Creation in African Traditional Religion; African Concept of Human Beings; Ethics in African Traditional Religion; Judgment in African Traditional Religion; Eschatology as Well as Sin and Reward in African Traditional Religion.
The material has been specially developed for students in African context with particular focus on Nigeria.
There are no compulsory pre-requisites for this course.
The Course Guide tells you briefly what the course is about, what you are expected to know in each unit, what course materials you will be using and how you can work your way through these materials.
It also emphasizes the need for tutor-marked assignments.
Detailed information on tutor- marked assignments is found in the separate file, which will be sent to you later.
There are periodic tutorial classes that are linked to the course.
What You Will Learn in this Course The overall aim of CTH692: Theology of African Traditional Religion is to introduce you to the basic issues in the Theology of African Religion like ethics, judgment, reincarnation, women, sin and reward, eschatology and the effects of modernization on African Traditional Religion.
Your understanding in this course will prepare you as a student to understand the beliefs of Africans for good and profitable interaction.
Further, the course will broaden the understanding of the students about African religion within the context of the Nigerian society.
Course Aims The aim of the course can be summarized as follow: This course aims at helping the students of Christian Theology to understand the theology of African Traditional Religion.
It also examines the influences of modernization on the religion and a comparative analysis of the religion and other religions.
1COURSE GUIDE CTH692 Course Objectives To achieve the aims set above there are set overall objectives.
In addition each module and unit also has specific objectives.
The modules and units objectives are always included at the beginning of every module and the unit; you should read them before you start working through the unit.
You may want to refer to them during your study of the module and unit to check on your progress.
You should always look at the module and unit objectives after completing each section.
In this way, you can be sure that you have done what was required of you by the module and unit.
Stated below are the wider objectives of this course as a whole.
By meeting these objectives you should therefore know that you have achieved the aims of the course as a whole.
On your successful completion of the course, you should be able to explain the following: know the definition of religion, types of religious belief, the functions of religion in the society.
On successful completion of the course, you should be able to: • Explain the principal elements that make up the African traditional religion.
• Explain African beliefs in ancestors, spirit, divinities; magic and medicine and witchcraft.
• Explain the African philosophy of humanity in relation to deity.
• Explain Eschatology in African Traditional Religion • Explain the methodology, sources and identification of the theology of African Traditional Religion.
• Explain the concept of ethics in African Traditional Religion • Explain the place and role of women in African Traditional Religion • Explain the effects of modernization on African Traditional Religion Working through this Course To complete this course, you are required to read the study units, read recommended books and other materials.
Each unit contains self- assessment exercises, and at some points in the course you are required to submit assignments for assessment purposes.
At the end of this course is a final examination.
Below you will find listed all the components of the course and what you have to do.
Course Materials Major components of the course are: 2COURSE GUIDE CTH692 1.
Course Guide 2.
Study Units 3.
Textbooks 4.
Assignments File 5.
Presentation Schedule In addition, you must obtain the materials.
Obtain your copy.
You may contact your tutor if you have problems obtaining the text materials.
Study Units There are fourteen study units in this course broken into 3 modules of 4 units in the first module and 5 units in the second and third module.
They are as follows: Module 1 Unit 1 Definitions of African Traditional Religion Unit 2 Theology of African Traditional Religion Unit 3 Creation in African Traditional Religion Unit 4 The African Concept of Human Beings Module 2 Unit 1 Ethics in African Traditional Religion Unit 2 Judgment in African Traditional Religion Unit 3 Reincarnation in African Traditional Religion Unit 4 Women in African Traditional Religion Unit 5 Sin and Reward in African Traditional Religion Module 3 Unit 1 Eschatology in African Traditional Religion Unit 2 The Human Agency in African Traditional Religion Unit 3 Modernization and African Traditional Religion Unit 4 The Contemporary Study of African Traditional Religion Unit 5 African Traditional Religion and Other Religions Each Unit contains a number of self-tests, in general terms, these self- test questions on the materials you have just covered or require to cover are to be of help to you in your relationship to the traditionalists and it is also meant to help you to evaluate your progress and to reinforce your understanding of the materials.
Alongside with your tutor-marked assignments, these exercises will assist you in achieving stated learning objectives of the individual units and of the course.
3COURSE GUIDE CTH692 Textbooks/References Awolalu, J. O and Dopamu.
P.A.
(1979).
West African Traditional Religion, Ibadan: Onibonoje Press and Book Industries (Nig) Ltd. Idowu, E. Bolaji (1973).
African Traditional Religion: A Definition, London: SCM Press Ltd. Imasogie, O.
(1982).
African Traditional Religion, Ibadan: Ibadan University Press Ltd. Olupona, J.K.
(ed.)
African Traditional Religion in Contemporary Society, Minnesota: Paragon House.
Gyekye, Kwame (1996).
African Cultural Values: An Introduction, Accra: Sankofa Publishing Company.
Mbiti, John: African Religions and Philosophy, London: Longman.
Parrinder, E. G. (1974).
African Traditional Religion, London: Sheldon Press.
Ray, Benjamin.
(1976).
African Religion: Symbols Rituals and Community, New Jersey: Prentice-Hall.
Assignment File In this file, you will find the details of the work you must submit to your tutor for marking.
The marks you obtain from these assignments will count towards the final mark you obtain for this course.
Further information on assignments will be found in the Assignment File itself and later in this Course Guide in the section on assessment.
Presentation Schedule The Presentation Schedule included in your course materials gives you the important dates for the completion of tutor-marked assignments and attending tutorials.
Remember, you are required to submit all your assignments by the due date.
You should guard against falling behind in your work.
Assessment There are two aspects to the assessment of the course.
First are the tutor-marked assignments; second, there is a written examination.
In 4COURSE GUIDE CTH692 tackling the assignments, you are expected to apply information and knowledge acquired during this course.
The assignments must be submitted to your tutor for formal assessment in accordance with the deadlines stated in the Assignment File.
The work you submit to your tutor for assessment will count for 30% of your total course mark.
At the end of the course, you will need to sit for a final three-hour examination.
This will also count for 70% of your total course mark.
Tutor Marked Assignments There are fifteen tutor-marked assignments in this course.
You need to submit all the assignments.
The best four (i.e.
the highest four of the fifteen marks) will be counted.
The total marks for the best four (4) assignments will be 30% of your total course mark.
Assignment questions for the units in this course are contained in the Assignment File.
You should be able to complete your assignments from the information and materials contained in your set textbooks, reading and study units.
However, you are advised to use other references to broaden your viewpoint and provide a deeper understanding of the subject.
When you have completed each assignment, send it, together with the TMA (tutor-marked assignment) form to your tutor.
Make sure that each assignment reaches your tutor on or before the deadline given to the Assignment File.
If, however, you cannot complete your work on time, contact your tutor before the assignment is done to discuss the possibility of an extension.
Final Examination and Grading The final examination of CTH692 will be of three hours’ duration and have a value of 70% of the total course grade.
The examination will consist of questions which reflect the type of self-testing, practice exercises and tutor–marked problems you have come across.
All areas of the course will be assessed.
You are advised to revise the entire course after studying the last unit before you sit for the examination.
You will find it useful to review your tutor-marked assignments and the comments of your tutor on them before the final examination.
Course Marking Scheme 5COURSE GUIDE CTH692 This table shows how the actual course marking is broken down.
Table 1: Course Marking Scheme Assessment Marks Assignments 1- 4 Four assignments, best three marks of the four count at 30% of course marks Final Examination 70% of overall course marks Total 100% of course marks Course Overview This table brings together the units, the number of weeks you should take to complete them, and the assignments that follow them.
Table 1: Course Overview Module 1 Title of work Week’s Assessment Activity (end of unit) Unit Course Guide 1 1.
Definitions of African 1 Assignment 1 Traditional Religion 2.
Theology of African 2 Assignment 2 Traditional Religion 3.
Creation in African Traditional 3 Assignment 3 Religion 4.
The African Concept of 4 Assignment 4 Human Beings Module 2 Unit 1.
Ethics in African Traditional 6 Assignment 6 Religion 2.
Judgment in African 7 Assignment 7 Traditional Religion 3.
Reincarnation in African 8 Assignment 8 Traditional Religion 4.
Women in African 9 Assignment 9 Traditional Religion 5 Sin and Reward in African 10 Assignment 10 Traditional Religion Module 3 Eschatology in African 11 Assignment 11 Unit Traditional Religion 1 2 The Human Agency in 12 Assignment 12 African Traditional Religion 6COURSE GUIDE CTH692 3 Modernization and African 13 Assignment 13 Traditional Religion 4.
The Contemporary Study of 14 Assignment 14 African Traditional Religion 5 African Traditional Religion 15 Assignment 15 and other Religions 16 Revision 16 17 Examination 17 How to Get the Most from this Course In distance learning, the study units replace the university lecturer.
This is one of the great advantages of distance learning; you can read and work through specially designed study materials at your own pace, and at a time and place that suit you best.
Think of it as reading the lecture instead of listening to a lecturer.
In the same way that a lecturer might set you some reading to do, the study units tell you when to read your set books or other material.
Just as a lecturer might give you an in-class exercise, your study units provide exercises for you to do at appropriate points.
Each of the study units follows a common format.
The first item is an introduction to the subject matter of the unit and how a particular unit is integrated with the other units and the course as a whole.
Next is a set of learning objectives.
These objectives let you know what you should be able to do by the time you have completed the unit.
You should use these objectives to guide your study.
When you have finished the units you must go back and check whether you have achieved the objectives.
If you make a habit of doing this you will significantly improve your chances of passing the course.
Reading Section Remember that your tutor’s job is to help you.
When you need help, don’t hesitate to call and ask your tutor to provide it.
1.
Read this Course Guide thoroughly.
2.
Organize a study schedule.
Refer to the ‘Course Overview’ for more details.
Note the time you are expected to spend on each unit and how the assignments relate to the units.
Whatever method you chose to use, you should decide on and write in your own dates for working on each unit.
3.
Once you have created your own study schedule, do everything you can to stick to it.
The major reason that students fail is that they get 7COURSE GUIDE CTH692 behind with their course work.
If you get into difficulties with your schedule, please let your tutor know before it is too late for help.
4.
Turn to Unit 1 and read the introduction and the objectives for the unit.
5.
Assemble the study materials.
Information about what you need for a unit is given in the ‘Overview’ at the beginning of each unit.
You will almost always need both the study unit you are working on and one of your set books on your desk at the same time.
6.
Work through the unit.
The content of the unit itself has been arranged to provide a sequence for you to follow.
As you work through the unit you will be instructed to read sections from your set books or other articles.
Use the unit to guide your reading.
7. Review the objectives for each study unit to confirm that you have achieved them.
If you feel unsure about any of the objectives, review the study material or consult your tutor.
8.
When you are confident that you have achieved a unit’s objectives, you can then start on the next unit.
Proceed unit by unit through the course and try to pace your study so that you keep yourself on schedule.
9.
When you have submitted an assignment to your tutor for marking, do not wait for its return before starting on the next unit.
Keep to your schedule.
When the assignment is returned, pay particular attention to your tutor’s comments, both on the tutor-marked assignment form and also on what is written on the assignment.
Consult your tutor as soon as possible if you have any questions or problems.
10.After completing the last unit, review the course and prepare yourself for the final examination.
Check that you have achieved the unit objectives (listed at the beginning of each unit) and the course objectives (listed in this Course Guide).
Facilitators/Tutors and Tutorials There are 8 hours of tutorials provided in support of this course.
You will be notified of the dates, times and location of these tutorials, together with the name and phone number of your tutor, as soon as you are allocated a tutorial group.
8COURSE GUIDE CTH692 Your tutor will mark and comment on your assignments, keep a close watch on your progress and on any difficulties you might encounter and provide assistance to you during the course.
You must mail your tutor- marked assignments to your tutor well before the due date (at least two working days are required).
They will be marked by your tutor and returned to you as soon as possible.
Do not hesitate to contact your tutor by telephone, e-mail, or discussion board if you need help.
The following might be circumstances in which you would find help necessary.
Contact your tutor if: • you do not understand any part of the study units or the assigned readings, • you have difficulty with the self-tests or exercises, • you have a question or problem with an assignment, with your tutor’s comments on an assignment or with the grading of an assignment.
You should try your best to attend the tutorials.
This is the only chance to have face to face contact with your tutor and to ask questions which are answered instantly.
You can raise any problem encountered in the course of your study.
To gain the maximum benefit from course tutorials, prepare a question list before attending them.
You will learn a lot from participating in discussions actively.
Summary CTH692 intends to introduce you to the basics of The Theology of African Traditional Religion.
Upon completing this course, you will be able to answer questions such as: • What is African Traditional Religion?
• What are the contents of the theology of African Traditional Religion?
• From what sources can we study the theology African Traditional Religion?
• What are the roles of the divinities in African Traditional Religion?
• What is the role of women in the traditional African society?
• What are the challenges facing the role of women in African Traditional Religion?
• Discuss myths in African societies.
• Death is not the end of any human being.
Discuss.
9COURSE GUIDE CTH692 Of course, the questions you will be able to answer are not limited to the above list.
African Traditional Religion is an exciting study.
We wish you success with the course and hope that you will find it both interesting and useful.
10
