COMMON THEMES IN CTH 602 CHRISTIANITY AND ISLAM Course GuideCOURSE GUIDE CTH602 COURSE GUIDE CTH602 COMMON THEMES IN CHRISTIANITY AND ISLAM Course Developer Dr. Jacob .A.
Owolabi National Open University of Nigeria, 14/16 Ahmadu Bello Way, Victoria Island, Lagos.
Course Writer Dr. Jacob .A.
Owolabi National Open University of Nigeria, 14/16 Ahmadu Bello Way, Victoria Island, Lagos.
Course Editor Dr. J. S. Adekoya University of Ibadan.
Course Coordinator Dr. Jacob .A.
Owolabi National Open University of Nigeria, 14/16 Ahmadu Bello Way, Victoria Island, Lagos.
Programme Leader Dr. A. O. Adewale National Open University of Nigeria, 14/16 Ahmadu Bello Way, Victoria Island, Lagos.
NATIONAL OPEN UNIVERSITY OF NIGERIA iiCOURSE GUIDE CTH602 National Open University of Nigeria Headquarters 14/16 Ahmadu Bello Way Victoria Island Lagos Abuja Office NOUN Building No.
5 Dar es Salaam Street Off Aminu Kano Crescent Wuse II, Abuja Nigeria e-mail: centralinfo@nou.edu.ng URL: www.nou.edu.ng National Open University of Nigeria 2008 First Printed 2008 ISBN: 978-058-628-8 All Rights Reserved Printed by For National Open University of Nigeria iiiCOURSE GUIDE CTH602 TABLE OF CONTENTS PAGES Introduction………………………………………………….
1 What you learn in this course……………………………….. 1 Course Aims………………………………………………… 1 Course Objectives…………………………………………... 2 Working through this course………………………………… 2 Study Units………………………………………………….. 2 – 3 Assignment File…………………………………………….. 3 Course materials…………………………………………….. 3 Set Textbooks……………………………………………….. 4 – 5 Self Assessment Exercise…………………………………….
6 Tutor Marked Assignment…………………………………… 6 Final Examination and Grading……………………………... 6 Course Marking Scheme…………………………………….. 6 Course Overview…………………………………………….. 7 How to get the most from this course………………………... 7 – 10 Tutors and Tutorials………………………………………….
10 ivCOURSE GUIDE CTH602 Introduction Common Themes in Christianity and Islam is designed for students to learn about religious tolerance in Nigeria.
Besides, it also teaches the similarities of themes in both religions.
It emphasized the following: faith and good works, unity and oneness of God, free-will and determinism, legal rational authority versus personal authority.
The course is available to Postgraduate students of Christian Theology, and it is suitable for other students in the humanities and the sciences, especially for the liberal, broad-minded scientist.
The course consists of 16 study units and is structured into three modules of 5 study units for the first module and the second module consists of 6 study units.
While the third module is made up of 5 study units respectively.
This course guide tells you briefly what the course is about, what you are expected to know in each study unit, what course materials you will be using and how you can work your way through these materials.
It also emphasizes the need for tutor-marked assignments.
There are periodic tutorial classes, among others, as shown in the table of contents of this document.
Finally, the course will be of great help to both Christian and Muslim students by providing means of religious understanding between the adherents of both faiths in Nigeria.
What you will Learn in this Course The overall aim of the course: Common Themes in Christianity and Islam is designed and produced to help student’s grape the golden rules in the Holy Bible and the Al-Quran for mankind.
Accordingly, during the course, you will learn the definition of religion, the importance of prayers, moral values and the unity and oneness of God which Christianity and Islam teach the adherents of the two religions.
Course Aims The aim of this course can be summarized as that of leading you to the understanding of: (i) the meaning of religion, (ii) why you must have faith in God; (iii) the role of prayers in your life 1COURSE GUIDE CTH602 (iv) The close link between the teaching of the Bible and the Quran on moral values.
It also leads you to understand how you should use your free-will properly before God and man without misusing it to cause harm to other people in your society.
Course Objectives To achieve the aims set out above, there is a set of objectives, both general and for each course as well as for the modules thereof.
It is advisable that you pay attention to these objectives as they should assist you to assess the extent to which the materials at each stage meet the set objectives.
The following are the overall objectives of the course, or what you are expected to know and do on the successful completion of the course: (a) Explain religious beliefs of man (b) List some of the things which God had created (c) Trace the origin of sin (d) Identify the gradual means by which God reveals His will and plan concerning the promised Saviour of human being.
(e) Choose the best type of love that should be practiced by Christians (f) State the importance of moral values to mankind Working through this Course To successfully complete this course, you are required to read and carefully study all the 16 course units.
Each course unit, as well as parts thereof, has self-assessment exercise.
Also at designated points in the course, you are required to complete, submit assignments for assessment purposes.
At the end of the course, there will be a final examination.
The total marks will be shared between the assignments and the final examination, as explained below.
Study Units The following is the outline of the 16 study units of this course, divided into 3 modules of 5 study units, 6 study units and 5 study units respectively.
2COURSE GUIDE CTH602 Module 1 Definition of Religion Unit 1 What is Religion?
Unit 2 The Concept of God Unit 3 The Concept of Sin Unit 4 God’s Eternal Plan of love for lost human being.
Unit 5 Love Module 2 Prayer Unit 1 What is Prayer?
Unit 2 Healing in Christianity and Islamic Perspectives Unit 3 Christian Moral Values Unit 4 Fear of God Unit 5 The Patriarchs Unit 6 Caring for the Poor in Christianity Module 3 Unity and Oneness of God (Allah) Unit 1 The meaning of Islam Unit 2 Prayer in Islam Unit 3 Faith in Islam Unit 4 Free – will Unit 5 Moral Laws Assignment File In this file, you will find all the details of the assignments you must submit to your tutor for marking.
The mark you obtain in these assignments will count towards the final mark for this course, in the ratio of 30:70.
Course Materials Course Guide Study Units References Assessment/Assignment File Presentation Schedule Tutor Marked Assignments (TMA) Final Examination and Grading Course Marking Scheme Course Overview 3COURSE GUIDE CTH602 Set Textbooks Ade – Odunmuyiwa E; Christianity and Humanitarian services in Remoland 1854 – 1930s – A Historical Approach in the “Religion and Service to Humanity, Nigerian Association for the Study of Religious, Christy – David printers, 1993.
Awolalu, Ahunanya and Dopamu, Religions and moral instruction for Junior Secondary Schools, Evan Brothers publishers Limited, Ibadan, Nigeria 1981.
Athar Hussain, The Message of the Quran Islamic Publications Bureau, Lagos, Nigeria, 1974.
Akanmidu R. A.
‘Religion and Morality’ Journal of Arabic and Religious Studies, Akanmidu, R. A.
‘Christian Moral Values, Studies in religious understanding in Nigeria Islam, Christianity and African Religion, Nigerian Association for the Study of Religions, 1993 Charles .W.
Kegey (Ed) The Theology of Emil Brunner Macmillan, Nigeria, 1862.
Cunningham Geikie, The Life and words of Christ, New York, D. Appleton, 1980 Carl .F.
H. Henry, Christian Personal Ethics Grand Rapdis: W. B. Eerdmos publishing Co. Ltd 1971.
David Adam .S.
A. Handbook of Christian Ethics, Edinburgh, T & T Clark, 1952 David .F.
Hinson, History of Israel, TEF Study Guide 7, United Society for Christian Fund, London, S. P. C. K. 1963.
Fawole S. F. Essentials of Bible knowledge, Abiodun works Ltd, Ijebu Bye-pass, Ibadan, 1994.
Gerand .J.
Hughes S. J.
Moral Decisions, Islamic (Ed) Misconceptions about Islam, Islamic Trust Publications Division, Minna, Niger, Nigeria, 1992 Gunter Delin, Man and Revelation, Hornby, Oxford Advanced Learner’s Dictionary, The 6th edition, Oxford University, Press, 2000.
4COURSE GUIDE CTH602 London, Hodder and Stoughton, 1936.
IS – Hom Akintola, Creation, Science or Allah?
In the God the contemporary discussions Decency Printers.
Ltd Ilorin, Nig.
2005.
Marshall, L. H. The Challenges of New Testament Ethics, London, Macmillan and Co. Ltd 1946.
Mohammad Marmaduke Pickthal, The meaning of the Glorious Koran, Islamic Publications Bureau, Mushin, Lagos, Nigeria, (date of publication not indicated) M. Moinuddin Saddiqui, Moral Teachings of Islam, Islam Education Trust Publication Unit, Minna, 1992.
Onimhaqo J.
A.; and Peter Ottuh .O; Islamic Revivalism in Nigeria: Sharia law and the Rule of Law re-examined in Iroro: Journal of Arts Vol.
10 No K2, Ambrose Ali University, Ekpoma, Edo State, Nigeria, 2005.
Oseni, A. I.
The Golden Rule; The Islamic and African Religions perspectives in the African Culture, modern science and Religious thoughts, Decency Printers and Stationaries Ltd, 7 Mijindadi Street, Ita Amodu Street, Ilorin, Nigeria.
Oseni, A. I: Islamic Scholars as Spiritual healers in a Nigerian community in the place of religion with Development of Nigeria, The Department of Religions, University of Ilorin, 1985.
Paramole K. O.
Ethics in Islam: An Analytical Study, Islamic Studies Circle, Lagos, Nigeria.
Paul Tilich, Ultimate Concern, London, SCM Press Ltd. 19965.
Richardson, A.
An Introduction to the Theology of the Old Testament SCM, 1958.
Rahman .I.
Do: Introduction to the Quran, Nigeria, Publishers Services Ltd. Ibadan, Nigeria, 1981.
The Holy Bible, Revised Standard Version, New York, Macmillan publishing Company Inc. 1971.
5COURSE GUIDE CTH602 Wale J. S. The Christian Doctrine, Cambridge, Cambridge University Press, London.
1977.
Self Assessment Exercise (SAE) Your assessment will be based in tutor-marked assignments (TMAs), seminars and written examination.
You are expected to apply the information, knowledge, techniques acquired during the course.
The assignments must be submitted to your tutor within the period of the deadline.
These assignments will count for 30% of your total mark.
At the end of the course you will need to sit for a final written two-hour examination for the remaining 70% mark for the course.
Tutor Marked Assignments Assignment questions for the units are compiled in the Assignment File.
You should be able to complete your assignment from the information and material contained in your course study units.
When you have completed each assignment, send it, together with TMA to your tutor.
Make sure that each assignment reaches your tutor on or before the deadline given.
If however, you cannot possibly complete your assignment on time, contact your tutor before the assignment is due, to discuss the possibility of an extension.
Final Examination Grading The two-hour examination will consist of questions which reflect the type of self-testing practice exercise and tutor-marked problems you have come across.
All areas of the course will be assessed.
Course Marking Scheme The final course mark will be distributed as follows: Assessment Mark Tutor-Marked Assignments Four assignments, best three marks of the four count at 30% of course marks Final Examination 70% Total 100% Table 1: Course Mark Allocations.
6COURSE GUIDE CTH602 Course Overview Table 2 brings together the units, the weeks to complete them and the accompanying assignments.
Table 2: Course Organizer Title of work/Study Unit Weeks End of unit Activity Assessment Module 1 Course Guide Definition of Religion 1 unit What is Religion?
1 Assignments 1 2 The Concept of God 2 Assignment 2 3 The Concept of Sin 3 Assignment 3 4 God’s Eternal plan of 4 Assignment 4 love for lost human being 5 Love 5 Assignment 5 Module 2 Prayer 1 What is Prayer?
6 Assignment 6 2 Healing in Christianity 7 Assignment 7 and Islamic Perspectives 3 Christian Moral Values 8 Assignment 8 4 Fear of God 9 Assignment 9 5 The Patriarchs 10 Assignment 10 6 Caring for the Poor in 11 Assignment 11 Christianity Module 3 Unity and Oneness of God (Allah) 1 The meaning of Islam 12 Assignment 12 2 Prayer in Islam 13 Assignment 13 3 Faith in Islam 14 Assignment 14 4 Freewill 15 Assignment 15 5 Moral Laws and Revision 16 Assignment 16 Examination 17 How to get the most from this Course In distance learning, the study units replace the University lecturer.
This is one of the advantages of distance learning that you can read and work through specifically designed study materials at your own pace, and at a time and place that suit you best.
You should see them (study unit 7COURSE GUIDE CTH602 materials) as reading lectures, instead of listening to them in the classroom.
In the same way that a lecturer might set you some reading to do, the study units also tell you when to read your text materials.
You are provided exercise to do at appropriate points just as a lecturer might give you class exercises.
Each of the study units follows a common format.
The first item is an introduction to the subject matter of the unit and how a particular unit is integrated with the other units and the course as a whole.
Next to this is a set of learning objectives.
These objectives let you know what you should be able to do by the time you have completed the unit.
These learning objectives are meant to guide your study.
The moment a unit is finished, you must go back and check whether you have achieved the stated objectives.
If this is made a habit, then you will significantly improve your chance of passing the course.
However, when you runs into any difficulty, telephone your tutor or visit the Study Centre nearest to you for assistance.
Remember that your tutor’s job is to help you.
When you need help, therefore, don’t hesitate to call and ask him to provide it.
The following is a practical strategy for working through the course: Read the Course Guide thoroughly, several times to ensure that the message gets really across to you.
(i) Organise a study schedule.
Refer to the ‘course overview’ for more details.
Note the time you are expected to spend on each unit and how the assignments relate to the units and how the assignments relate to the units.
Important information, e.g.
details of your tutorials and the date of the first day of the semester, is available at the Study Centre.
You need to gather together all this information in one place; such as your dairy or a wall calendar.
Whatever method you choose to use, you should decide on and write in your own dates for each unit.
(ii) Once you have created your own study schedule, do everything you can to stick to it.
The major reason why students fail is that they get behind with their course work.
If you get into 8COURSE GUIDE CTH602 difficulties with your schedule, please let your tutor know before it is too late for help.
(iii) Assemble the study materials.
Information about what you need for a unit is given in the overview at the beginning of each unit.
(iv) Work through the unit.
The content of the unit itself has been arranged to provide a sequence for you to follow.
As you work through the units you will be instructed as to what to read from them.
Keep in touch with the Study Centre.
Up-to-date course information will be continuously available there.
(v) Well before the relevant due dates (about 4 weeks before due dates), check on the assignment at the Study Centre and take note of your next required assignment.
Keep in mind that you will learn a lot by doing the assignments carefully and as they fall due.
Do not allow backlog.
They have been designed to help you meet the objectives of the course and, therefore, will help you pass the examination.
Submit all assignments not later than the due date.
(vi) Again, on the exercises/assignments, you will discover that these are placed both within (under each major section) and at the end of the unit.
Some of the sectional exercises are also used as TMAs at the end.
You are free to undertake the assignment either section by section or together at the end.
The assignments are however graded per unit and not section by section.
(vii) Review the objectives for each study unit to confirm that you have achieved them.
If you feel unsure about any of the objectives, review the study materials again and again and/or consult your tutor.
(viii) When you are confident that you have achieved a unit’s objectives, you can then go on to the next unit.
Proceed, until by unit, through the course and try to plan your study such that you keep yourself on schedule.
(ix) When you have submitted an assignment to your tutor for marking, do not wait for its return before starting on the next unit.
Keep to your schedule.
When the assignment is returned, pay particular attention to your tutor’s comments, both on the tutor- marked assignment from and also written on the assignment 9COURSE GUIDE CTH602 consult your tutor as soon as possible if you have any questions or problems.
(x) After completing the last unit, review the course and prepare yourself for the final examination.
Check that you have achieved the unit objectives (listed at the beginning of each unit) and the course objectives (listed in this Course Guide) Tutors and Tutorials There are 8 hours of tutorials provided in support of this course.
You will be notified of the dates, times and location of these tutorials, together with the name and phone number of your tutor, as soon as you are allocated a tutorial group.
Your tutor will mark and comment on your assignments, keep a close watch on your progress and on any difficulties you might encounter and provide assistance to you during the course.
You must mail your tutor-marked assignments to your tutor before the due date (at least two working days are required).
They will be marked by your tutor and returned to you as soon as possible.
Do not hesitate to contact your tutor by telephone, e-mail or by a visit to the Study Centre, if you need help.
The following might be circumstances in which you would find help necessary.
Contact your tutor if: (i) You do not understand any part of the study units or the assignment(s) readings (ii) You have difficulty with any exercise (iii) You have a question or problem with an assignment with your tutor’s comments, on an assignment or with the grading of an assignment.
You should try your best to attend the tutorials.
This is the only chance to have face-to-face contact with your tutor and ask questions, which are answered instantly.
You can also raise any problem encountered in the course of your Study at the tutorials.
To gain the maximum benefit from course tutorials, prepare a question list before attending them.
You will learn a lot from participating actively in the discussions.
We wish you success in the programme.
10
