REFORMATION CTH 642 Course GuideCTH642 COURSE GUIDE COURS E GUIDE CTH642 REFORMATION Course Developer Dr. Deji Ayegboyin University of Ibadan Ibadan, Oyo State Course Writers Dr. Deji Ayegboyin University of Ibadan Ibadan, Oyo State Course Editor Dr. Olubiyi A. Adewale National Open University of Nigeria, Victoria Island, Lagos Course Coordinator Revd.
(Dr.) Jacob A. Owolabi National Open University of Nigeria Lagos Programme Leader Dr. O.
A. Adewale National Open University of Nigeria, Victoria Island, Lagos NATIONAL OPEN UNIVERSITY OF NIGERIA iiCTH642 COURSE GUIDE National Open University of Nigeria Headquarters 14/16 Ahmadu Bello Way Victoria Island Lagos NOUN HOUSE, 5, Dar es Salaam Stree.t Off Aminu Kano Crescent Wuse II Abuja, Nigeria e-mail: centralinfo@nou.edu.ng URL: www.nou.edu.ng National Open University of Nigeria 2008 First Printed 2008 ISBN: 978-058-760-8 All Rights Reserved Printed by For National Open University of Nigeria iiiCTH642 COURSE GUIDE TABLE OF CONTENT PAGE Introduction ……………………………………………….
1 What You Will Learn In This Course …………………….
1 Course Aims ……………………………………………… 1 Course Objectives………………………………………….
2 Working through this course……………………………… 2 Course Materials…………………………………………... 3-4 Study Units………………………………………………... 4 Set Textbooks …………………………………………….. 4 Assignment File…………………………………………… 5 Presentation Schedule……………………………………... 5 Assessment………………………………………………... 5 Tutor Marked Assignments ……………………………….
5-6 Final Examination and Grading…………………………... 6 Course Marking Scheme………………………………….. 6 Course Overview………………………………………….. 6-7 How to Get the Most from This Course…………………… 7-8 Reading Section…………………………………………… 8-9 Tutors and Tutorials……………………………………….
9-10 Summary…………………………………………………… 10 ivCTH642 COURSE GUIDE Introduction CTH642: Reformation is a one-semester 2- credit unit course.
It will be available to all students as a course in Post-Graduate Diploma in Theology.
The course is also suitable for anybody who is interested in the theological study of Christian faith.
The course consists of 14 units which include; the state of the church prior to the Reformation, the factors leading to the Reformation, the Luther Reformation, the Reformation of Zwingli, John Calvin, Knox and other Protestant leaders as well as the Counter Reformation which is the Catholic response to the Reformation.
It also includes the effects of the Reformation on Africa with particular reference to Nigeria.
The material has been especially developed for students in African context with particular focus on Nigeria.
There are no compulsory pre-requisites for this course.
The course guide tells you briefly what the course is about, what you are expected to know in each unit, what course materials you will be using and how you can work your way through these materials.
It also emphasizes the need for tutor-marked assignments.
Detailed information on tutor-marked assignments is found in the separate file, which will be sent to you later.
There are periodic tutorial classes that are linked to the course.
What You Will Learn In This Course The overall aim of CTH642: Reformation is to introduce you to the basic issues in the Reformation of the Church, the state of the church before the Reformation, factors leading up to the Reformation, focus on leading Reformation figures like Martin Luther, Zwingli, John Calvin and John Knox among others, the factors that promoted the Reformation like the invention of the Press and the response of the Church to the Reformation in evangelical zeal as well as the response of the African Church to the reformation.
Your understanding in this course will prepare you as a student to understand the beliefs of Africans for good and profitable interaction.
Further, the course will broaden the understanding of the students about African religion within the context of Nigerian society.
Course Aims The aim of the course can be summarized as follow: This course aims at helping the students of Christian Theology to understand the history of the Church and how the Reformation led to the plurality of the church.
It also examined the influences of the Reformation on the Catholic Church and on the African continent as well as the response of the African church to the Reformation.
1CTH642 COURSE GUIDE Course Objectives To achieve the aims set above there are overall set objectives.
In addition each module and unit also have specific objectives.
The modules and unit objectives are always included at the beginning of every module and unit; you should read them before you start working through the unit.
You may want to refer to them during your study of the module and unit to check on your progress.
You should always look at the module and unit objectives after completing each section.
In this way, you can definitely be sure that you have done what is required of you in that module and unit.
Stated below are the wider objectives of this course as a whole.
Definitely by meeting these objectives you should therefore know that you have achieved the aims of the course as a whole.
On your successful completion of the course, you should be able to: • know the definition of religion; • types of religious belief; • the functions of religion in the society.
On successful completion of the course, you should be able to: • Discuss the state of the church before the Reformation • Identify the factors that led to the Reformation • Identify the factors that promoted the Reformation • Narrate the role of Martin Luther in the Reformation • Evaluate the role of the other reformers • Examine the impact of the invention of the printing press on the Reformation • Examine the role of Geneva on the Reformation • Discuss the tools of the counter-reformation or Catholic reformation.
• Examine the role of Pope John Paul III on the Reformation • Examine the place of the African Church in the Reformation.
Working through this course To complete this course, you are required to read the study units, read recommended books and other materials.
Each unit contains self- assessment exercises, and at points in the course you are required to submit assignments for assessment purposes.
At the end of this course, there will be a final examination.
Below you will find listed, all the components of the course and what you have to do.
2CTH642 COURSE GUIDE Course Materials Major components of the course are: 1.
Course Guide 2.
Study Units 3.
Textbooks 4.
Assignments File 5.
Presentation Schedule In addition, you must obtain the materials.
Obtain your copy.
You may contact your tutor if you have problems in obtaining the text materials.
Study Units There are fourteen study units in this course broken into 3 modules, 5 units each under modules first and second while third module has only 4 units.
They are as follows: Module 1 Unit 1 Protestantism and the Reformation: Clarification of Terms Unit 2 The Emergence of Roman Catholic and the Rise of the Papacy Unit 3 The Call for Reformation Unit 4 Martin Luther and the Pilgrimage to the Reformation Unit 5 The Trial of Luther and the Refuge at Wartburg Castle Module 2 Unit 1 Reformation in Germany and the Evolution of Lutheranism Unit 2 Calvin and the Reformation in Geneva Unit 3 Ulrich Zwingli and the Reformation in Geneva Unit 4 Radical Reformation: The Anabaptists Unit 5 Reformation in Great Britain: England Module 3 Unit 1 Reformation in Great Britain: Scotland Unit 2 The Huguenots and the Reformation in France Unit 3 The Counter-Reformation Unit 4 The Church in Africa: Nigerian Experience Each Unit contains a number of self-test, in general terms, these self-test questions on the materials you have just covered or require to cover.
They are to assist you in your relationship with the traditionalists and it is also meant to help you to evaluate your progress and to reinforce your 3CTH642 COURSE GUIDE understanding of the materials.
Alongside with your tutor-marked assignments, these exercises will assist you in achieving stated learning objectives of the individual units and the course as a whole.
Set Textbooks Bowker, M, The Henrician Reformation: The Diocese of Lincoln under John Langard, 1521-1547.
Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 1981.
Cameron, E. The European Reformation.
Oxford: Oxford University Press, 1991.
Chaunu, P.
(ed.)
The Reformation.
Gloucester: Alan Sutton, 1989.
Gonzalez, J. L. The Story of the Church: The Reformation to the Present, New York: HarperCollins, 1985.
Ganzer, K & Bruno Steimer, Dictionary of the Reformation, New York: Crossroad Publishing, 2002.
Greengrass, M. The Longman Companion to the European Reformation, c.1500–1618 London: Longman, 1998.
Haigh, C. English Reformation: Religion, Politics and Society under the Tudors.
Oxford and New York, 1998.
Hillerbrand, H. J., (ed).
The Oxford Encyclopaedia of the Reformation.
4 vols.
Oxford: Oxford University Press, 1996.
Pettergree, A.
(ed).
The Early Reformation in Europe.
Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 1992.
Robinson, James (ed.)
Readings in European History Vol.
II.
Boston & New York: Ginn & Co., 1904.
Redworth, G. “Whatever Happened to the English Reformation?” History Today 37 (October 1987) 29-32.
Scribner, R. W. For the Sake of Simple Folk: Popular Propaganda for the German Reformation.
Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 1981.
Stephen Tomkins, A Short History of Christianity.
Grand Rapids: William Eerdmans, 2005.
4CTH642 COURSE GUIDE Assignment File In this file, you will find all the details of the work you must submit to your tutor for marking.
The marks you obtain from these assignments will count towards the final marks you obtain for this course.
Further information on assignments will be found in the Assignment File itself and later in this Course Guide in the section, on assessment.
Presentation Schedule The Presentation Schedule included in your course material gives you the expected dates, for the completion of tutor-marked assignments and tutorials time – table.
Remember, you are required to submit all your assignments by the due date.
You should guard against falling behind in your work.
Assessment There are two aspects to the assessment of the course.
First are the tutor-marked assignments; second, is a written examination.
In tackling the assignments, you are expected to apply knowledge acquired during this course.
The assignments must be submitted to your tutor for formal assessment in accordance with the deadlines stated in the Assignment File.
The work you submit to your tutor for assessment will count for 30% of your total course mark.
At the end of the course, you will need to sit for a three-hour examination.
This will also count for 70% of your total course mark.
Tutor Marked Assignments There are fifteen tutor-marked assignments in this course.
You need to submit all the assignments.
The best four (i.e.
the highest four out of the fifteen marks) will be counted.
The total marks for the best four (4) assignments will be 30% of your total course mark.
Assignment questions for the units in this course are contained in the Assignment File.
You should be able to complete your assignments from the information and materials contained in your set textbooks, reading and study units.
However, you are advised to use other references to broaden your viewpoint and provide a deeper understanding of the subject.
When you have completed each assignment, send it, together with TMA (tutor-marked assignment) form to your tutor.
Make sure that each 5CTH642 COURSE GUIDE assignment reaches your tutor on or before the deadline given to the Assignment File.
If, however, you cannot complete your work on time, contact your tutor before the assignment is done to discuss the possibility of an extension.
Final Examination and Grading The final examination of CTH 642 will be of three hours’ duration and have a value of 70% of the total course grade.
The examination will consist of questions which reflect the type of self-testing, practice exercises and tutor–marked problems you have come across.
All areas of the course will be assessed.
You are advised to revise the entire course after studying the last unit before you sit for the examination.
You will find it useful to review your tutor-marked assignments and the comments of your tutor on them before the final examination.
Course Marking Scheme This table shows how the actual course marking is broken down.
Assessment Marks Assignment 1-4 Four assignments, best three marks of the four count at 30% of course marks Final Examination 70% of overall course marks Total 100% of course marks Table 1: Course Marking Scheme Course Overview This table brings together the units, the number of weeks you should take to complete them, and the assignments that follow them.
Module 1 Title of work Week’s Assessment Activity (end of unit) Unit Course Guide 1 1.
Protestantism and the 1 Assignment 1 Reformation: Clarification of Terms 2.
The Emergence of Roman 2 Assignment 2 Catholicism and the Rise of the Papacy 3.
The Call for Reformation 3 Assignment 3 4.
Martin Luther and the 4 Assignment 4 6CTH642 COURSE GUIDE Pilgrimage to the Reformation 5.
The Trial of Luther and the 5 Assignment 5 Refuge at Wartburg Castle Module 2 Unit 1 Reformation in Germany and 6 Assignment 6 the Evolution of Lutheranism 2 Calvin and the Reformation in 7 Assignment 7 Geneva 3.
Ulrich Zwingli and the 8 Assignment 8 Reformation in Geneva 4.
Radical Reformation: The 9 Assignment 9 Anabaptists 5 Reformation in Great Britain: 10 Assignment 10 England Module 3 Unit Reformation in Great Britain: 11 Assignment 11 1 Scotland 2 The Huguenots and the 12 Assignment 12 Reformation in France 3 The Counter-Reformation 13 Assignment 13 4.
The Church in Africa: 14 Assignment 14 Nigerian Experience 15 Revision 16 16 Examination 17 Table 2: Course Overview How to Get the Most from This Course In distance learning the study units replace the university lecturer.
This is one of the great advantages of distance learning; you can read and work through specially designed study materials at your own pace, and at a time and place that suits you best.
Think of it as reading the lecture instead of listening to a lecturer.
In the same way that a lecturer might give you some recommended Readings set you some reading to do, the study units tell you when to read your set textbooks or other recommended material.
Just as a lecturer might give you an in-class exercise, your study units provides exercises for you to do at the appropriate times.
Each of the study units follows a common format.
The first item is an introduction to the subject matter of the unit and how a particular unit is integrated with the other units and the course as a whole.
Next is a set of learning objectives.
These objectives let you know what you should be able to do by the time you have completed the unit.
You should use 7CTH642 COURSE GUIDE these objectives to guide your study.
When you have finished the units you must go back and check whether you have achieved the objectives.
If you make a habit of doing this you will significantly improve your chances of passing the course.
The main body of the unit guides you through the required reading from other sources.
This will usually be either from your set books or from a Reading Section Remember that your tutor’s job is to help you.
When you need help, don’t hesitate to call and ask your tutor to provide it.
1.
Read this Course Guide thoroughly.
2.
Organize a study schedule.
Refer to the ‘Course overview’ for more details.
Note the time you are expected to spend on each unit and how the assignments relate to the units.
Whatever method you chose to use, you should decide on and write in your own dates for working on each unit.
3.
Once you have created your own study schedule, do everything you can to stick to it.
The major reason that students fail is that they get behind with their course work.
If you get into difficulties with your schedule, please let your tutor know before it is too late for help.
4.
Turn to Unit 1 and read the introduction and the objectives for the unit.
5.
Assemble the study materials.
Information about what you need for a unit is given in the ‘Overview’ at the beginning of each unit.
You will almost always need both the study unit you are working on and one of your set books on your desk at the same time.
6.
Work through the unit.
The content of the unit itself has been arranged to provide a sequence for you to follow.
As you work through the unit you will be instructed to read sections from your set books or other articles.
Use the unit to guide your reading.
7. Review the objectives for each study unit to confirm that you have achieved them.
If you feel unsure about any of the objectives, review the study material or consult your tutor.
8.
When you are confident that you have achieved a unit’s objectives, you can then start on the next unit.
Proceed unit by unit through the 8CTH642 COURSE GUIDE course and try to pace your study so that you keep yourself on schedule.
9.
When you have submitted an assignment to your tutor for marking, do not wait for its return before starting on the next unit.
Keep to your schedule.
When the assignment is returned, pay particular attention to your tutor’s comments, both on the tutor-marked assignment form and also on what is written on the assignment.
Consult your tutor as soon as possible if you have any questions or problems.
10.After completing the last unit, review the course and prepare yourself for the final examination.
Check that you have achieved the unit objectives (listed at the beginning of each unit) and the course objectives (listed in this Course Guide).
Tutors and Tutorials There are 8 hours of tutorials provided in support of this course.
You will be notified of the dates, times and location of these tutorials, together with the name and phone number of your tutor, as soon as you are allocated a tutorial group.
Your tutor will mark and comment on your assignments, keep a close watch on your progress and on any difficulties you might encounter and provide assistance to you during the course.
You must mail your tutor- marked assignments to your tutor well before the due date (at least two working days are required).
They will be marked by your tutor and returned to you as soon as possible.
Do not hesitate to contact your tutor by telephone, e-mail, or discussion board if you need help.
The following might be circumstances in which you would find help necessary.
Contact your tutor if: • you do not understand any part of the study units or the assigned readings, • you have difficulty with the self-tests or exercises, • you have a question or problem with an assignment, with your tutor’s comments on an assignment or with the grading of an assignment.
You should try your best to attend the tutorials.
This is the only chance to have face to face contact with your tutor and to ask questions which are answered instantly.
You can raise any problem encountered in the course of your study.
To gain the maximum benefit from course 9CTH642 COURSE GUIDE tutorials, prepare a question list before attending them.
You will learn a lot from participating in discussions actively.
Summary CTH642 intends to introduce you to the history of the Reformation.
Upon completing this course, you will be able to answer questions such as: • What is the Reformation?
• What are the factors that led to the Reformation?
• Discuss the role of the printing press in the Reformation.
• Discuss the role of Martin Luther in the establishment of the Reformation.
• What is the role of Calvin in the Reformation?
• What is the role of John Knox in the Reformation?
• What is the Counter-Reformation?
• What are the tools of the Counter-Reformation?
• What is the outcome of the Council of Trent?
Of course, the questions you will be able to answer are not limited to the above list.
The Reformation is an exciting study.
We wish you success with the course and hope that you will find it both interesting and useful.
10
