Principles of Business Education ECE 412 Course GuideECE 412 COURSE GUIDE COURSE GUIDE ECE412 THE SCHOOL ENVIRONMENT AND THE CHILD Course Code ECE 412 Course Title The School Environment and the Child Course Developer/Writer Dr. Obi,T.E.C.
Faculty of Education Abia State University Uturu Course Editor Dr. (Mrs.) E. O. Egbochuku, Department of Educational Psychology & Curriculum Studies Faculty of Education, UNIBEN Course Coordinator Johnson, H. I.
(Mrs.) School of Education, NOUN, Victoria Island, Lagos .
Programme Leader Dr. Alhassan, A.
B.
School of Education, NOUN, Victoria Island.
NATIONAL OPEN UNIVERSITY OF NIGERIA iiECE 412 COURSE GUIDE National Open University of Nigeria Headquarters 14/16 Ahmadu Bello Way Victoria Island Lagos Abuja office No.
5 Dar es Salaam Street, Off Aminu Kanu Crescent Wuse II, Abuja Nigeria e-mail: centralinfo@nou.edu.ng URL: www.nou.edu.ng Published by: National Open University of Nigeria 2008 First Printed 2008 ISBN: 978-058-808-6 All Rights Reserved iiiECE 412 COURSE GUIDE CONTENTS PAGES Introduction.
…………………………………………………1 Course Aims.…………………………………………………1 Course Objectives……………………………………………2 Working through this Course……………………………….. 2 Course Materials…………………………………………….
2 – 3 Study Units ………………………………………………… 3 – 4 Textbooks and References.………………………………… 4 Presentation Schedule ……………………………………… 4 Assessment………………………………………………….. 4 Tutor-Marked Assignment.………………………………… 4 Final Examination and Grading…………………………….
5 Course Marking Scheme.
………………………………….. 5 Course Overview…………………………………………… 5 – 6 How to Get the Most from this Course ……………………...6 – 8 Summary……………………………………………………..8 – 9 ivECE 412 COURSE GUIDE Introduction In this course, we shall discuss an interesting topic concerned with the school environment and the child.
The school is an institution or an agency created by society for influencing the child’s development and learning.
Learning here means a relatively permanent change in behaviour as a result of experience.
Environment is the surroundings in which an institution situates or a person or objects exist.
School Environment refers to school surroundings.
By school surrounding we mean the school compound, the school buildings, the classroom surroundings, the learning materials in the classroom, the facilities available in the school for recreation, games and sporting activities.
It includes human beings like school children and their mates, the teacher and other non tutorial workers in the school, the sanitation, ventilation, adequate organisation of materials, how noisy and how quiet the school children are and the existence of good relationship between the teacher and children, to mention but these.
All these human and material factors in a school comprise the child’s school environment which he/she can see, hear, touch, smell, taste and feel to receive experiences that influence his development and earning.
At this stage, we can define school environment as all the influences that surround a child in the school and cause him or her to be interested in learning.
Thus, a school environment is a learning environment.
It is you the teacher who makes a school environment a learning environment.
An empty classroom for example, is an empty environment.
In such an environment children learn to be bored, restless and naughty.
Teachers can provide materials that will turn a school or classroom into an effective learning environment.
A learning environment that is adequately organized by the teacher reflects active involvement of the children in learning activities in the school.
Course Aims This course aims at introducing you to the school environment and the influence on the school child.
It is a fascinating study that provides an understanding of the meaning of the school environment and factors that comprise the school environment which influence the child’s development and learning in school.
In this course, the child, the teacher and the classroom materials will be discussed as some examples of school environment that influences and make school interesting and conducive for the child to learn effectively.
1ECE 412 COURSE GUIDE Course Objectives After studying this course, you should be able to: • explain the meaning of the school environment and the influence on the child; • identify the human and material factors that comprise the school environment; • identify an effective environment for learning; • describe the child’s needs and the type of classroom that satisfies the needs; and • discuss the role of the teacher in developing a school or classroom environment for learning.
Working Through This Course 1.
You should read the course guide carefully.
Read the instructions carefully too and obey them all.
2.
You should read through the unit(s) once.
Note the important ideas and make sure that you look up the unfamiliar words in the dictionary.
3.
You should go back and study the unit, step by step as arranged change all the sub-headings into questions and answer them as you re-read.
4.
You should attempt all the self-assessment activities given in each unit.
5.
You should carry out all the tutor marked assignment only after you have understood the entire unit.
6.
You are advised to avail yourself the opportunity of attending the tutorial sessions where you would have the opportunity of sharing knowledge in conference with your tutorial facilitators and peers.
7.
You should participate actively in all discussions during your tutorials.
Make sure you ask questions on anything you do not clearly understand.
Show enough interest and be motivated to achieve effective learning.
The Course Materials You will be provided with the following materials: • Course guide • Study Units 2ECE 412 COURSE GUIDE In addition, useful textbooks which are not compulsory for you to buy or read are recommended for you and listed as supplementary to the course material.
Study Units The following are the study units contained in this course: Module 1 The Teacher’s Role and Characteristics in a School Environment Unit 1 The Meaning of the Term ‘Teacher’, His Characteristics and Factors which influence Teaching and Learning in the School Environment Unit 2 The Teacher’s Academic Roles.
Unit 3 The Teacher’s Administrative Roles.
Unit 4 The Teacher’s Role in Extra-Curricular Activities.
Unit 5 The Teacher’s Role in Keeping Discipline in the Classroom.
Module 2 The Influence of the School Environment on the Child’s Development and Learning Unit 1 The Influence of School Environment on the Child’s Development.
Unit 2 Influence of School Environment on the Characteristics of Children Development.
Unit 3 Influence of School Environment on the Child’s Learning.
Unit 4 The Need for Systematic Planning for Effective Teaching of the Child.
Unit 5 The Need for Classroom Management Module 3 The Role of the School in Personality Development Unit 1 Personality Development in School Children.
Unit 2 Basic Moral Behaviour Children Should Acquire.
Unit 3 Social Behaviour in Children.
Unit 4 The Role of the Schools in Developing Positive Attitude in Children.
Unit 5 The Need for Guidance and Counselling in Schools.
The first module of this course discusses the Teacher’s Role and Characteristics in a School Environment.
The second module discuses the influence of the school environment on the child’s development.
The third 3ECE 412 COURSE GUIDE module rounds up the discussion with the role of the school in personality development.
Text Books and References The following books are recommended for your further reading: please, look for their more recent editions.
Bello, J. Y.
(1982).
Basic Principles of Teaching.
London: John Wiley and sons.
Farrant, J. S. (1980).
Principles and Practice of Education.
England: London.
Federal Republic of Nigeria.
(2004).
National Policy on Education.
Lagos: Federal Ministry of Education.
Ryan, K. and Cooper, J. M. (1974).
Those Who Can Teach.
New York: Houghton Mifflin Company.
Wheeler, D. K. (1978), “Curriculum Process.” London: Hodder and Houghton.
Assignment File There are two types of assessment for this course.
The Tutor Marked Assignment (TMA) and the End of Course Examination.
Assessment This examination concludes the assessment for the course.
It constitutes 70% of the whole marks for the course.
You will be informed of the time for the examination.
Tutor-Marked Assignment The Tutor Marked Assignment is the continuous assessment component of your course.
It accounts for 30% of the total score.
You will be given three TMAS to answer before you are allowed to sit for the end of course examination.
The TMA would be administrated to you by your facilitator and returned to him after you have done the assignment.
4ECE 412 COURSE GUIDE Final Examination and Grading The final examination for ECE 412 will be of three hours duration and have a value of 70% of the total course grade.
The examination will consist of question which reflect the types of self testing.
Practice exercises and tutor marked problems you have previously attended to.
All aspect of the course will be assessed.
Use the time between finishing the last unit and sitting the examination to revised the entire course.
You might find it useful to review your self-tests tutor marked assignment and comments on them before the examination.
The final examination covers information from all parts of the course.
Course Marking Scheme The following table lays out how the actual course marking is broken down.
Assessment Marks Assignment 1 – 15 Fifteen assignments, 30% of course mark Final exam.
Total 70% overall course mark 100% of course Marks.
Course Overview This table brings together units, the number of hours you should take to complete them and the assignment that follow them.
Unit Title of Work Hours Assessment Module 1 1 The Meaning of the Term Teacher Assignment 1 2 The Teacher’s Academic Roles Assignment 2 3 The Teacher’s Administrative Roles Assignment 3 4 The Teacher’s Role in Extra-Curricular Assignment 4 Activities 5 The Teacher’s Role in Keeping Discipline in Assignment 5 the Classroom Module 2 1 The Influence of the School Environment Assignment 6 on the child’s Development 2 Influence of School Environment on the Assignment 7 Characteristics of Children Development 3 Influence of school Environment on the Assignment 8 Child’s Learning 5ECE 412 COURSE GUIDE 4 The Need for Systematic Planning for Assignment 9 Effective Teaching of the Child 5 The Need for Classroom Management Assignment 10 Module 3 1 Personality Development in School Assignment 11 Children 2 Basic Moral Behaviour Children should Assignment 12 Acquire 3 Social Behaviour in Children Assignment 13 4 The Role of the Schools in Developing Assignment 14 Positive Attitude in Children 5 The Need for guidance and Counseling in Assignment 15 Schools How to Get the Most from This Course In distance learning, the study units replace the university.
This is one of the great advantages of distance learning; you can read and work through specially designed study materials at your own pace, and at a time and place that suite your bets.
Think of it as reading the lecture in instead of Listening to a lecturer.
In the same way that a lecturer might set you some reading to do, the study unit tell you when to read your set books or other materials, when to undertake practical works.
Just as a lecturer might give you and in-class exercise, your study units provide exercises for you to do at appropriate points.
Each of the study units follows a common format.
The first item is an introduction to the matter of the units and how a particular unit is integrated with the other units and the course as a whole.
Next is a set of learning objectives.
These objectives let you know what you should use these objectives to guide your study.
When you have finished the unit, you must to back and checks whether have archived the objectives.
If you make a habit of doing this, you greatly improve your chances of passing the course.
The main body of the unit guides you through the required reading other sources.
This will usually be either from our set books or from a readings section.
Self tests re-interspersed throughout the units and answers are given at the end of each test.
Working through these self tests will help you to achieved the objectives of the unit and prepare you for the assignment and the examination.
You should do each self-test as you come to it in the study unit.
There will also be numerous example given in the study units, work through these when you come to them too.
The following is a practical strategy for 6ECE 412 COURSE GUIDE working through the course.
If you run into any problem, get in touch with your tutor.
Remember that your tutor jobs are to help you.
When you need help, don’t provide it.
1.
Read this Course Guide thoroughly 2.
Organize a study schedule.
Refers to the course overview for more details.
Note the time you are expected to spend on each unit and how the assignments relate to the unit.
Important information e.g.
details of your tutorials, and the date of the first day of semester is available from the NOU.
You need to gather together all this information in one place such as your Dairy or a well calendar.
Whatever methods you choose to use, you should have decided on and write in your own dates for working on each unit.
3.
Once you have created your study schedule, to everything you can do to it.
The major reason that students fails is that they get behind with their course work.
If you get into difficult with your schedule, please let your tutor know before it is too late for help.
4.
Turn to unit 1 and read the introduction and objectives for the units.
5.
Assemble the study materials.
Information about what you need for a unit is given in the overview at the beginning of each unit.
You will almost always needs both the study unit you are working on and one of your set books on your desk at the same time.
6.
Work through the unit.
The content of the unit itself has been arranged to provide a sequence for you to follow.
As you work through the unit, you will be instructed to read sections form your set books or other articles.
Use the units to guide your reading.
7.
Keep an eye, ear on your television or radio.
Up-to-date course information will be continuously posted there.
8.
Well before the relevant due date.
Find out mind that you will learn a lot by doing the assignment carefully.
They have been designed to help you meet the objectives of the course and therefore will help you to pass the examination.
Submit all assignments not later then the due date.
9. Review the objectives for each study unit to confirm that you have achieved them.
If you feel ensure about any of the consult your tutor.
7ECE 412 COURSE GUIDE 10.
When you are confident you have a unit objective, you can then start on the next unit.
As you go through the course, try to space your study so that you keep yourself on schedule.
11.
When you have submitted an assignment to your tutor for marking, do not wait for its return before starting on the next unit keep your schedule.
When the assignment is returned, pay particular attention to your tutors comments; both on the tutor-marked assignment form, and also written on the assignment.
Consult your tutor as soon as possible if you have any question or problem.
12.
After completing the last unit, review the course and prepare yourself for the final examination.
Check that you have archived the unit objectives listed at the beginning of each unit and the course objectives listed in this course guide.
Summary This course aims at providing you with some underlying knowledge of the school environment and the influence on the school children.
By the time you complete studying this course, you will be able to answer the following types of questions: 1 (a) what is a school environment?
(b) Describe an effective learning school environment.
2.
Differentiate between a child-centred and teachers centred classrooms.
3.
Discuss the role of the teacher in developing a school or classroom environment for learning.
4.
‘The education of the whole child is the concern of the teacher’ what does this statement suggest, regarding the teacher’s role in extra curricular activities?
5.
Discuss fully with examples the message conveyed to the teacher by the following: I hear, and I forget I see, and I remember I do, and I understand.
6 (a) what is your personal perception of the role of a teacher?
(b) in what ways do you think your teacher education programme in the National Open University of Nigeria is preparing you for your future role as a teacher?
8ECE 412 COURSE GUIDE We wish you success in this course we hope you enjoy the course.
Best Wishes!
9
