THE SCHOOL ENVIRONMENT ECE 412 AND THE CHILDECE 412 THE SCHOOL ENVIRONMENT AND THE CHILD Course Code ECE 412 Course Title The School Environment and the Child Course Developer/Writer Dr. Obi,T.E.C.
Faculty of Education Abia State University Uturu Course Editor Dr. (Mrs.) E. O. Egbochuku, Department of Educational Psychology & Curriculum Studies Faculty of Education, UNIBEN Course Coordinator Johnson, H. I.
(Mrs.) School of Education NOUN, Victoria Island, Lagos .
Programme Leader Dr. Alhassan, A.
B.
School of Education NOUN, Victoria Island, Lagos NATIONAL OPEN UNIVERSITY OF NIGERIA iiECE 412 THE SCHOOL ENVIRONMENT AND THE CHILD National Open University of Nigeria Headquarters 14/16 Ahmadu Bello Way Victoria Island Lagos Abuja office No.
5 Dar es Salaam Street, Off Aminu Kanu Crescent Wuse II, Abuja Nigeria e-mail: centralinfo@nou.edu.ng URL: www.nou.edu.ng Published by: National Open University of Nigeria 2008 First Printed 2008 ISBN: 978-058-808-6 All Rights Reserved iiiECE 412 THE SCHOOL ENVIRONMENT AND THE CHILD CONTENTS PAGES Module 1 The Teacher’s and Characteristics in a School Environment…………………………… 1 Unit 1 The Meaning of the Term ‘Teacher’, His Characteristics and Factors Which Influence Teaching and Learning in the School Environment... ………………….......……..............…….
1 – 8 Unit 2 The Teacher’s Academic Roles……………….
9 – 13 Unit 3 The Teacher’s Administrative Roles………….
14 – 19 Unit 4 The Teacher’s Role in Extra-Curricular Activities ……………………………………...20 – 25 Unit 5 The Teacher’s Role in Keeping Disciple in the Classroom……………………………………...26 – 33 Module 2 The Influence of the School Environment on the Child’s Development and Learning …… 34 Unit 1 The Influence of School of the Environment of the Child’s Development Course Materials ….. 34 – 40 Unit 2 Influence of School Environment on the Characteristics of Children Development……..41 – 49 Unit 3 Influence of School Environment on the Child’s Learning ………………………...…….50 – 55 Unit 4 The Need for Systematic Planning for Effective Teaching of the Child………………..……….. 56 – 63 Unit 5 The Need for Classroom Management……….
64 – 69 Module 3 The Role of the School in Personality Development…………………………………….
70 Unit 1 Personality Development in School Children ….70 – 78 Unit 2 Basic Moral Behaviour Children should Acquire.
…………….………………………..…79 – 86 Unit 3 Social Behaviour in Children …………………87 – 92 Unit 4 The Role of the Schools in Developing Positive Attitude in Children.
……………..….
93 – 98 Unit 5 The Need for Guidance and Counselling in Schools.
……………………………………… 99 –105 ivECE 412 THE SCHOOL ENVIRONMENT AND THE CHILD MODULE 1 THE TEACHER’S AND CHARACTERISTICS IN A SCHOOL ENVIRONMENT Unit 1 The Meaning of the Term ‘Teacher’, His Characteristics and Factors Which Influence Teaching and Learning in the School Environment Unit 2 The Teacher’s Academic Roles Unit 3 The Teacher’s Administrative Roles Unit 4 The Teacher’s Role in Extra-Curricular Activities Unit 5 The Teacher’s Role in Keeping Disciple in the Classroom UNIT 1 THE MEANING OF THE TERM ‘TEACHER’, HIS CHARACTERISTICS AND FACTORS WHICH INFLUENCE TEACHING AND LEARNING IN THE SCHOOL ENVIRONMENT CONTENTS 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objectives 3.0 Main Content 3.1 The Teacher and His Characteristics 3.2 Factors Which Influence Teaching and Learning in the School Environment 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutor-Marked Assignment 7.0 References/Further Readings 1.0 INTRODUCTION In this unit, we are going to examine the meaning of the term ‘Teacher’ his characteristics and multiple roles in a school environment.
The teacher is the most important influence of all in the child’s environment.
Indeed it is he or she who makes a school environment conducive for learning.
Creating a positive conducive classroom or school environment cannot depend on the classroom.
It is the teacher who can change an ordinary classroom into an environment for learning.
It is a teacher who has interest, enthusiasm and understanding of the children’s needs; and who enjoys teaching children and watching them learn that will enjoy creating an environment that helps children to learn.
1ECE 412 THE SCHOOL ENVIRONMENT AND THE CHILD 2.0 OBJECTIVES By the end of this unit, you should be able to: • explain what is meant by the word teacher; • describe the characteristics of the teacher; and • explain the teacher’s multiple roles in a school environment.
3.0 MAIN CONTENT 3.1 The Teacher and His Characteristics The term “Teacher” or “Teachers” embrace all those persons in schools who are responsible for the education of pupils or students.
The term also includes school heads, supervisors and inspectors and all those who assist teachers in their work through advice or direct action.
But for the purpose of this unit, the term “teachers” refers only to those who assist pupils or students in schools to develop their potentials and learn the skills that would enable them become useful to themselves and to the nation in general.
Teachers also assist the children to acquire some positive changes in their behaviour.
In addition the teacher assists children to develop independent judgement and action.
Over all, the central objective of teacher’s assistance to the child is to equip him or her with the knowledge and the skills that would enable him solve his or her problems and live a successful life in the society.
To achieve these objectives, the teacher should possess the following characteristics.
The General Characteristics of the Teacher These characteristics of the teacher include: 1.
Emotional and Mental Stability: This is shown in the teacher’s sense of affection; security and self-respect.
The emotions of the teacher have a bearing on his or her teaching effectiveness.
Teachers that can control their emotions tend to be very effective, while those that do not are not as effective in influencing the development of children.
Such teachers commit blunders in handling children and their problems.
For example, a teacher who loses his or her temper is showing wickedness rather than strength to children.
Further more, you must note that to lose one’s temper is to lose one’s dignity and to lower oneself respect in the eyes of school children.
It is indeed, fatal for the children because it could lead to their maladjustment and prevent their proper emotional, mental and behavioural development.
2.
Patience: A Teacher must be patient to positively influence 2ECE 412 THE SCHOOL ENVIRONMENT AND THE CHILD school children.
A good teacher should be able to patiently deal with problems of children in his or her class.
Patience will enable teachers to be willing to repeat lesson plans, lesson presentation and re-evaluation of children’s learning outcomes when set lesson objectives are not achieved by the children.
Beyond this, it will enable the teacher not to believe that the cane can drive in sense into the children’s head to increase learning.
He or she would rather accept the use of rewards not punishments to effectively achieve children’s high level of learning.
3.
Knowledge Ability: The teacher should have a good grasp and understanding of the subject he or she teaches children.
The teacher’s cognitive ability and his or her intellectual characteristics shape his thought, his knowledge of the content of what he teaches and his method of imparting his ideas into the child.
This in fact builds in the teacher self-confidence.
The teacher should be professionally prepared in the major subjects.
These prepare a teacher, however he should read wide and know what is happening in other fields of study, not just in one or two subjects.
He should be able to exploit this knowledge in his or her teaching.
Teachers occupy a high and respectable position in the thoughts and minds of learners at any level of education.
Pupils or students attach more intellectual value to their teacher than to their parents and relatives.
They look up to the teacher as one who knows all the answers and as an inexhaustible source of knowledge.
For example, you may want to help a child with his or her homework, you may be surprised to be told by the child that, “that is not how my teacher taught us to do it”.
A teacher should be knowledgeable and intelligent and should have a sound knowledge of the content in all the subjects so that he or she can deliver the intellectual goods.
You must know that a teacher, it is said, can only give out what knowledge he or she does have.
4.
Piety and Honesty: This relates to the teacher’s desire to help student’s intellectual society, emotionally and otherwise.
5.
Physical Health and Potentiality: This is shown in the teacher’s liveliness, zest for knowledge and spirit of adventure.
6.
Originality and Resourcefulness: This has to do with the teacher’s capability in the invention of new teaching methods, improvisation of teaching materials.
7.
Personal Relationship with Children: The teacher should 3ECE 412 THE SCHOOL ENVIRONMENT AND THE CHILD possess the qualities of cheerfulness, kindness, gentleness, patience, good sense of humour, friendliness, general charm of character to succeed in relating and dealing with children.
These qualities make the teacher approachable and encourage the children or students to bring their problems to him or her voluntarily.
Additionally, learners respond more positively to the efforts of teachers who are gentle, kind, cheerful, friendly with a good sense of humour.
On the other hand, there should be no doubt that negative teacher qualities such as unfriendliness, moodiness, suspicion, truancy, unhappiness, resentfulness, fearfulness, cruelty, easily discouraged, autocracy, partiality, apathy, falsehood, lack of firmness, lack of fairness, lack of justice, and lack of devotion to duty, impatience and loss of temper would naturally be found repulsive to school children and would limit their freedom of self-expression and consequently the teacher’s effectiveness.
The teacher’s attitude towards pupils or students should be friendly and positive.
The teacher should regard his or her students as high achievers and motivate them to achieve high.
The teacher must see himself or herself as a facilitator.
As a facilitator, the relationship between him or her and the learner in the school learning situation must be genuine or real.
This realness enables both the teacher and learners express their natural feelings whether they are positive or negative.
The teacher as facilitator must value the learner as he or she is and also values his or her strengths and weakness.
As a human being with this attitude, the teacher can accept the learner’s natural reasons such as feelings of apathy, fear or failure, etc.
This attitude too, shows the facilitator’s confidence and trust in the capacity of human beings.
Furthermore, the teacher should have empathic understanding for the learner.
This refers to the ability of the facilitator to put himself in the position of the learner.
When the teacher sees himself or herself as a facilitator and his or her personal relationship with learners is characterised by natural feelings, emphatic understanding of the learner and valuing and acceptance of the learner as he or she is, a climate that promotes self-initiated experimental learning will be created.
In other words, the right type of attitude on the part of the teacher creates an environment or climate that is conducive and promotes learning.
This obviously shows that the teaching success of the teacher will depend very much upon the exhibited characteristics.
The teacher is like a parent.
He/she takes the place of the mother or 4ECE 412 THE SCHOOL ENVIRONMENT AND THE CHILD father and as such, should be firm, fair, loving, caring, hardworking and honest.
The teacher exhibits these traits so as to enable the learners to acquire them.
The children should be able to approach the teacher for help at any time and also to express their ideas.
The teacher should not harass and scold the learner unnecessarily.
If the teacher is harsh and not approachable, his or her learners may become truants.
They may not participate actively in the teaching-learning process.
A cordial relationship between the teacher and learners will help to create a conducive school environment that will facilitate learning on part of the learners.
SELF-ASSESSMENT EXERCISE 1 i List six characteristics of a good teacher.
ii List four characteristics of a bad teacher.
3.1 Factors Which Influence Teaching and Learning in the School Environment There are numerous factors which influence, teaching and learning in the school environment.
These factors are: the classroom environment, cultural factors, economic situations, urban/rural dichotomy in teacher posting, education and training of teachers, tests, teacher’s attitude to work and rewards and punishment.
Classroom Environment Classroom environment refers to the teacher and children including the curriculum, actual teaching, classroom management, classroom climate (noisy or quiet), and the physical condition of the classroom (dark or illuminated) (hard floor or sandy floor) (arrangement of seats etc).
A good classroom environment can be achieved through: 1.
Classroom organisation and class size-the number of children in each class should be manageable.
2.
Physical organisation of the class to ensure good seating arrangement, floor space and placement of the chalkboard at the centre of the classroom.
The classroom should be well illuminated with enough light and there should be free flow of air through adequate ventilation.
3.
Teachers’ and children’s disposition should reflect cheerful atmosphere.
The teacher should show interest and concern for her children and work.
In the classroom the teacher’s voice should be audible, controlled and should be heard by every member of the 5ECE 412 THE SCHOOL ENVIRONMENT AND THE CHILD class.
A child that is partially sighted should be made to sit in front of the class in order to help him or her see and copy more easily what is on the chalkboard.
During oral reading exercise, a partially sighted pupil should be placed where there is enough light to see what he or she is about to read.
Writing on the chalkboard for such group of children will be of bold character in order to help the child read without much difficulty.
The children are expected to be calm and attentive and show involvement in class activities to ensure active group interaction between teacher and pupils.
These are children who are obviously enjoying learning in the classroom.
Cultural Factors In traditional African society, children are to be seen not heard.
Questions from children are often neglected.
As a result these children may grow up to be timid and when this attitude is carried to school the children’s chances of learning are hindered.
A child in the classroom should be free to ask questions and make contributions towards the teaching/learning process.
Learning is an interdependent effort.
The child shares his or her perceptions of reality, listens intently to the perception of others and if need be revises his world view out of what he has learned.
For children who are shy and unable to talk in class, the teacher should encourage them through promptings and questions directed to such children.
When this is done quite often, these passive children will realise that they can contribute meaningfully to class discussions which will lead to learning.
Teacher’s Attitude to Work A teacher should be devoted to duty.
The way and manner he takes his work is very important in the learning process.
School children can read situations and quickly make accurate deductions from prevailing circumstances.
A lesson presented by a disinterested teacher to his class children can fail to awaken them to action.
The children may feel that the lesson is not important and correspondingly they may fail to pay attention.
A teacher who takes two weeks or more to grade his students’ answers to homework or any assignment is showing lack of seriousness to work.
Teachers may show poor motivation by sitting down or half lying on the table while delivering their lesson, such attitude to work on the part of the teacher is detrimental to learning.
You must note that the teacher serves as a model to her students.
A hardworking teacher is bound to produce equally a hardworking student whose attitude towards learning is intrinsically motivated.
Economic Situation 6ECE 412 THE SCHOOL ENVIRONMENT AND THE CHILD The economic situation prevailing at any point in time affects teacher’s motivation and the level of in-put in his class work.
A satisfied teacher who at least is sure of his monthly salary and other benefits works excitedly towards the end of the month for his emoluments.
He therefore puts in his best at work ensuring that his students get the maximum out of his teaching.
But when the prospects of a continued payment of his salary are gloomy, the motivation and enthusiasm to teach evaporate.
The teacher’s concentration in the work wears, and the children, when they know it, sympathize with him.
An unhappy teacher is incapable of relating favourably to his children and since learning involves relationship and interaction, this is bound to be badly affected and the losers are the children.
Other Factors Other factors include schools functioning without libraries, lack of funds for essential articles like chalk, pens, and to carry out repairs, large class size handled by a single teacher which results in teaching difficulties and minimal learning, shortage of teachers and inadequate health facilities.
SELF-ASSESSMENT EXERCISE 2 List 4 factors which influence teaching and leading in school environment.
4.0 CONCLUSION The teacher is the person in school who is responsible for the education of pupils or students.
Some of his characteristics lead to his success as a teacher while some factors influence him and his pupils or students in the school environment.
5.0 SUMMARY Emotional and mental stability, patience, knowledge, ability, honesty, originality and resourcefulness; personal relationship with students are some of the characteristics of a good teacher.
Teachers attitude to work, culture of the people, prevailing economic conditions, in the country, shortage of teachers, are some of the factors that influence the teacher and the child in the school environment.
7ECE 412 THE SCHOOL ENVIRONMENT AND THE CHILD ANSWER TO SELF-ASSESSMENT EXERCISE 1 i Six Characteristics of a Good Teacher are: (1) Emotional stability (2) Patience (3) Honesty (4) Knowledge/ability (5) Resourcefulness (6) Personal relationship with learner.
ii Four Characteristics of a bad Teacher are: (1) Autocracy (2) Partiality (3) Truancy (4) Cruelty ANSWER TO SELF-ASSESSMENT EXERCISE 2 (1) Classroom Environment (2) Cultural Factors (3) Teacher’s Attitude (4) Economic Situations 6.0 TUTOR-MARKED ASSIGNMENT Discuss any four factors that influence teacher and children in the school environment.
7.0 REFERENCES/FURTHER READINGS Bruner, J. S. (1978).
Towards a Theory of Instruction.
Cambridge: The Belknap Press of Harvard University.
Hamachek, D. (1969).
Characteristics of Good Teachers and Implication for Teacher education.
PH, Delta: Kappan, 50, 341-344.
ILO and UNESCO, (1984).
The Status of Teachers Geneva: Labour Office.
Maduewesi, E. J.
(1988).
General Methodology for Primary Schools.
Nsukka: University of Nigeria, Institute of Education.
Onwuka, Uga.
(1981).
Curriculum Development for Africa.
Onitsha: Africana Fep Publishers limited.
8ECE 412 THE SCHOOL ENVIRONMENT AND THE CHILD UNIT 2 THE TEACHER’S ACADEMIC ROLES CONTENTS 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objectives 3.0 Main Content 3.1 The Teacher’s Academic Role 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutor-Marked Assignment 7.0 References/Further Readings 1.0 INTRODUCTION In unit one, we discussed the meaning of the term “Teacher” his characteristics and the factors which influence teaching and learning in the school environment.
It is hoped that you gathered that the teacher’s attitude to his work, students’ attitude to their studies and the class work can create and influence a school environment and classroom climate that would promote effective teaching and learning.
If the teacher is characterized with emotional stability, patience, honesty, knowledge/ability, resourcefulness, appreciation, interest, gentleness, humility, and understanding of the children’s needs, then he or she can create a school or classroom environment that will help children to learn.
In this unit, we shall discuss the teacher’s Academic role.
2.0 OBJECTIVES By the end of the unit, you will be able to: • identify the academic role of the teacher; and • discuss the academic role of the teacher.
3.0 MAIN CONTENT 3.1 The Academic Role of the Teacher The academic role of the teacher refers to the teaching job of the teacher.
The job of a teacher is developing human potentials through good and effective teaching in the school environment.
The teacher believes that the environment is a crucial factor in human development, and it determines what a child becomes.
This implies that when the child is born, he comes like a clean slate into an environment.
The environment 9ECE 412 THE SCHOOL ENVIRONMENT AND THE CHILD influences the child and makes him/her what he or she becomes as an adult.
The teacher is engaged to maximize the school environment to provide a variety of environmental stimuli that can encourage children in an active process of learning.
Such enthusiastic learning leads to a permanent change of behaviour within the individual.
All the roles teachers perform such as: - interpretation of the curriculum, - developing the syllabus, - mapping out the scheme of work, - preparing the lesson plans and lesson notes, - the actual teaching with motivation and reinforcement; - the application of varying methods, skills and materials to provide for individual differences, - testing for set objectives and recycling where objectives are not achieved comprise the academic role of the teacher.
The interpretation of the curriculum is also one of the academic roles of teachers.
The school curriculum is the programme of studies, programme of activities and programme of guidance counselling which a school wants its students to have, so that the students at the end of schooling would have realized the optimum development of intellect, character, skill and competences to function in their social environment with happiness.
Interpreting the school curriculum starts with the classroom teacher understanding the reason for teaching the various subjects in the curriculum.
The teacher also should understand how his or her subject fits into the overall school curriculum.
If the school curriculum is to serve real purpose then it must assist each student to see the value of the past in relation to the present and the future.
It must equip the student with the necessary skills for modern living, and help to keep the student a fully integrated member of his or her community.
The teacher co-ordinates the different activities and experiences in the classroom, in order to ensure the harmonious functioning of the learning process that leads to the expected changes in behaviour.
To assist the teacher achieve this goal, he develops his lesson plans from the scheme of work and the teaching syllabus.
By so doing the teacher takes decisions that inevitably change the curriculum from exactly what was intended by the curriculum planners to what is experienced in the 10ECE 412 THE SCHOOL ENVIRONMENT AND THE CHILD classroom by the learners.
The teacher makes analysis of his learners or students to understand their characteristics and determine their developmental levels and needs as well as differences in the learner.
The teacher decides what to teach the students and the tasks involved, he further decides the instructional objectives on the basis of the objectives.
The teacher decides how to teach it (method) and the materials to use as well as the teaching skill to employ and the evaluation criteria to determine when objectives are achieved.
After planning and making preparations and arrangements the teacher makes a written summary of the lesson plan in a lesson note.
The second role of the teacher is that of carrying out the teaching of the planned lesson.
The main focus of the teacher’s lesson presentation is to change the behaviour of the learner.
The teacher should use appropriate entry behaviour tests to determine the readiness of the students.
He should also use appropriate set-induction teaching skills to arouse their interest to pay attention to the lesson.
To further hold their interests and attention, the teacher should ensure that his teaching proceeds from: • Known to unknown • Simple to complex • Particular to general.
The teacher should use varieties of teaching methods as determined by the lesson objectives.
Methods of teaching used should provide the students natural tendency to express themselves and to do things.
The use of a variety of teaching materials selected at the planning stage in the light of the stated objectives should be adopted.
The use of concrete materials like real objects, pictures, graphs, charts, drawings etc to improve teaching and learning should be adopted.
A multi-media use of the materials is advocated; some for interest arousal while others are for deepening understanding.
Improvisation by the teacher and students is very necessary particularly when selected teaching and learning materials are not available and cannot be bought especially at this period of economic hardship.
The teacher’s third role is that of a helper or a facilitator.
The teacher therefore, should help and guide the learners in actively making discoveries and solving problems.
It is the child and not the teacher who is there to do the learning.
In other words, it is not the role of the teacher to explore the environment and discover things for the learners while they watch and listen.
Children are by nature active, inquisitive and 11ECE 412 THE SCHOOL ENVIRONMENT AND THE CHILD curious and they normally come to school with these characteristics.
It is unfortunate that it is in the school that teachers turn children into passive listeners as they talk and chalk on the board in the classroom.
You must note that when a child is quiet he or she must be sick.
The role of the teacher is to encourage children to be active and to direct their activities along the lines specially prepared by the school.
It has been observed that learners (both children and adults) learn by listening and watching, but they will learn better, i.e more rapidly and with a higher level of retention if they are actively involved in the learning process.
This explains why learners should be encouraged to discuss a problem, think out a solution, and practice a skill.
They must be given an opportunity to practice what they learn before they forget it or dismiss it from their memory.
Learners learn by solving realistic problems.
Therefore teachers should present practical realistic problems to learners.
The fourth role of the teacher is to use reinforcement in the form of verbal praise, approving words such as ‘very good’, ‘excellent’, ‘very well done’, ‘good’ and other forms of reinforcement like prizes, special tributes, citations, awards, certificates etc to strengthen a student’s, emitted behaviour in the right direction.
This will bring about the desired behaviour to be repeated by the student.
For reinforcement to be most effective in learning, it must follow immediately after the behaviour being reinforced, and there will be clear evidence to the learner that the two (the emitted desired behaviour and the reinforcement) are connected.
Sheer reinforcement is an unsatisfactory way to learn.
The teacher should also practice use of reviews.
It is known that frequent reviews immediately after initial learning, followed by not so frequent ones over a period of time help to “settle” what is learned and aids retention of knowledge.
The teacher should note that pleasurable experiences are the easiest to remember.
Memory works best when it is not a rule to be driven by force.
A teacher who is aware of this and who wishes his children to remember what is taught knows that he must make his teaching pleasurable, vivid and full of life.
The fifth role is that of a manager of human and material resources of the class.
The teacher must arrange the children in an orderly manner and maintain adequate control for effective teaching to take place.
The sixth role is that the teacher is the children’s counsellor in the class.
He should solve the learning and sometimes personal problems of his students.
This is because unless such problems are identified and nipped 12ECE 412 THE SCHOOL ENVIRONMENT AND THE CHILD in the bud they will adversely affect the learning abilities of the pupils.
SELF-ASSESSMENT EXERCISE How will teacher keep the interest of learners?
4.0 CONCLUSION The Teacher performs many academic roles in the school environment to achieve effective teaching and learning.
5.0 SUMMARY There are six roles of the teacher that affect his or her teaching effectiveness.
They are: • Interpreting the school curriculum.
• Carrying out the teaching of the planned lesson in the classroom.
• Helping the learner as a facilitator.
• He is the human and material resource manager of the class.
• He is the counsellor of the children.
• He is the reinforcer of desired emitted behaviour.
ANSWER TO SELF-ASSESSMENT EXERCISE To teach from: (1) Known to unknown (2) Simple to complex (3) Particular to general 6.0 TUTOR-MARKED ASSIGNMENT List any five academic roles of the teacher and discuss any one.
7.0 REFERENCES/FURTHER READINGS Awotua-Efebo, E. B.
(1999).
Effective Teaching Principles and Practice.
Port Harcourt: Paragraphic.
Ebele, Maduewesi (1988).
Introduction to Teaching.
Enugu Nigeria: ABIC Books.
Kevin, Ryan and James, Cooper (1972).
Those Who Can Teach.
Boston: Houghton Mifflin and Co. 13ECE 412 THE SCHOOL ENVIRONMENT AND THE CHILD UNIT 3 THE TEACHER’S ADMINISTRATIVE ROLES CONTENTS 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objectives 3.0 Main Content 3.1 Classroom Management 3.2 Teacher as Participant in Decision Making 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutor-Marked Assignment 7.0 References/Further Readings 1.0 INTRODUCTION In unit two, we discussed the Academic role of the teacher.
It is hoped that you learned that the teacher performs some academic roles which include the roles of interpreting the school curriculum, lesson presentation - Helping the learner as facilitator, manager of class human and material resources, a counsellor and giver of reinforcement.
In this unit, we shall discuss the Teacher’s Administrative roles.
2.0 OBJECTIVES By the end of this unit, you will be able to: • identify the administrative roles of the teacher; • discuss classroom management as one of the administrative roles of the teacher; and • discuss teacher’s participation in school decision making.
3.0 MAIN CONTENT 3.1 Classroom Management Meaning: Classroom Management is the process by which a teacher gets his or her pupils to co-operate in directing actions towards achieving the proper atmosphere or climate in the classroom for learning.
It also means arranging classroom resources (pupils and equipment) in an orderly manner for effective use and management.
14ECE 412 THE SCHOOL ENVIRONMENT AND THE CHILD This involves placement of pupils’ lockers with tables in orderly roles; leaving the windows open to allow for ventilation, central placement of the chalkboard; placement of pupils with health problems at appropriate places and other arrangements to make for easy movement.
Beyond orderly placement of pupils and facilities, classroom management involves the teacher establishing clear routines for doing things in order to get orderly behaviour in the classroom from students.
For example, when children, are given exercises to do in class, they should be told whether they are allowed to talk to each other or not, to take their finished work up to the teacher or class rep. or monitor or wait for the teacher to come around.
Similarly, a routine for receiving visitors in the class will enable the pupils to understand what to do when ever a visitor arrives.
The teacher should inform the children the procedure for getting the teacher’s attention, whether it is by taking turns in a line or is it a scramble for the survival of the fittest?
The teacher should establish the process for doing classroom chores such as cleaning the chalkboard, setting the chalk and dusters, sweeping the classroom, watering the plants, if any, of closing the windows after class/school activities, and distributing pupil’s exercise books.
Purpose The major purpose of the orderly arrangement of pupils and equipment is to create a conducive school or classroom environment for learning.
Such a well organized classroom environment leads to efficiency in the use of class space, class time, use of teacher and children’s energy, the use of teaching and learning materials.
It also helps the teacher to create an atmosphere which would foster imaginative and creative activities.
Routines have to be set up for doing a number of chores so that courtesy respect for other’s rights and the care of classroom facilities and cleanliness are properly provided for.
It will also enable both teacher and learners work smoothly in the classroom without interrupting and unduly disrupting the teaching and learning activities going on.
Furthermore, teaching materials like chalk, dusters, globes, maps, charts, graphs, realia, orthography, flannel/graphs etc should be stored in places where they are easily accessible so that they can be taken out and used when necessary without undue inconvenience.
In a well managed classroom, the teacher and the pupils work out an acceptable procedure for pupil’s movement in and out, as well as within the classroom.
When pupils or students need to leave the classroom to ease themselves, they need not disturb the whole class but only make a sign to the teacher or monitor.
They should develop a sense of timing which considers others’ feelings and convenience.
During certain 15ECE 412 THE SCHOOL ENVIRONMENT AND THE CHILD lessons, it might be desirable for children to discuss or consult each other.
This should be agreed upon so that it should not be regarded as disruptive.
The teacher should create an attractive learning atmosphere by pleasant manner.
Seats for young children should conform to their size and their cleanliness which promotes the child’s aesthetic sense should be maintained.
The taller pupils should sit at the back while the shorter ones should sit in front.
Those who are hard of hearing should be allowed to sit in front to be able to hear the teacher.
Those pupils with poor sight should have their sitting positions adjusted to suit their condition.
Children with high I.Q should be given more challenges while those of low I.Q.
should be helped to move at their own pace.
Courtesy, promptness, punctuality can become part of the inbuilt management of the classroom.
The teacher should set the standard in being courteous, punctual, pleasant and tidy, both in personal appearance and the way he or she arranges his or her table and books in the classroom.
Thus, the well organized teacher runs the well managed classroom.
To be able to achieve good class management, a teacher needs to pay attention to two qualities, namely: 1.
Efficiency and 2.
Effectiveness 1.
Efficiency: The efficiency of a teacher is the measure of the direct activities of his class.
For a teacher to efficiently manage his class, he needs to be qualified, systematic and enthusiastic.
A teacher needs to be qualified for the job.
He needs to have the knowledge of not only what he has to teach, but also of how to teach.
In terms of knowledge, the teacher must always know more than the pupils.
This means that a teacher must continue to read widely and deeply to be able to keep up with new developments and point them out to his students.
In terms of how to teach, the teacher needs to be trained in the act of teaching.
In addition to his training in a teachers’ college or university, he should take advantage of in-service training, seminars and workshops to keep him up-to-date in the area of teaching methodologies.
To be efficient, a teacher needs to be systematic in his class management; he must achieve what he sets out to do within a given 16ECE 412 THE SCHOOL ENVIRONMENT AND THE CHILD time.
They include seating arrangements, cleaning the classroom, tidiness and orderliness, storage of equipment, permission to leave class, lesson preparation, marking and return of pupil’s assignments.
The teacher should be proud of his profession.
He should be punctual to school and be well prepared for each lesson to be taught each day.
Anything which is worth doing is worth doing well.
He should maintain a high degree of enthusiasm.
2.
Effectiveness: The effectiveness of a teacher is measured by the academic achievements of his pupils and the level to which they display the type of behaviour expected of them by the society.
For a teacher to manage his class effectively he needs to assess his students continuously, communicate clearly and set a good personal example.
The teacher needs to keep good records of the work of his students.
The students should be given assignments regularly so that they can practice for themselves what they have been taught.
The teacher must also develop the habit of correcting and marking the students’ work quickly and also have the students correct their own errors.
Delays in correcting students’ assignments can lead to establishing wrong ideas in their minds which make the subjects difficult to understand.
Continuous assessment will help the teacher to know the performance of each student and he will be able to determine the level of help each student needs.
For the teacher to be effective he needs to be able to communicate with his students clearly.
If a teacher cannot communicate with his students properly, they will not understand him well, and they find learning his subject difficult.
The teacher’s language must be simple, clear and to the point.
The use of appropriate audio-visual media helps a great deal in communicating.
In the area of character training, the teacher must see himself as a model to his students.
Children are very observant and they tend to imitate their teachers.
Teachers therefore owe it to society in general to give a good example for the students to follow.
Teachers must have a very high sense of responsibility for their behaviour.
SELF-ASSESSMENT EXERCISE 1 From your understanding of our discussion, what does the term classroom management mean?
17ECE 412 THE SCHOOL ENVIRONMENT AND THE CHILD 3.2 Teacher as Participants in Decision Making Decision making is the process by which a teacher chooses his course of action from various alternatives in order to achieve his objectives.
You should take note of two important points here.
First, decision making involves a choice; if there is only one course of action and there are no other alternatives to consider, then there is no decision to be made.
Second, there are two types of decision namely: Individual decisions and group decisions.
Individual decisions are decisions a teacher takes himself on those activities that he must carry out alone.
Such activities include the following: • Breaking up of the syllabus into terminal and weekly schemes of work or breaking up the scheme of work into units and daily lesson topics; • The sequence of the topics to be taught; • Initiating the back up plans; • Selecting teaching and learning materials to be used; • Choosing resource persons to be used; • Making lesson plans and writing lesson notes; • Arranging field-trips or educational visits.
Group decisions are decisions a teacher has to take with other people.
It allows for participation of different interest groups in the decision making process.
Such interest groups include the students, other teachers, parents and the local community.
Decisions with students are decisions which call for the active participation of the students in such areas as of class leader or (monitor), unscheduled lessons and extra lessons outside the normal time-table, and extra-curricular activities.
Decisions with other teachers are the decisions that would require the co-operation of other teachers in such areas as the use of common school facilities like the games field, and school library, the planning of the general school time-table, common school activities, team teaching, or team planning of subject matter and the sequence of teaching.
Decisions with parents are the decisions that would require the co- operation of parents in areas such as parent’s consent for their children to go on field-trip or excursion that might involve risks, and the discipline of problem children.
Decisions with local community are decisions that would require the co-operation of the local community in such areas as community service programmes and cultural activities.
18ECE 412 THE SCHOOL ENVIRONMENT AND THE CHILD SELF-ASSESSMENT EXERCISE 2 What two qualities will a teacher need for good class management?
4.0 CONCLUSION The teacher plays some administrative roles to establish a conducive school climate to achieve set objectives.
5.0 SUMMARY The teacher undertakes classroom management and participates in decision making as part of his administrative roles to achieve school effectiveness.
ANSWER TO SELF-ASSESSMENT EXERCISE 2 1.
Efficiency 2.
Effectiveness 6.0 TUTOR-MARKED ASSIGNMENT Prepare a checklist from the items discussed in this unit to be used to evaluate children’s learning environment.
7.0 REFERENCES/FURTHER READINGS Njoku, A.
C (1997).
Key Points and Essential Notes in Education Principles and Practice.
Benin City: Favourite Printers.
Ryan, K. and Cooper, J. M. (1972).
Those Who Can Teach: New York: Houghton Miffin Company.
19ECE 412 THE SCHOOL ENVIRONMENT AND THE CHILD UNIT 4 THE TEACHER’S ROLE IN EXTRA- CURRICULAR ACTIVITIES CONTENTS 1.0 Introduction.
2.0 Objectives 3.0 Main Content 3.1 The Meaning and Advantages of Extra Curricular Activities 3.2 The Role of the Teacher in Extra-Curricular Activities 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutor-Marked Assignment.
7.0 References/Further Readings 1.0 INTRODUCTION In unit 3, we discussed the teachers Administrative Roles.
It is hoped you gathered that the teacher undertakes classroom management and participates in decision making as part of his administrative roles to achieve school effectiveness.
In this unit, we shall discuss the teacher’s role in extra-curricular activities.
2.0 OBJECTIVES By the end of this unit, you should be able to: • identify the various roles of the teacher in extra-curricular activities; • discuss the teacher’s roles in extra-curricular activities; and • discuss the teacher’s function in managing physical facilities in the school.
3.0 MAIN CONTENT 3.1 The Meaning and Advantages of Extra-Curricular Activities Extra-curricular refers to activities outside the regular course of academic work or studies in the school.
Such activities are games, sports and physical recreation.
Their importance is shown in the saying that “all work and no play makes jack a dull boy” This statement simply 20ECE 412 THE SCHOOL ENVIRONMENT AND THE CHILD means that mental learning cannot be successful without proper physical health.
Apart from supporting mental activities, sports and games are crucial factors in the development of personality and influence the development of self-confidence, social skills and health inter-personal relationships.
Education is a process of human growth involving the mind, the body as well as relation with others.
It is characterized by continuous development and changes.
It is an on-going thing and continues as long as one is alive.
The teacher is concerned about effective learning, interested in monitoring the learner’s progress, all round activities both in the classroom and outside the classroom such as in games field so that learning gains are made both mentally and physically.
This is education of the whole learner.
It is the concern of the teacher to take care of the proper development of the physical, emotional, social and mental aspects of the children.
Many useful skills and concepts are learned outside the classroom and the teacher has to follow and monitor such learning outside the classroom so that it can supplement and support classroom learning.
You must note that human development is interactive because the physical and the socio-emotional aspects affect the mental aspect.
The role of the teacher in extra-curricular activities is not only to monitor the learner’s progress but also to get to know his students as persons outside the classroom.
The games and sports field provides an ideal setting for the teacher to get to know his or her students as persons outside the classroom.
Furthermore, this kind of opportunity gives an invaluable insight into understanding human behaviour such that the teacher can then help the students on the basis of actual and authentic understanding.
Again teachers who serve as games masters/mistresses and coach or teach sporting activities not only enrich their own teaching experience, but also enrich the learning experiences of their students.
It appears, the teachers’ teaching is incomplete without this aspect.
You should remember that beyond games and sporting activities, a great deal of learning takes place outside the classroom in clubs and other school organizations.
For example, Debating societies, Writers club, farmers club, Science clubs, Religious organizations and Choirs, Red Cross, Girls Guide and Boy Scout movements are among organizations and clubs which teach children a vast number of skills.
These skills help the development of personality by teaching self-confidence, demonstrating the value of service to others, teaching concepts like democracy, the dignity of labour, care of others, endurance, integrity, perseverance and so on.
You must understand that since education does 21ECE 412 THE SCHOOL ENVIRONMENT AND THE CHILD not consist of academic achievement alone and since the classroom is not always adequate for you to practice the many theoretical concepts learned, these clubs and organizations serve as the laboratory for the ‘practical’.
These extra-curricular clubs and organizations provide the opportunity for children to trying out the theoretical ideas in the real human forum.
Therefore the teacher should take interest in and play an active role that support the students’ clubs and organizations.
You must know that the teacher cannot deem himself to have completed his teaching when only the theoretical aspect has been covered in the classroom leaving the practical aspects in extra-curricular activities outside the classroom.
You are to notice now that extra – curricular activities or out of class room activities whether in the form of games, sporting and recreational activities or in the form of clubs and other organizations are part of the learning experiences obtained in the school indeed.
They are training grounds for the personality, for interpersonal relations, and for understanding student’s behaviour.
They constitute the laboratory for the practical application of various skills learned example, physical, verbal, organizational, interpersonal and others.
The teacher cannot claim to have completed teaching a topic or course when the practicum is outstanding.
The practicum is part of the topic or course and cannot be separated from it.
So are extra-curricular activities.
Teachers have roles or responsibility for them just as for the school subjects studied inside the classroom.
SELF-ASSESSMENT EXERCISE 1 List four advantages of extra curricular activities 3.2 The Role of the Teacher in Extra-Curricular Activities In the administrative hierarchy of the school, the teacher is directly responsible to the school head and directly responsible for the students.
In the school organizational set up the teacher is expected to play three major roles: as a participant in decision making, as a classroom and out of classroom teacher and as a counsellor.
The teacher is a participant in decision making.
There are areas where decisions are made at a higher level; for example policy statements handed down from the higher educational authorities who indicate the extra-curricular activities to engage in and the terminal performance objectives of the school such as the skills the students are expected to acquire at school.
But there are other areas where teacher’s participation in decision making is of great importance for the smooth running of the school.
For example, the teacher as games master or mistress helps to 22ECE 412 THE SCHOOL ENVIRONMENT AND THE CHILD determine the operational objectives of the school.
Within each school, how decisions are made is as important as what decisions are made; therefore, involving teachers in determining the operational objectives and the means of their realization are the key factors in achieving the stated objectives.
The teacher helps in policy making too within the school.
This area concerns daily school procedure relating to games and sports activities and the equipment, attendance and punctuality of students to activities and active participation, distribution and use of facilities, equipment, and resources allocated.
The teacher is also involved in the Selection of sporting events and key players.
Such policy decisions will give each games master or mistress directly concerned with particular games or sporting activities the authority of the school to act without having to get a decision from the entire staff meeting each time an action becomes necessary.
The teacher is responsible and accountable for what goes on in the classroom and outside the classroom during extra-curricular activities.
If children after learning theories in the classroom yet remain uninteresting in games, sporting activities, and club or organizational activities, the teacher has failed to achieve an important objective.
He has failed to motivate his students.
In extra-curricular activities, the teacher is expected to be an innovator in the way he presents learning experiences to his students.
He should never be discouraged by the shortage or absence of equipment and he should be creative enough to use alternatives and at times improvise by making some himself from local material.
The teacher should play the role of a sports or games counsellor.
He should counsel students on how to participate in games and sporting activities without getting injured and with injuring other participants.
The teacher should help students with difficulties and counsel them on matters that affect their learning abilities as well as planning for future.
The teacher should help in evaluating the extra-curricular programme of activities against set objectives.
For example, he should find out by asking: How is the school programme of activities helping to achieve the national objectives of education?
How are the children doing in their academic and extra-curricular achievements?
Are the children in school involved games and sporting activities or in club and sporting activities?
Are the children well prepared to go on for higher education or to work for a living?
If there is a high drop-out rate, what is the reason?
If the children are uninterested in participating in sports, games or club and 23ECE 412 THE SCHOOL ENVIRONMENT AND THE CHILD organizational activities, what is the reason?
If parents are not keen to send their children to school or encourage them to engage in extra- curricular activities, what is the reason?
In answering these and other questions, the teacher establishes the criteria for evaluating the extra- curricular programme of activities in the school.
The teacher should help students develop self-discipline by following some general principles like: - Understand normal behaviour.
This will help the teacher become aware of a change in behaviour.
The teacher will then investigate the cause rather than simply administrating punishment.
- Allow the children to help develop classroom and out of classroom rules.
The rules should be few in number.
Children should be guided to see the need for the rules and realize the possible consequences if the rules are not followed.
The teacher should recognize the importance of group influence and control on individual children.
Positive group behaviour will usually influence individual children to behave well.
An interested group resents disorder and will help to control a trouble.
- Make more effective by their social disapproval than a teacher does through punishment.
Help children to develop a social conscience.
Our conscience is our knowledge of what is right and wrong.
A social conscience is to know how our behaviour affects the people around us and behaving in a way that is acceptable to the group.
- Teachers should be careful to observe the situation.
First, the teacher can prevent many small problems from developing into big ones by being aware of what is happening in the classroom or on the games or sporting field.
A little argument over a pencil can grow into a proper fight.
It is easy to settle the pencil dispute but much more difficult to settle fighting children and a disturbing class.
Second, Teachers need to be careful observers so that they understand just what has happened and: Is the problem serious enough to require punishment?
Are the real offenders being punished?
Children are guided to notice if the teacher is confused or unable to decide what has happened or what to do.
When this happens, order usually breaks down.
A teacher who knows his class children is a careful observer, able to maintain control.
Some of the things children do in class or field of play are serious and they need to be made aware of what they have done and why it is wrong.
But this does not necessarily need caning.
The child may be withdrawn from the team or group until he is able to behave properly or a privileged may be taken away.
Minor problems can be down with a word or even a look.
24ECE 412 THE SCHOOL ENVIRONMENT AND THE CHILD SELF-ASSESSMENT EXERCISE 2 What is the meaning of extra-curricular activities?
4.0 CONCLUSION Extra-curricular activities are activities outside the regular classroom academic activities.
Teachers have some roles to play in these outside classroom activities.
5.0 SUMMARY The teacher’s roles in extra-curricular activities in the school are many.
They include decision making within the school, counselling, and evaluator of extra-curricular programme of activities, and helping children develop self-discipline.
ANSWER TO SELF-ASSESSMENT EXERCISE 2 Extra-curricular activities refer to activities outside the regular classroom activities.
Such activities are games, sports, physical recreation, scouting, Girls guide and debating etc.
6.0 TUTOR-MARKED ASSIGNMENT 1.
List the advantages of extra-curricular activities.
2.
List at least two roles of the teacher in Extra-curricular activities and briefly discuss one.
7.0 REFERENCES/FURTHER READINGS Arno, Bellack (2005).
The Language of the Classroom.
New York.
Clay, Lindgen (1972).
Psychology in the Classroom.
London: Wiley and Sons.
Maduewesi, E.J.
(1988).
Introduction Top Teaching.
Enugu-Nigeria: ABIC Books.
Hubert, J.
B.
(1979).
The Teacher and His Pupils.
Great Britain: Oxford University Press.
25ECE 412 THE SCHOOL ENVIRONMENT AND THE CHILD UNIT 5 THE TEACHER’S ROLE IN KEEPING DISCIPLINE IN THE CLASSROOM CONTENTS 1.0Introduction 2.0 Objectives 3.0 Main Content 3.1 Meaning, Types and Causes of Discipline Problems in the Classroom 3.2 Teacher’s Role in Keeping Discipline in the Classroom 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutor-Marked Assignment 7.0 References/Further Readings 1.0 INTRODUCTION In unit 4, we discussed the teachers’ role in Extracurricular Activities.
It is hoped that you gathered that the teacher plays some roles in extracurricular activities in the school.
The teacher is a participant in decision making.
As games master or mistress, the teacher helps to determine the operational effectives of extracurricular activities within the school.
The teacher also plays the role of games counsellor and evaluates extra-curricular programme of activities against set objectives.
The success in students’ participation in extracurricular activities depend to a large extent on the discipline in and outside the classroom.
In this unit, we shall discuss the teacher’s role in discipline in the classroom.
2.0 Objectives By the end of this unit, you should be able to: • explain the meaning of discipline; • identify types of discipline in the classroom; • discuss factors responsible for discipline problems in the classroom; and • identify and explain teacher’s role in keeping discipline in the classroom.
26ECE 412 THE SCHOOL ENVIRONMENT AND THE CHILD 3.0 MAIN CONTENT 3.1 Meaning, Types and Discipline in the Classroom Meaning of Discipline Discipline means many things to many persons.
To some persons discipline means punishment.
To some other persons, discipline means control by enforcing obedience and orderly conduct.
Orderly conduct here means without confusion.
It is a condition in which everything is carefully arranged.
For example, when the classrooms, football fields, the laboratories, the office spaces, workshops, the flowers and hedges and so on are carefully arranged, we say there is order or harmony in the school.
Discipline and order go together.
Discipline therefore refers to a systematic training through education in accordance with rules and regulations to achieve orderly conduct.
Why discipline is the training of a person for self-control, order is the good state of affairs.
Orderly conduct therefore is evidence that there is discipline in a school.
Discipline is learner centred; the teacher only helps and guides the learner to develop discipline.
Against the fore going, we can define discipline in this unit as training which helps to guide and corrects or strengthen a person to build up and develop inner controls which leads to self-control or self-discipline.
Here self-discipline transfers the responsibility for self-control or discipline to the child or the learner while the teacher’s role is that of helping and guiding the learner to build up strength and develop inner controls by use of reward and punishment.
The question about discipline is: how do teachers help children become responsible, law abiding persons, able to consider the welfare of others, and able to carry out responsibilities in spite of frustrations?
To answer these questions correctly, let us discuss the various types of discipline that exist in the school environment.
Types of Discipline • Teacher-imposed discipline: This refers to teacher preferring controlling the behaviour of children rather than helping them to develop control.
This is unsatisfactory training in self-discipline.
• Group-imposed discipline: The children’s peer group is important force in regulating children’s behaviour.
A wise teacher should work with the peer group and not against them in regulating the behaviour of children.
• Task-imposed discipline: Classroom Tasks that are interesting 27ECE 412 THE SCHOOL ENVIRONMENT AND THE CHILD and involving to children automatically regulate their behaviour.
• Punishment: Punishment can be either physical or psychological.
The following should guide administration of punishment when necessary in the schools: i.
Punishment is more effective if the teacher already has a positive relationship with the child or children to be punished.
ii.
The child or children should be quite clear as to why they are being punished iii.
It should be administered early in a series of misbehaviours and should be applied systematically.
iv.
Punishment should be adequate and prompt.
v. It should be corrective and administered in love and not in anger.
vi.
Punishment should address the cause and not the effect.
vii.
It should be directed to the goals of self-discipline and given where and when the offence was committed.
viii.
It should teach respect for authority.
ix.
It should serve as a deterrent x.
It should spur one to positive action.
Punishment could be in the form of: • Advice, pointing out a person’s mistakes • Conference with offender’s parents • Censure that is a reprimand or re-proof of offender • Class scolding: The offender may be asked to stand up and be scolded in front of the class.
The offender could be administered deprivation punishments such as: • Loss of marks when the offender has cheated • Stop the child from performing responsibilities like prefect-ship duties • Deprivation of pleasure • Sending the child out of class • Detention and imposing a force on the offender.
These are mild punishment.
The harsh or serious punishments are: a. Corporal punishment b.
Suspension c. Expulsion No matter the form of punishment administered to a child or children, it 28ECE 412 THE SCHOOL ENVIRONMENT AND THE CHILD may harden the offender.
It may also ridicule the offender.
Corporal punishment may inflict an injury on the recipient.
Causes of Discipline Problems in the Classroom Many conditions exist within the school environment which can cause indiscipline.
There are the following: i.
Children or Learners can be the Source of Indiscipline due to: • Bad peer group influence • Bad home training • Poor feeding • Poor academic performance • Inadequate school materials • Inherent tendencies in the child.
ii.
Teachers can also be the Source of Indiscipline in the School because of: • Lateness to school • Absence from school • Inadequate lesson preparation • Poor teacher personality • Poor teaching • Existence of cheating among teachers • Sexual immorality • Care free attitude iii.
School Heads: • Too many school rules • Lack of close contact between school head and his or her staff • Mistrust by the head teacher in his or her staff • Lateness to school • Absence from school • Lack of effective supervision • Lack of courtesy and tact in handling matters.
• Sexual immorality • Laissez-faire attitude iv.
Classroom Activities can Cause Children’s Indiscipline Behaviour when: 29ECE 412 THE SCHOOL ENVIRONMENT AND THE CHILD Children do not have enough class activities to keep their idle hands busy.
At such times, children can decide to try to a number of actions like: chewing something like gum, climbing over desks, drawing funny pictures, dropping things on the floor, giggling, lighting the matches in other children, tapping on the desk, talking, throwing things, tickling or teasing other children and writing and carving on the desk to mention but these.
v. Physical Discomfort of the School Environment: When children are not comfortable where they learn, they may not learn well.
Physical discomfort can lead to the following disciplinary problems: • Coughing intentionally to disturb the class • Eating in the classroom • Fidgeting • Frequent movement in and out of the classroom • Inattention • Quarrelling with another child • Yawning or sleeping vi.
Poor Teaching Method: When teaching method is unvaried or does not suit the content being taught; when teaching is mainly teacher talk and chalk and there is little or no reinforcement for children’s efforts, children can protest by displaying unusual behaviour which could be deemed discipline problem or indiscipline.
vii.
Unsuitable Tasks: When the learning task is too difficult or too easy the learner could resort to unacceptable behaviour.
Similarly, in balance in grouping students misunderstanding and anxiety can also trigger off behaviour which could lead to disciplinary problem.
SELF-ASSESSMENT EXERCISE 1 Define discipline.
3.2 Teacher’s Role in Keeping Discipline in the Classroom 30ECE 412 THE SCHOOL ENVIRONMENT AND THE CHILD • The teacher must be sympathetic towards misbehaving children and try to find out the cause of the indiscipline behaviour.
This is preferred to teacher recourse to punishment which at times could be too harsh.
• Teachers should praise and give social approval than giving blame, punishment and criticism.
• It is unwise to punish a whole class for the misconduct of an individual or small group of learners.
• The teacher should not consider a child’s or children’s misconduct as a personal insult.
• Few school rules should be made and rules to guide behaviour in class should be made by the children alone or with the assistance of the teacher.
• Whenever discipline issues arise teacher should search himself first, posing questions like: What is wrong with my teaching method, material, attitude, dressing, language etc?
The teacher should bear in mind that some misbehaviour may be as a result of physical or medical disorder.
• Whenever a child misbehaves, teacher should make effort to study him to determine which of his needs have not been satisfied.
The teacher should ensure that school experiences are satisfying to the child.
• The teacher should prefer prevention of disciplinary disorder to trying to remedying difficulties that have arisen.
He should ensure that children have sufficient readiness and are highly motivated.
He should treat school children with sympathy, consideration and understanding to curtail disciplinary problems arising.
• The teacher should prepare good lesson plans summarized in lesson notes.
• The teacher should use a variety of teaching methods, skills and media in lesson presentations.
• The teacher should possess good personality.
• The teacher should give children assignments with enough 31ECE 412 THE SCHOOL ENVIRONMENT AND THE CHILD challenges.
• The teacher should be punctual to school and class and should not be leaving class and school before closing time.
• The teacher should give rewards to children for good behaviour to motivate the recipient and to lead to a healthy competition.
SELF-ASSESSMENT EXERCISE 2 List at least two roles of the teacher in keeping discipline in the class room.
4.0 CONCLUSION Discipline is the training which helps, guides and corrects or strengthens a child or children to build up and develop inner controls which leads to self-control or self-discipline.
The teacher plays a variety of roles to train children in discipline.
5.0 SUMMARY The sources of students discipline problems in the school environment are many.
No matter the source of indiscipline the good teacher will always check indiscipline by the many roles he plays in the classroom.
ANSWER TO SELF-ASSESSMENT EXERCISE 1 Discipline is the training which helps to guide and correct or strengthen a person to build up and develop inner controls which leads to self- control or self-discipline.
ANSWER TO SELF-ASSESSMENT EXERCISE 2 1.
Teacher should be sympathetic towards misbehaving children and try to find out the cause of the indiscipline behaviour instead of giving punishment.
2.
Teachers should praise and give social approval than giving blames and criticisms or punishment.
6.0 TUTOR-MARKED ASSIGNMENT 1.
With three examples in each case, show how the teacher and the children contribute to indiscipline in school.
32ECE 412 THE SCHOOL ENVIRONMENT AND THE CHILD 2.
Outline any three roles of a teacher in keeping discipline in school environment 7.0 REFERENCES/FURTHER READINGS Madueuesi, E. (1988).
Introduction to Teaching.
Enugu Nigeria: ABIC Books.
Njoku, A. C. Yaya, D. O.
(1997).
Key Points and Essential Notes in Education Principles and Practice.
Benin City, Favourite Printers.
33ECE 412 THE SCHOOL ENVIRONMENT AND THE CHILD MODULE 2 THE INFLUENCE OF THE SCHOOL ENVIRONMENT ON THE CHILD’S DEVELOPMENT AND LEARNING Unit1 The Influence of School of the Environment of the Child’s Development Unit 2 Influence of School Environment on the Characteristics of Children Development Unit 3 Influence of School Environment on the Child’s Learning Unit 4 The Need for Systematic Planning for Effective Teaching of the Child Unit 5 The Need for Classroom Management UNIT 1 THE INFLUENCE OF THE SCHOOL ENVIRONMENT ON THE CHILD’S DEVELOPMENT CONTENTS 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objective 3.0 Main Content 3.1 The Influence of School Environment on the Child’s Physical, Mental, Emotional, Social Development 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutor-Marked Assignment 7.0 References/Further Readings 1.0 INTRODUCTION In the preceding unit we discussed the teacher’s role in keeping discipline in the classroom.
It is hoped that you learnt among other things, that discipline means the training which helps, guides, corrects and strengthens a person to build up and develop inner controls which leads to self-control.
The teacher uses rewards and punishment in helping and guiding the learner to become a disciplined, responsible, law abiding person, able to consider the welfare of others, and able to carryout responsibilities in spite of frustrations distractions and other difficulties.
To achieve discipline in the learner, the teacher plays a variety of roles.
In this unit of module 2, we shall discuss the influence of the school environment on the child’s development.
34ECE 412 THE SCHOOL ENVIRONMENT AND THE CHILD 2.0 OBJECTIVE By the end of this unit, you should be able to: • discuss the influence of the school environment on the child’s development.
3.0 MAIN CONTENT 3.1 The Influence of the School Environment on the Child’s Development School environment refers to all the human and material resources available in the school which a child can see, hear, touch, smell, taste, feel and respond to.
Examples are teachers, school children, school buildings, school compound, classrooms, other workers in the school, games and sporting equipment, facilities and fields, recreational facilities, teaching and learning materials, the arrangement of seats and desks in the classroom, ventilation, the nature and position of the chalkboard and the pattern of relationship among the school administrators and teachers, between teachers and teachers and between teachers and students, as well as between students and students to mention but these.
These listed resources comprise the school environment and they influence the physical, mental, social, emotional and personality, development of school children.
How they positively or negatively influence the children’s development will be the focus of our discussion here.
We may start first with physical development of the child.
Physical Development of the Child There are two aspects of physical development of the child, namely the development of gross motor skills – through throwing, running and jumping activities and the development of fine motor skills through handling small objects, toys, tying shoes laces, drawing etc.
For the child to develop physically he/she should use his or her limbs and entire body in carrying out a number of activities.
Children like to jump, cross dwarf wall, walk across sticks, play with balls, pet animals like dog, cats and rabbits, climb short trees, play on swing and roles, manipulate old bicycles and motor tyres.
The school should provide children with a stimulating environment that offers facilities for physical activities and development.
The school should set aside periods for physical training during which children feel free to engage in activities of their choice; their limbs are well develop as result of such physical activities.
As children grow older in their developmental process, it is of absolute 35ECE 412 THE SCHOOL ENVIRONMENT AND THE CHILD necessity that recreational facilities, discussion facilities, games and sports fields, equipment and materials and libraries should be made available in schools for adequate child development.
Intellectual or mental development of the child: Piaget a famous psychologist who studied intellectual development of children explained to us that intellectual or mental development of children progresses in stages.
He outlined four stages namely: a. Sensory Motor Stage (0-2 years of age).
The child at this stage learns about the environment through the use of senses (sensori) and movement (motor).
The child touches and puts everything in the mouth to learn about it.
The major thing the body learns is that objects have permanence.
If the child must know about the world, then the world must exist whether the child sees it or not.
This stage is followed by.
b.
The Pre-operational Stage (2-7 years).
The child explores the world of objects and people more extensively.
The ability to represent things blossoms in the use of language and imaginative play.
The mental ability of the child is irreversible.
Example, a child may add 2 & 4 to obtain 6 but he might not understand that 6-4 would be 2 unless he has been taught that concept before.
c. Concrete Operations Stage (7-11 years).
The children at this stage become logical, they can classify objects logically.
They are no more deceived by external arrangements.
They acquire conservation and understanding that certain properties of objects do not change even when the objects are rearranged.
The child however only reasons about concrete objects.
d. The Formal Operations Stage (11-18 years).
Children at this stage are able to think about the world abstractly.
They can reason about things without concrete objects and they are more logical in their approach to problem solution.
They are capable of formulating hypotheses or making scientific guesses from observation of events.
These are manifested both in academic and non-academic situations.
The implications of intellectual development of the child are that the teacher who is a component of the school environment should: 1.
Provide stimulating situations and atmosphere that facilitates intellectual functioning.
2.
Help children in classifying objects, and ideas at all levels of the 36ECE 412 THE SCHOOL ENVIRONMENT AND THE CHILD school.
3.
Help children to find and establish relationships of different kinds.
Organising and relating things in series, in a hierarchy, comparing part and whole, etc.
4.
Help children practice problem solving.
The teacher should be guided to look for and locate problems and try out possible solutions.
5.
He should provide stimulating objects to the child to play with to hasten conservation ability.
6.
Give the child practice in flexibility in converting ideas into different modes of expression.
7.
The teacher should encourage individual and small group work to help children to be independent, to think and look for information.
8.
The teacher should guide children to monitor their own thinking, principally by establishing the outcome of their thinking.
9.
Social Development.
Social development refers to development of social competencies like verbal, physical, sharing and restraint skills which make interaction with others effective.
Verbal skills are how to talk to different people on various occasions, how to ask questions and thank people for favours that have been done.
This skill is not easy and has to be learnt by children.
Greeting people of different ages or ranks on different occasions at specific times of the day can be tricky in our country.
Even though the home gives children a start, the school needs to help children further.
Some of these skills are: - Physical skill: Involves physical gesture and body movements in interactive situations.
Touching, holding and shaking hands, embracing, putting an arm around the shoulder etc are used to enhance interaction and the child needs to know how to use them appropriately.
We can use eye contact to pass information between parents and children or friends.
We can use body movement to recognise age, status and to show appreciation.
Examples are bowing, bending, kneeling, lying down, a clasp of a hand, two hands behind the back and so on to demonstrate these.
- Sharing skill: Refers to giving and receiving tactfully and graciously.
It has to be learnt that helping and taking turns definitely assist in smoothening social interactions.
Persons who lack this skill do not take turns but jump queries.
37ECE 412 THE SCHOOL ENVIRONMENT AND THE CHILD - Restraint skill: This restraint skill enables us to tolerate other people’s viewpoints and differences.
Children need to learn these social skills which will help them to avoid quarrels and self- centredness and to control their resentments.
Specifically, social skills enable a child to satisfy his needs.
This is because he can ask for what he wants, and can make himself a useful member of the group.
They enable the child to be accepted by others.
If a child knows how to relate to peers, he is likely to have friend and be popular with his age mates.
They enable the child also to establish relationships with others.
Relationship with others becomes easy when the child develops appropriate social skills.
He can function in a situation with ease in person – to – person situation.
Nigeria, good social skills can help to break down inter ethnic barriers, they help to promote peaceful co-existence; the individual’s self concept is enhanced.
When we feel that we can relate to them effectively, we tend to have a favourable and positive self concept.
When we are confident, we tend to show independence and initiative in doing things.
Even when we fail, we can always explain what went wrong.
Or ask for advice since one knows how to do so.
There are very specific things which a teacher can do to develop any social skills in which his students are deficient.
They include: - Arranging the class environment in a way that permits social interactions.
- The class atmosphere should be democratic and relaxed with children sitting properly.
- There is evidence of warmth, laughter, interests in the children.
- Movement is within safe limits and children have knowledge of what is permissible.
This enables children to interact with the teacher and with one another.
The teacher should train by the use of reinforcement after the environment has been set up.
He should use modelling – this is the use of the teacher as a model as well as peers in like situation.
The teacher can coach children through direct instruction, stories and class discussions.
Teachers must try to appear or present themselves to the students in a manner that will help the children to identify with them.
This teacher’s appearance will be in his way of dressing, teaching or behaving, example: being punctual to school, preparing lessons very well and having self-control so that students who model after him will learn something good to make them good citizens.
Emotional Development 38ECE 412 THE SCHOOL ENVIRONMENT AND THE CHILD Emotion means the stirred up condition of the organism involving internal and external changes in the body.
Simply put, emotions are outward expressions of inner feelings which are aroused by our behaviour and that of others.
Emotion can be expressed in love, fear, anger, laughter and tears etc and these emotions, to some extent, control human behaviour.
Emotion also involves jubilation or depression.
The following may cause emotion to develop in school children: - Worry: The emotion of worry is an imaginary fear.
Among school children worry or imaginary fear is caused by a repeated reoccurrence in the child’s mind of the situation that is feared.
Some of the things school children fear include examinations, weekly tests and sometimes the partial treatment of the class teacher.
- Love: The emotion of love is closely associated with school children.
It develops from infancy and continues throughout the life of the organism.
- Anger: This is a learned response to environment stimuli.
School children are usually prone to anger.
The following may arouse the emotion of anger among school children.
1.
Teasing by parents, elders, teachers, or other peers 2.
When a child feels that he is unfairly treated or his plans of self assertion have been thwarted the emotion of anger is aroused.
3.
Lack of love or affection by classmates and teachers can affect the child’s emotion.
4.
Emotional tension can arise from the child.
The implication of these are: - The teacher should motivate children - Students should be emotionally involved in classroom activities to give them a sense of belonging.
- Appropriate incentives should be given when necessary.
Such incentives include: verbal, praise, facial approval of correct responses or rewards.
- Learning tasks should be made meaningful and related to the cultural background of the children.
SELF-ASSESSMENT EXERCISE Explain any one aspect of physical development of the child.
39ECE 412 THE SCHOOL ENVIRONMENT AND THE CHILD 4.0 CONCLUSION The school environment influences physical, emotional, mental, social, and the personality development of the child.
5.0 SUMMARY The School environment plays an important role in the child’s development of positive attitudes when the school provides a conducive stimulating environment.
However, when the school provides feelings in insecurity, lack of discipline, partiality, lack of facilities, lack of guidance, defective curriculum contents and examination system, the environment will be not conducive for learning.
It will then cause delinquency in children.
ANSWER TO SELF-ASSESSMENT EXERCISE One aspect of physical development of the child is development of gross motor skills-through throwing, running, jumping activities.
6.0 TUTOR-MARKED ASSIGNMENT 1.
Identify the emotions associated with school children.
2.
Explain four things a teacher can do to make his students to be emotionally free.
3.
List four characteristics of emotional maturity.
7.0 REFERENCES/FURTHER READINGS Chauhan, S.S. (1981).
Advanced Educational Psychology.
New Delhi: Vikas Publishing House.
Sandstorm, C. I.
(1972).
The Psychology of Childhood and Adolescence.
London: Penguin Books.
UNIT 2 THE INFLUENCE OF THE SCHOOL ENVIRONMENT ON THE CHARACTERISTICS OF CHILDREN’S DEVELOPMENT 40ECE 412 THE SCHOOL ENVIRONMENT AND THE CHILD CONTENTS 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objectives 3.0 Main Content 3.1 Characteristics of Development and Influence of School Environment 3.1.1 Childhood and Adolescence 3.1.1.1 Physical Characteristics of Infancy and Early Childhood (0-5 Years of Age) 3.1.1.2 Physical Characteristics of Adolescence (12-18 Years of Age) 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutor-Marked Assignment 7.0 References/Further Readings 1.0 INTRODUCTION In unit one, we discussed the influence of school environment on the child development.
It is hoped that you gathered that the school environment plays an important role in the child’s physical, intellectual or mental, emotional and social developments.
In this unit, we shall discuss influence of children’s development on the characteristic.
2.0 OBJECTIVES By the end of this unit, you should be able to: • discuss the development characteristics of the childhood and adolescence; • explain the implication for the school environment; and • identify areas of individual differences.
3.0 MAIN CONTENT 3.1 Characteristics of Development and Influence of School Environment 3.1.1 Childhood and Adolescence 3.1.1.1 Physical Characteristics of Infancy and Early Childhood (0-5 Years of Age) Physically, the child at this stage lacks muscle control.
This is the reason the child does things clumsily.
He lacks muscle co-ordination as the 41ECE 412 THE SCHOOL ENVIRONMENT AND THE CHILD brain which controls the movement of body parts is not yet fully developed.
This is again why children have no fixed direction when they are playing.
Accident Proneness Children at this stage of physical development are accident prone.
This is because children are active and engage in running, climbing, jumping activities.
By engaging in these activities, they soil their clothes and body and can contact diseases.
The teacher must ensure that children wash their hands before and after eating.
Their playing materials should not be faulty.
Loss of Milk Teeth Children lose their milk teeth at this stage.
It creates some gaps in their dentition it causes then embarrassment because they feel that gap in their dentition will be permanent.
The children so affected should be re- assured to understand that such milk dentition is temporary.
Feeling of Tension Feeling of tension varies with individual children.
It is evident in thumb- sucking, nail-biting, mistakes in toilet habits and other involuntary actions.
Such children are insecure and not confident.
Such children should be made to learn in a more relaxed mood.
Fear should not be instilled in them through saddling and attracting the attention of other children to their mistakes.
The school environment should be made stimulating, and safe.
Provision of a large play ground with many play items for indoor and outdoor activities should be made by the teacher.
3.1.1.2 Physical Characteristics of Adolescence (12-18 Years of Age) The following are the physical development characteristics of Adolescence.
- There is change in the height and body proportion of adolescence as a result of the growth part.
The pelvic bones of girls become broadened.
Boys begin to develop broad shoulders.
- There is a tendency for the voice of boys to become deep.
Girls develop a mellow voice during the adolescence period.
42ECE 412 THE SCHOOL ENVIRONMENT AND THE CHILD - During Adolescence the sex and associated organs develop.
The genital organs of the sex organs of the boys increase in size while the sex organ of girls mature.
The breast grow to size for girls and their figure changes.
Hair appears on the upper limbs, and in the armpits.
There is also the pubic hair.
In addition, boys begin to grow beard.
- Girls will begin to menstruate between 11 and 14 years.
Implication for the teacher: Because of the rapid physical changes which the adolescent is experiencing, he or she might develop negative self concept.
It is the responsibility of the teacher to reassure the adolescent that all these bodily changes are normal.
All normal adults went through them.
2.
Sex and moral education should be given as appropriate in the school.
This will prepare the adolescent to cope with the heterosexual attractions and the problems associated with physical changes.
- Human biology, Health science and health education should be taught students to backup sex and moral education in the school.
- Teachers and counsellors in the school should counsel these adolescents.
- It is important for the teachers to realize that physical advancement or retardation is accompanied by emotional and behavioural changes, and by changes in mental ability and attitudes to the learning situation, most of the variations observed in children in Africa are due to low standards of living, excessive infection and poor nutrition, all factors which could be altered.
The teacher can instil in the minds of his students the need for prevention of these adverse conditions.
- Understanding of children’s characteristics of physical development is of practical everyday use to the teacher.
Recognition of the problems of late developer or an early mature can make learning much easier for the child concerned.
The teacher who can recognize individual differences in the physical growth and development of his students will be able to provide them with suitable environment and activities and will be more able to relate his plans for children’s education to their individual differences.
- Increasing reasoning ability: Childhood reasoning is often naïve and faulty because: 43ECE 412 THE SCHOOL ENVIRONMENT AND THE CHILD - The child’s intelligence is not fully developed.
- The child is still lacking in experience, and he is not capable of generalizations and deductions which are needed for discovery and evaluation of hypotheses.
- The child has not sufficient vocabulary or other abstract symbols with which to manipulate ideas.
- The child is not capable of concentrating on one task long enough to learn about the qualities of that task.
- The child often allows emotional factors to affect his reasoning either by being too emotionally engrossed in issue to be able to reason about them at all for example when he is very angry or letting emotional attitudes towards the object of reasoning affect the reasoning process (for example, when the child refuses to accept that something he likes to play with very much may be dangerous for him).
- The very young child, aged 2 to 5 years old, is not usually capable of handling more than one idea or object of idea at one time.
By the age 12, however, the child can deal with a range of ideas of varying degrees of complexity.
Implication to the Teacher The role experience here is clearly important.
It appears, that richer and more diversified the child’s experience, the more rapid his intellectual development.
To be of benefit, experience must introduce him to new areas of life.
It must afford him the opportunity of handling ideas about the properties of objects in the new situation.
This can be achieved by visits to local museums, botanical gardens, craft centres and similar places where the child has never been.
SELF-ASSESSMENT EXERCISE 1 Why do you think children are accident prone during this stage of human development?
Adolescence Intellectual Characteristics The following represent the intellectual characteristics of Adolescence: 1.
Ability to Generate Facts Children usually generalize when faced with concrete objects.
But in adolescence the ability to generalize on conceptual level develops.
The adolescent can also manage abstract concepts.
They can understand and 44ECE 412 THE SCHOOL ENVIRONMENT AND THE CHILD communicate with concepts like justice, rule of law, democracy, and capitalism etc.
2.
Increased Ability in Understanding Unlike the childhood stage, the adolescent can reason better and deeper.
He can attempt the solution of different problems.
Sometimes, the adolescent thinks he has the answer to all problems.
This may explain why students very often clash with authorities.
3.
Ability to Make Decisions The adolescent, with time, becomes capable of making decisions based on logical and systematic considerations.
He is able to survey several alternatives, makes a decision and abides by it.
He is capable of taking independent decisions.
Educational Implication for Teachers 1.
Teachers, as much as possible, should expose adolescents to rich experiences.
This enables them to see challenging situations.
For example, an adolescent would like to watch a court proceeding instead of a lecture on the concept of justice.
2.
The teacher should teach adolescents through the problems solving approach.
Example is: If you become a commissioner for finance in your state suggest ways of generating new revenue for your state.
They will enjoy such assignments.
3.
Guided discovery method should be used for teaching the adolescent classes.
For instance, the teacher could guide an adolescent class through a project aimed at solving community water project.
Most of the thinking could be done by the adolescents.
4.
Finally, libraries and other opportunities for free discussion and independent work should be provided for adolescents.
Social Characteristics The social characteristics of children at Adolescent stage are as follows: - The adolescent at this stage develops personal identity.
During childhood the parent assumed a dominant role in the child’s personality but the adolescent requires more independence.
Question like whom am I?
How will fit into this plan?
begin to come from the adolescent.
45ECE 412 THE SCHOOL ENVIRONMENT AND THE CHILD - Another characteristic of adolescents’ social development is increased influence of peer groups.
Adolescents remain most of the time with their peer groups.
The peer group determines the adolescent’s social relationships.
His interests, attitudes and values are all influenced by his peers.
Whatever he does is for the sake of pleasing his peers.
The problem of the adolescent is how he or she will be acceptable to his peer group.
And he always wants independence.
- Social relationship in adolescence is heterosexual in nature.
In late childhood, boys play with boys while girls play with girls.
But in adolescence, boys and girls become friends based on their common interests.
- Adolescents’ structure of social relationship takes different forms.
Examples are: a. Friends- Friendship with opposite sex could be fairly permanent.
b. Cliques- Small exclusive groups made up few friends.
c. Crowds- Made up of several clique with identical interest d. Organized Groups- Boys scout, Girls guide, Christian fellowship are open to all who wish to join.
e. Gang- Made up of delinquent adolescents with similar sinister objectives.
Educational Implications 1.
The teacher should provide opportunities for effective use of the social groups for classroom work.
A group could be asked to supervise for the teacher the class manual labour.
2.
Peer teaching and group assignment should be exploited to the full.
3.
As teachers, we should provide enough lectures on moral and sex education.
This should be effectively taught to guide the adolescents in their hetero sexual relations.
4.
The schools should have guidance and counselling experts to guide adolescents in the schools.
Characteristics of Adolescent Emotional Development They include the following: 46ECE 412 THE SCHOOL ENVIRONMENT AND THE CHILD a. Complexity- Adolescent is a period of storm and stress.
This is because of the emotional upheavals which adolescents encounter.
For example, the adolescents feel that they are no longer children because of their size yet society refuses to accept them as adults.
This complex situation may lead to emotional disturbance.
b. Generalization- In childhood, emotional expression is directed to specific objects and events.
Adolescents now can express their emotional feelings in a general way and in a wider context.
For instance, an adolescent may develop strong love for school work.
c. Shared Emotional Experiences- Adolescents possess the ability to share emotional experiences with others.
As adolescents grow, their friendship circle widens to their class mates and other peers from other towns or even states.
d. Control- Adolescents develop competencies to bear the tension they meet.
One way through which they do this is by developing self- control.
Children generally do not develop self-control.
e. You will recall that some Adolescent Emotions include: - Love and Affection- Adolescents need this to satisfy their sexual drives.
- Joy, pleasure and deliqut.
- Superiority- Adolescents manifest super writing in passing examinations and manifest inferiority feeling in failing to accomplish a task.
- Worry: Adolescents worry (ie imaginary fear) and become anxious.
This may be as a result of impending examination or lack of teacher’s love.
Educational Implications - As teachers we may use the classroom teaching to expel or dismiss some adolescent, fear of inadequacies.
Give adolescents projects they can perform to rescue them.
- The class teacher should engage the adolescents in a critical examination of causes of failures and frustrations.
By so doing the adolescents will develop resistance to frustration.
- Teachers should help to change any negative attitudes parents have about their adolescent children.
The teacher should create proper 47ECE 412 THE SCHOOL ENVIRONMENT AND THE CHILD environment for adolescents, in his classroom to express their pent up feelings.
- As a result of the different characteristics exhibited by adolescents, classroom teachers should be prepared to guide them with love in the class.
Teachers should see all the developments in adolescents as normal.
Subjects such as sex and moral education, human biology, health and physical education should be functionally taught to adolescents.
- Adolescence is a period of storm and stress characterized by frequent quarrels, and tensions with emotional outbursts.
Some adolescents are overcome by a number of starting developments.
As a result guidance and counselling services should be provided to help adolescents pass through this relatively difficult but really interesting stage of human development.
SELF-ASSESSMENT EXERCISE 2 List any three intellectual characteristics of adolescents.
4.0CONCLUSION The school environment influences the characteristics of children’s physical, intellectual, emotional and social developments.
5.0 SUMMARY Development is a product of interaction: As a child interacts with his environment he learns more and more things and grows and develops well.
ANSWER TO SELF-ASSESSMENT EXERCISE 2 (1) Ability to generate facts (2) Ability to make decisions (3) Increased ability in understanding.
He can reason better and deeper.
6.0 TUTOR-MARKED ASSIGNMENT 1.
List any two physical characteristics of adolescence.
2.
State any two educational implications of these characteristics.
7.0 REFERENCES/FURTHER READINGS Blair, G. M, Jones, R. S and Simpson R. H (1975).
Educational Psychology New York: Macmillan Publishing Co. 48ECE 412 THE SCHOOL ENVIRONMENT AND THE CHILD Medinnus G. R and Johnson R. C (1976).
Child and Adolescent Psychology New York: John Wiley and Sons.
Durojaiye, M. O.
A (1983).
A New Introduction to Educational Psychology.
London: Evans Brothers Limited.
UNIT 3 INFLUENCE OF SCHOOL ENVIRONMENT ON THE CHILD’S LEARNING CONTENTS 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objectives 3.0 Main Content 3.1 Meaning and Types of Learning 3.2 Influence of School Environment on the Child’s Learning 49ECE 412 THE SCHOOL ENVIRONMENT AND THE CHILD 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutor-Marked Assignment 7.0 References/Further Readings 1.0 INTRODUCTION In unit 2, we discussed the influence of school environment on the characteristics of children’s development.
It is hoped that the physical, mental, emotional, and social development of children have various characteristics which have serious educational implications.
In this unit, we shall discuss influence of school environment on the child’s learning.
2.0 OBJECTIVES By the end of this unit, you should be able to: • define learning; • identify types of learning; and • explain how school environment influences learning.
3.0 MAIN CONTENT 3.1 Meaning and Types of Learning What is learning?
Learning is a relatively permanent change in behaviour as a result of experience and practice.
There are different types of learning.
They include the following: • Simple Repetitive Association or Verbal Associated Learning.
This is the type of learning that takes place when a familiar object is presented to the learner.
For example, a child is shown an object as a “ball” and he calls it “ball”.
The next time he sees it he calls it “ball”.
This is because he has associated it with that presented to him before.
This type of learning is based on stimulus-Response (S-R) Connection.
• Trial and Error Learning.
This is learning by chance.
For instance, a child could be given a box with number key, but he does not know the number to press to open the box.
He keeps on trying the various numbers until he eventually opens it.
This is 50ECE 412 THE SCHOOL ENVIRONMENT AND THE CHILD learning by trial and error.
It is not an efficient way of learning but it leads to discovery.
Therefore the teacher can modify it to reduce the number of trials.
• Learning by Imitation/Habit Learning.
This is the do-as-I-do method of learning.
It is good for skill acquisition.
It becomes a habit when it is repeatedly done over time.
• Incidental Learning: In this type of learning, there is no strategy.
If during a football match a player sustains an injury, the teacher gives a deeper understanding of the learning materials into something with the mind.
Insightful learning like trial and error leads to discovery.
• Learning by Doing: This is putting a theory into practice type of learning.
The example of learning by doing is when an imagination (a mental picture) is made real by a person.
Learning by doing has also taken place if a child thinks of how to build a helicopter and later starts translating his thought into action, he has started learning by doing.
• Memorization: This is a special strategy for remembering.
It is what we usually call “committing to memory” or remembering by heart.
Most children can memorize poems.
The value of memorization depends on the understanding that accompanies it.
Without understanding memorization becomes merely an accumulation of words.
For meaningful memorization the following principles must apply: a.
Learning whole: If the learner sees what he is trying to memorize as a meaningful whole, the task of learning is made easier.
b.
Pattern learning: This refers to any arrangement that is orderly.
If the material that is to the memorized is arranged in some orderly manner that gives it form or makes it more easily understood and remembered.
You can see this in the patterns made by setting out teaching materials under headings and sub- headings.
We use memorization for learning facts and not for understanding how things are caused or why they happen.
c. Mnemonics – These are artificial devices for helping people to remember details in a quick orderly way.
They are very useful for examination where they reduce the memory work load of students and give confidence to those who might be afraid of omitting essential information under the stress condition that 51ECE 412 THE SCHOOL ENVIRONMENT AND THE CHILD examinations create.
Training This is used in developing attitudes, habits, skills and standard procedures.
By training, elephants can learn to dance, and children become obedient, respectful, fast readers or anything the teacher wants.
Training has two qualities.
It depends on a system of punishment and rewards and it must be repeated frequently to become effective.
Thus, children can be rewarded for work which is done well and punished for practices which the teacher strongly wants them to avoid.
The need for consistency of practice is an important feature of training.
The children must always receive the same or similar treatment so that habits develop.
Inconsistent treatment greatly weakens the effectiveness of the method.
Another feature of training is that the activities involved are greatly strengthened by their repeated use.
The more often a child performs as he has been trained to, the more likely he is to continue to do so even when training is stopped.
Thus, children well trained in the rote work of school subjects such as spelling, multiplication tables and so forth will automatically continue to perform well in these.
Training is the only kind of learning which has considerable transfer value.
Training in qualities such as neatness, carefulness, persistence and punctuality have a high degree of transfer value to many school and day- to-day practices.
The aim of all training is to achieve efficiency of performance, that is, the best possible standard with the least possible effort.
SELF-ASSESSMENT EXERCISE 1 Define Learning 3.2 Influence of School Environment on the Child’s Learning The school is an agency created by society to influence the child’s learning.
Learning takes place when there is an observable change in an organism.
The changes in behaviour which the organism makes in learning are changes which enable him to cope effectively with the regularities of the environment.
Thus, learning depends on the availability of certain regularities in the environment which must be conducive.
In the school environment the facilities that will influence the child’s learning include teachers and other workers in the school, the child’s school mates, school compound, school buildings, the classrooms, the 52ECE 412 THE SCHOOL ENVIRONMENT AND THE CHILD learning materials in the classrooms, games and sporting equipment and materials, the games field, recreational facilities available in the school, classroom climate, relationship between school heads and teachers, between teachers and students, the curricula contents, the examination system, to mention but a few.
These facilities that comprise the school environment influence the child’s learning.
Starting with the teacher: 1.
The teachers have been found to greatly influence the learning of children in the school.
A properly trained teacher creates a classroom environment conducive for children to learn effectively.
Teachers involve themselves in explaining information and showing how; initiating, directing, administrating, unifying the group, giving help, love and security, clarifying attitudes, beliefs and problems, diagnosing learning problems, planning, setting objectives, choosing media, skills and methods, for lesson presentation, organizing and arranging classroom effectively, participating in school activities, professional and civic life; evaluating, recording and reporting.
Teachers perform these tasks to influence the child’s learning.
2.
Classroom climate: This refers to an atmosphere of love, trust, humanity, and co-operation between the teachers and the students and also between the students themselves as well as between school administrators and the teachers.
Such atmosphere of love and trust and mutual respect and co-operation creates a very favourable or conducive climate for learning to take place effectively.
The classroom climate that is conducive will remove charged emotions and bring serenity for increased learning among students.
Poor classroom climate brings class distraction and other vices which will disturb learning by the children as study time is wasted in quarrels between the students.
3.
Peer group influence: The peer group is a small group of children of the same sex that a child will likely belong to while in school.
Every normal child in the school usually has a small group sometimes same age and or social class that he or she like to join.
The peer group influence on the child seems to be stronger than the influence of the home.
Children in the school obey the decisions of their peers without question.
Therefore, care should be taken to find out the type of group a child joins in the school that is likely to influence the child’s performance in the school work or his personality in general.
Peer group usually has a leader whom other children tend to take orders from.
A good leader will likely have good members who identify with the leader.
The members in the group will develop certain good traits 53ECE 412 THE SCHOOL ENVIRONMENT AND THE CHILD like self-control, courage, loyalty obedience, fidelity and fair play within the group.
The good traits developed in the group are carried to the adult life.
Peer grouping can be advantageous in that the child in the group learns from others what he cannot get from his or her teachers or parents.
Peer group helps the child to understand better what he could not understand well in the home or in the school.
The peer group gives the child freedom and co-operative attitude which is ideal for personality development and social integration.
SELF-ASSESSMENT EXERCISE 2 List any 3 facilities that comprise school environment.
4.0 CONCLUSION A school environment with facilities for games, sports, library, drama, debates, scouting, field trip, educated skilled and experienced teachers and good classroom climate etc influence effective learning of children.
5.0 SUMMARY The school environment plays an important role in effective learning of children.
The school environment should provide an environment for learning that is free from fear, tension, hate, tribe, creed or religious discrimination and frustration.
ANSWER TO SELF-ASSESSMENT EXERCISE 1 Learning is a relatively permanent change in behaviour as a result of experience and practice ANSWER TO SELF-ASSESSMENT EXERCISE 2 (1) Teachers (2) Classroom climate (3) Peer group influence.
6.0 TUTOR-MARKED ASSIGNMENT Discuss one factor in the school that will negatively affect learning by the child.
7.0 REFERENCES/FURTHER READINGS Chauhan, S. S. (1981).
Advanced Educational Psychology.
New Delhi: 54ECE 412 THE SCHOOL ENVIRONMENT AND THE CHILD Vikees Publishing House Stone, E. (1966).
An Introduction to Educational Psychology.
Ibadan: Spectrum Books Ltd Thorndike, E. L (1931).
Human Learning.
New York: Appleton Century-crofts.
UNIT 4 THE NEED FOR SYSTEMATIC PLANNING FOR EFFECTIVE TEACHING OF THE CHILD CONTENTS 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objectives 3.0 Main Content 3.1 Instruction Plan by National and State Government 3.2 Systematic Lesson Plans 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutor-Marked Assignment 55ECE 412 THE SCHOOL ENVIRONMENT AND THE CHILD 7.0 References/Further Readings 1.0 INTRODUCTION In unit 3, we discussed the influence of school environment on the child’s learning.
It is assumed that you gathered that learning which means a relatively permanent change in behaviour as a result of experience and practice is influenced by the school environment that is free from fear, tension and frustration, tribe, crude or religious discrimination.
In this unit, we shall discuss the need for systematic planning for effective teaching of the child.
2.0 OBJECTIVES By the end of this unity, you should be able to: • explain the relationship between the unit plan and the scheme of work and between the unit plan and the daily lesson plan; • discuss the importance of lesson planning; and • discuss procedure systematic lesson planning.
3.0 MAIN CONTENT 3.1 Instruction Plan by National and State Government The curriculum, syllabus and scheme of work being used in our school today are forms of instructional plan.
This is so because they guide the teacher in determining what to teach in each subject and for each year.
However, these instructional plans are not planned by the teacher.
They are prepared at the national or state levels.
There are some instructional plans which the teacher makes.
They include the unit and the lesson plans are inter- related because the syllabus is derived from the curriculum, while the scheme of work is derived from the syllabus.
(Again, the unity plan is derived from the scheme of work while the daily lesson plan is derived from the unity plan is derived from the unity plan and summarized in 9 lesson notes).
The school curriculum is derived from the National policy on education, The National policy on Education is based on a Nation’s developmental needs, goals and objectives.
The school curriculum is planned experiences in an institution to realize a Nation’s developmental needs, goals and objectives.
The curriculum contains the broad outline of work to be carried out all through the whole years.
The syllabus contains work to be carried out each year.
The scheme of work indicates work to be carried out each term in one year.
The unit plan shows work to be covered within a few weeks.
While the lesson plans 56ECE 412 THE SCHOOL ENVIRONMENT AND THE CHILD are worked to be covered during one lesson period.
The lesson plan is usually summarized in a lesson note.
The relationships among the various levels of instructional plans may be illustrated diagrammatically.
National Policy on Education Work to be done all through Curriculum the duration of schooling Work to be done in each Syllabus year Work to be done each term Scheme of Work in a year Work to be done within 2 -6 Unit Plan weeks Work to be done in one Lesson Plan lesson The summary of lesson plan Lesson Note Fig.1: Relationship between Levels of Instructional Plans You, as a teacher, must be familiar with these terms.
We shall therefore discuss these instructional plans in order to understand their importance and use.
School Curriculum The school curriculum is all the planned experiences which a school wants its students to have, so that students at the end of schooling would have realized the optimum development to function in their social environment.
The school curriculum aims at assisting each student to see the value of the past in relation to the present and the future.
It equips the student with necessary skills for modern living, and help to keep the student a fully integrated member of his community.
In a nutshell, it must help the learner to realize the goals and aspirations of the nation as 57ECE 412 THE SCHOOL ENVIRONMENT AND THE CHILD stated in the National Policy on Education.
The role of the teacher thus is to co-ordinate the different experiences, especially in the harmonious functioning of the educational process that leads to the expected changes in behaviour as stated in the National Policy on Education.
To aid the teacher achieve this goal, a syllabus is developed from which the scheme of work is designed.
The Syllabus The syllabus, also called teaching scheme in most developing nations, is prescribed and laid down by the government.
In such a case, the responsibility of the teacher is to follow the syllabus which is laid down.
The syllabus serves as a guide to the teacher as to topics, objectives and contents to cover, equipment and materials, teaching methods, and assessment types.
It also suggests student’s activities, equipment and materials, teaching methods and evaluation criteria for each objective that may be appropriate.
In Nigeria, the Federal Ministry of Education through the Nigerian Educational Research and Development Council (NERDC) prepares the teaching syllabuses for junior and senior secondary schools.
This teaching syllabus should not be confused with the syllabuses of examination bodies like West African Examination Council (WAEC) and the National Examination Council (NECO).
The syllabus of an examination body is only an examination syllabus.
The Scheme of Work The scheme of work is very important to the teacher.
It guides him in planning the units of instruction in line with time available for each subject in the term.
It indicates not only what has to be covered in each term of the year but all the sequence of treatment of topics.
The scheme of work also guides supervisors of schools in determining the efforts of the school teachers towards meeting the societal demands on them.
At the end of instruction on any topic in the scheme of work, the same topic is entered in the diary called the “record of work”.
The record of work helps to determine whether all the topics listed in the scheme of work for the term(s) have actually been treated by the teacher(s).
The scheme of work is a guide to the planning of units of work.
If, for instance, the scheme of work for the term of 12 weeks duration indicates that four topics should be studied during the term, the information is useful in unit planning.
The teacher may decide to form each topic into 58ECE 412 THE SCHOOL ENVIRONMENT AND THE CHILD units.
The Unit A unit plan is the planned content and learning experiences derived from an analysis of the term’s scheme of work often existing as inter related ideas in a given subject which are meant to be covered within a period of a few weeks (about 2-6 weeks).
The teacher should prepare the teaching – learning unit for the following reasons: • When the unit plans are prepared from the unit scheme of work by teachers, there is greater possibility that the relevant aspects of the syllabus will be thoroughly covered before examination.
• It makes for a wiser use of time.
• It guides the teacher to determine what to teach, how to teach and with what.
• It aids instructional supervision substitute teachers.
The Lesson Plan The lesson plan is a planned organized amount of subject matter and learning experiences that the teacher will communicate to the learners with details of how the instruction will take place within a lesson period.
We can also describe the lesson plan as a structured series of sequentially organized subject matter and learning experiences which derive from an analysis of the teaching.
• Learning unit plan, involves statements of behaviourally stated objectives and such other elements as instructional resources and evaluation plans for the purpose of helping the teacher implement the curriculum at the classroom level for one lesson period.
Importance of Lesson Plan Lesson plans are vital in curriculum implementation.
They are used to ensure that: • The teacher follows correct steps and procedures in instructional presentations.
• Time is not wasted in the class on irrelevant matters • Meaningful objectives are pursued in relation to content and objectives\Adequate materials are selected in the light of set objectives and used • Proper evaluation procedures and tools are used 59ECE 412 THE SCHOOL ENVIRONMENT AND THE CHILD • A substitute teacher can be guided to hold on the class when the class teacher is unavoidably absent.
• The most important content is identified for learners.
It appears, however, that the unit and lesson plans teachers prepare, present and evaluate are not systematic but traditional.
The unit and lesson plans made by the teachers most often are made in intuitive fashion and may be based on ambiguous purposes.
Subject content and not the learner is the basis for the unit and lesson planning.
Indeed, only casual attention is given to other details.
For example, often in unit and lesson plans objectives are not spelt out in terms of the required student behaviour at the end of lesson.
Objectives too, are not efficiently stated to reflect its three components namely: (1) Desired terminal student behaviour (2) Condition for the behaviour to manifest and (3) The criteria or acceptance level of performance.
The general characteristics of the learner for whom the unit and lesson are planned are not described (i.e.
the learner’s age, grade level, socio- economic background, motivation, intelligence, learning style, reading ability, his entry level) and the task description and task analysis, and criterion referenced evaluation are not determined.
Furthermore, credit is not given for objectives already achieved in cognitive, affective and psychomotor domains by the learner.
Also, units and lessons plans prepared by the teachers do not incorporate systematic revision when objectives are not achieved.
Thus, unit and lesson plans are not recycled when set objectives are not achieved.
It is now recognized that the units and lesson plans process are complex and that attention must be given to their many interrelated parts if outcomes are to be successfully achieved by the learners.
In other words, unit and lesson plans need systematic planning.
SELF-ASSESSMENT EXERCISE 1 Identify three uses of lesson plan.
3.2 Systematic Lesson Plans Systematic lesson plans recognize that several components make up the lesson or instruction namely: the teacher, learner, community, content, methods, media, skills, evaluation, feedback, recycle, school setting, classroom etc.
The learner is the centre piece of the lesson or instruction.
The problems of learners should be identified.
The teacher has to be compete in the 60ECE 412 THE SCHOOL ENVIRONMENT AND THE CHILD subject content area and in all aspects of methodology and human development and the characteristics.
The content has to be relevant to learners’ needs to enable teacher to achieve set objectives.
Appropriate methodology, media, evaluation tools must be available in school.
The school climate must be conducive for effective teaching and learning.
All these parts of instruction must work interrelated for the set objectives to be achieved.
Systematic lesson plan enjoins the teacher to cultivate it as an attitude to always identify instructional problems which could be the lesson topic to teach students etc and to search for the interrelated component units essential for providing a solution to the problem and ensure that such a solution is logically implemented, evaluated and recycled where objectives are not achieved.
In systematic lesson plans therefore, you have to: 1.
Identify the problem: The problem may be the topic to teach students.
It may be with students, teachers or teaching methods or media etc.
2.
Analyze the learners’ characteristics.
To assist you in this exercise ask the following questions.
• What are the characteristics of the learners?
• Can they enjoy studying alone or in group or both?
3.
Analyze content (topic) and 4.
Specify the tasks, explain concepts, procedures and skills to enrich and enliven.
5.
State objectives and classify objectives into cognitive, affective and psychomotor levels.
6.
In the light of the objectives, select teaching methods, media, skills, and evaluation criteria.
7.
Present instruction and 8.
Evaluate and provide a feedback.
Continuously 9.
Recycle if objectives are not achieved.
Maintain accurate record of the process of each learner.
SELF-ASSESSMENT EXERCISE 2 Teacher and learner who is at the centre of systematic lesson plan?
4.0 CONCLUSION Systems approach to lesson plans is a tool to help you in preparing lessons.
61ECE 412 THE SCHOOL ENVIRONMENT AND THE CHILD 5.0 SUMMARY Systems approach to instruction is the adoption of step-by-step methods to identify problems of instruction and the component parts required to prepare, present and evaluate alternative instructional solutions logically to help the learner to learn effectively.
ANSWER TO SELF-ASSESSMENT EXERCISE 1 1.
It helps the leaders to follow correct steps and procedures in lesson presentation.
2.
Time is not wasted in irrelevant matters.
3.
Meaningful objectives are pursued in relation to contents and objectives.
Adequate materials, methods and evaluation criteria are selected in the light of set objectives.
ANSWER TO SELF-ASSESSMENT EXERCISE 2 The Learner 6.0 TUTOR-MARKED ASSIGNMENT Identify at least 6 elements involved in systematic lesson plans.
7.0 REFERENCES/FURTHER READINGS Dike, H. I.
(1988).
A Textbook of Educational Technology.
Owerri: Totan Publishers.
Kemp, E. K. and Dayton, D. K (1985).
Planning of Producing Instructional Media.
New York: Harper of Row Publishers.
62ECE 412 THE SCHOOL ENVIRONMENT AND THE CHILD UNIT 5 THE NEED FOR CLASSROOM ORGANIZATION OF MANAGEMENT CONTENTS 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objectives 3.0 Main Content 3.1 Classroom Management and Operation 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutor-marked Assignment 7.0 References/Further Readings 1.0 INTRODUCTION In unity 4, we discussed the need for systematic planning for effective 63ECE 412 THE SCHOOL ENVIRONMENT AND THE CHILD teaching of the child.
It is hoped that you gathered that systems approach to lesson plan is a tool to help you in preparation, presentation and evaluation of instruction to your learners.
To achieve effective learning success in this regards depends on effective classroom management.
In this unit, we shall discuss the need for classroom management 2.
0 OBJECTIVES By the end of this unity, you should be able to: • define classroom management; and • state and explain classroom management operation.
3.0 MAIN CONTENT 3.1 Classroom Organization and Management Classroom management is the process by which a teacher gets his students to co-operate in directing actions towards achieving the proper atmosphere for learning in the proper classroom.
In establishing the proper atmosphere in the classroom for learning, we need to make efficient use of the resources that are put into a classroom in order to produce student with academic achievement that are as high as desirable and so attain the overall objectives of the school.
Simply put, classroom management is putting classroom resources into effectives use.
Classroom resources are the students, teachers, equipment and materials in the classroom.
- Classroom organization is the arrangement of classroom resources in an orderly manner for effective management or use.
This involves placement of pupils, lockers with tables in orderly rows, leaving the windows open to allow for ventilation, central placement of the chalk board, placement of students with health problems at appropriate place and other arrangements to make for easy movements.
You must note that the classroom is one important place in the operation of a school which holds students together and offers the purpose of education.
Students bring into the classroom various traits arising from attitudes, social class, ethnicity, bias, idiosyncrasy, whims and caprices.
Students too, are of different types.
They have their likes and dislikes, they have varying levels of 1.Q.
while some are big sized, other is small sized.
While some are healthy, others are sick physically and health- wise.
This is so because students come from different home backgrounds.
While some are withdrawn and shy others are bold and out spoken.
All these individual differences influence students’ performance.
64ECE 412 THE SCHOOL ENVIRONMENT AND THE CHILD All these should be considered by the teacher in dealing with students in classroom management and organization.
Furthermore, in teaching and learning, the classroom has played very many important roles.
For example, the greater part of educational activities of any school occurs in the classroom.
Teachers organize their work there, it is a place where research findings are tested or tried out.
It is a place where educational plans are carried out or implemented.
It also serves as a common ground for shaving experiences and for growth in group living.
Students learn to accommodate their likes an dislikes in the classroom.
It promotes learning and encourages effective social relationship such as in developing tolerance and role behaviour.
It is an art gallery, museum, workshop, display centre and exhibition area.
The classroom surroundings should be made beautiful, imaginative, stimulating exciting and enjoyable.
Children should be made to be happy in the classroom since they spend about a quarter of their working hours a year in it.
The effective teacher must possess the ability to organise a classroom to ensure not only the welfare and safety of students but also to maintain an atmosphere that is conducive for optimum learning.
Efficient classroom organisation is achieved by the teacher by analysing classroom life into its component activities and making prompt and effective provision for each!
This implies that classroom life comprises of a sequence of events like role call, giving out and collecting back lesson notes, textbooks or teaching equipment, cleaning the chalk board after lesson presentation, leaving the classroom in an orderly fashion and closing the doors and shutters.
The teacher needs to make simple rules and establish systematic procedures for dealing with each event.
The Teacher is expected to have a place for everything normally needed in the classroom and he should see that things are always returned to their proper place after use.
You must note that efficient classroom organisation depends on ability to anticipate needs and ability to deal effectively with them at the appropriate time.
It requires two kinds of leadership.
They are: a.
Maintenance Leadership to: - harmonise differences in opinions - Encourage good communication - Provide class control b.
Task Leadership to: 65ECE 412 THE SCHOOL ENVIRONMENT AND THE CHILD - Initiate ideas - Keep the students active - Stimulate and motivate - Propose solutions to problems - Suggest problems to tackle A teacher who applies himself or herself to the above classroom organisational leadership ability is sure to achieve effective teaching and is sure of much satisfaction out of his or her teaching.
You should note that when teachers organize or arrange classroom activities and material recourses will it will: Provide Opportunities for Student – teacher interaction and student – student interaction.
The interaction can be shown when the student is able to: i.
Listen to directions ii.
enjoy working with others iii.
Ask other students for help iv.
Ask the teacher for help v. Be the boss - take initiatives vi.
Help others vii.
Get along with others viii.
Impress others ix.
Listen to others x.
Express his/her own ideas xi.
Be told what to do xii.
Facilitate the independence of children by encouraging choice of activities and creativity.
Independent – oriented activities can be seen when the student is able to do the following: i.
Define a personal goal ii.
Plan and organise means to accomplish defined goals iii.
Choose resources materials iv.
Develop a task v. Maintain interest vi.
Conclude projects or tasks vii.
Seek appropriate assistance or avoidance d. Facilitate ego-satisfaction through the development of self confidence as children begin to perceive themselves as participants and contributors in classroom activities.
A number of 66ECE 412 THE SCHOOL ENVIRONMENT AND THE CHILD such ego-satisfying behaviour are like when a student: a. expresses a personal viewpoint b. shares concern or feelings c. responds to the ideas feelings and behaviour of others d. accepts criticisms and praise e. debates on issues or viewpoints f. does not require praise or encouragement in order to proceed g. does not dominate others h. shares success and failures i. assumes responsibility j. chooses own task or goal k. demonstrates interest in others l. assists others co-operatively m. accepts membership activities n. chooses activities commensurate with ability and evaluates self.
These statements show that the teacher is the key person in determining class morale.
It is the teacher’s attitude towards his students that determines the nature and scope of his students’ class morale.
You have to note that if the teacher is critical, fault-finding, harsh and unfriendly, morale will be low in the class.
Similarly, if the teacher is aloof and talks down to his students and is impatient, morale will not be high.
However, morale will be high if the teacher is serious, reserved and sets realistic standards, is friendly, considerate, courteous but not over familiar.
Thus, the more supportive a teacher is with encouragement and kindness, the less likely will his class experience chaos and disorder.
If a teacher expects his or her class to respect him then likewise the class expects him to respect them.
Mutual respect in the classroom setting requires that every child should be respected appreciated, trusted and valued, to generate pleasant feelings in the children for effective learning and good academic performance.
In the classroom management the teacher’s activities include class grouping, designing curricular, time-tabling, formulating school rules and regulations as preliminary actions to teacher-student interaction.
To create favourable condition to facilitate instruction, the teacher should desist from disruptive behaviour.
He should regulate students’ social behaviour by directing questions at an inattentive student, using positive reinforcement or applying punishment as a remedial control measure, use planned ignoring of students’ minor bad behaviour to have the bad behaviour extricated.
Make class assignment understood by students.
Give time out to rescue students from fatiguing situations.
The teacher should be flexible in changing classroom events from time to time like 67ECE 412 THE SCHOOL ENVIRONMENT AND THE CHILD teaching methods, material, time allotment, student learning style to address teaching problems.
Class management is a critical part of the teacher’s function in which his success lies while teaching, is able to monitor students’ progress, anticipate their behavioural problems and provide meaningful options in handling their problems.
The teacher should be fair and firm and maintain his or her dignity.
SELF-ASSESSMENT EXERCISE Define classroom organisation and management.
4.0 CONCLUSION To achieve good class management and organization, a teacher needs to pay attention to two qualities, namely, efficiency and effectiveness.
Efficiency refers to the measure of how he directs activities of his class systematically and enthusiastically.
Effectiveness of a teacher is measured by the academic achievement of students and the level to which students display the type of behaviour expected of them by society.
To be effective, the teacher should assess his students continuously; communicate clearly an set good personal examples.
5.0 SUMMARY Effective classroom organisation and management creates proper atmosphere in the classroom for learning.
ANSWER TO SELF-ASSESSMENT EXERCISE Classroom organisation and management is a process by which a teacher gets his students to cooperate in directing actions towards achieving the proper atmosphere for teaching and learning in the classroom.
6.0 TUTOR-MARKED ASSIGNMENT Describe how a well organised and managed class should be.
7.0 REFERENCES/FURTHER READINGS Akubue, A (1991).
A Structural Analysis of Education Students Study Habits and Their Relationship to Academic Achievement.
The Nigeria Journal of Education.
Farrant J.S (1985).
Principles and Practice of Education.
London: 68ECE 412 THE SCHOOL ENVIRONMENT AND THE CHILD Longman.
MODULE 3 THE ROLE OF THE SCHOOL IN PERSONALITY DEVELOPMENT Unit 1 Personality Development in School Children Unit 2 Basic Moral Behaviour Children Should Acquire Unit 3 Social Behaviour in Children Unit 4 The Role of the Schools in Developing Positive Attitude in Children Unit 5 The Need for Guidance and Counselling in Schools UNIT 1 PERSONALITY DEVELOPMENT IN SCHOOL CHILDREN CONTENTS 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objectives 3.0 Main Content 3.1 Personality: Meaning and Development 3.2 The Role of School in Personality Formation 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutor-Marked Assignment 7.0 References/Further Readings 1.0 INTRODUCTION In unit 5 of module two, we discussed the need for classroom organization and management.
It is hoped that you learnt that effective 69ECE 412 THE SCHOOL ENVIRONMENT AND THE CHILD classroom organization and management creates proper conducive atmosphere and climate in the classroom for effective learning to take place.
In this unit, we shall discuss personality development in the school children.
2.0 OBJECTIVES By the end of this unity, you should be able to: • define personality; • explain characteristics of personality; and • describe the role of the school teacher in personality formation.
3.0 MAIN CONTENT 3.1 Personality: Meaning and Development Personality is the projection of yourself to others.
It is not what we think ourselves to be like, but ourselves as others see us.
Personality is the sum total of what a person really is.
Personality is being a particular person.
The concept of personality implies the following characteristics.
- Personality is a dynamic, growing and changing entity.
- It starts with heredity.
- It involves the capacity for the maturation of physical and intellectual potential, provided the environment factors are right.
- Personality includes what we can see and what we cannot see.
- It includes behavioural as well as physical attributes.
- It grows, changes and manifests itself in the social surroundings of human group relations.
In this sense, every individual has a personality.
It is not correct to consider only those aspects that we can see in commenting on an individual’s personality.
The tall and short, the big and the small, the popular and the unpopular, the beautiful and the ordinary, the clever, the mediocre and the dull, the noisy and the quiet, the bold and the shy, all have personality.
Each of this type refers to only one aspect of a particular person’s personality.
You must remember that different levels of personality understanding are required at different levels of normal relationships.
Suppose you were asked what you needed to know about someone else before 70ECE 412 THE SCHOOL ENVIRONMENT AND THE CHILD agreeing to be in any of the following relationships with him or her: (i) Acquaintance (ii) Causal friends (iii) Work mates or class mates (iv) Neighbours (v) Close friend (vi) Employer-employee (vii) Members of the same family (viii) Potential marriage partners.
You would ask certain questions about the person you were going to be dealing with.
The questions would aim at probing the personality of the would-be companion.
You will require more detailed personality information as the relationship becomes more complex.
In our listing above, acquaintances is the simplest relationship while marriage partner is the most complex.
The more complex a relationship or purpose of a relationship, the greater the personality details that will be required before a prediction of success in that relationship can be made.
Similarly, the more complex the relationship, the more detailed will be the description of personality which individuals in that relationship will be able to give about one another.
Thus, one may describe an acquaintance as tall.
A workmate could be described as tall, friendly, clever and hard-working.
One’s husband or wife to be could be all those plus affectionate, kind, considerate, generous and so on.
These differences in description stem from differences in depth of knowledge.
Psychological tests can, however, yield personality descriptions which reveal what someone else does not know about a particular person, often including what that person does not consciously know about himself.
The broad areas that we often use in describing personality include: 1.
Physical characteristics- body structure, complexion, height, weight.
2.
Temperament- typical, emotional behaviour and characteristics mood.
3.
Intelligence- skills, information storing and retrieval system creativity and competencies.
4.
Interest- likes and dislikes.
5.
Morals and values- character.
6.
Social attitudes, prejudices and attitude towards democracy, socialism, authoritarianism, egalitarianism, and dogmatism and Schuler.
7.
Motivational dispositions- needs and motives e.g.
achievement, motives, afflictive motive.
8.
Aptitude- potential for doing well in particular areas of activity.
9.
Expressive and stylistic traits- habitual behaviour, e.g.
politeness, bossiness, submissiveness, talkativeness, sociability, shyness, consistency, hesitancy.
Apart from descriptions of body build and intelligence, African cultural patterns are bound to lead distinctly to African personality traits.
The 71ECE 412 THE SCHOOL ENVIRONMENT AND THE CHILD extended family pattern and African chid- rearing practices have been said to account for certain distinct personality patterns, especially among rural and illiterate Africans.
The following have been suggested: 1.
Emotional attachment to many members of the extended family.
2.
Group feeling and group consciousness 3.
Sense of social responsibility and fear of social sanction 4.
Willingness to surrender to the will of the group 5.
Traditional orientation –resistance to new ideas, preference for traditional practices 6.
Preference for informal and practical learning 7.
Tradition directed approach- guidance from customs and habits.
8.
Maintenance and acknowledgement of rigid social class, respect for orders.
9.
Male domination (in patrilineal system by the father in matrilineal systems by the Mother’s brother.
10.Stable marriage and family pattern.
11.
Clearly prescribed and accepted sex roles 12.Limited, but long- lasting, social relationships with small homogeneous groups/ tribes and clans.
You are to note that these traditional and cultural practices that lead to these personality patterns may not exist in all African countries.
We shall now look briefly at the following selected ways of looking at personality under the heading: THE NATURE OF PERSONALITY 1.
The self- concept approach 2.
The Freudian approach 3.
The trait approach 4.
The learning theory approach 5.
The direction-theory approach.
1.
The Self- Concept Approach Self- concept is how one characteristically feels about oneself.
Carl Rogers, said the following about the self: - They may take on the valves of other people and see them in a distorted heavy-way.
- The person behaves in a way that is consistent with the self.
- Experiences that are not consistent with what is n the make up are perceived as threats.
- The self may change as a result of maturation and learning.
- The self is learned, it is not ready made.
- The self develops as one’s inherited potential meet with the experience of everyday life.
It is constantly changing as a result 72ECE 412 THE SCHOOL ENVIRONMENT AND THE CHILD of growth and various experiences.
- As the self develops, it becomes the centre point around which new experience gather to be given meaning, acceptance or rejection.
If new experiences are pleasant and enhance the self, we accept them.
If they are insulting, painful or unpleasant, we tend to reject them and to forget them, even when they might help us to become better persons.
How one thinks about oneself affects not only what one thinks about.
A person who has a positive self-concept thinks about his success and good qualities.
A person with negative self- concept thinks about his failures and his inadequacies - The self –ideal is what one would like to be.
The self- accepting person sees little discrepancy between his self- concept and his self- ideal.
The self- rejecting person sees a large discrepancy.
The self consists of three basic components namely: 1.
How a person views himself (conceptual) 2.
How a person thinks of himself (conceptual) 3.
A person’s attitude towards himself (attitudinal).
This includes attitude like self-esteem, self –reproach, values, ideals and convictions.
We may define self as follow: A person’s self is the sum total of all he can call his.
The self includes, among others things, a system of ideas, attitudes values and commitments.
The self is a person’s total subjective environment.
The self constitutes a person’s inner world as distinguished from the outer world consisting of all other people and things.
When an individual has good mental health, when he has self esteem, prestige, a feeling of love and belonging in relation to others, and is satisfied with his work and everyday life, then that person can be said to be self-actualizing, Self- actualized according to Maslow and Rogers includes: - The ability to accept oneself, to accept others and to accept nature.
- The ability to engage in interpersonal relations - Efficient perception of reality and a comfort table relation with it - Continued freshness of appreciation of people and objects.
- Autonomy and independence of thought and action unhampered by cultural and environmental conditions - Creativeness –an original way of doing simple things - A democratic character structure 73ECE 412 THE SCHOOL ENVIRONMENT AND THE CHILD - Willingness to accept what one experiences - Trust in oneself - Self –reliance -Willingness to continue to grow as a person Thus self actualized individuals tend do: a.
Enjoy life more.
b.
Respond to many more dimensions of life.
c. Possess deep and lasting human relations with others.
d. Lead happier, self fulfilling lives.
e. Make their families and children happy.
f. Perform better in their work or at school.
The Freudian Approach The human personality is made up of three basic elements which are dynamic in personality behaviour.
These are the id, the ego and the super-ego.
Freud sees the id as representing what we are born with like inherited potentials, impulses, urges, determined by physiological body processes.
There are two main functions of the id.
One is sexual and creative by nature, the other is destructive and hostile.
The id leads to tensions and energies which must be released.
The way an individual releases these tensions and energies depends on the strength of the ego and the super ego.
Whereas the id craves for pleasure and the satisfaction of natural impulses the ego is reality oriented.
It is guided by the intellect.
It requires thought processes, plans, decisions and care.
Self-image and the damage one can do to one’s reputation have to be considered before the id impulses are allowed.
The id says ‘I want release’ but the ego says ‘let’s see if it is convenient’.
The super-ego represents the conscience.
It is the moral value that each person develops through learning processes.
It is the internalised restraining forces of parents, teachers, peer groups, other adults, churches and mosques, and other agencies of education and moral training.
The super-ego controls the id.
Without it man would not be able to control either his sexuality or his hostility.
Whether the situation is convenient or not is not the concern of the super-ego.
It asks the questions, is it morally right?
Is it socially acceptable?
The Trait Approach The trait approach is based on the idea that there are unique patterns or traits which are revealed with relative consistency in behaviour.
For example if a person has few friends, avoids social contacts and rarely 74ECE 412 THE SCHOOL ENVIRONMENT AND THE CHILD speaks to other unless spoken to first, that person can be said to show the trait of an introvert or a withdrawn person.
A person who is sociable, is interested in people and who expresses his feelings and thoughts openly, may be said to be an extrovert or a very expressive person.
His common personality traits include interests, sociability, emotions, self- insight and ambition.
The Learning Theory Approach Children have to learn many things like intellectual, moral, social and emotional behaviours.
All these are aspects of personality.
Personality manifestations can thus be explained in terms of learning.
Four aspects are involved in learning: ii.
Drive, need, motive or motivation.
ii.
Response, act thought.
iii.
Stimulus or cue.
iv.
Reinforcement-reward, punishment.
We may explain the above terms by considering how adolescents become sociable in terms of learning theory.
We might describe it as follows: The adolescent likes being friendly with other young persons whose company she enjoys (MOTIVATION-afflictive motive, gregarious drive, the need to belong).
Whenever she sees other young persons going to a party (STIMULUS, CUES), she puts on her party cloths, makes herself attractive and gets herself invited to the party (RESPONSE).
Because she is such a good dancer, so well dressed, so attractive, and full of nice things to say (all she learned before), she gets invited to other parties time and time again (Positive Reinforcement-reward).
As a result she continues in the way that gets results.
Thus we now understand how this adolescent became sociable.
The Direction-Theory Approach Reisman proposed certain personality types namely: a. Tradition-direction leads to tradition directed types.
b.
Inner direction leads to inner-directed types.
c. Other-direction leads to other directed types.
The tradition-directed person’s personality is determined by the demands of custom, beliefs, mores and sanctions of his cultural or family group.
75ECE 412 THE SCHOOL ENVIRONMENT AND THE CHILD The Inner-directed person’s personality is determined by the internalised values and morals which have given him a strong conscience or super- ego.
Such a person no longer needs external forces, pressures and sanctions.
He can live in societies with diverse moral values without looking to any of them for direction.
He knows what to do in every situation.
He does what he should do rather than what he wants to do.
The personality of the other-directed person is largely determined by parents and his social group membership.
He is sensitive to changing climates of opinion and social pressure requirements.
He adapts to these contemporary external demands.
Thus, while the tradition-directed sinks his root in the traditional ground for stability, the inner-directed person uses a psychi gyroscope, and the other-directed person uses a psycho logical radar.
SELF-ASSESSMENT EXERCISE 1 How would you identify self actualizing individuals?
3.2 The Role of the School Three suggestions which we can pass on to you as a teacher to influence children’s personality development in their formative years are: 1.
If you wish others to be dependably stable, sincerely motivated, and ethically oriented, treat them exactly that ways.
2.
If you whish other do be reasonable, rational and effective in their thinking, provide them with a model of these behaviours and give them the opportunity and trust for them to develop these desirable characteristics.
3.
If you wish others to be genuinely friendly for any length of time, treat them in the most genuinely, warmest, and kindest ways consistently.
SELF-ASSESSMENT EXERCISE 2 State one way the teacher can influence children’s personality development.
4.0 CONCLUSION The School plays significant role in influencing personality development of children in the schools.
76ECE 412 THE SCHOOL ENVIRONMENT AND THE CHILD 5.0 SUMMARY The school should use the opportunities they have to influence personality development of school children.
The ways to do this in schools have been suggested.
ANSWER TO SELF-ASSESSMENT EXERCISE 1 - They tend to enjoy life more.
- Respond to many more dimensions of life.
- Possess deep and lasting human relations with others.
- Lead happier self-fulfilling lives.
- Make their family and children happy.
- Perform better in their work at school.
ANSWER TO SELF-ASSESSMENT EXERCISE 2 The teacher should behave the way he wants children to behave.For example, if the teacher wants children to be sincere and truthful he, the teacher, should tell the children the truth and nothing but the truth.
He should sincerely deal with children at all times and in all circumstances.
Teacher should not say one thing and do another.
6.0 TUTOR-MARKED ASSIGNMENT Explain the role of the school in developing the personality of school children.
7.0 REFERENCES/FURTHER READINGS Duroanya, M.O.A (1983).
A New Introduction to Educational Psychology.
Ibadan: Evans Brothers Limited.
Farrant, J. S. (1982).
Principles and Practice of Education.
England: Longman.
77ECE 412 THE SCHOOL ENVIRONMENT AND THE CHILD UNIT 2 MORAL BEHAVIOUR CHILDREN SHOULD ACQUIRE CONTENTS 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objective 3.0 Main Content 3.1 Meaning and Types of Moral Character 3.2 Some Basic Moral Behaviour that Children Should Acquire 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutor-Marked Assignment 7.0 References/Further Readings 1.0 INTRODUCTION In Unit 1, we discussed personality development in school children.
It is hoped that you gathered that for school to influence personality development in her children it should do exactly those things expected from children.
In this unit, we shall discuss basic moral behaviour children should acquire.
2.0 OBJECTIVES By the end of this unit, you should be able to: • explain the meaning of moral behaviour; • explain some basic moral behaviour that child should acquire; and • discuss the school’s role in moral training.
3.0 MAIN CONTENT 3.1 Meaning and Types of Moral Behaviour Moral behaviour is the ability to understand the difference between right and wrong or good behaviour connected with the sense of what is right and just.
Morality is standards or principles of right or wrong or of good behaviour.
Morality is a social variable.
If there were no society or 78ECE 412 THE SCHOOL ENVIRONMENT AND THE CHILD cultural setting, if there were no other people for whom you had to show consideration, the question of morality would largely not arise.
You have to note that what is moral in one cultural environment or social setting may be immoral in another.
Because of this, if you engage in activities your culture permits the on-lookers who may have judged you from your own cultural viewpoint will conclude that you behaved well.
Here your good behaviour is in the eyes of your beholders in your cultural environment.
Also evil is often in the eye of the beholder inside a cultural setting or society.
This suggested that children learn morals from their community or school at the same time as they learn to show self-control and consideration for others.
Children learn about the rights of other people through gradual understanding of the dictum “do unto others as you would like them to do to you”.
They learn honesty and respect for the proper use of time and for their own and other people’s property.
Morality also involves the ability to draw a balance between what is due to oneself and what is due to others and it involves the development of the ability to postpone immediate pleasure for further satisfaction in the future.
Through self-control and control of their own emotions and impulses in the face of frequent temptations, children learn to develop from the selfish egocentric stage of infancy and early childhood to the controlled and considerate stage of late childhood.
You have to note that moral character is one of the most frequently used indices of personality.
In moral character we have six aspects of mature character as follows: 1.
The ability to accept and follow a moral code willingly and regularly.
2.
The ability to make accurate rational judgements, show correct insight and appropriate feelings.
3.
The ability to exercise self-control.
4.
The spontaneous, uninhibited expression of wishes and feelings.
5.
Friendliness and general warmth of feeling for others.
6.
Freedom from guilt and from fear of external hostility or punishment.
Using these six dimensions as our guide we have five types of moral character.
Types of Moral Character 1.
The Amoral Person: This is a person who follows his or her impulses without consideration for anyone, example is the behaviour of a child under two years of age which is acceptable.
The child feels no shame or guilt.
79ECE 412 THE SCHOOL ENVIRONMENT AND THE CHILD 2.
The Expedient Person: This refers to a person who does things only for his own ends.
He behaves in a moral way as long as it suits his purpose, or as long as anyone in position of authority is watching, otherwise he or she behaves in an irresponsible manner.
He or she has few moral values and a poor conscience.
This kind of behaviour is acceptable only in early childhood, before the age of six years.
3.
The Conformist Person: This kind of person accepts the rules of his or her group and follows the law correctly even if it is unreasonable.
He or she feels ashamed and guilty when his behaviour departs from what is expected by society.
Children aged seven to ten years might be excused for this kind of behaviour.
4.
The Irrational-Conscientious Person: This person follows only what he believes to be right.
He feels very guilty if he has not been true to his or her conscience even when his or her conscience is mistaken.
He would violate the demands of his social group rather than the dictates of his or her conscience.
He or she fails to consider the situation, the time and other factors.
This is typical adolescent idealism.
5.
The Rational-Altruistic Person: This person has a high stable set of moral principles.
He assesses situations objectively.
He considers others as well as his own interest.
He or she lets circumstances alter cases when confronted with a decision, he or she studies the situation carefully and considers the alternatives.
He or she takes final action according to the finest moral principles and according to what he or she believes to be morally right in the light of careful consideration of the circumstances.
SELF-ASSESSMENT EXERCISE 1 List three differences between the Conformist person and the Expedient person.
3.2 Some Basic Moral Character Children Must Acquire There are certain types of moral behaviour which every child should be encouraged to acquire.
They include: 1 Honesty 2 Respect for the properties of others 3 Respect for truth 4 Respect for other people’s feelings 5 Tolerance 80ECE 412 THE SCHOOL ENVIRONMENT AND THE CHILD 6 Sexual control Honesty Honesty means freedom from deceit, cheating, telling lies, or stealing.
It means being straight forward in whatever one does.
In other words in everything you do, let your guiding principle be honesty.
This is the reason the old adage said that “honesty is the best policy”.
All other types of moral behaviour are related to honesty.
Honesty includes what you do to other people.
Honesty too, includes what you do to yourself i.e.
being true to yourself in proper use of your time, acceptance of your weakness and strength, and sincerity in your relationship to others.
Uprightness, justice and fairness are all dimensions of honesty.
Respect for the Property of Others A child should respect the properties of others.
Stealing occurs when a child cannot restrain himself from the properties of others.
Stealing can be caused by: • Faulty training in self-control.
• The inability to distinguish between what is free, what is common property for the whole class, and what is the property of others.
• Being trained to steal and getting away with it (children in this type of environment are sometimes even expected to steal).
• Attention-seeking behaviour for fame, status and excitement.
• Fulfilment of deep-lying emotional needs as revenge on parents, teachers and other adults or companions.
• Resolution of repressed emotional conflicts and tensions, to compensate for not being loved and for loneliness.
Such children may steal money to buy sweets for other children so that those children may be friendly to them.
Teachers and parents, if attentive, can easily recognise the cause of stealing in a particular child.
They should help and guide a first offender.
They should try and remove the cause of stealing.
Respect for Truth Children should have respect for truth and not tell lies.
Lying is the art of not telling the truth.
Children lie for a variety of reasons: 1.
Many children lie because they have observe adults and other children lie and get away with it.
2.
Lying often follows stealing and other dishonest acts which 81ECE 412 THE SCHOOL ENVIRONMENT AND THE CHILD children want to cover up.
3.
Many children lie in order to avoid punishment either at home or at school, especially when parents and teachers are known to be severe.
4.
Some children lie because they want to experience the effect of untruth on their parents, teachers and companions.
5.
Some children lie in order to seek attention.
6.
Most serious of all, some lie to get other children into trouble.
This is often called “malicious lying”.
Teachers and parent must handle the situation according to why they think it happened.
Adults should avoid labelling children as thieves and liars.
It is a mistake to give a child a reputation of lying or stealing.
Respect for other People’s Feelings Children should acquire the moral character to respect other people’s feelings.
This means that children should learn not to tease, abuse, ridicule or bully other children.
These acts hurt people’s dignity and sometimes, as in the case of bullying, it can be injurious physically.
Some of the reasons why some children tease or bully include: - The example of other children especially their peer group - Show of strength, especially by children who mature early and are bigger than the children they bully.
- Idleness, lack of constructive occupation.
- Curiosity or experimentation.
- Jealousy of qualities another child may possess.
- Compensation for feelings of insecurity.
- Inordinate pleasure in hurting others.
- Revenge for personal failures and misfortune.
Tolerance Children should acquire the moral behaviour of tolerance.
Children who fail to acquire tolerance are intolerant.
Children can become intolerant for the following reasons: - Lack of opportunity to meet people from different environments.
- Insecurity about socially unfamiliar persons.
- Lack of social training.
-Excessive conformity to in-group feelings and fear of sanctions for non-conformity.
- Emotional conflicts and tension.
- Social prejudice.
Sexual Control 82ECE 412 THE SCHOOL ENVIRONMENT AND THE CHILD Sexual control is one of the moral characters children should acquire.
Sexuality starts in infancy.
It can be seen in children showing curiosity about their own bodies and those of children of the opposite sex, and in manipulation of the genitals.
This curiosity should be dealt with by adults honestly and frankly.
Adults should avoid any harshness that may result in children becoming inhibited and repressed in later life.
Sexual morality is an important factor in the discussion of morality.
The sexual act involves the production of off-spring and the structure of family life.
Sexual drives form a new experience for adolescents and children alike.
Learning to handle this new experience of sexual impulses is a difficult task that consumes a great deal of adolescent time ad energy.
They need adults’ understanding and help with sympathy, with information about the proper and usual conditions of the sexual act.
The dignity of the sexual act in marriage should be stated.
Teachers should not have sexual intercourse with their students.
You should note that rapid development of the adolescent sexual organs and the appearance of secondary sexual characteristics awakens interest in the opposite sex.
The school should give adequate early training in sex education, self-control appropriate to the age, the physical maturation and the social situation of particular children.
Because the adolescent gets carried away by the normal sexual demands made on him or her chastity is quite a problem.
Sex education should be given to: - Provide boys and girls correct and adequate factual information and understanding of sex, its development, its function and its expression.
- Cultivate correct reactions to sexual experiences.
- Prevent the child from acquiring a sense of guilt, horror, digust or fear of sex .
- Teach children continuing and widening socially acceptable expressions for sexual thoughts, feelings and acts.
- Cultivate in children self-respect and self-control, without blocking or repression, but with growing consideration for others.
- Introduce children to the roles of parents and school.
School’s Role in Moral Training The school should give children moral training by giving children: 1.
The opportunity to take care of themselves and their belongings.
2.
The opportunity to do things for others.
3.
Take turns so that they can appreciate the right of others.
4.
To hear about other children’s interests and lives to broaden their 83ECE 412 THE SCHOOL ENVIRONMENT AND THE CHILD sympathy and understanding.
5.
Proper respect for school work.
6.
Learning to co-operate with other children and partake in group participation 7.
Opportunity to make contact with students from different cultural backgrounds for increasing social tolerance.
SELF-ASSESSMENT EXERCISE 2 What does teaching co-operation, charity and self control require from the teacher?
4.0 CONCLUSION It is very important that children should acquire some moral character in school.
The teachers have invaluable opportunities to give children moral training.
5.0 SUMMARY The basic moral behaviour children should acquire include honesty, respect for the properties of others, respect for truth, respect for other people’s feelings, tolerance and sexual control.
The school plays important role in helping children acquire basic moral behaviour.
ANSWER TO SELF-ASSESSMENT EXERCISE 1 Morality means the principles of right and wrong or good behaviour.
Three types of moral character are: (1) The amoral person (2) The expedient person (3) The rational altruistic person.
ANSWER TO SELF-ASSESSMENT EXERCISE 2 The teacher is required to: i.
Carefully plan situation to which activities are natural for successful response ii.
Make provision for building a group moral which supports the desirable mode of conduct.
iii.
Give opportunity for application of the principles involved in different situations so that these principles may be integrated and internalized by the child and reflected in his or her behaviour.
Examples: 84ECE 412 THE SCHOOL ENVIRONMENT AND THE CHILD 1.
An important aspect of morality is that you should not always seek retaliation or vengeance because nature itself punishes wrong doing.
2.
Children should not be motivated to achieve merits by dishonest means.
Etc.
6.0 TUTOR-MARKED ASSIGNMENT List any five opportunities the school can give children to acquire moral behaviour.
7.0 REFERENCES/FURTHER READINGS Durojauye, M.O.A (1972).
Psychological Guidance of School Child.
London.
Evans Brothers limited.
Durojauye, M.O.A.
(1983).
A New Introduction to Educational Psychology.
Ibadan: Evans Brothers Limited.
Kay, W. (1968).
Moral Development.
London: George Allen & Unwin.
UNIT 3 SOCIAL BEHAVIOUR IN CHILDREN 85ECE 412 THE SCHOOL ENVIRONMENT AND THE CHILD CONTENTS 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objectives 3.0 Main Content 3.1 Social Behaviour in Children 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutor-Marked Assignment 7.0 References/Further Readings 1.0 INTRODUCTION In Unit 2, we discussed basic moral behaviour children should acquire.
It is hoped you gather that honesty, respect for the property of others, respect for truth, respect for other people’s opinion, tolerance and sexual control are the basic moral behaviour children should acquire.
The school is expected to play active role in helping children acquire these basic moral behaviour.
In this unit, we shall discuss social behaviour in children.
2.0 OBJECTIVES By the end of this unit, you should be able to: • explain social behaviour in children; and • discuss the role of the school in shaping children’s social behaviour.
3.0 MAIN CONTENT 3.1 Social Behaviour in Children Social behaviour refers to the way of behaving by children living in communities or it refers to treatment shown to other children living in community by children.
We can also refer to social behaviour as the attitude and habits of social responses of children.
Some of the social behaviour of children are as follows: 1.
Social Communication 2.
Play 3.
Social Co-Operation 4.
Social Competition 5.
Social Aggression 6.
Social Prejudice 86ECE 412 THE SCHOOL ENVIRONMENT AND THE CHILD We shall now briefly discuss each of these six patterns of children’s social behaviour.
1.
Social Communication Social communication here includes language and gestures, looks and smiles, handshakes, bowing and bending or kneeling when greeting or saluting other people.
It also includes all forms of facial or hand expressions which convey some type of social feeling or social relationship.
Social communication depends upon the culture to which an individual belongs like most social skills, social communication is learned first in the family, then in the peer group and community and then in the school.
You have to note that by the age of four months a baby responds discriminatingly to his mother’s facial expression.
He smiles when…….
He responds discriminatingly also to his mother’s voice.
He cries when her voice is harsh, and smiles when her voice is friendly.
Hand movement can make him cry with fright or wriggle with pleasure at the chance of being carried.
By the age of one year the child responds to an adult’s facial expression and reacts meaningfully and knowingly to hand gestures that are meant to show friendship.
From then on, social communications develop with the widening scope of experience and increasing social skills.
Thus by the age of ten, the child has virtually mastered well the forms of social communication in his immediate environment.
Upon these the child builds the understanding of those social communications that he or she needs in his adolescence and adulthood.
Social communication is a social behaviour pattern that starts in early infancy and develops through out life.
2.
Play Play is a universal activity for all healthy children.
It is a form of recreation that has great educational value.
It is through play that some children practice some of the roles they will later be called upon to play as adults.
Play also gives the children opportunity to practice the skills they have already acquired.
In play, children exercise their bodies and minds and generally improve and maintain their physical and mental health.
Play is a means of starting and continuing social relationships.
The development of play as a social behaviour starts with solitary play in infancy, group play starts early childhood.
In later child hood boys form themselves into unique groups.
In adolescence, heterosexual relationships are developed.
Organised team competitions with proper 87ECE 412 THE SCHOOL ENVIRONMENT AND THE CHILD leaderships, equipment and uniform are important for adolescents.
Teachers and parents should be concerned about the group to which their children belong.
A group with many few well- behaved ones.
The converse is equally true.
It is important that teachers and parents should constantly support and strengthen good behaviour in their children so that each individual member of the group is not left at the mercy of the group’s pleasure.
A child should not be advised to abandon a group unless the group’s behaviour is so demoralising, corrupting and hopeless as to be dangerous for the good behaviour and the mental health of a particular child.
The teacher should foster co-operation among the school children in team games, school projects, drama production and other school activities.
3.
Social Competition Competition can exist: Between children of the same group Between two rival groups of children Between children and Authority Between a child’s performance and his own previous of standard performance.
All these forms of competition can be seen in children school age.
Competition seems natural to many children.
When children compete against one another they may use commands, threats, force or cheating to gain their objectives.
Healthy competition between two rival groups, as in football matches between two schools, helps to strengthen the spirit of co- operation within each group.
Competition between children and authority is basically a cry for independence.
An adult should put this to constructive use by asking children to participate in decision making.
If uncontrolled, this kind of competition often lies behind some of the delinquent problems of children.
Children who successfully compete with authority by out witting it may, if not helped, later compete with the law.
Competition between one’s present performance and one’s previous standard does not involve another person.
It depends instead on whether the present performance is more or less positive than the previous standard.
A child who sets himself the zeal of increasing good behaviour and achievement shows the best form of competition, a model which teachers should try to cultivate in every child.
You have to note that some factors may produce the opposite – co- operation for example, too different age range of children larger than 88ECE 412 THE SCHOOL ENVIRONMENT AND THE CHILD five in number produces competition.
Similarly, intolerant group behaviour could lead to competition, different interest of members leads to competition.
Inadequate equipment could lead to competition.
Insufficient space could lead to competition.
While teacher authoritarian leadership style in the classroom leads to competition among the school children.
On the other hand, similar age range, size of group not more than five, sympathetic group behaviour, similar interest of members, adequate equipment, ample space and teacher’s democratic leadership style in class usually leads to co-operation.
4.
Social Aggression Social aggression refers to all forms of insistent social behaviour shown by a person in order to achieve a social goal.
It includes also the behaviour shown by an individual when he or she is being prevented from achieving a social goal, and the way a person tries to prevent any obstacle being put between him and his social goal.
There are two purposes of social aggression.
The first type is social aggression displayed as a result of having been thwarted.
This is aggression to get even with some one or to show that one has been hurt.
Aggression here can be shown by punitive actions like: kicking, stamping feet, banging the door, moaning and answering back.
This type of aggression is called RETALIATORY AGGRESSION.
Its purpose being to pay back even when the object of the attack is not immediately clear.
The second type of aggression seen in school children is initiated to put them in limelight, or to give them an advantage over others.
This is a common purpose of social aggression.
This type of aggression is called Conciliatory Aggression; it means aggression designed to obtain the friendship of someone, to placate or modify; something from another person or to attract someone.
For example, the little girl who brings flower for the teacher who makes special efforts to tell jokes to others, or who carefully completes her home work is probably showing conciliatory aggression.
The boy who plays with great gusto, the boy who shows leadership, the strong boy who bullies others, the teenage girl who wears mini-skirt or make-up or the adolescent who tells dirty stories and brags about his or her conquests, is probably trying to impress some one , and is showing attention –seeking behaviour, is conciliatory aggression.
Social aggressive behaviour whether retaliatory or conciliation can either be destructive or constructive in its effect.
If it adversely affects 89ECE 412 THE SCHOOL ENVIRONMENT AND THE CHILD the moral or physical welfare of the person showing the aggressive behaviour or of someone else to whom the behaviour is shown it is destructive.
Social aggression that boosts the morale of the individual from whom it originates without adversely affecting others, is constructive.
Thus aggressive social behaviour is not necessarily an undesirable thing; and the school has an important role to play in the development of whole- some social aggression.
Children must be taught by teachers not to fight against other people, but to fight with them and for them, for some worthy cause.
Teachers must realise that wholesome aggression should not be repressed, but carefully channelled into socially acceptable behaviour.
Sympathy, understanding and sincere decision with children and adolescents can help teachers to find out the cause of unwholesome aggression in children and avoid excessive punishment for it.
By so doing teachers can help children out of their inner conflicts and the emotional problems that give rise to unwholesome aggressive behaviour.
5.
Social Prejudice Prejudice is a pattern of hostility in interpersonal relations which is directed against an entire group or against its individual members.
It fulfils its bearer.
Prejudice is not only expressed as hostility towards others but also as favouritism towards others in either case.
It carries a deep emotional overtone.
When the expression is hostility against some else, the person at the receiving end suffers hurt and humiliation by being made to feel inferior.
When prejudice is in favour of someone else, that person is given privileges and accorded opportunities which he does not deserve and from which others may be excluded.
Either way, the favoured person may suffer from a sense of inadequacy and guilt, while the disfavoured may suffer a sense being cheated by society.
Society is thereby often denied the effective contribution of both types of individuals.
Often prejudice involves putting social labels on persons or groups, calling them names and attributing certain negative characteristics to them.
Example, people X are great, tribe Y are dirty.
The school has essential duty in training children to be tolerant of strange customs and people.
Emphasis on the complementary roles and richness afforded by the differences between people is more useful than mere identification of these differences.
Excessive competition arranged by the teacher between two tribal or ethnic groups is likely to foster division, suspicion and prejudice between the groups concerned.
Experience as far as possible is for children to feel secure in their tolerance of and mutual existence with children of other back grounds.
90ECE 412 THE SCHOOL ENVIRONMENT AND THE CHILD SELF-ASSESSMENT EXERCISE List the situations in which social prejudice can be expressed.
4.0 CONCLUSION Social behaviour in children are manifested in social communication co- operation competition, aggression and prejudice.
The degree of expression of this social behaviour varies with age and social context.
5.0 SUMMARY Social behaviour are natural to children as human beings, some acquired through years of living in a social situation.
The school is responsible for ensuring that all children develop these social behaviour and social understanding and tolerances that will enable them to satisfy their social needs and to lead a wholesome social life as adults.
ANSWER TO SELF-ASSESSMENT EXERCISE Social prejudice can be expressed In clothing, food, language, culture, religion, colour, socio-economic status, race, skin -colour; minority group.
6.0 TUTOR MARKED ASSIGNMENT 1.
“It is said that a child who never fights is abnormal”!!
What is the implication of this statement to a classroom teacher?
2.
Identify time factors that produce co-operation in children.
7.0 REFERENCES/FURTHER READINGS Bowlby, J.
(1982).
Maternal Care and Mental Health, World Health Organization, General, Switzerland.
Duro.
Jaiye, M.O.A (1972) Social Relations in a Nigeria International School.
West African Journal of Education vol.
xvi, No.
3.
Duro Jaiye, M.O.A.
(1983).
A New Introduction to Education Psychology.
Ibadan: Evans Brothers Limited.
UNIT 4 THE ROLE OF THE SCHOOLS IN DEVELOPING POSITIVE ATTITUDE IN CHILDREN 91ECE 412 THE SCHOOL ENVIRONMENT AND THE CHILD CONTENTS 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objectives 3.0 Main Content 3.1 School Environment Variables that can Inhibit Developing Position Attitude in Children 3.2 The Role of School in the Development of Positive Attitudes in Children 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutor-Marked Assignment 7.0 References/Further Readings 1.0 INTRODUCTION In unit 3, we discussed social behaviour in children.
It is hoped that you learnt that social behaviour in children are expressed in social communication , co-operation, competition, aggression and prejudice, The school plays important role in developing social behaviour in children.
In this unit, we shall discuss the role of school in developing positive attitude in children.
2.0 OBJECTIVES By the end of this unity, you should be able to: • discuss school environment variables that can inhibit development of positive attitudes in children; and • identify and explain the role of the school environment in developing positive attitude in children.
3.0 MAIN CONTENT 3.1 School Environment Variables that can Inhibit Development of Positive Attitude in Children The school Environment Variables that can inhibit development of positive attitude in children are: inadequate training of teachers, inadequate curriculum, lack of recreational facilities, poor classroom climate; inadequate examination system unhealthy relationship between the teachers and school administrators, teachers and students lack of modelling in the schools and negative influence of peer group.
92ECE 412 THE SCHOOL ENVIRONMENT AND THE CHILD Inadequate Training of Teachers Teachers who are inadequately educated and trained in educational courses like educational psychology, technology, curriculum, methodology measurement and evaluation and administration and planning to mention but these with specialization in subject areas may commit blunder in handing children and their problems are borne out of ignorance of child developmental characteristics and behaviour.
Such untrained teacher’s partiality and autocratic attitude are factors that may lead to maladjustment in children, create tension and anxiety in children and therefore prevent proper personality, emotional, social, and moral behavioural development in children.
The untrained teacher may be ignorant of the fact that the most effective method in teaching and learning situation is the use of rewards not punishment.
Untrained teachers believe in the use of the cane to achieve student learning.
Such teachers correct children undesirable behaviours like truancy, lateness to school, poor performance in class work and other vices by giving punishment instead of finding out the remote causes of those undesirable behaviours and try to correct them by means of removing them from the minds of children.
Inadequate Curriculum If the school curriculum does not seem to meet the needs of children it is inadequate.
Children have several physical, intellectual, emotional, social and moral needs at different developmental stages.
Adequate curriculum is one which will cater for the needs of children at different stages of their development so as to make them adjust well and increase in learning.
Lack Recreational Facilities Recreational facilities affect children’s development and effective learning.
Where there are lack of recreational facilities in the form of play materials, libraries, games and sports fields, equipment and materials, discussion facilities and so on, children may manifest maladjustment which may prevent adequate learning and positive attitudinal development.
It is therefore of absolute necessity that there must be recreational facilities in schools if desirable positive attitudes and increased learning in children is to take place effectively.
Unfavorable or Unconducive Classroom Climate In a school where the class room climate is unfavorable due to lack of love, trust, humility and co-operation between teachers and school 93ECE 412 THE SCHOOL ENVIRONMENT AND THE CHILD administrators and between teachers and teachers and between teachers and students and between students and students the emotions will be charged and there may be class distinctions, feelings of insecurity and other vices.
Consequently learning is disturbed and children will develop poor attitudes.
Stressful Examination System One of the problems children face in the schools is stressful examination system.
It creates strain and stress in the minds of the students.
Continuous assessment of students is the innovation introduced in our examination system to reduce stress.
It is used in the assessment of their performance for promotion and award of certificates.
When students realize that it is not only through one short examination that their abilities will be assessed, the strain and stress they have during examination will reduce.
This will also help them to develop positive attitudes.
Cheating in examinations will also reduce.
Teachers should practice continuous assessment in schools to realize its set objectives.
Unhealthy Relationships in Schools The pattern of relationship among the school administrators and teachers between teachers themselves, students and teachers plays an important role in creating the type of environment that will exist in the school.
If there is co-operation, mutual understanding and love and trust among the people in the school, then an environment that is conducive will be created for the development of positive attitudes and there will be effective teaching.
There is partial treatment on the basis of race, tribe, religion, nepotism, open criticisms, leg-pulling or helping some one to climb up and the other to fail as well as authoritarian administration which affect the mental health of the children in a negative direction there will be no conducive school environment and children will not learn well and develop positive attitudes.
Ineffective Modelling in Schools Children imitate the physical, social and mental characteristics of their model in schools such as teachers and classmates.
If teachers present themselves in good manners of dressing, being punctual to school, preparing lesson very well, and teaching, as well as self-control, students who identify with these teachers will model the teachers and learn something good that will bring them up as good citizens.
However, if the teacher has bad manners students who model him will develop negative attitudes and undesirable behaviour.
Influence of Peer Group 94ECE 412 THE SCHOOL ENVIRONMENT AND THE CHILD Children’s development in school is highly influenced by the peer group.
The peer group is a small group of children of the same sex that a child will likely belong to while in school.
The child at this age has his or her personality development greatly influenced by the peer group.
The child is always sensitive to the approval of his or her peers on whatever he or she does.
The peer group influence on the child seems to be stronger than the influence of parents.
Even the peer group influence affects what a child learns from the parents.
Children obey the decisions of their peer group without question.
The peer group usually has a leader whom other children tend to take orders from.
A good leader will likely have good members because other children try to identify with their leader.
The member in such a group will develop good traits like self- control, courage, loyalty, obedience, fidelity and fair play within the group.
The peer group will help the members to develop the good traits in adult life.
Delinquency may result in peer grouping children due to bad influence of peer group.
There may be bad activities in the peer group like lying, taking physical risk and snubbing.
When this is the case children develop negative attitudes.
SELF-ASSESSMENT EXERCISE 1 Identify some school factors that may lead to delinquency in children.
3.2The Role Of School In The Development of Positive Attitudes in Children School will help in developing positive attitude in children by providing an atmosphere free from emotional tensions, facilities for extra- curricular activities, desirable teacher’s behaviour, adequate curriculum and good reading habits.
The teacher should organize a variety of activities in the school to foster social development and proper social attitudes in children.
The teachers should organize informal social functions that will cater for the needs of all types of students such as arrange excursions, field trips, games, debates, and seminars.
Make appraisal of each student’s social interests, his or her socio-economic conditions and organize activities to foster socialization.
The school should foster attitudes of co-operation and generate a satisfactory emotional atmosphere.
The teachers should adopt democratic approach in promoting learning and should use rewards and not punishment to correct undesirable behaviours.
95ECE 412 THE SCHOOL ENVIRONMENT AND THE CHILD SELF-ASSESSMENT EXERCISE 2 Briefly explain a positive attitude of teachers that bring about positive attitude in children.
4.0 CONCLUSION The school has an important role to shape the personality of children by creating better emotional atmosphere for them and using improved tested methods in conducting its business of teaching and learning.
The school should guide and counsel children.
5.0 SUMMARY The school environment plays an important role in the development of positive attitudes.
In order to do this effectively, the school environment should be free from insecurity so as to provide a conducive environment for learning that is free from fear, tension and frustration.
ANSWER TO SELF-ASSESSMENT EXERCISE 1 1. location of the school 2. lack of discipline 3. unfavourable emotional climate 4. partiality 5. lack of facilities for games and sports, and library, drama, debates, swatting and education excursions, for students, class distinction, lack of guidance, objective curriculum and examination system.
The location of school should be near children’s home and not far away.
It should not be in an industrial area, near movie houses and markets so as to prevent children from engaging in delinquent acts.
ANSWER TO SELF-ASSESSMENT EXERCISE 2 1.
The teacher should present himself as a friend to the children.
2.
He should create a warm, friendly atmosphere in the classroom.
3.
He should gear his teaching to the needs of the learner.
Teachers should have sympathetic attitude towards deviant children.
He must try to locate the causes of anti-social behaviour and help children to improve on their personality.
The teacher should use different motivational techniques in the classroom for the improvement of performance and learning by children.
96ECE 412 THE SCHOOL ENVIRONMENT AND THE CHILD 6.0 TUTOR-MARKED ASSIGNMENT What activities of the school will influence positive attitude of children?
7.0 REFERENCES/FURTHER READINGS Chauhan, S.S. (1981).
Advanced Educational Psychology.
New Delhi: Vikas Publishing House pro.
Ltd. Hilgard, E.R, Athwson, R.C.
and Ikmson, R.C.
(1975).
Introduction to Psychology.
New Delhi : Oxford and IBH Publishing Co. Durojaiye, M.O.A (1983).
A New Introduction to Education Psychology.
Ibadan : Evans Brothers Limited.
UNIT 5 THE NEED FOR GUIDANCE AND COUNSELLING 97ECE 412 THE SCHOOL ENVIRONMENT AND THE CHILD CONTENTS 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objectives 3.0 Main Content 3.1 Meaning of Guidance and Counselling 3.2 The Need for Guidance and Counselling in School 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutor Marked Assignment 7.0 References/Further Readings 1.0 INTRODUCTION In unit 4, we discussed the role of the schools in developing positive attitudes in children.
It is believed that you gathered that the school creates better emotional climates or atmosphere to shape the personality of children to develop positive attitudes.
In this unit, we shall discuss the need for guidance and counselling in the school.
2.0 OBJECTIVES By the end of this unit, you should be able to: • define guidance and counselling; • explain the nature and need for guidance and counselling in schools; and • identify the general principles of guidance and counselling in schools.
3.0 MAIN CONTENT 3.1 Meaning of Guidance and Counselling The two terms guidance and counselling do not mean the same thing, but they are related to each other.
Therefore it is necessary for us to define the two terms and differentiate them.
Meaning of Guidance Guidance as a concept has been variously defined by many people, but they all agree that guidance means to render help.
We can therefore state that guidance is the assistance and information given to individuals to enable them make intelligent choices and adjustments independently.
98ECE 412 THE SCHOOL ENVIRONMENT AND THE CHILD Guidance refers to the provision of experiences which assist children to help themselves towards overcoming obstacles which maybe intellectual, social, emotional, physical and moral development.
In this regard the individual strives to achieve optimum development of his or her personal resources.
We can also say that guidance is a process of helping the individuals to be aware of their personal identify, perceive themselves in relation to their environmental and interpersonal relationships.
Guidance can help the individual to understand himself or herself, develop his/her potentialities and satisfy his needs and aspirations; understand himself or herself implies being able to understand that there are variables within himself or herself that are capable of blocking his emotions and in the process make it impossible to develop a better personality, examples of such variables are: interests, needs, values and motivation.
The world around the individual are various environmental factors such as peer attitudes, sibling influences, parental influences, emotional climate of the school, teacher-student relationship, physical plants and school buildings.
The meaning of guidance is that the individual is assisted with all the necessary information to enable the individual child identify these needs, factors and make efforts to relate them in everyday interaction within the school and outside the school for effective integration of self and study.
Guidance ensures that children are guided in such a way that they should be able to control their emotions and feelings and avert the chances of becoming societal deviants or sociopaths.
Meaning of Counselling Counselling has also been defined by many authors in various ways, but all of the definitions appear to be saying the same thing that counselling mostly helps in motivation.
It is therapeutic, sensitive to their environment and responding to it in a manner that would be self- satisfying.
Educational counselling is therefore defined here as a continuous process of helping the learner to understand himself and the school environment around him so as to adjust himself appropriately to his school environment, adjust to his academic work and its demand, develop desirable curricular interests and worthy life goals, cultivate efficient working habit and sound practical skills, acquire desirable interpersonal relations and a high sense of moral and satisfactory mental health.
Thus counselling helps school children gain insight into their problems and help them resolve some of the problems.
It helps children develop vocational consciousness, occupational interests and adjustment to learning situations, to the society and to personal changes.
From our definitions of guidance and counselling, you will notice that the two terminologies are referred to as helping professional service to support educational efforts and assist in the development of the 99ECE 412 THE SCHOOL ENVIRONMENT AND THE CHILD individuals to become good citizens who live successful lives.
We may note the differences between guidance and counselling for proper understanding of the two concepts.
Differences between Guidance and Counselling Guidance and counselling is systematic in collecting information about individuals and groups; classifying, grading, advising, recommending, persuading and suggesting.
It is a helping profession that is highly personalized and seeks to expend understanding self and others towards self-realization and self-actualization.
Guidance and counselling focuses on developing of understanding of self such that proper perception, thinking, feelings emotions, motivation can be developed for effective adjustment.
It is also a process as well as a relationship that encourages face to face dialogue through discussions and understanding especially during counselling encounter.
It stresses perceptual understanding of human behaviour to maximise educational problems.
It stresses understanding of the unique goals, precepts, assets and liabilities of the individual.
SELF-ASSESSMENT EXERCISE 1 With one concrete example give one operational definition of guidance and counselling.
3.2 The Need for Guidance and Counselling in School There is a need for educational guidance and counselling services in the school.
In primary schools guidance counselling is needed for: 1.
Possible prevention of personality maladjustments.
2.
Encouraging successful learning achievements through: - Preventing emotional disturbance from developing in young children through co-operative efforts of teachers, parents, and other guidance and counselling workers.
- Offering assistance to the child whose learning in particular area is poor especially when the deficiency is considered the result of emotional difficulties.
- Helping teachers recognise pupils with serious emotional difficulties and make proper arrangements for treatment.
- Serving as a means of facilitating communication between school 100ECE 412 THE SCHOOL ENVIRONMENT AND THE CHILD and home.
- Providing parents with information about child development as well as about school leaving.
- Helping the teacher orient children to school and to help then prepare children for a change to secondary school when they have reached primary six.
- Providing information about schools and vocations for the pupils in elementary schools.
- Helping teachers acquire information about guidance techniques and how to utilize them I motivating the children.
- Preventing psychological problems from developing in the child especially a child with damaged personality; example, stammering, hard of hearing, low self-concept.
- Fostering creativity in children’s growth and development especially at the age of curiosity, exploration and experimentation.
- Encouraging desirable social behaviours such as co-operative attitudes, obedience, respect for elders.
In secondary schools 1.
Guidance and counselling is the tool for piloting the affairs of the students.
2.
Guidance and counselling creates the opportunities for the students to discuss their problems in relation to their academic programmes.
It enables the students to deliberate upon their ideas, plans, and discussions and relate their abilities to the academic, social or vocational decisions which they may encounter.
3.
Guidance and counselling provides the students with the opportunities to obtain useful and usable data about all types of present and probable future educational opportunities as well as educational problems which include requirements for entering into universities through the JAMB, extra-curricular activities, school rules and regulations, curricular activities, school clubs and social activities, credit hours, terminologies for various course such as elective and compulsory courses, subjects required for entering into tertiary institutions like colleges of education, polytechnics and universities, problems of study habits, reading and forgetting, and motivation for learning.
In guiding and counselling, students, individuals are accepted without conditional restrictions.
The approach to students’ problems is more consultative to help them get to their academic ladder.
They need to understand the concept of course content and special abilities.
Guidance 101ECE 412 THE SCHOOL ENVIRONMENT AND THE CHILD and counselling should develop ways to strengthen the use of student’s abilities, and make wise choices and think critically.
- Provide occupational counselling in such a way that students’ desired vocation matches with the required subjects.
- Help students to develop better attitude to learn in such a way that examination anxiety is be minimized.
- Help students to pay attention, concentrate on relevant attributes in such a way that the number of drop-outs from schools would be minimized.
- It aids students to clarify what preparations are needed for their future careers and, in addition, provide students with programmes which could help them come in contact with the world of work through career talks, lectures, and workshops.
SELF-ASSESSMENT EXERCISE 2 Briefly explain the need of guidance and counselling in the second year of Junior Secondary Schools.
4.0 CONCLUSION Guidance and counselling services are needed in all schools.
5.0 SUMMARY Guidance and counselling services should be provided in schools to assist in the development of students to become good citizens who will live successful lives as adults.
ANSWER TO SELF-ASSESSMENT EXERCISE 1 Operationally, guidance and counselling is a process of helping the individual to overcome obstacles and strive to achieve optimum development of his personal resources.
A concrete example is in self actualization.
This refers to personal desire to become everything one is capable of becoming and the ability to reach a set goal and attainment of personal aspiration.
For instance, if a child aspires to become a medical doctor, the guidance counsellor should help the child develop all his potentialities, abilities and talents.
In the end the child strives to do well in secondary subjects related to medicine.
In medicine the child does well and eventually graduates as a medical doctor.
This is self actualization or self-fulfilment.
Guidance and counselling helped the child to get to the peak of his talents .i.e.
self actualization.
The child is 102ECE 412 THE SCHOOL ENVIRONMENT AND THE CHILD guided and counselled to make achievement consistent with his set goal.
ANSWER TO SELF-ASSESSMENT EXERCISE 2 - To provide adequate information and opportunities for all students to become aware of educational setting or environment, academic content and programmes, schools rules and regulations, the use of school libraries, to keep their things safe from pilfering by students, appropriate and inappropriate behaviours, importance of good relationships with teachers and fellow students, requirements for graduation from Junior Secondary School level, how to obtain information from libraries, market places, government offices and industries, through tours, talks, use of documents, pamphlets, magazines, pictorial books, journal and books.
- To guide and counsel students to take academic subjects, business studies and the elective subjects.
i.e.
the student should take grammar school subjects, technical subjects, business studies and elective subjects crucial to further development of students.
6.0 TUTOR-MARKED ASSIGNMENT Explain any three areas of educational guidance and counselling services in schools.
7.0 REFERENCES/FURTHER READINGS Anagbogu, M.A.
(1988).
Foundations of Guidance and Counselling for Colleges and Universities.
Awka: Ikenga Publishing Company.
Ginzberg, E. (1972).
Toward a Theory of Occupational Choice- A Restatements: Vocational Guidance Quarterly 20(1) 196-176.
Uba, Anselem (1983).
Introduction to Counselling.
Ile-Ife: University of Ife Press.
103
