 NATIONAL OPEN UNIVERSITY OF NIGERIA SCHOOL OF EDUCATION COURSE CODE: EDU 668 COURSE TITLE: SOCIAL STUDIES METHODS 1  EDU 668: SOCIAL STUDIES METHODS COURSE GUIDE Course Developer: Dr. M. Babatunde Lawal National Open University of Nigeria, Victoria Island, Lagos.
Course Writer: Dr. M. Babatunde Lawal School of Education National Open University of Nigeria Victoria Island, Lagos Course Editor: Prof. Ken A. Meseiobi National Open University of Nigeria Owerri Study Centre Owerri Programme Leader: Dr. M. Babatunde Lawal School of Education National Open University of Nigeria Victoria Island, Lagos Course Coordinator: Dr. U. S. A. Osuji School of Education National Open University of Nigeria Victoria Island, Lagos 2  EDU 668: SOCIAL STUDIES METHODS 1.0 : INTRODUCTION The course EDU 668 titled “Social Studies Methods” is a two-credit course consisting of three modules and fifteen units.
It is designed to cater for undergraduates offering B.A.Ed programmes and other related programmes in the School of Education of the National Open University of Nigeria.
It is a two-unit course that demands your full attention and commitment as an undergraduate student.
As an undergraduate student of Education the course familiarizes you with the meaning of Social Studies and the various methods, techniques and strategies that can be used to promote the teaching of the subject for cognitive, affective as well as psychomotor learning.
Your successful completion of this course should prepare you better for the handling any Social Studies curriculum in the nation’s educational system.
This course guide tells you briefly what the course is all about, what relevant reference materials are available to complement your reading of the course material and how you can work your way through the course.
It suggests some general guidelines for the amount of time you are likely to spend on each unit of the course in order to complete it successfully.
It also gives you some guidance on your tutor-marked assignments.
2.0 : WHAT YOU WILL LEARN IN THIS COURSE The course EDU 668 titled “Social Studies Methods” will avail you an opportunity to acquire the basic and relevant knowledge and skills required for becoming a professional teacher of Social Studies as you will be able to differentiate from the three seemingly confusing technical terms of methods, techniques and strategies.
The Course is expected to facilitate your understanding of those methods and techniques of teaching Social Studies with vantage opportunity provided for you to apply some of them while studying and later when you get to your actual classroom.
You will also learn about what it takes to plan for effective teaching of any Social Studies content at any level of the nation’s education system.
The issue of dearth of instructional materials is one major problem facing the teaching and learning of Social Studies in our schools.
It is expected that this Course Material will assist y ou greatly in acquiring the skills of sourcing for and using these materials in your classroom.
Strategies for improvising and using the community as learning resource centre will also be discussed.
3  3.0 : COURSE AIM The course is designed for you as a reader and student to improve your knowledge and skills of teaching Social Studies as a value-based subject with the ultimate desire of creating opportunities for the learners to master solving their problems of survival with less stress.
4.0 : COURSE OBJECTIVES The aim of this course as stated in the preceding section serves as an all embracing goal which equally influences the objectives of your studying each of the units presented in the course material.
The objectives have been identified for each of the units.
You are advised to read them before you start working through each of the units.
You may want to refer to them during your study of the unit to check on your progress.
You should always look at the unit objectives after completing a unit, in this way , you can be sure that you have done what is required of you by the unit.
By the end of this course it is therefore expected that you should be able to do the following: i.
Give concise and up to date definitions of Social Studies.
ii.
Explain the nature and scope of Social Studies and iii.
Describe Nigeria’s national philosophy of education and the philosophical background of Social Studies as a school subject.
iv.
Highlight the relationship between the philosophical background of Social Studies and Nigeria’s National Policy on Education.
v. Identify the goals of teaching and learning Social Studies as a school subject.
vi.
Highlight the values of learning Social Studies.
vii.
Describe what is new in the structure of the 9-Year Basic Education Social Studies viii.
Curriculum.
ix.
Describe how best difficult concepts can be handled by Social Studies teachers.
x.
Describe the concepts of methods, techniques and strategies as they apply to teaching and learning.
xi.
Describe and apply different instructional techniques in Social Studies classroom.
xii.
Identify those features that can be used to describe effective teaching in a Social Studies class.
xiii.
Identify the essentials of lesson planning for Social Studies teaching.
xiv.
Practically prepare yourself for effective teaching of Social Studies at either the primary or junior secondary level.
xv.
Explain in simple term the concept of instructional media or instructional material resource.
xvi.
Identify the principles guiding the selection and effective utilisation of instructional resource materials in the Social Studies classroom.
xvii.
Identify those factors that can promote effective use of instructional material resources in the Social Studies classroom.
xviii.
Describe the different types of instructional resource materials and use some of them in the Social Studies classroom.
4  xix.
Define the concept of improvisation.
xx.
Highlight the importance of improvisation towards the effective teaching of Social Studies.
xxi.
Identify and describe some of the skills needed by the teacher for improvising instructional resource materials in Social Studies classrooms.
xxii.
Describe the categories of community resources that can be used for Social Studies xxiii.
Teaching xxiv.
Highlight the importance of community resources for Social Studies teaching 5.0 : WORKING THROUGH THIS COURSE It is important for you to be determined to complete this course by reading through from Unit 1 of the first module to the last unit of the third module and, carrying out all the activities stipulated therein.
These include self-assessment exercises and tutor-marked assignments listed under every unit.
At certain points during the course, you will be expected to submit your tutor-marked assignments as your scores in some of them form a reasonable percentage of your total scores for the course.
Each unit of each of the modules starts with an introduction followed by objectives to be achieved after interacting with the main content and the exercises.
Your facilitator for the course will be available to attend to you in case you find it difficult to comprehend any aspect of the course material.
You are therefore advised to ensure that you read ahead and attend tutorial sessions where you would be able to ask questions and interact with other colleagues of yours and the facilitator.
At the end of the course is a final examination.
The course should take you about a total 42 weeks to complete.
Below are the components of the course, what you have to do, and how you should allocate your time to each unit in order to complete the course successfully on time.
5  6.0 : THE COURSE MATERIAL The major components of the course which will be made available to you include: • The Course Guide • The course material with the corresponding Study U nits • Assignment file & • Presentation Schedule.
7.0: STUDY UNITS The study units in this course are presented in the table below.
Module Title Unit No.
Unit Title 1.
Meaning, Nature and Scope of Foundations of Social Studies Social Studies 2.
Philosophical Background of Social Studies 3.
Relevance of Teaching Social Studies 4.
Overview of the new 9-year Basic Education Social Studies Curriculum 1.
Methods, Techniques and Methods, Techniques and Strategies Strategies of Teaching of Teaching Social Studies Distinguished 2.
T Techniques of Teaching Social Studies I 3.
Techniques of Teaching Social Studies II 4.
Planning for Effective Teaching of Social Studies Instructional Resource Materials for 1 .
Meaning and Principles Guiding Effective Social Studies Teaching the Selection and Utilisation of Instructional Un Resource Materials 2.
Types of Instruction Resource Materials and their Application in Social Studies Classrooms 3.
Improvisation of Instructional Resource Materials in Social Studies Classrooms 4.
The Community as a Learning Resource in Social Studies 6  8.0: ASSIGNMENT FILE Your assignment file will be available through your facilitator and Study Centre Manager.
In this course, y ou will find all the details of the work you must submit to your tutor for marking.
The marks you obtain for these assignments will count towards the final mark you obtain for this course.
Further information on assignments will be found in the assignment file itself and later in the section on assessment in this course guide.
There are tutor-marked assignments in this course and you are expected to practice all but submit at most 4.
9.0: PRESENTATION SCHEDULE The presentation schedule included in your course materials gives you the important dates for this year for the completion of tutor-marked assignments (TMAs) and attending tutorials.
Remember, you are required to submit all your assignments by the due dates.
You should guard against falling behind in your works.
10.0: ASSESSMENTS There are two aspects to the assessment of the course: first are the tutor-marked assignments (30%) ; and second is a written examination (70%).
In tackling the assignments, you are expected to apply information, knowledge and techniques gathered during the course.
The assignments must be submitted to your tutor for formal assessment in accordance with the deadlines stated in the Presentation Schedule and the Assignment File At the end of the course, you will need to sit for a final written examination of two hours duration 11.0: TUTOR-MARKED ASSIGNMENTS (TMAs) There are fifteen (15) tutor-marked assignments in this course and you are advised to attempt all.
Aside from the course material provided, you are advised to read and research widely using other references which will give you a broader viewpoint and may provide a deeper understanding of the subject.
Ensure all completed assignments are submitted on schedule before set deadlines.
If for any reasons, you cannot complete y our work on time, contact your facilitator before the assignment is due to discuss the possibility of an extension.
The extension may not however be granted after the due date except with very genuine excuse.
12.0: FINAL EXAMINATION AND GRADING The final examination for this course will be of two hours duration and has a value of 70% of the total course grade.
All areas of the course will be assessed and the examination will consist of questions, which reflect the type of self-testing, practice exercises and tutor-marked problems you have previously encountered.
All areas of the course will be assessed.
Utilise the time between the conclusion of the last study unit and sitting for the examination to revise the entire course.
You may find it useful to review your self-assessment exercises, tutor- marked assignments and comments on them before the examination.
7  13.0: COURSE MARKING SCHEME The work you submit will count for 30% of your total course mark.
At the end of the course, you will be required to sit for a final examination, which will also count for 70% of your total mark.
The table below shows how the actual course mark ing is broken down.
Table 1: Course Marking Scheme ASSESSMENT MARKS Assignment 4 (TMAs) 4 assignments, best 3 will be used for C.A = 10 x 3 = 30% Final Examination 70% of overall course marks Total 100% of course marks 14.0: COURSE OVERVIEW This table brings together the units and the number of weeks you should take to complete them and the assignment that follow them.
Unit Title of work Week`s activity Assessment (end of unit) 1 Meaning, Nature and Scope of Social Studies 2 Philosophical Background of Social Studies 3 Relevance of Teaching Social Studies Submission of TMA 1 4 Overview of the new 9-year Basic Education Social Studie s Curriculum 5 Methods, Techniques and Strategies of Teaching Distinguishe d 6 Techniques of Teaching Social Studies I 7 Techniques of Teaching Social Studies II Submission of TMA 2 8 Planning for Effective Teaching of Social Studies 9 Meaning and Principles Guiding the Selection and Utilisation of Instructional Resource Materials 10 Types of Instruction Resource Materials and their Submission of TMA 3 Application in Social Studies Classrooms 11 Improvisation of Instructional Resource Materials in Social Studies Classrooms 12 The Community as a Learning Resource in Social Submission of TMA 4 Studie s Revision Examination 15.0: HOW TO GET THE MOST FROM THIS COURSE 8  In distance learning, the study units are specially developed and designed to replace the university lecturer.
Hence, you can work through these materials at y our own pace, and at a time and place that suits you best.
Visualize it as reading the lecture instead listening to a lecturer.
Each of the study units follows a common format as earlier explained under the section on `Working through the Course`.
The first item is an introduction to the subject matter of the unit, and how a particular unit is integrated with the other units and the course as a whole.
Next is a set of learning objectiv es.
These objectives let you know what you should be able to do by the time you have completed the unit.
You should use these objectives to guide your study.
When you have finished the unit, you must go back and check whether you have achiev ed the objectives.
If you make a habit of doing this, y ou will significantly improve your chances of passing the course.
The main body of the unit guides you through the required reading from other sources.
This will usually be either from your set books or from a Reading Section.
Working through the self assessment exercises will help you to achieve the objectives of the units and prepare y ou for the assignments and the examinations.
You should do each activity as you come to it in the study unit.
The following is a practical strategy for working through the course.
If you run into any trouble, telephone y our facilitator.
Remember that your facilitator’s job is to help you.
When you need help, don’t hesitate to call and ask your tutor to provide it.
In summary, • Read this course guide.
• Organise a study schedule.
Refer to the course overview for more details.
Note the time you are expected to spend on each unit and how the assignments relate to the unit.
You need to gather together all this information in one place, such as your diary or a wall calendar.
Whatev er method you choose to use, you should decide on and write in y our own dates for working on each unit.
• Once you have created your own study schedule, do everything you can to stick to it.
The major reason that students fail is that they get behind with their coursework.
If you get into difficulties with your schedule, please let your facilitator know before it is too late for help.
• Turn to Unit 1 and read the introduction and the objectives for the unit.
• Assemble the study materials.
Information about what you need for a unit is given in the ‘Overview’ at the beginning of each unit.
• Well before the relevant due dates (about 4 weeks before the dates) access the Assignment file.
Keep in mind that you will learn a lot by doing the assignments carefully.
They have been designed to help you meet the objectives of the course and, therefore, will help you pass the examination.
Submit all assignments not later than the due dates.
• Review the objectives for each study unit to confirm that you have achieved them.
If you feel unsure about any of the objectives, rev iew the study material or consult your facilitator.
• When you are confident that you have achieved a unit’s objectives, you can then start on the next unit.
Proceed unit by unit through the course and try to pace your study so that you keep yourself on schedule.
9  • When you have submitted an assignment to your facilitator for marking, do not wait for its return before starting on the next unit.
Keep to your schedule.
When the assignment is returned, pay particular attention to your facilitator’s comments.
Consult your facilitator as soon as possible if you have any questions or problems.
• After completing the last unit, review the course and prepare yourself for the final examination.
Check that you have achieved the unit objectives and the course objectives.
16.0: FACI LITATORS AND TUTORIALS There are 20 hours of tutorials (ten 2-hour sessions) provided in support of this course.
You will be notified of the dates, times and location of these tutorials, together with the names and phone number of your facilitator, as soon as you are allocated a tutorial group.
Your facilitator will mark and comment on your assignments.
Keep a close watch on your progress and on any difficulties you might encounter as they would provide assistance to you during the course.
You must mail your tutor-marked assignments to your facilitator well before the due date (at least two working days are required).
They will be marked by your facilitator and returned to you as soon as possible.
Do not hesitate to contact your facilitator by telephone, e-mail, or discussion board if y ou need help.
The following might be circumstances in which you would find help necessary: when • you do not understand any part of the study units or the assigned readings.
• you have difficulty with the self-assessment exercises.
• you have a question or problem with an assignment with your facilitator’s comment on an assignment or with the grading of an assignment.
You should try your possible best to attend the tutorials.
This is the only chance to hav e face-to-face contact with your facilitator and to ask questions which are answered instantly.
You can raise any problem encountered in the course of your study.
To gain the maximum benefit from course tutorials, prepare a question list before attending them.
You will learn a lot from participations in discussions.
10  17.0: SUMMARY In this course PED 313, you have learnt about a variety of concepts and issues relating to child rearing practices, parenting and effects of the child`s cultural and historical background on his/her social behaviours and growth.
Specifically, you have interacted with topics such as: Meaning, Nature and Scope of Social Studies Philosophical Background of Social Studies Relevance of Teaching Social Studies Overview of the new 9-year Basic Education Social Studies Curriculum Methods, Techniques and Strategies of Teaching Distinguished Techniques of Teaching Social Studies I Techniques of Teaching Social Studies II Planning for Effective Teaching of Social Studies Meaning and Principles Guiding the Selection and Utilisation of Instructional Resource Materials Types of Instruction Resource Materials and their Application in Social Studies Classrooms Improvisation of Instructional Resource Materials in Social Studies Classrooms The Community as a Learning Resource in Social Studies Best of luck in y our examinations.
We wish you every success in the future.
We hope you enjoy your acquaintances with the National Open University of Nigeria (NOUN).
16.0: TEXTBOOKS AND REFERENCE MATERIALS 11  Adaralegbe, A.
(1980).
The Nigerian Social Studies Programme: Retrospect and Prospect.
In NERC (1980) Social Studies: Teaching Issues and Problems.
Benin: Ethiope Pub.
Co. Adeyoyin, F.A.
(1991).
Towards a theory of Social Studies.
Nigerian Social Studies Journal 2 (1) 13-23 ADPRIMA (2003) Methods of Teaching Retrieved from www.adprima.com on the 20th May 2009.
Alonge, E. I.
(1983): Improvisation in integrated science: A practical demonstration.
Science Teacher Association of Nigeria.
24th Annual Conference Proceedings pa 171 – 181 ASESP (1994).
Social Studies Curriculum and Teaching Resource Book for Africa Nairobi: ASESP Secretariat Eniayeju, A.
(1983): Improvisation in integrated science: A practical demonstration.
Science Teachers Association of Nigeria – 24t h Annual Conference Proceedings 187-190 Esu, A.
E.O., Umoh, S. J.
& Obi, F. B.
(1995).
Pedagogy of environmental education Lagos: Macmillan Pub.
Federal Ministry of Education (1992).
Training Guide for Master Trainers in Social Studies.
Ibadan Comprehensive Guide Limited.
Gestwicki, C. (2007).
Home, school and community relations USA: Delmar Cengage Learning Hornby, A. S. (1978): Advanced Learner’s Dictionary of Current English.
3rd Edition.
Oxford University Press.
Kissock, C. (1981) Curriculum Planning for Social Studies Teaching.
New York: John Wiley.
Lawal M. B.
(1995).
Principles and concepts of Social Studies.
A Monog raph Lawal, M. B.
(1997).
Enhancing in-service teachers’ skill in procuring and improving instructional resources for junior secondary studies.
Journal of Continuing Education (1) 1 June 36-44.
Lawal M. B.
(1999).
Values clarification, concept mapping strategies and students’ learning outcomes in junior secondary Social Studies Unpublished doctoral dissertation, University of Ibadan Lawal, M. B.
(2003).
Foundations of Social Studies.
A Monograph Lawal, M. B.
(1999) Principles and Concepts of Social Studies Lagos: A Triad Associates Lawal, M. B.
(1999) Critique Report on the Nigerian primary and junior secondary Social Studies curricula Presented at the NERDC/UNICEF Workshop on Basic Education Curriculum on Gender Sensitivity Lawal, M. B.
& Oyeleye, A.S. (2003) Foundations and Principles of Social Studies 12  Education Lagos: A Triad Associates Lawton, D, & Dufour, B.
(1976) New Social Studies.
London: Heinemann Mansaray, A.
(1984) The nature and scope of Social Studies A Monograph Mansaray, A.
(1999) The Nigerian Social Studies curriculum: A critique Paper Presented at the NERDC/UNICEF Workshop on Basic Education Curriculum on Gender Sensitivity Mesieobi, K.A.
(1993).
Teaching values in Social Studies: A contradiction of conceived and operative values in Nigeria.
Nigerian Journal of Social Studies Review 2(1) June Metcalf, L. E. ed.
(1971).
Values education: Rationale, strategies and procedures.
The NCSS 41st Year Book.
Washington, D.C. :National Council for Social Studies Michaelis, J.U.
(1972).
Social Studies for children in a democracy.
5t h ed.
Englewood Cliffs, N.J.: Prentice-Hall Muyanda-Mutebi, P. & Yiga-Matovu, M. (1994) Social Studies Curriculum and Teaching Resource Book for Africa Nairobi:ASESP Secretariat NCSS (1992) Testing and evaluation of Social Studies students Social Education 55 (5) 284-293 NERC (1973) Guidlines on primary school curriculum Lagos: NERC NERDC, (1988).
Teaching methodologies in Population Education: Population Education self learning module 12 Lagos: Population Education Dept.
Nwosu, S.& Corbin, H. (1977).
Handbook for Social Studies teachers Ikeja: Longman Pub.
NERDC, (2007) 9-Year Basic Education Curr iculum Social Stud ies for Junior Seco ndary 1 – 3 Abuja: NERDC NERDC, (2008) Teachers Handbook for the 9-Year Basic Education Curriculum (Junior Secondary Level) Abuja: NERDC NERDC, (2008) Teachers Handbook for the 9-Year Basic Education Curriculum (Primary School Level) Abuja: NERDC Ogundare, S. F. (1988).
Curriculum dev elopment: a description of National Curriculum for Primary Social Studies in Nigeria.
Educational Studies 14(1) 45-50.
Ogundare, S. F. (2000).
Foundations of Social Studies I badan: Adesesan Press Ogunjimi, R.
A.(1996).
Values clarification as an instructional technique for teaching Home Economics Paper presented at a Training Workshop for Lagos State Secondary School Teachers Ogunyemi, S. (2000) Strategies for Teaching Social Studies Ibadan: OACE Pub Ogunsanya, M. (1984).
Introduction to Methodologies of Social Studies Ibadan: University Press Omosehin, F. (1996).
A Handbook on foundations of Social Studies.
Lagos: OACE Pub 13  Olatunde, F. (2006).
Primary school Social Studies curriculum and methods Lagos: NOUN Oroge, S. A.
(1995).
An overview of teaching methodologies in Population/Family Life Education In NERDC, A POP/FLE handbook for classroom teachers Lagos: NERDC Quartey (1984) Social Studies Methodology for Teachers Lagos: Refield Pub.
Quartey, S .
M. & Lawal, M. B.
(1989) Refeild model objective questions and answers for Social Studies Lagos: Refeild Pub.
Preston, R. C. & Herman, W. L. Jnr.
, (1981).
Current research in elementary Social Studies New York: Crowell-Collier-Macmillan Raths, L.E., Harmin M. & Simon, S.B.
(1966).
Values and teaching: working with values in the classroom Ohio: Charles E. Merrill Walker, R. (1970) Rationale for elementary Social Studies In R.H. Jones (1970) Social Studies Education for Young Americans Iowa: Kendal/Hunt Pub.
Co. Wesley, E. (1950) Teaching Social Studies in high schools Boston: D.C. Heath & Co. Wright, I.
(1980) Elementary Social Studies: A Practical Approach to Teaching and Learning.
Toronto: Methuen Publications.
www.itek.ac.ug/curriculum, Retrieved 10th October 2009 14  EDU 668: SOCIAL STUDIES METHODS Course Developer: Dr. M. Babatunde Lawal Natio nal Open Univer sity of Nigeria, Vict oria Island, L agos.
Course Writer: Dr .
M. Babatunde Lawal School of Education National Open University of Nigeria Victo ria Island, Lagos Course Editor: Prof. Ken.
A. Meseiobi National Open University Owerr i Study Centre Owerr i Prog ramme Leader: Dr. M. Babatunde Lawal School of Education National Open Univer sity of Nigeria Vict oria Isla nd, Lagos Course Coordinator: Dr. U. S. A. Osuji School of Education National Open University of Nigeria Vict oria Isla nd, Lagos 15  EDU 668: SOCIAL STUDIES METHODS MODULE 1: FOUNDATIONS OF SOCIAL STUDIES Unit 1: Meaning, Nature and Scope of Social Studies Unit 2: Philosophical Background of Social Studies Unit 3: Relevance of Teaching Social Studies Unit 4: Overview of the new 9-year Basic Education So cial Studies Curriculum UNIT 1: MEANING, NATURE AND SCOPE OF SOCIAL STUDIES CONTENTS 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objectives 3.0 Main Content 3.1: Meaning of Social Studies 3.2: The Nature o f Social Stud ies 3.3: Scope of Studies 3.4: Self Assessment Exercise 4.0 Conc lu sio n 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutor Marked Assignments 7.0 References/Fur ther Readings 1.0: INTRODUCTION This is the first of the units in the 15-u nit course material aimed at impro ving your sk ill of teaching the subject So cial Studies as a teacher in training.
It is a unit that will familiarise you with the current conception of the subject, its nature and scope.
The opportunity provided for you to interact with the content of this unit will also clarify your though ts with regards to the wrong perception of the discipline as o ne that is restricted to the immediate co nfinements of the single discipline purview of the Social Sciences.
2.0: OBJECTIVES By the end of your interaction with this Unit, you should be able to: i.
Give a minimu m of three concise and up to date definitions of So cial Studies.
ii.
Explain the nature of Social Studies and iii.
Descr ibe the scope of the subject 16  3.0: MAIN CONTENT 3.1: Meaning of Social Studies Socia l Studies as a discipline of o ffer ing in Nigeria’s educational system has o ver the years been subjected to a var iety of definitions which in most cases have been quite r estrictive in focus and content.
For instance, majority of the earliest practitioner s of the subject have defined it as an amalgamation of the arts, and social sciences in terms of hi stor y, geography, political science and sociology.
Again the varying professional backgrounds of the handling the subject befor e no w, have equally affected the var iety of defin itions of the subject.
This made teacher s to teach Social Studies as o ne week of histo ry, another week of geography and so on.
Teachers who had this kind o f perception taught the subject purely fo r kno wledge ac qu isit io n, whereas the subject is supposed to be perceived as one that promotes the three domains of lear ning; cognitive, affective and psychomotor and not only the cognitive orientations of the subject.
This is a misco nception of the discipline of Social Studies.
Lawal (1999) supports this view by observing that Social Studies is not a discipline in which acad emic selfishness is exhibited.
That is, a discipline in which a teacher seizes opportunity to emphasize his/her own area of specialisation at the expense o f the real co ntent of the subject (no co mpartmentalisation of knowledge).
Lawal & Oyeleye (2003) also remarks that other scholars have also had course to define Social Studies as the study of man and his environment.
In this definition, it is important to ask if this is not what other disciplines are equally doing or capable of doing.
This definitio n can described as one that does not ascr ibe any uniqueness to the subject.
As an adjunct, they also say it is how man inf luences the enviro nment and how the environment influences man.
One cou ld observe that this definitio n does not emphasize the essence of stud ying the relationships as well as the process for carr ying out such task.
It could also be said to have a strong direct geographical and socio logical connotations.
These observations might have influenced the lines of thoughts of scholars like Edgar Wesley as far back as 1950 when he defined Social Studies as a subject that de a ls wit h var ious kinds of social relationships needed for better understanding of social living.
This is clo sely related to Adaralegbe’s definition (1980) in whi ch Soc ia l Studie s is descr ibed as a “study of man’s mutual inter actio n with his p hysical, so cial, political, religious, econo mic, psycho logical and cultural environments.
The implication o f this definition underlines the fact that within the hu man society, various skills are required to ensure living, interaction, growth, development and survival.
The reco gnitio n o f the various misconceptions by contemporary practitioners of Social Studies have engendered o pportunities fo r more rigorous researches and concerns capable of getting scho lars to perceive the subject as o ne that offers education that is relevant to life.
For instance, at two different fora, NERC (1973 & 1977), looked at Social Studies and concluded that it should be defined as the “study of the o utcomes of interactio ns between humans and their environment which equip the youth with tools necessary for solving personal and co mmunit y- related problems.
Thus defined, Social Studies will therefore not mainly aim at giving out knowledge; rather, according to Quartey ( 1984), it will in add itio n put emphasis on inculcating a certain 17  distillate knowledge which will assist man in acquiring tools necessary for life.
Such too ls, he maintains, include knowledge, values, attitudes and skills needed to help the youth in solving both personal and community related problems.
This view is shar ed by Mansaray (1984) and Mesieobi (1993).
Mansaray (1984) defines Social Studies as the “study of the inter actions between man and his physical and social environments, of the pr oblems and issues posed by these interactions and of the way by which man seeks solution and clarification to them.
Mesieobi(1993) also confirms this by observing that the core o f Social Studies teaching is value development, which sho uld be positively oriented towards the betterment of the indiv idual learner and for the overall societal progress.
Socia l Stud ie s as a discipline of study in our educational system should therefore be seen as citizenship education, education for cultural integration and education for living.
This position has influenced the National Council for Social Studies (NCSS) in the United States of America to adopt an official definition of the subject which reads, The integrated study of the Social Studies and humanities to promote civic competence and help young people develop the ability to make informed and reasoned decisions as citizens of a culturally diverse, democratic society in an inter-dependent world.
(NCSS, 1992) In a nutshell, Social Studies can therefore be descr ibed as a discipline which attempts to modify or change the learners’ behaviours in the d irections of acceptable values and attitudes through a process of studying human beings ‘relationships with their environment and with the desire to provide solutions to the var ious complementing problems in order to ensure their survival, having been equipped with the necessary tools such as valu es, attitudes, skills and knowledge ( VASK), Lawal & Oyeleye ( 2003).
From the foregoing it is important to reiterate the fact that it mig ht be ver y d ifficult to find a universally accepted definition of Social Studies.
Accor ding to Ogunsanya (1982) this is because the subject var ies in objectives from time to time and fr om p lace to place, depend ing on the need s, aspirations and desires of a people.
In add itio n, there are other factors such as the dynamic nature o f man and his culture as well as the d iversity o f culture among peoples.
3.2: The Nature of Social Studies The nature of Social Studies is concerned with the basic character istics of the subject in t erms of focus and content.
The variations in the defin itio ns o f the subject as po inted out earlier in Sectio n 3.1 of this Unit have however gone a long way in determining its nature as well as the scope.
Nevertheless, Adeyoyin (1991) in o ne of her studies o n the dynamics of Social Studies identified eight different but competing conceptions that o ne cou ld use to explain the nature of the subject.
These include: So cial St ud ies a c itiz enship educ at ion Social Studies as skill development 18  So cial Stud ies as eco logical studies.
Social Studies as social science So cial St ud ies as cult ur al integra tion So cial Stud ies as dynamic education So cial Stud ies as educatio n fo r living So cial St ud ies as a disc ipline .
3.2.1: Social Studies a citizenship education This co nception harbours a nature o f Social Studies char acterised by an attempt to use the subject to inculcate the right beliefs into learners.
Here, Social Stud ies pr ogrammes are designed around the learning of democratic platitudes (Walker, 1970).
The individual is expected to be trained to become goo d citizen who votes during elections, o beys rules and regu lations, performs his or her own duties and is active in the society.
This is presented in Figur e 3.1 below: Exercises rational judgement Maintains respectable home life Develops abilities to the fullest Offers useful advice Obeys school rules when called upon Performs his civic Attends relevant duties community An Individua l a s a Good meetings Works willingly Citizen Active member of with his hand s the society Respects the rights Puts himself up and pro perties Social S tud ies as Citize nship Educ ation for elections of others when eligible Votes during Figure 3.1: Social Studies as Citizenship Education elections This nature o f Social Stud ies requires the teacher to transmit essentia l co mpo nents of a particular society’s cultural patterns which su ch society wants the learner s to a c tually learn about and acquire.
This nature of the subject however restricts intellectual develo pment and enlig htenment while emphasizing too much of patriotism.
This view is fully supported by Ogundare (2000) where he observes that indoctrination as a result of citizenship education does not recognize the worth and initiative o f the ind ividual child.
He stresses further that it ho lds values as static for all ages and it does not allow free flow of culture contact thro ugh knowledge explosion.
19  3.2.2: Social st udies as skill development The nature of the subject prescribed by this conception emphasizes a variety of opportunities that would encour age the learners to acquire a variety of skills.
Such skills would normally include those of: Locating i nfor mat ion; Interpreting info rmation and materials; Cr itical /reflective thinking; Performing in a group; and Analysing; Evaluating.
Synthesizing, comparing, and gener alizing; It is not impossible to think that the acqu isition of these sk ills is capable o f consider ably reducing learners’ problems of survival.
But on a cautionary note, the essential roles which knowledge processing and acquisition as well as attitudinal development play in learning canno t be o ver emphasized at any given time in the learning cycle of any child.
3.2.3: Social st udies as ecological studies The natur e of Social studies in this case emphasises human beings as the central focus around which all other relevant knowledge, values, attitudes, and skills revolve.
Social Studies nature here provides learners with the o ppo rtunity to interact with t he so le a im o f understand ing better the complementar y operations within and outside such interactio ns.
This is in terms o f knowledge to be learnt, the values and attitudes being developed and the skills being acqu ired in the course of these various interactions.
This is diagrammatically represented in Figure 3.2 as provided by Adeyoyin (1994) The World Community ECOWAS National Community State Communi t y Town Community y S tin ch u Family o OAU mm ol UNO o C The Child e galli V Figure 3.2: The Expanding CommUu nNitICieEs Fo f Man 20  3.2.4: Social Studies as dynamic education This conception reflects the open-ended nature of Social Studies as it emphasises the accommodation of social issues considered relevant to life.
This level of d ynamism is reflected in the way through which an expanded horizo n is pro moted in Social Studies.
For instance, the focu s o f the subject in recent times is known to include Enviro nmental Education, Population/Family Life/HIV/AIDS Education, Drug Abuse Education etc.
Socia l Studies students are now involved in the study of these areas in an integrated manner both at the fo rmal and non-forma l le ve ls of the na t ion’s educ at ional syste m. Lawal and Oyeleye (2003) however remark that the majo r problem with this nature of the subject is the relatively low level of prepar edness of its teachers who are expected to handle these dynamic character istics of the subject.
It is o nly in recent times that one could find some pr e-service teacher education pro grammes incor por ating new educational initiatives into their curriculum and instruction programmes as a way of acco mmodating co ntemporary educational initiatives.
3.2.5: Social Studies as social science The nature of the subject here is characterized by an over lap of other disciplines ( see Figure 3.3).
The emphasis here is that the contents of the social sciences are used to build the structure of Social Studies.
This is done with almost a total disregard for the personal social values of So cial Studies and its democratizing and humanising r oles.
GEOGRAPHY ECONOMICS HISTORY SOCIAL STUDIES POLITICAL SOCIOLOGY SCIENCE ANTHROPOLOGY Figure 3.3: Social Studies as Social Science-an Overlap of ot her Disciplines 21  Walker (1970) remarked that this nature of Social Studies attempts to freeze subject matter lines and causes knowledge to be explored within the confines of a structure of separateness which he said further increases the fragmentatio n of k no wledge.
From the foregoing, it co uld be deduced that the nature o f Soc ia l Stud ie s essentially presents the subject as o ne which puts both the teacher and the learner s in positions where they have to learn how to use effective decision mak ing pr ocesses for tackling the var io us problems co nfronting human beings in the society so that appro pr iate solutions can be proffered in order to ensure their survival.
3.3: The Scope of Social Studies The fact that So cial Studies is a discip line that stud ies the totality o f hu man existence makes its sco pe o r what you can simp ly call level of cover age qu ite wide.
The var iations in t he de fi nit io ns of the subject as discussed in Section 3.1 of this Unit have however been disco vered to influence what pr actitioners accept as the scope of the subject.
Lik ewise, the nature of the su bject equally influences the scope of the subject.
Hence, in a situa tion where you and I both agree that a good definition of the subject must necessar ily emphasise problem solving and detailed understanding of the outcomes of human interactions with the environment, its scope must r eflect integration o f relevant discip lines and concepts for learning purposes.
Specifically, Social Stud ies content ar eas shou ld: i.
Be problem solving oriented.
ii.
Not be limited to one or even just a few academic areas (that is, it must be multi- disc ip linar y).
iii.
Be concerned with how to examine and acquire positive democratic valu es.
iv.
Be concerned with how to examine and develop attitudes.
v. Be eclectic, that is, concerned with multi-faceted problems o f huma beings which come in differ ent for ms and fr om time to time.
vi .
Recognise the impo rtance of immediate and wider env ironment in term o f cultur e and value systems.
vi i.
Involve learners in the analysis of real life problematic situations so that they could help co ntribute their best to the advancement of their immediate and wider environment.
viii.
Be ho listic, that is, provide opportunity for humans to be studied in an integrated manner- studying hu man behavior in its entirety.
22  In summary, a good Social Studies pro gramme should have a scope which allo ws the learners to study peop le as they interact with one and the other, as they meet their needs for survival and comfort, and work out problems of group living within their environment.
3.4: Self Assessment 1.
State any two definitions that can be used to effectively descr ibe the discipline o f Social Studies.
2.
Descr ibe the nature of So cial St udi es.
3.
What should be the sco pe of a good Social Studies pro gramme?
4.0: CONCLUSION This Unit has presented to you the various misconceptions about the meaning of Social Studies.
It has advanced reasons why some o f these definitions cannot be accepted for effective teaching o f the subject.
From the presentations, the importance o f having a clear perception o f the nature and scope of the subject was emphasized and one could conclude that the kind o f defin itio n embraced by a teacher of Social Studies is capable o f influencing the nature of the subject and the content area to be fo cused o n in the classro om.
For effective teaching o f the subject, it should be seen as one that is concerned with the co ntinuing impr ovement of the society through the application o f social criticisms and ethical decisions on so cial issues.
5.0: SUMMARY My dear reader, you will agr ee with me that this Unit has provided you with an amp le opportunity to clarify your thoughts about what a good Social Studies definition should co ntain.
You have also been familiar ized with the nature and scope of the su bject.
The relationship among the definition, natur e and sco pe of the subject has been d iscussed.
It is therefore expected that you will beco me a rebranded teacher o f Social Studies when it co mes to the issue of defining the subject and bu ild ing content areas fo r yo ur lesso n. 6.0: TUTOR-MARKED ASSIGNMENT a.
Attempt a concise and good definition of Social Studies.
b.
The nature o f Social Studies is capable of influ encing its scope.
Discuss 7.0: REFERENCES/FURTHER READINGS Adaralegbe, A.
( 1980) The Nigerian Social Studies Programme: Retro spect and Prospect.
In NERC (1980) Social Studies: Teaching Issues and Problems.
Benin: Ethiope Pub.
Co. 23  Adeyoyin, F.A.
(1991) Towards a theo ry o f Social Studies.
Nigerian Social Studies Journal 2 (1) 13-23 Lawal, M. B.
(1999) Principles and Concepts of Social Studies Lagos: A Tr iad Associates Lawal, M. B.
& Oyeleye, A.S. (2003) Foundations and Principles of Social Studies Education Lagos: A Triad Asso ciates Mansaray, A.
(1984) The nature and scope of Social Studies A Monograph Mesieobi, K.A.
(1993).
Teaching values in Social Studies: A contradiction of conceived and operative values in Nigeria.
Nigerian Journal of Social Studies Review 2(1) June NCSS (1992) Testing and evaluation of Social Studies students Social Education 55 (5) 284-293 NERC (1973) Guidlines on primary school curriculum Lagos: NERC Ogundare, S. F. (2000) Foundations of Social Studies Ibadan: Adesesan Press Ogunsanya, M. (1984) Introduction to Methodologies of Social Studies Ibadan: University Press Quartey (1984) Social Studies Methodology for Teachers Lagos: Refield Pub.
Walker, R. ( 1970) Rationale for elementary Social Studies In R.H. Jones (1970) Social Studies Education for Young Americans Iowa: Kendal/Hunt Pub.
Co. Wesley, E. (1950) Teaching Social Studies in high schools Boston: D.C. Heath & Co. 24  MODULE 1: FOUNDATIONS OF SOCIAL STUDIES UNIT 2: PHILOSOPHICAL B ACKGROUND OF SOCIAL STUDIES CONTENTS 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objectives 3.0 Main Content 3.1: Nigeria’s Nat io na l Philosophy of Education 3.2: Philosophical Background of Socia l St udies 3.3: Philo sophical Backgro und o f Social Stud ies in relation to Niger ia’s National Po licy on Education 3.4: Self Assessment Exercise 4.0 Conc lu sio n 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutor Marked Assignments 7.0 Refer ences/Further Readings 1.0: INTRODUCTION In the previous unit you learnt about the meaning, scope and nature of Social Studies.
This is very essential for a better understanding o f the philoso ph ical backgro und o f the subject which happens to be the focus of this unit.
You will therefore have an opportunity to learn about Nigeria’s natio nal philo so phy o f education and its relevance to the cho ice o f Social Studies as a co re subject of offer ing at the basic level of the nation’s educational system.
This is based o n the principle that the relevance of a school subject is determined by the educational philosophy of a country.
2.0: Objectives By the end of your interaction with this Unit, you should be able to: i.
Describe Nigeria’s national philo sophy o f education.
ii.
Describe the philo sophical backgro und o f Social Studies as a school subject.
iii.
Highlight the relationship between the philosophical background of Social Studies and Niger ia’s Natio nal Policy on Educatio n. 25  3.0: MAIN CONTENT 3.1: Nigeria’s Philosophy of Education The philo sophy o f Niger ian education which is vividly stated in the country’s national Policy on Education (2004) is based on the provision of an education that emphasizes the integration of the individual into a sound and effective citizen with equal educational opportunities for all.
Specifically, the main objectives preached by this kind of philosophy are aimed at building of: i. a free and democratic society; ii.
a just and egalitar ian society; iii.
a united, strong and self-reliant nation; iv.
a great and dynamic economy; and v. a land of br ight and full opportunities for all citizens.
The National Policy o n Education is a tool for achieving the country’s national o bjectives.
3.2: Philosophical Background of Social Studies The fact that numerous subjects exist in the school curriculum fo r learners to pick from for offer ing imp lies that so many of them are cap able o f facilitating the r ealization o f the nation’s philosophy of education.
But what is mo re important is how capable is a nation’s educatio nal system in organizing and reorganizing its school cur ricula to achieve desirable goals and aspirations.
This is particu larly so when it is recalled that the type o f education legacy Nigerians enjoyed at immed iate po st independence was no t one that co uld assure t he m smoot h t ransit ion de void o f soc ial i lls.
Hence, school su bjects with peculiar features that could help train the young ones in a way that avail them opportunities to use the content of what they were being taught to gener ate interest, and acqu ire experiences needed fo r co ping with the noticed problems char acterizing the transition from colonial rule to independence.
Educationists at this time realized the importance of the schoo l as an agency o f the co mmunity and the society at large which can be used to develop effective living in the society.
Social Studies was therefo re perceived as one of those subjects that could be char ged with this responsibility.
The subject was seen as one with a pr imary function o f humanizing the learner s based on the philosophy of the society they belong to.
A cr itical look at the curricu lum o f the subject called Social Stud ies at this time did not however reflect a subject would easily facilitate greater chances of co ping with these societal problems.
Hence, they explored these inadequacies and worked towards 26  addressing them.
This attempt formed the nucleus of the philosophy of Social Studies as it pr esently exists in the country, although the dynamic natur e o f the subject have gone a long way to influence such philosophy.
Consequently, the philosophical background of the subject became more influenced by the concept of integratio n which emphasizes the comprehensive bo dy of k no wledge, and inter-rela tionship of knowledge.
This has over time encouraged the construction of syllabuses and curricula which intr oduce lear ners to the interrelated aspects of the basic fo rms of knowledge and each of the several discip lines but in an integrated manner.
This backgr ound allows the subject to be perceived as the study of human beings, their interactions with their physical and social environments in the past, present and emerging future.
Human relationships ar e studied as learners explor e ways of developing their personalities and art o f living at home, on communities and in other lands.
Emphasis is thus given to relationships among people, relationships between people and institutions, relationships between people and goods and services, and r elationships between people and the earth.
One could conclude using Ogundar e’s position ( 2000) that the need to educate the child firmly in the rudiments of his or her culture thereby re-establishing the role of education as a socio -po litical agent thro ugh its emp hasis on citizenship led to the introduction of Social Studies in schools.
3.3: Relationship between the Philosophical Background of Social Studies and Nigeria’s National Policy on Education As ear lier highlighted in section 3.1 of this Unit, the philosophy of Nigeria’s education is pr emised on specific objectives.
I n order to effectively realize these objectives the National Po licy o n Educatio n (2004) Section 1(2) emphasizes that the quality of instruction at all levels of our educational system shou ld be o riented towards the inculcating of some values which include: i.
Respect for the worth and dignity of individuals.
i i. Fa ith i n man’s abi lit y t o make rat ional de cisions.
iii.
Mor al and spiritual values in interperso nal and human relatio ns.
iv.
Shared responsibility for the common good of society.
v. Respect fo r the dignity of labour.
vi.
Promotion of the emotional physical and psychological health of all children.
27  The recognition of these values in the National Policy on Education as being essential in the realization of o ur natio nal goals implies that a subject lik e Social Studies which incidentally is a value-or iented or affective-based su bject is capable of playing a key role in the inculcation of these values.
This is not saying that So cial Studies can sing le-handedly achieve this task.
Other subjects are capable of equally assisting.
By their differences in nature, content and methodolog y, each subject has its own basic functions as well as peripheral respo nsib ilities.
I f we critically look at the national objectives of education in Nig eria and those values they sho uld pro mo te, it could be noted that words and phrases such as “natio nal conscio usness”, “natio nal unity”, “attitudes”, “skills” and “competencies” etc.
are quite prominent.
The focus of Social Studies and its philosophical background which emphasizes hu man interaction among themselves, societal values and problems as well as their environment, can make the subject have a co mparative ad vantage of being very suitable fo r the accomplishment of such objectives relating to national consciousness, national unity, and inculcation of right type of societal values over other existing bodies of knowledge.
Social Stud ies can therefore be taken as o ne discipline which effective teaching is capable of promoting those values that the quality of instruct ion should emp hasize as stated in the National Policy on Education.
For example, teaching to achieve a Social Studies objective like developing a capacity to learn and to acquire certain basic sk ills can equally facilitate o ppo rtunity to train a group of youths that can contribute to the build ing of a united, strong and self reliant nation, which incidentally is part of nation’s philosophy of education.
Again in an attempt to teach to promote national identity and integration within Nigeria’s varied historical or igins and inter-related cultures, a just and egalitar ian society can be built which is one o f the country’ national objectives emp hasized by the National Policy on Education.
This is qu ite possible because the So cial Studies teacher handling this to pic will normally be expected to emphasize and inculcate the values of r espect for the worth and d ignity o f the ind ividuals in their lear ners.
The desire to relate the philosophical background o f Social Studies to the Natio nal Policy on Education could therefo re be descr ibed as one that is based o n the recognition of the importance of establishing a link between the education system o f a given countr y and the fulfillment o f the needs of the so ciety.
The Niger ia Natio nal Policy on Education can be regarded as a by-pr oduct of the 1969 national Cur riculum Conference which recognized among other things, the importance of Social Studies as a subject capable of being used to promote citizenship, knowledge about one’s community, nation and commitment to democratic rule.
It canno t therefore be out of place to conclud e that the realization o f Nigeria’s philo so phy of education can partially be made possible with the help of Social Studies as value-laden discip line.
The subject can thus be seen as one that facilitate the 28  inculcation of social, political, civic and value education which are all embedded in the co untry’s national objectives of education.
3.4: Self Assessment Exercise i.
Identify and list out those objectives that can be u sed to describe the natio n’s philosophical background.
ii.
Attempt a descriptio n o f the philosophical background of Social Studies as a school subject.
iii.W hat values do the Natio nal Po licy on Education recommend for pr omotio n through our quality o f instruction as So cial Studies teacher s?
4.0 CONCLUSION The discussion on the philosophical background of Social Studies presented in this Unit is reflection in the belief o f the dynamic nature of the subject which without do ubt is a major influ encing factor in its philo sophy.
Hence, the recognition of some inadequacies in the old curr iculu m of Social Studies which could not facilitate the development of relevant concepts, positive attitudes and critical thinking abilities needed for living in the mode rn societ y engendered a review.
This eventually brought about the integrated Social Studies as we presently o ffer it o n the school curricu lum.
5.0 SUMMARY In this Unit, yo u have interacted with the content areas that focus on Nigeria’s philosophy of education, the philosophical background of Social Studies as a school subject and the relationship between such background and the co untry’s National Policy on Education.
The Unit has pr esented those factors which influenced the d evelo pment of Social Studies as a value-laden su bject and a derivative of modern philosophy of educatio n which emphasizes the integration and inter-relat ionshi p of knowledge.
6.0 TUTOR MARKED ASSIGNMENT What is the relationship between the philoso phical background of Social Studies and the realisation if Nigeria’s national objectives of education as contained in the Natio nal Policy Education?
7.0 REFERENCES/FURTHER READINGS Lawal, M.B.
& Oyeleye, A.S. (2003) Foundations and Principles of Social Studies.
Lagos: A-Triad Asso ciates Ogundare, S.F.
(2000) Foundations of Social Studies: A handbook of Concepts and P rinciples of Social Studies.
Ibadan: Adesesan Graphic Press.
Omosehin, F. (1996) A Handbook on Foundations of Social Studies.
Lagos: OACE Pub.
29  UNIT 3: RELEVANCE OF TEACHING SOCIAL STUDIES CONTENTS 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objectives 3.0 Main Content 3.1: The Goals of Socia l Studi e s Pro gramme 3.2: The Values of Soc ial Studies 3.3: Self Assessment Exercise 4.0 Conclu sio n 5.0 Summar y 6.0 Tutor Marked Assignments 7.0 References/Further Readings 1.0: INTRODUCTION In the last unit you learnt about the philo sophical background of Social Studies and its relevance to the realization of Nigeria’s National Policy on Education.
This unit further presents you an opportunity to understand the general goals of learning Social Studies as a subject.
This is informed by the recognition of the subject as a tool for partial solution to human social problems as well as for national development.
2.0: OBJECTIVES By the end of your interaction with this unit, you should be able to: 1.
Identify the goals of teaching and learning Social Studies as a school subject.
2.
Categorise these goals u nder the fo ur general motifs of teaching the subject.
3.
Highlight the values of lear ning Social Studies.
3.0: MAIN CONTENT 3.1: The Goals of Social Studies Programme Generally, Lawton and Dufour (1976) obser ved that the goal of Social Studies should be the development in children a cr itical and balanced awareness.
This is needed for the development of positive socio- civic attitudes and values in the lear ners, thereby redu cing the chances of indoctrination in them through the teaching-learning pro cess.
Ogundare (1988) supported this position by r emar king that the modern Social Studies programme emphasizes the promotion of how to think over what to think.
30  This is why Lawal & Oyeleye (2003) obser ved that the main goal o f a Social Studies Programme should be to help students develop the ability to make decisions so that they can reso lve personal problems and co ntribute to po licy mak ing pro cesses.
They went o n further to argue that Social Studies is expected to help students to find ways of acquiring skills and values needed for dealing with and shaping the future, through the process of developing a positive perspective that will allow constr uction, planning, creativity and innovation.
Specifically, the goals would nor mally include: i. Develo ping well informed and responsible citizen; ii.
Developing children who would possess the ability to deal with questions o f what ought to be?
And what can I do about it?
iii.B uilding attitudes and values that are consistent with so ciety’s desires; iv.
Develo ping in lear ners skills su ch as those invo lved in repo rting, acquiring and classifying data (reflective thinking/inquiring skills); v. Develo ping the appreciation and u nderstanding o f learner s cultural heritage and its role in contemporary society; vi.
Acquisition of academic k no wledge and skills related to the study of the human actions, and their consequences as they live individually as well as in groups and societies, in a variety o f places and timelines; vii.
Using the So cial Sciences, humanities and sciences to describe social pheno mena.
Kissock (1981) had explained that the need for establishing Social Studies pro grammes arises when a society determines that it requires formal instruction to develop a co mmon set o f understanding, skills, attitudes, and actions concerning human relationship among members of the so ciety.
So the introduction of the discipline at any level in any nation is basically aimed at producing citizens with sk ills, competencies, moral values and reasoned judgements required to effectively live, interact, interrelate and contribute positively to the economic, so cial, political and cu ltural develo pment of the Nigerian society in particular and the world in general.
Social Studies is also a discip line aimed at providing humanistic education.
By this, it facilitates in learners, an opportunity to better co mprehend the aro und them.
The su bject should help the learners to understand their experiences and find meaning in life.
The discipline equally pr epares the learners for social responsibility in order that they may perpetuate and enhance their society through the knowledge of the heritage o f the society to which they belo ng, its dominant social values and political economic life.
Thro ugh social Studies, the learners are assisted to participate effectively in the dynamic life of their society.
31  Social Studies as a subject of offering in schools avail learners that opportunity to acquire knowledge of the potentials and limitations of their environment and thus become able to appreciate the co ntributio ns they can make towards improving their society.
I t is aimed at providing lear ners with an awareness o f po ssible futur es and the ro les they might play in developing these futures.
A good Social Studies programme is aimed at helping learners to acquire analytical ideas and problem solving skills.
Through the subject, lear ners should be able acqu ire basic sk ills not only tho se of listening, speaking, reading and wr iting as well as calcu lation, but also those asso ciated with the ability to o bserve, analyse critically and make reasoned judgement.
The subject is expected to develop students’ abilities to deal with questions of “what ought to be ?” and “what can I do about it?” (Wr ight, 1980).
It is therefore not out of place to conclude here that Social Studies is a discipline established with sole aim o f helping the learners to acquire so cial, intellectual, and psycho mo tor skills for the pur pose of making them independent learners and functional human citizens o f their co unt ry.
3.2: Categorising the Goals under Four General Motifs of Teaching the Subject Ogundare (2000) quoting the NCSS (1981), highlighted four general motifs under which the goals o f Social Studies can be categorized.
These are: i.
Concern with Self-Esteem; ii.
Concern for Right and Wrong; iii.
Concern for others; and iv.
Concern for the World.
3.2.1: Concern with self-esteem: This is related with the develop ment of self-esteem and a strong sense of identity.
So me of the goals of Social Studies progr amme that can be classified under this concer n are: a.
Acquisition of appropriate skills and attitudes to be a lifelong learner; b.
Ability to communicate effectively; c. Competence in co nducting activities necessar y for research, critical think ing and problem solving; d. Ability to recognize and capitalize upon relationship between school subjects as well as integrate experiences with academic knowledge; e. Awareness and use of primary so ur ces.
3.2.2: Concern for right and wrong: This is related to the develop ment o f ethics and the goals that can be put under this include: a. Comm itment to democratic valu es and ethical standards; b.
Ability critically and to analyse one’s thought and actions.
3.3.3: Concern for others: This is related to the development of group and other- centredness.
The go als catego rized under this include: 32  a.
Ability to function effectively as a member of var iety o f po litical, eco no mic and social groups such as the family, market place and the community; b.
A sense of efficacy in analyzing and participating in contemporary affairs, public matters, and global issues; and c. Understanding of the signif icance of one’s own past life in relation to current social issues.
3.3.4: Concern for the world: This emphasizes the development of a global perspective o f issue s. The goa ls o f Soc ial Studies that can be categorized under this concer n include: a.
Respect for cu ltural d iversity, k no wledge of diverse cu ltures, and their inter-c ul tura l co mpetences; b.
Understanding of and appreciation of the world and its characteristic features; c. Kno wledge o f temporal and spatial relationships and of the wo rld as a dynamic syst em.
Socia l St udie s pro gra mme as a subject in African schools is one discipline that sho uld make ever y scho ol-going child to acquire relevant knowledge, develop the skills, attitudes and values that can facilitate his/her ability to identify his/her personality as an African with a rich heritage, worth of pride.
3.3: The Values of Social Studies The values of learning Social Studies are quite related to the goals and objectives of teaching the subject at different levels o f a nation’s education system.
The nature of Social Studies as a problem solving discipline makes it ver y essential fo r the develop ment o f any nation, especially if one accepts that no society is static.
Hence, exposing learners to the subject using appropriate value- oriented strategies and techniques is therefore capable of promoting in them the ethics of good and responsible citizenship.
In this case, learners are more likely to commit themselves to active citizenship particularly if they ar e effectively taught some concepts that are related and fall within the context of human problems of survival.
Cognition of knowledge which is part of Social Studies is also capable of assisting the learners assess the imp licatio ns of co nd it io ns withi n the ir imm ediat e soc ial e nvi ronme nts- face- to- face relationships such as fr iendship, family, school and religious for making and imp lementing decisio ns to achieve their per sonal goals.
Effective teaching o f Social Studies also assists learners greatly in the appreciation o f the contributions of individuals and groups to ever changing cultural her itage.
This could eventually make them develo p the desir e to foster attitudes that can facilitate the reduction of tensio n and friction among groups and encour age cooperation among individuals as well as among groups and nations.
Learning Social Stud ies is a so ur ce o f inspiratio n in childr en to love their co untry and appreciate their natural heritage.
For instance, the emp hasis in the subject fo r the teacher to 33  expose the learners to national symbo ls and her oes/hero ines can effectively facilitate the desire in them to show more appreciation for their countr y.
3.4: Self Assessment Exercise 1.
Highlight the goals which any good Social Studies programme should aspire to achieve in any edu cational system.
2.
What are the general mo tifs that can be used to categorise the goals of Social Stud ies?
4.0: CONCLUSION The fo regoing presents a positio n that effective teaching of any Social Studies programme demands a detailed understanding of its goals.
It is by this that the subject will not be taught in ways that will make lear ners perceive and believe that the so cial phenomena they are studying ar e essentially d isconnected from the co nd itio ns of their lives and the goals they seek in life.
5.0: SUMMARY In this Unit, there is no doubt that your knowledge of the goals for teaching and learning Social Studies at any level o f educational system.
The general motifs which suppo rt the goals have also been highlig hted, with concerted efforts made to categorise them u nder these motifs.
It is ther efore expected that this opportunity will make yo u prepar e better for the teaching o f the subject as a value- laden subject.
6.0: TUTOR-MARKED ASSIGNMENT 1a.
Convince a group of So cial Studies teacher s in training that teaching and learning the subject at any level o f o ur educational system is of ultimate importance.
1b.
How will you catego rise the go als of teaching Social Stud ies using the four general mot ifs?
7.0: REFERENCES/ FURTHER READINGS Kissock, C. (1981) Curriculum Planning for Social Studies Teaching.
New York: John Wiley.
Lawal, M.B.
& Oyeleye, A.S. (2003) Foundations and Principles of Social Studies.
Lagos: A-Triad Asso ciates Lawton, D, & Dufour, B.
(1976) New Social Studies.
London: Heinemann Ogundare, S.F.
(2000 ) Fo undations of So cial Studies: A hand bo ok o f Co ncepts and P rinciples of Social Studies.
Ibadan: Adesesan Graphic Press.
Ogundare, S. F. (1988) Curriculum development: a description of National Curriculum for Primary Social Studies in Nigeria.
Educational Studies 14(1) 45- 50.
Omosehin, F. ( 1996) A Handbook on Foundations of Social Studies.
Lagos: OACE Pub.
Wright, I.
(1980) Elementary So cial Studies: A Practical Appr oach to Teaching and Learning.
Toronto: Methuen Publications.
34  UNIT 4: OVERVIEW OF THE NEW 9-YEAR BASIC EDUCATION SOCIAL STUDIES CURRICULUM CONTENTS 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objectives 3.0 Main Content 3.1: What is New in the structure of the 9-Year Basic Education Social Studies Curriculu m?
3.2: The New Content Areas in the Socia l Studie s Curriculum 3.3: Handling Dif ficult Concepts in the New Social Studies Curriculum 3.4: Self Assessment Exercise 4.0 Conclu sio n 5.0 Summar y 6.0 Tutor Marked Assignments 7.0 References/Further Readings 1.0: INTRODUCTION As teachers in training, it is mandator y that you are conversant with the structure, contents, the dynamics and instructional delivery demands of your subject curricu lum which in this case is Social Studies.
This Unit therefore provides a chance for you to understand the recent developments and transformatio n which the Social Studies curricu lum at the Basic Education level has undergo ne and the what is expected of you either as pre-service or in-service teachers.
2.0: OBJECTIVES By t he end of your interaction with this Unit, you should be able to: 1.
Describe what is new in the structure of the 9-Year Basic Education Social Studies Curric ulum.
2.
Identify the new content areas in the Social Studies Curriculum 3.
Identify di ff icult co ncepts in the new Basic Education Social Studies Curr iculu m 4.
Describe how best such difficult concepts can be hand led by Social Studies teachers.
35  3.0: MAIN CONTENT 3.1: What is New in the Structure of the 9-Year Basic Education Social Studies Curriculum?
In 1999, the Federal Government introduced the Universal Basic Education (UBE) programme and the Niger ian Educational Research and Development Council (NERDC) was mandated to develo p curr icula for use at all levels of these educational system in Nigeria.
In line with the Federal Gover nment mandate for a 9-year Basic Education Programme, the Nigerian Educatio nal Research and Develop ment Council (NERDC) restructured and realigned the existing Primary and Junio r Seco ndary School Cur ricula to meet the government targets of ensur ing unfettered access and equity to education that will lead to the realizatio n of the National Economic Empo werment and Development Strategies (NEEDS) objectives and the Millennium Develo pment Goals (MDGs).
At both the primar y and junior secondary school levels which no w form Nigeria’s Basic Educatio n level, a number of subjects of which So cial Studies is one, have been recommended for o ffer ing.
A new 9—year Basic Educatio n Curriculum which pr escribes what is to be learnt in each o f these su bjects was develo ped by the Nig eria Educatio nal Research and Development Council (NERDC) in 2007 .
However, before the develo pment of this curricu lum, the curr icula used for teaching Social Studies at both the pr imar y and junio r secondar y scho ol levels were found not to be in full tune with the philosophy and objectives of the subject.
This was particularly so with the junior seco ndary scho ol Social Studies curriculum.
For instance, prior to the development of the 9-year Basic Educatio n Curricu lum, there existed the Primary Cur riculu m Modules designed and pro duced by the then National Primar y Education Co mmission which were used thro ugho ut all the pr imary schools in the co untry.
The Pr imar y Curricu lum Modu les for Social Studies just like others, was programmed schemes of work based on the co ntents o f earlier developed National Curriculum in Social Studies, produced by the then Nigerian Educational Research Council (NERC).
An analysis of these modules however, r evealed that they are not likely to be adequate enough to help the poor, the socially marginalized and vulnerable groups effectively develop their full capacities and po tentials.
This is par ticu larly impor tant now that the Federal Government is fo cusing on 36  the use o f education to promote value re-orie nt at ion, poverty eradication, job/employment generatio n, wealth creation and general capacity build ing.
The fo rmat of the curr iculum of So cial Studies, at the ju nior seco ndary level is also presented in thematic form unlike the old o ne that adopted the topical approach.
The thematic appro ach ado pted by the new curricu lum is reflected in the alteratio n of the structur e of presenting its co ntents.
The structur e presents ver y specific and clear co mponents which are effectively linked with o ne and the other.
These components are theme, corresponding topics, perfor mance objectives, content, activities (teacher and students) teaching and learning mater ials and evaluation guide.
Hence, the new curr iculu m is structur ally a clear departure from the existing o ne.
Unlike the existing one which is more of mo dular, the new one is thematic in nature.
There is no w a shift from the modu lar structure to a thematic arrangement.
The new structure provides fo r issues to be studied in themes and sub-themes, but in spiral natur e, that is, stud ying the same co ncept from its simp lest level to its most complex level as the learner progresses in his/her educational pursuit.
Ano ther uniqueness of the cur riculum structure is that, o ppo rtunity is created for practising teacher s to be conscious of the desire to promote the infusion of emerging issues right from the per formance objectives level all through to evaluatio n guide co lu mn.
The ad vantage o f this is that while p lanning a lesson, the teacher is placed in a vantage positio n to ensure that there is a strong link between what is to be taught and what behavioural change is expected from the learners.
There is that deliberate effort to promote total infusion o f emerging issues.
Practising Socia l St udie s teachers at the primary school level are therefore expected to note this while interacting with the cur ricula.
3.2: The New Content Areas of Social Studies in the New 9-Year Basic Education Curriculum The new structural arrangement o f the curr iculu m has subsequ ently in fluenced the enrichment of the content areas of the curriculum of Social St udi es at both the primary and junior secondary school levels.
There is tremendous enr ichment in the content areas of the curricula.
There are a lo t of new to pics r eflecting the current thinking of using education to 37  promote the social wellbeing of its recipients and contribute to the realization of the Millennium Development Goals.
The content areas drawn out of the existing Social Studies Curricu lum have been structured in such a way that the students can be re-oriented to become mor e po litically tolerant and interested in the democratic governance of the natio n and her citizens.
The new Upper Basic Educatio n level Social Studies Curriculum as a document is a co mplete departure from the old Junior Secondary Social Stud ies Curriculum.
This is reflected in the inclusio n of a lot of new to pics and total restructuring o f the cur riculu m. The new Social Studies curriculu m presents its co ntent in a concentric pattern which allo ws topics to be studied from simple to complex.
This is unlike the o ld curr iculu m wher e topics were presented in more glo bal form and with broad topics, and u ncoordinated format.
In the new str ucture of the upper Basic Educatio n Socia l St ud ies Cur riculu m, teachers are expected to infuse some emerging issues and the foundation of which the students would have had at the primary school level.
These emerg ing issues include: • Peace education: an education that pro vides opportunity for the teacher to “incite” the students into investigating deep-rooted causes of violence and suggesting tentative solutions for bringing about genuine peace.
• HIV/AIDS educatio n: which is aimed at educating learners o n the various misco nceptions abo ut the disease as well as pro moting healthy sexu al behaviour s and better care for people living with HIV/AIDS?
• Family life education: This is aimed at promoting good quality of life within the family.
The new co ntent areas of the primary section of the Social Studies co mponent o f the 9- year Basic Education Curriculum are presented as follo ws: • Citizenship - Trafficking in dangerous drugs and the -Co mmunity law - Leadership • Health Issues - Government main services - Drug Issues - National Honorary Award - HIV/AIDS - Drug Abuse - Nat ionali sm and Pat riotism • Social Issues and Problems • Agriculture Techno logy 38  • Mechanized Agriculture • Agencies that Promote social • People and Environment wellbeing of Youths - Pollution The new content areas of the Social Studies Curriculum for junior secondary school, as informed by so me emerging issues are pr esented as follo ws: • Introduction to Social Studies o Meaning, Scope and objectives of So cial St udi es • People and their Environment o So cial Groups o Group Behaviour • Social Issues and Problems o Drug Trafficking o Poverty o Corruption o Cult ism • Communication o Information and Communication Technology (ICT) • Health Issues o Drug Abuse o Water Supply • Social Values o Trafficking in Children and Women o Harmful Traditional Practices o Popul at ion o Family Life • Peace and Conflicts o Peace o Conflicts o Natio nal secur ity • National Economy o Sectors o Natur e of Nigerian Economy o Economy reform Measures • World Issues o Global and Internatio nal Cooperatio n Unlike the o ld curr icula, which are sketchy and quite abstract, the new thematic curricu la, co ntent-wise, are very info rmative and direct to the issues.
The way the content co mponents of the curricu la have been developed will gu ide yo u as practising teachers to build on the available background of the pupils and the information provided.
39  In the new curr icula, the use o f variety o f co ncrete o bjects, co mmunity, human as well as mater ial resources are recommended.
In these curricu la, the prescribed evaluation gu ide co mpo nent is clo sely r elated to the reco mmended perfor mance objectives.
This is another new and very unique co mponent that is capable of reminding the teacher o f the need to be fully pr epared before teaching his or her pupils.
These evaluation guides are also structured to assess and promote lear ning at all three do mains o f lear ning; cognitive, affective and psychomotor.
The content enrichment in the new Primary Social Studies Curr iculum now makes it possible for teachers to interact with their pupils more effectively.
Co ntent areas that hitherto existed in the old curricu lum have been effectively expanded to make lear ning more meaningful.
For instance, while learning about “Culture” pupils at this level can now lear n about issues such as “pre- marital sexual relationship and its dangers”.
However, t he reco gnit ion of t he pr evai ling pr oblem of lac k of pa t riotism, loya lt y, co mmit ment a nd lo ve fo r one nation, despite the existence of these su bjects that sho uld help address these problems, among the Nigerian citizenry influenced government’s desir e to intr oduce this curricu lum.
The new curriculum reflects depth, appropriateness and interr elatedness in co ntents.
The curriculum also co ntains emer ging issues that cover value o rientation, peace and dialo gue, human rights educatio n, family life and HIV/AIDS education.
The introduction o f the curricula is going to serve a ver y unique purpose in Nigeria where it is effectively taught.
This is because it will facilitate in the learners, the develop ment of sk ills needed for making decisions about public issues and participating in public affairs.
3.3: Strategies for Handling Difficult Concepts in the New Basic Education Curricula NERDC (2008) observes that past and current interactions with practising and pre-service teacher s at the primary schoo l level reveals that there are content areas which qu ite a large number o f them find d ifficult to teach while in the classroom.
On inquir y it was disco vered that this pr oblem is based either on the level o f pr ofessio nal preparation or their non- 40  readiness for the introduction of unfamiliar new content areas by the teachers who are sometimes less resourceful.
Some of the concepts which primary schoo l Social Studies teachers have been find ing difficult to teach o ver time include: • Internatio nal Conflicts • Group Conflicts • Agr icult ura l Tec hn ology • People and Environment • Gender Discriminatio n • Values • HIV/AIDS • Drug Abuse • Agencies that Promote Social wellbeing of Youths Each of these concepts can be better handled where the pr imary scho ol Social Studies teacher decides to increase his/her level o f resourcefu lness and readiness to search for new and relevant knowledge, experiences and examples that will make the pupils learn more meaningfully.
Let us see how some of these co ncepts can be hand led in the Social Stud ies class at the primary school level.
(a) Drug abuse: - The relative newness of this theme in the curriculum is a reflection of the d ynamism of the su bject.
The misconceptio n usually haboured by a large nu mber of teachers on the concepts of drug and drug abuse has to a great extent affected the way the concepts are handled.
These teachers are not too clear of when a drug beco mes abused and/o r what exactly are drugs.
For example, some o f them find it d ifficult to believe that self-medicatio n is dr ug abuse.
The teacher needs a lo t of value clar ificatio n exer cises to convince their pup ils on the dangers of dr ug abuse.
The effect o f this app roach is that, they can get back home and also convince their parents who usually the ones are lead ing them into this abuse of drugs (a) People and environment:- Practising teacher s’ perception o f the theme need s to be extended beyo nd environmental sanitation.
The Social Stud ies teacher will need to understand that the concepts within the theme go beyo nd sanitation.
They need to emphasise other human activities that affect the quality o f our 41  environment.
This is in terms of industrial pr ocesses, careless use of natural resources, and the effects of these on the enviro nment.
They should also be ready to source for infor mation on ways o f promoting wise use of our natural resources and strategies for develo ping r elevant positive attitudes and sk ills in the pupils as they interact with their environment.
Suggestions on the strategies for handling other difficu lt concepts that are more specif ic are contained in the next few par agraphs.
(a) Gender discrimination: - The relative newness o f the theme “Gender discrimination“ and the non-availability of abu ndant locally relevant textboo ks has made this theme and its corresponding co ncepts difficult to hand le by teacher s. However, Primar y Social Studies teachers can better handle this theme, where they take gender issues as those relating to ho w people are perceived and expected to think and act as men, women, bo ys o r girls because o f the way society is organised, not because of their sex or bio logical differences.
Teachers should be ready through their teaching to de-emphasize discr imination based on a person’s sex and emphasize fairness and ju stice in the distr ibution of benefits and responsibilities between men and women.
(b) HIV/AIDS: The myths surrounding the concept and pheno menon of HIV/AIDS particularly the causes and treatment of the d isease seem to make it difficult to handle by the teacher and easily learnt by the pupils.
This is particularly so, when it is remembered that majority of the teachers do not have any prior training or orientation on how to teach the co ncept.
Teachers can ho wever, handle this mo re effectively if they are read y to so ur ce for relevant published materials, books, magazines, pamphlets, flyer s, films, poster and charts that will pr ovide r ich in for mation which they can pr ocess and use for teaching- lear ning purposes.
It is equally important to emphasise here, the use of invited guest speakers from health-related institutio ns and non-gover nmental or co mmunity- based organizations working to promote healthy living.
42  (c) Def ending democracy/social justice (Pressure groups): These co ncepts are very impo rtant ones that sho uld be skillfu lly taught by the teacher.
This will be easier do ne, where the teacher creates avenue for the pup ils to develop interest in politics and learn to analyse public po licy decisions.
This will make them develop in the learners po sitive attitudes needed for showing concern and co mmitment to government activities and progr ammes that might not be too beneficial to the populace.
The Soc ial St ud ies teacher wou ld also be expected to create and maintain a classroom climate that is conclusive to free and open exchange of opinions about public issues and other co ntro versial topics.
This is a fo undatio n that will later make these pup ils beco me reliable members of pressure groups in the society.
(d) Values: This is a concept most So cial Studies teachers generally find difficult to teach and evaluate.
This is probably based on the traditional pr actice which reflects the fact that teachers are usually more confident teaching for knowledge acquisition rather than fo r all r ound co gnitive, affective and psychomotor learning.
Teachers of Primary Social Studies can however handle this co ncept better if they equip themselves with instructional techniques that promote value acqui sitio n. Some of the techniques include values clarification, use of value sheets, raising o f value -laden questions and keeping of anecdotal records on the pupils.
In addition, the teacher handling the concept of values must be ready to serve as good role model for the learners.
At the Junior Secondary level, Social Studies teachers are equally like ly t o find it difficult to handle so me co ncepts like: • Meaning, Sco pe and Natur e of So cial Studies • Objectives and Impor tance of Social Studies • Na tiona l Unity and I ntegration • Group Behaviour • Trafficking in Children and Women 43  • Po verty • Economic Reforms – Pr ivatization, Commercialization and Deregulation • Global Cooperation • Core Messages o f Family Life Education The Social Studies teacher at this level sho uld be able to handle these d ifficult co ncepts better where he or she is conversant with the goals and objectives of the subject.
This is to reduce the chances of delivering the concepts purely for knowledge acquisition sake.
Examp les of ho w some of these co ncepts can be handled by the teacher of Social Stud ies include: (a) The Meaning, Scope, Nature, and Objectives of Social Studies: These are co ncepts which most practising teachers o f the subject have fou nd very difficult to teach.
They usually allow their professional biases in terms o f their discip lines as Geographers, Historians and Economists etc to influence what they co nceive as So cial Studies.
The subject can be better explained to the students as o ne which allows them to study the relationship between humans and their environment with the pur po se of getting them to acquire the knowledge, values, attitudes and skills necessary for solving the var ious problems confronting human survival.
This perception of the subject sho uld influence the teachers’ organization of his/her and the delivery of such content using appr opriate instructional strategies and resour ce mater ials.
(b) Economic Reforms: This is a new co ncept in the Junior Secondar y curricu lum that co uld be difficult to handle fo r the teachers particularly those without a Social Science educatio n background.
Infor mation on related concepts such as privatizatio n, commercializatio n, der egulation and national economy must be sourced by the teacher fr om r elevant eco no mic institutions and med ia outfits in the commu nity.
This will include the state and federal ministries of finance, the leg islative houses (state and federal), banks and other national agencies such as the National Eco no mic Intelligence Group.
44  The teacher sho uld equally be ready to relate these concepts to the day to day activities o f the students and the co mmunity/society to which they belo ng.
This will make them more real as well as make their learning mo re permanent.
Socia l Studies teachers should not also hesitate to consult co lleagues who are more knowledgeable in those areas, while not forgetting the use o f relevant invited guests to give talks on the concepts.
Effective teaching and learning o f Social Studies, at both the primary and junior secondar y school levels requ ires that some basic skills must be d evelo ped in the learners.
This shou ld be in additio n to some essential values and attitudes needed by the learner s for effective interaction with various shades o f human beings.
Some of these sk ills include: • Identification • Reporting • Interfer ence Drawing • Listening • Crit ical T hinki ng • Narration • Effective • Manipulative Co mmunication • Discovery • De monstrat ion • Information Processing • Soc ial Skil ls • Part ic ipat ion • Decision Making • Interpersonal • Observation • Creativity • Team Building The affective nature of the Social Studies demands that teachers mu st strive to use their content and instructional deliver y strategies to promote learning environment where learners can gain knowledge, pro cess information, develop these identified skills, examine and clarify values and participate in decisions and actions about their quality of life and survival.
Some of the values that could be developed here will include those o f tolerance, co mmitment, lo yalty, patriotism, respect etc.
3.4: Self Assessment Exercise 1.
Highlig ht the features of the structure of the new 9-year Basic Education Social Studies Curriculum.
2.
List so me of the new content areas of the new Basic Education Social Stud ies Cur ricu lum.
45  3.
Select any five co ncepts from the new 9-year Basic Educat ion Socia l Studie s Cur ricu lum a nd describe how you will handle them in your class.
4.0: CONCLUSION The teaching and learning of Social Studies, at the lower and middle basic levels of our educatio nal system is a ser io us exercise that requires carefu l planning and skills from the teacher .
So cial Studies teachers are therefor e expected to fully understand the structur e and co ntent of the new 9-year Basic Education Social Stud ies Curr iculum so that it can be effectively used for pro mo ting affective based learning.
The difficult concepts that have been identified in the new cur riculu m will be better handled where the teacher prepares himself/herself very well fo r explor ing a var iety of primar y and secondar y literature so urces.
46  5.0: SUMMARY In this Unit, you have been intimated with the char acteristics features of the new 9-year Basic Educatio n So cial Studies Curricu lum in terms o f structur e, content ar eas and new concepts.
Attempt has also been made to identif y some of the concepts which quite a number of practising Social Studies teacher s might find diff icult to handle while interacting with the new curriculum which structurally is a clear cut departure from the old ones.
It is therefore hoped that you will lay your hands on a copy o f this new curr iculum and attempt to practically identify so me of these features and uniq ue characteristics o f the cur riculum.
6.0: TUTOR-MARKED ASSIGNMENT The 9- year Basic Educatio n Social Studies Curriculum is clear cut departure fro m the old ones in terms of structure and co ntent areas.
Discuss.
7.0: REFERENCES/FURTHER READINGS ASESP (1994) So cial Studies Curriculum and Teaching Reso urce Book for Africa Nairobi: ASESP Secretariat Kissock, C. (1991) Cur riculum Planning for Social Studi es Teaching.
New York: Jo hn Wiley & Sons Lawal, M. B.
& Oyeleye A. S. (2003)Founda t ion of So cial Studi es Lagos: A Triads Asso ciate Lawal, M. B.
& Oyeleye A. S. (2004)A Pedagogy Handbook for Social Studi es Pre-service and In-service Teachers Lagos: Tur bans Pub.
Lawal, M. B.
(1999) Critique Report on the Nigerian primary and junio r secondary Social Studies curricula Presented at the NERDC/UNICEF Worksho p on Basic Education Curriculum on Gender Sensitivity Mansar ay, A.
(1999) The Nigerian Social Studies cur riculum: A cr itique Paper Presented at the NERDC/UNICEF Worksho p on Basic Education Curriculum on Gender Sensit ivi t y NERDC, (2008) Teachers Handbook for the 9-Year Basic Education Curriculum (Junior Seco ndary Level) Abuja: NERDC NERDC, (2008) Teachers Handbook fo r the 9-Year Basic Education Curriculum (Pr ima ry School Level) Abuja: NERDC NERDC, (2007) 9-Year Basic Education Curriculum Social Studies for Junior Secondary 1 – 3 Abuja: NERDC 47  MODULE TWO: METHODS, TECHNIQUES AND STRATEGIES OF TEACHING SOCIAL STUDIES Unit 1: Methods, Techniques and Str ategies of Teaching Distinguished Unit 2: Techniques of Teaching Social Studies I Unit 3: Techniques of Teaching Social Studies II Unit 4: Planning for Effective Teaching of Social Studies UNIT 1: METHODS, TECHNIQUES AND STRATEGIES OF TEACHING DISTINGUISHED CONTENTS 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objectives 3.
0 Main Content 3.1: Meaning of Methods as it App lies to Teaching and Learning 3.2: Meaning of Techniques as it Applies to Teaching and Lear ning 3.3: Meaning of Strategies as it Applies to Teaching and Lear ning 3.4: Relationship among Methods, Techniques and Strategies 3.5: Self Assessment Exercise 4.0 Co nc lusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutor Marked Assignments 7.0 References/Further Readings 1.0: INTRODUCTION A quick recall of what operates in our classroo ms will r eveal o ne fact which is the seeming confusio n by teachers in the use of the terms methods, techniques and strategies of teaching.
These three concepts have often been loosely considered as means of delivering instructio n by most teachers.
This Unit will therefo re avail you an oppo rtunity to better understand what each o f them is, how they are related and how can each be app lied in a typical Social Studies classroom.
2.
0: OBJECTIVES By the end of your inter action with this Unit, you should be able to: i.
Describe the concept of methods as it applies to teaching and learning.
ii.
Describe the concept of techniques as it applies to teaching and learning.
iii.
Describe the concept of strategies as it applies to teaching and learning.
48  iv.
Establish the relatio nship amo ng methods, techniques and str ategies in teaching-learning sit ua t ions.
3.0: MAIN CONTENT 3.1: Meaning of Methods Muyanda-Mutebi & Yiga-Matovu (1994) observed that that the ter m method or method of teaching is often used as a general term to cover everything a teacher does.
This they believe cannot be taken as a one best way of d escribing the concept.
Hence, they def ine method as “the way a teacher decides o n what the students will lear n”.
They perceive method as a general choice between what lear ners will mainly be told and what they will largely find out by themselves.
Lawal and Oyeleye (2004) gave a simple definition of metho d as “an orderly arrangement of activities and systematic procedure of doing things.
It sets guidelines for the patterns of behaviour the teacher expects fro m the learners in class.
Method is therefo re a teacher’s approach to instruction on facts, concepts and generalisations, that is , a systematic way in which teachers approach their teaching.
The method o f teaching also descr ibes how the teacher intends to pro ceed with the lesson.
For instance, o ne teacher may intend to proceed by presenting information, while ano ther, teaching the same lesson intends to proceed by providing situations which demand that the students must work on a proble m. ADPRIMA (2003) categorises methods of teaching as either direct or indirect.
When it is direct, it invo lves the organisation of the content in advance and the teacher is expected to have information about his or her students as prerequ isites fo r the lesson.
Here, students are told reasons why content is impo rtant.
The indirect type of metho d of teaching involves situations that give the teacher the opportunity to decide what sk ills or knowledge are to be lear ned, with the students g iven some time to prepare how to work on their or in groups.
Closely related to this catego risation made by ADPRIMA (2003) is that one that had ear lier been made by Muyanda-Mutebi and Yiga-Matovu (1994).
They remarked that ther e are two main metho ds of teaching and these are transmission and problem-so lving.
They obser ved that if the teacher or the bo ok mainly pro vides the class with what they have to learn, then the teacher is using tra nsmission me thod.
T hi s implies that the teacher merely hands do wn o r conveys the subject matter to the learners.
In brief, it is an expo sitory appro ach which involves the teacher in the do mination of the instructional pro cess and telling of students what they need to know.
It encourages nothing but passive learning.
The problem-solving method on the other hand emphasises situatio ns where learners are challenged to examine, investigate, and explor e subject matter.
Here, the teacher or a teaching reso urce demands that the students must think about questions or problems and try to wo rk out the answer s or solutions to the problems.
3.2: Meaning of Techniques Teaching techniques on the o ther hand, are the specific activities and actions requ ired in class to implement the selected method, either transmission or pro blem-solving.
Lawal & Oyeleye (2003) there fo re describe a teaching technique as an activity performed to achieve the method selected for teaching.
It is simp ly the activity which the teacher gets the learners to perfo rm in/out of the classroom.
49  Teaching techniques are also specific actions and processes through which the go al of a particu lar metho d of teaching is realised.
Some of these actions and processes are pr esented and utilised in a teaching-learning environment in form of lecture, recitation, debates, discussio n, dramatisation, r ole play, brainstorming etc.
Let us examine the kind of techniques to be expected in situations where the teacher is using transmission metho d and those to be expected when he/she is u sing problem-solving method.
Some of the teaching techniques that can be drawn from, by that teacher using transmission method would include, recitatio n, lectur ing, and workbook exercises.
The one employing problem-solving method would require cho osing from techniques such as inquiry, field trips, case studies and values clar ifica tion.
Teaching techniques can therefore be described as activities performed to achieve the method.
ADPRIMA (2003) observed that techniques are building blocks of learning, remembering and effective learning.
Techniques facilitate the develo pment of skills that can be used to encourage and assist learner s develop the concepts and processes required for achieving the set goals and objectives of any teaching-learning end eavour .
A teacher who is for instance interested in develo ping the critical sk ills o f his or her lear ners can employ inquiry technique.
This is because it will cr eate roo m for the learners to investigate, ask questions, compile and co llate data for analysis and presentation n the class.
Invo lving the learners in this kind of activities (techniques) therefo re implies tak ing them through a pr ocess that reflects problem-solving, whereas passive techniques will usually achieve transmission.
3.3: Meaning of Teaching Strategy Strategy generally is a term that has been po pu lar ised over time by the militar y as it suggests the plan for success on a battle ground.
When it is applied to teaching and learning, our battle ground becomes the classroom.
It co uld therefore be seen as a plan made in order to win a battle and in this case, successful teaching.
Quoting Muyanda-Mutebi & Yiga-Matovu (1994), Lawal & Oyeleye ( 2003) describe a teaching strategy as the sequencing or ordering of the techniques that have been selected by a teacher to teach a par ticu lar lesson.
It is simply the sequencing or organisation of a given selection of techniques for the purpose of achieving a par ticu lar method.
Ogunyemi (2000) also describes a teaching strategy as the overall plan developed by a teacher to satisfy his/her instructional o bjectives..
It is thus a laid out specific plan which is characterised by systematic presentation.
The pro cess o f sequencing techniques o f teaching by a teacher interms of which one comes first and which one follows is also a reflection of what teaching strategy actually means.
Strategy can equally be referred to as the steps taken in organising a general or specific plan of teaching and learning activities so that the objectives are achieved.
( www.
itek.ac.ug/curricu lum, 2009).
It invo lves the arrangement of techniques relating to a teacher’s particu lar choice of method in a systematic order, that is, in a way that allows the lesso n to flow, so that it can effectively and efficiently delivered.
For instance, a teacher using problem so lving method can apply a combination of techniques such as using reaction to posters fir st, follo wed by questioning and later discussion.
This implies that the 50  teacher is strategising in o rder to ensur e that his/her lesson is effectively taught.
This exp lanation is a reflection of the importance o f the acquisition of the sk ill of strategising by the teacher which incidentally demands the knowledge and consideration of the use of a variety of techniques and the ability to combine them in one single teaching-learning situation.
3.4: Relationship among Method, Technique and Strategy in Teaching and Learning It is not going to be a wrong tho ught to assume at this juncture that you can now differentiate these three co ncepts fr om one ano ther.
While you will want to agree with this writer that the three concepts are not the same, as they each refer to different but related activities, it is expected that a highly professional teacher should be ready to be mindful of a variety of them when preparing for any teaching- lear ning situation.
Methods, techniques and strategies are related to good teaching but we have seen in the preceding paragraphs that they are different from each other.
This implies that they mean differently although they are all part of planning to teach.
Hence, we can say that while they could be different fro m one another , they need each for effective teaching and learning to take place.
So if a metho d is accepted as a teacher’s appr oach to instruction, techniques would mean the specific activities performed while using the method and the strategy will be the sequence ado pted for using the techniques dur ing the lesson.
For instance if as a So cial Stud ies teacher you decide to use problem-so lving method to teach a topic of your choice to a group o f learners, you will need to also select a co mbination of techniques (activities) such as role play, case studies and small group discussion, depending on the topic.
Your strategy will now require determining which of these techniques will come first and which one will follow.
That is, you can decide to say I will first use case stud ies by presenting a relevant case o n the to pic for the students to react to, then, followed by a role play and finally a small gro up discu ssion on their obser vatio ns on the case pr esented and roles played.
Thus, the use of techniques and strategies in a teacher’s method of instructio n is a reflection of a greater possibility in his/her chances of realising the go als o f education as well as making learning mo re practical.
I dentifying the method, techniques and strategy for deliver ing a lesson is s reflection of a teacher’s level o f readiness for a planned lesson.
Methods, techniques and strategies d escribe how a lesso n is going to be taught, starting from the general method to the specific techniques and strategy fo r using such techniques with the learner s. In short, the three co ncepts descr ibe what the teacher will do and ho w it is going to done.
3.5: Self Assessment Exercise 1.
Give a simp le definitio n of method of teaching.
2.
Give two reaso ns to show that a technique of instr uctional delivery is not the same thing as teaching strategy.
4.0: CONCLUSION From the discussion so far, it is quite valid to to say that method of teaching is an umbrella co ncept in teaching that covers both teaching strategy and instructional technique.
The three co ncepts are major concepts that have been found to be usually misinterpreted and misused by mo st practising 51  teachers.
Effective teaching ho wever demand s a clearer perception of the meaning and expectation of each of these concepts if meaningful teaching must be promoted.
Thus, we can conclude that metho ds cannot be effective on their own; rather they need techniques and strategies.
As teacher s, you are therefore advised to be more co nversant with the distinguishing features of methods, techniques and str ategies and allow such experience to guide your preparation and delivery of lesso ns in your classrooms.
5.0: SUMMARY This Unit has exposed you to the unique features that distinguish seemingly confusing concepts of metho d, technique and strategy in teaching.
It revealed that method can be basically transmission or problem-so lving and direct or indirect in nature.
It has equally presented the fact that ther e co uld be infinite number of techniques that could be used in the classr oom depending o n the teacher’s cho ice of teaching method, and that, a strategy is mer ely the plan by which the techniques are sequenced to acco mplish the chosen method.
All these are however essential for active learning.
6.0: TUTOR-MARKED ASSIGNMENT Establish the fact that effective teaching of a subject like Social Stud ies demand s a detailed understanding of the statement that says “methods, techniques and strategies are no t the same, as they refer to different but related activities, which teacher cannot avoid, in or der to plan for a meaning ful lesson”.
7.0: REFERENCES/FURTHER READINGS ADPRIMA (2003) Methods of Teaching Retrieved from www.adprima.com on the 20th May 2009.
Lawal, M. B.
& Oyeleye, A.S. (2003) A Pedagogy Handbook for So cia l St udies Pre-Service and In-ser vice Teachers Lagos: Tunbans Publishers Muyanda-Mutebi, P. & Yiga-Matovu, M. (1994) So cial Studies Curricu lum and Teaching Resource Boo k fo r Africa Nairo bi:ASESP Secr etariat Ogunyemi, S. (2000) Strategies for Teaching So cial Studies Ibadan: OACE Pub www.
itek.ac.ug/curricu lu m, Retrieved 10th October 2009 52  UNIT 2: TECHNIQUES OF TEACHING SOCIAL STUDIES I CONTENTS 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objectives 3.
0 Main Content 3.1: Inquir y Technique and its Application in Social Studies Teaching 3.2: Va lue s Clar ification Technique and it s Appl ica tion i n Soc ial St ud ies Te aching 3.3: Role Play Technique and its Application in Social Studies Teaching 3.4: Case Studies Technique and its Application in Social Studies Teaching 3.5: Self Assessment Exercise 4.0 Co nc lusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutor Marked Assignments 7.0 References/Further Readings 1.0: INTRODUCTION In the first Unit o f this Module you lear nt about the differences among the co ncepts of method, technique and strategy as they apply to teaching and lear ning.
It is therefore important to learn about each of the techniques that can be used for the delivery o f Social Studies content depending on the method selected by the teacher, that is, problem solving or transmission.
Fo r the sake o f this Unit, you will interact with four techniques, all of which are ver y useful when using problem- solving as your method of deliver ing a lesson co ntent.
2.0: OB JECTIVES By the end of your interaction with this Unit, you should be able to: Describe and apply inquiry technique in Socia l Stud ie s cla ssroom.
Describe and apply va lues clarif ication technique in Social Studies classroom.
Describe and apply ro le pla y technique in Social Studi es c lassro om.
Describe and apply case studies tec hni qu e i n Soc ial St ud ies cla ssroo m. 3.0 MAIN CONTENT 3.1: Inquiry Technique and its Application in Social Studies Teaching Inquiry technique is a systematic investigation into a problem.
Nwosu and Corbin (1977) describe it as a way o f conducting, quests and searches into pro blems.
It is a technique in which students are asked to find out about things, which puzzle them on their own with the teacher playing the role o f a guide.
The technique also involves investigating into a problem with a view to arriving at alternative means of solving that particular problem.
53  Inquiry technique is a pr ocess of asking and answering key Social Studies questions.
SSCED (2002) further describes the technique as one that provides opportunity for students to develo p questions; co llect and organise data related to the questio ns, analyse the data and draw inferences o r co nclusions about the data to answer raised questions.
I t is a scientif ic method because it involves a systematic procedure.
It involves seeking of answers to the big question, the attack on which is made by formulating numerous smaller questions, which guide one through the investigation.
The technique is aimed at develo ping reflecting thinking skills in the learners.
Tucker (1965) lists four character istics of inquir y-centred Social Studies classroom to include: 1.
The lear ners are active and co ntent is problem- centred 2.
It utilizes the intellectual too l of inquiry 3.
It emphasises the systematic stud y o f problem issues and values.
4.
It becomes pro gressively/less teacher-centred.
Process Any inquir y techniques should basically take the learners through some major steps which SSCED (2003) say include: Step I : Identifying and clarifying questions, issues, pr oblems.
This can be student-generated (within limitatio ns) or teacher-created.
Step II: Propose a hypothesis.
That is, suggested possible solutions or explanations to the problem or question ear lier identified or raised.
This facilitates students’ ability to get involved in a research.
Step III:G athering and organising evidence.
It involves locating and collecting data.
To do this effectively, the students are expected to develop and use some skills such as selecting relevant data and dropping irrelevant o nes, evaluating the value of primary versus secondar y data, organising and interpreting information, classifying and categorising, presenting the interpreted informatio n etc.
Step I V: Evaluating, analysing and interpr eting the data.
This step allows students co nducting the resear ch or inquir y to examine the feasibility o r otherwise o f the possible solutions or explanations using the available collected data.
Step V: Conducting, inferring and making generalisations.
That is, the students want to co nc lude but based o n whether the hypo thesis is proven or d ispro ved.
It is at this stage that infer ences are drawn and what additional questions are raised by the analysis are revealed.
Udoukpon, (1988) traced the orig in of inqu iry as an instructional technique to the work of John Dewey.
He said that mo st experiences in the classroo m should be problem-centred and that the learner s need to be helped especially to bu ild skills of reflective thinking.
The technique offers opportunity for learners to gain and verify knowledge through a process of re-arranging and re-organizing information in order to make new k no wledge.
Ross (1985) 54  also expressed the o pinion that this is usu ally possible when the learners are exposed to either the use of the logical analytical model of r eflective inquir y or the reflective skepticism model.
Michaelis’ (1968) submission in the California Framework for Social Science Education lend credence to this view put forward by Ross, (1985).
For , Michaelis (1968) identifies three types of inquir y-analytic, integrative and po licy.
But he went further to emphasize that in the actual classroom situation it is highly unlikely that these models of inquiry will exist separately and distinctly.
Rather, he maintained that, it is the student who engages in inqu iry that will be running his mental processes through the three modes.
However, Hunk ins, (1970) had earlier emphasised that inquir y can be both inductive and deductive.
That is, pupils engaged in an inquiry would at times be proceeding in an inductive manner and at other times in a deductive manner.
Even then, there are probably numero us thinking behaviours compr ising each manner.
This is supported by Ausubel (1963) while mak ing a case for both inductive and deductive lear ning.
He maintained that deduction is a technique of teaching that proceeds fro m rules or generalization g iven to examples by the teacher .
Induction on the other hand proceeds fr om examp les or facts given to generalizations, which may be given by teachers or discovered by the students.
Regardless of the kind of interpretation given to the meaning of inquiry, Hunkins, (1970) still holds the belief that there are various degrees of pupils’ inqu iry.
There is one in which students or pupils can be engaged in pure inquir y and assume total responsibility fo r dealing with data.
There is another one which he tagged "direct inquiry", in which the teacher provides students with guidance in dealing with data.
The teacher in the latter type provides the students with the necessary skills needed for co nsultation and investigation.
Lawal ( 2003) spoke of some o f these skills as including, comparing so ur ces of data, interpreting data, drawing inferences, evaluating thinking as to its relative dogmatism and drawing conclusion from evidence.
Students using inqu iry are therefore expected to be assisted in confronting, questio ning and inquiring about data in o rder to co mpr ehend mo re thor oughly Social Studies knowledge.
Lawal, (1989) further explains that effective utilization of this technique guides the students in the use of tools like survey, interview, questio nnaire etc fo r information collection.
While recognizing the impo rtance o f those tools for data search and collection, a great proponent of inquir y Suchman, (1958) identified four types of questions that the students could be asking during any inquiry.
These he said include: a. Verification questio ns- those that will deal with specific facts about the discrepant event.
b.
Necessity questions- to determine if so mething were necessary fo r the discrepant event to take place.
c. Experimentation questions- which would manipulate data gathered, and d. Synthesis questions- which wou ld really state a theory or conclusio n arr ived at via questioning.
Clements, Fielder and Tabachnick, (1966) seems to be sharing Suchman's view by describing inquir ing as an attempt to seek answers to big questions.
They said that the attack on the big question is made by formulating numer ous smaller questions which guide one through the 55  investigation.
Hunkins, (1970) therefore observed that in the d iscu ssion o f Clements and his co lleagu es o n this issue, o ne can id entify several stages o f inquiry.
These includ e: formulation of the big question, identification of smaller questions to initiate inquiry, seeking answers to smaller questions through observations; inventing or cho osing concepts that facilitate inqu iry; and terminating the inquir y with some kind report to commu nicate the findings to other students.
All these go a long way to confirm Goldmark's (1989) idea of the process of any good inquiry.
Some of advantages of Inquiry as a student activity-oriented techniques include: It encourages students generate their own kno wledge It encourages students to discover answers on their own and these become more memo rable.
Divergent and creative thinking is encouraged It emphasizes high order thinking skills which include analysis, synthesis and evaluation Promotes the integration of skills with knowledge as students organize and analyze data in a variety o f ways e.g.
through maps, graphs, charts etc.
Application When teaching a topic like "Religious Co nflict and the Nige rian society" to a J.S.S.
3 class, the Social Studies teacher can engage the student in an inquiry-orient ed act ivi ty dema nding the following st eps: a) Get the students to identify the central problem to be focused o n e.g.
the increasing r ate of re ligious conflict s in some pa rt s of Niger ia .
In this case, the causes as well as the solutions will be sought for .
b) Ask them to make some guesses in terms of causes and tentative solut ions e .g.
"Sett ler/Indi ge neship perception has been a significant cause o f the incessant religious crises in some northern parts of Nigeria” or “Perceived supremacy o f one religio n over the other significantly influences the chances o f relig ious riots in some Stat es in Nigeria ”.
The students can now be asked to emplo y any of the methods of data co llectio n to get necessary info rmation from yo uths, religious leaders, opinion leaders, psyc ho logi st s, senior police o fficers or any relevant stakeholder as the case may be.
d) On collection of such data, they wo uld now need to put them together analyze and place beside their hypo theses/tentative guesses so as to come up with so me findings and concrete co nc lusions.
e) From their finding s, they may conclude with a general statements like “To stop r eligious co nflicts in Nigeria, the policy o f state of orig in should be abo lished” etc.
The role o f the Social Studies teacher in this k ind of learning enviro nment is that of a gu ide.
In doing this, he would need to be consistent and intellectually honest with the students.
Ample opportunities must be pr ovided for the students to develop their powers of systematic analysis.
Students also need to be allowed by the teacher to commit genuine mistakes and work their way o ut of such mistakes.
All these, avail the students with opportunity to oper ate in a contr olled enviro nment that allo ws them to experiment with problem and their so lut io ns in a setting descr ibed by Tucker, (1965) as that which builds success and self confidence before hazar do us ego -destroying encounter are made.
56  3.2: Values Clarification Technique and its Application in Social Studies Teaching Values are essential co mponents of any good Social Studies programme.
They are concerned with those things which peo ple consider desirable.
Social Studies teachers thro ugh their cho ice o f instructional techniques and str ategies are expected to teach for value acquisition amo ng others, particularly because of the affective nature of the subject.
Values serve as a basis for judging the behaviour of individuals.
They supply individuals with a sense of purpose and direction.
They play greatly in assisting individuals to fix the sense o f right and wrong, fair and foul, desirable and undesirable, moral and immoral (Barnes, 1970).
One major technique of maki ng all these possibl e in t he Soc ial Studies classroom is va lue s clarificat io n technique .
It has been described by Nelson and Michaelis, (1980) as a technique designed to help students clarify their personal values and resolve personal value s conflict.
Lawal, (1995) equally observed that it is an instructional technique designed to engage students in the active for mulation and examination of values.
The technique provides students with practical experiences that allow them to become aware o f their own feelings, ideas, and beliefs needed for making conscious and deliberate as well as concrete decisions about value system (Lawal, 1999).
Value clarificatio n technique calls for opportunity for the learners to remove shaft fro m grain, separate good from bad and useful from useless, in order to have a clear grip o f such things that are beneficial to one (Ogunjimi, 1996).
It is an instructional technique that can be used to help students develop both rational thinking and e mot iona l awareness in order to examine their personal and social values.
The skills acquired through this process become useful in solving value conflicts and to act in accordance with their value position choices.
The goal o f a well utilized value clarification technique is to involve students in practical experiences, making them aware of their own feelings, ideas and beliefs in order that decisions they ma ke ar e conscious, de libera te and base d on their own value syst em.
In order to effectively utilize the technique in the class, teachers ar-e advised to allow themse lve s to be guided by the fo llo wing guidelines recommended by NERDC (1988): (i) Before the value clarificatio n process is embar ked students need to understand the meaning o f values.
(ii) Teacher needs to be non-judgmental about students' own values by treating their values with respect.
(iii) Stude nts participa tion in the c la ssroo m di sc ussion value s shoul d be on a vo luntary basis (iv) Teachers are free to share their values with the students if it will help t he m clar ify t he ir values, but teacher's values must not be imposed on the students.
57  A teacher trying to involve his/her students in value clarification would be expected to take the students through so me value process.
This involves: a.
Choosing 1. freely 2. fro m alte rnat ives 3. after thoughtful consideratio n o f the co nsequences of each alternative b. Prizing 4. cherishing being happy with the choice 5. willing to affirm the choice publicly.
c. Acting 6. doing something with the choices 7. repeatedly in some pattern of life.
So ur ce: Raths, Har min & Simo n, (1966).
This process has been further simplified by Metcalf (1971) for teaching-learning purpose to include: i) Guiding the students to identify and clarify the issu e of value ii) Gathering and organize the facts.
iii) Assessing the truth of the facts iv) Clarifying the relevance o f facts v) Arr iving at a tentative value decision vi) Te st ing t he va lue princ iple implied in t he de cision.
Some of the strategies reco mmended for carrying out this process are: a.
Use o f the Value Bag i.e.
students are allowed to choose what they wish to reveal about themselves.
Students are asked to br ing to class a paper bag or envelope containing three to five possessions, replicas or pictur e of items the value in turns, students select and talk why those items ar e important to the m. The exercise helps students to think about some things that are important and to recognize that a var iety of things are symbolic and of deeper meaning in their lives.
b.
Use of Incomplete Sentences, i.e.
co mpletion of open-ended statements to help a student become mo re aware of some of his/her beliefs, likes and dislikes.
e.g.
If I have one million naira, I'd ........... During my leisure, I prefer to ........... My kind of wife or husband is a person who ...........
The completed sentences are read out and students are asked to confir m whether any of these ambitions or interests can become personal values for those who gave them and others include value listing and value rank order.
58  Application The Social Studies teacher who intends to teach a topic like “c ulture and identity” wit h a sub-topic like "Traditional Culture vs. Foreign Culture" can prepare a lesson like the follo wing.
Lesson To pi c: Cult ur e a nd ide nt it y Sub- topic: Tra dit io na l Cult ur e Vs. For eign Cultur e Concepts: Cultural Preservation Objectives At the end of the lesso n, students sho uld be able to: a) explain what is meant by culture b) differ entiate traditional culture fro m fo reign culture using five co ncrete examples c) state in simple words why it is good to preserve our cultural traditions instead of foreig n ones.
Instructional Aids i) A case o f two Nigerians relating with Nigeria Tradi tio nal cu lt ura l tra its and foreign cu lture traits respectively.
Procedure Step I: Guide students to identify and clarify the issue of value (a) Definition of Terms The concepts of culture, cultural traits, fo reign cultur e and cu ltural traditio ns are explained with the teachers guiding the students.
That is, culture means a particular group's total way of life.
It is dictated by what happens aro und us.
Cu ltur al traits are those symbo ls, which differ entiate one cultural pattern fro m the other.
They include the clothes we wear, the way and what we eat, the type of ho uses we live in, the way we great and even the work we do.
When cultural traits from foreign lands, especially from western or Arab world are brought into our country for practice, we talk of fo reig n culture.
Examples of these include, putting on pair of trouser, shirt and suit, speaking English or Arabic language, living a nuclear family life style etc.
Teacher presents a case in which two Nigerians were found with one rela ting to the t ra di tional c ult ural tra its, in t heir da y- to-day life act ivitie s. He also asks the stude nts to identi fy t he proble m(s) t hat is/ are immine nt in the case.
Step II: Guide students to gather and organize the facts.
a) Teacher asks the students to list the dangers and benefits of each type of these two Nigerian's actions or their relationship with cultural traits (that is the pros and co ns of each of the traits).
Step III: Guide students to assess the truth of the fa cts a) Teacher asks the stud ents to support each of the facts with concr ete real life examp les either from their personal exp eriences o r from boo ks/magazines they have r ead or stor ies they have heard.
Step IV: Guide students to clarify the relevance o f facts.
a) Students are then asked to weigh the facts for both traditional culture and foreign culture, so as to come up with the least preferred of the two, using genuine reasons with the guidance of the teacher.
(Use probing questions).
Step V: Assist students to arrive at a tentative va lue decision 59  a) Based o n the for egoing step s, the students are asked to arr ive at a decis ion on which of the two discussed cultures (traditional culture and foreign culture) they think will be more to lerant.
b) The students should then be made to give the criter ion on which their lesson is based, by asking questions like: (i) Is it comp ulsory for N iger ians to preserve their traditional cultural traits?
( ii) If yes, what roles can a Nige rian who believes in this play, which those who believe in fo reign culture cannot easily p lay?
Step VI: Teacher test s the value Principle implies in the decision Teacher could ask questio ns like: (a) I s it co mpulsory for every Nigerian to aspire to preserve every bit toraf doiut ri o n al cult ural trait s?
(b) What if as a Nigerian you discover that you need to practise and preserve foreign culture at the expense of traditional ones in a particular situatio n. How will you feel ?
(c) Suppose you are a Nigerian who because you belief and support the need to pr eser ve our own culture, you are requested to support the pr actice o f animal sacrifice at the shr ine.
What will you do?
Source: Lawal M. B.
(1999) 3.3: Role Play Technique and its Application in Social Studies Teaching Students love playing r oles.
They enjoy taking on the identity of others.
In the pr ocess they learn reliable Social Studies skills such as developing empathy and seeing situation from multiple perspectives.
Corbins et al, (1983), describe role p laying technique as a spo ntaneous organized activity in which players pr etend to be so meone else, by acting out the role of people to sho w specif ic situations for study or discussion.
Usually, in this technique there is no rehearsal or prepared script which students have to memorize.
ASESP, ( 1994) opines that since the technique encourages learning through impersonation, learners experience directly or through practice and this enco urages 80% learning and remember ing.
As an extemporaneous learning it emphasizes the act of getting learners to respond to a situation or set of feelings without prior practice.
When planning to use a role p lay, the teacher must begin by identifying the ro les that might be logical enough for students to play.
The teacher is expected to develop role description for the students once they have been identified.
Such role descr iptions should include backgro und info rmation regarding the character to be po rtrayed, typical behaviours of these 60  indiv iduals and other information that would enable role player to come to term with the personality being role-p layed.
He or she should develop a situatio n in which the characters to be role-played find themselves i.e.
(the scenar io ).
Time limit must be established to prevent the dia logue from drifting away from the main concerns.
Students are to be allo wed to select the role At the end o f the role play, a debriefing session sho uld be conducted by the teacher where value- laden questions like the following could be asked: a.
Did Abdulla hi po rtray the role played realistically?
b.
Having seen Abdullahi pla y that role, what do you think arme othste n o table perso nal characteristics of role pl ayed?
c. What did you base your o pinio n on?
d. What values were held by the character ro le pl ayed by Ngozi?
e. What modifications or change would yo u like to see effected?
This debriefing session would help students to synthesize what they have observed into some defensible conclusions.
Similarly, SSCED, (2003) reco mmends that role play should essentially take place in five stages which are: Stage 1: Init iation and Direction At this stage the teacher identifies a topic, which requires students to look at many side s of a difficult issue, requires the development of an opinion, or includes key players with interesting personalities.
Stage 2: Describing the Context The teacher sets the context and makes sure students do not full into the trap of “presentism” -role playing with hindsig ht.
The situatio n must be set up and all per spectives exp lained clearly.
Stage 3: Roles In a successful r ole p laying activity, everyone must have a r ole.
There may no t be five or six key roles but the entire class should be engaged in the role playing in some way, albeit as juror s, o r interested citizens, or newspaper reporters.
Ever yone has an assignment, something they do in the role play.
Once everyone is assigned a r ole, time is needed for students to understand t heir r ole, t o pr act ice, t o "try on" the ir new ident it y.
61  Stage 4: Enactment Make sure students stay in role, and pro ceed.
Stage 5: Debriefing Depending upo n the str ucture of the role playing activity, students comp lete the action with a written reflection followed by an oral debriefing.
The debriefing is the most impo rtant part o f a role play; it is the teacher's chance to ask students to discuss, to reaso n, to draw conclusions, and to pull ever ything together.
Application In teaching a to pic like "THE NEED FOR MORAL AND SOCIAL RESPONSIBILITY', you can present a story for the students to listen to and react to by role-p laying the content o f the story.
Usman and his best friend John are in super market.
John wants a birthday present for his sister, but hasn't enough money, especially for an expensive bottle o f perfume.
John picks up the per fume and puts it into his po cket and later gave Usman the perfume to hide.
At the gate, a security man stopped them and asked both o f them to empty their pockets.
What should Usman do?
This case can be presented to students with the teacher familiarizing them with the general situation, which is stealing.
Students could now be made to act this story, and the following questions could be asked dur ing the debriefing session.
a.
If you were Usman, wou ld you have exhibited the same reaction to the gateman's requ est?
b.
What do you think will be the consequence of the action of the two of them to: (i) Usma n (ii) John owner ( iii) Their parents (iv) The supermarket c. How would you feel if you were John or Usman?
d. What would happen if everyone has been stealing from the supermarket?
e. Is stealing right at all?
Why?
3.4: Case Studies Technique and its Application in the Social Studies Classroom This technique is quite similar to role play but unlike role play it does not require the students to act out the situatio n being presented by the teacher.
Dubey et al, ( 1982) remar ked that case studies require the selection of stories from r eal life situations and the bringing of such into the classroom for close examination and analysis.
This instructional technique involves situation analysis, which allo ws value laden questions to be raised at the end of presentation.
62  That is, it is a techniqu e that aims at developing positive values and attitude formation in the learners.
It is made up of an intensive study of an individual, a situation, an institution, a decisio n or an issue as basis of making generalization concerning similar situations.
This technique allo ws learners to infer from a concentrated and deep study rather than a hasty study of a number of cases.
While quoting Feeder, (1973) Udoukpong describes case studies "as examination of an institution, an organization, an event, a decision or situation.
A good case for study is further said to be intrinsically interesting; it could involve conflict and decision and it may tell a story.
Students may identify with one or mo re of the characters make value judg ments as they listen, read, take sides and gradually come closer to the real world of po litical economic and social behaviour than they would by reading a for mal description of an institution or process.
The efficacy o f case studies as an instructional technique has been highlig hted by Wasser Man, (1992) who descr ibes the technique as a complicated interaction that seeks to blend cognitive ad affective lear ning modes.
It promotes active students involvement and develo pment of think ing skills.
Effective utilization o f this technique however demands that the teacher must do ever ything possible to create the proper atmosp here in the class so that the period o f studying the case is pleasur able and at the same time educative.
The teacher must be r eady to select o r guid e learners in selecting short cases to fit the short class per io d and still have time for questio ns afterwards.
The kind of questions to be asked must be affective based, that is value-orie nt ed.
These will be similar to the o nes raised under application sectio n of ro le-play in the previous sect ion of t his Unit.
Application The situatio n or event descr ibed in the previous section of this Unit under role play could be app lied here.
This cou ld be by turning the ro le cards into a co mplete sho rt story or case, which will be presented to the students.
After listening to o r r eading the case by themselv es, the same set of questions raised under role play would serve a very useful purpose while using case studies as an instructional technique.
3.5: Self Assessment Exercise 1.
Explain the steps you will take your students while using inquiry technique with them.
2.
Use three features to distinguish between case studies and role play as instructional techniques in Social Studies.
3.
To carry out values clarification exercise with your students in So cial Studies classroo m yo u need to involve them in three steps.
What are these steps?
4.0: CONCLUSION 63  The techniques of instructional delivery discussed in this Unit can be seen as a set of techniques, which can enhance the Social Studies teacher’s capability to teach for cognitive, affective and psychomotor learning.
Effective utilization of any of these techniques will however depend on the Social St udies teacher s ability to get more involved in out of classroom activities in order to search for relevant backgr ound informatio n and materials that can be built up for teaching purposes.
This is very essential for the teacher if he or she must present and utilize relevant cases and stimulate meaningful role plays and discussion sessions in t he Socia l Studie s classroo m. 5.0: SUMMARY In this Unit, you have been expo sed to four techniques that can be used to promote effective teaching and lear ning in the Social Studies classrooms.
These include inquir y, values clarification, role p lay and case studies.
Specific attempts were also made to demo nstrate how you can apply each of the techniques to your classroom situatio n. It is therefo re expected that as Social Stud ies teachers you will move a step ahead by look ing fo r the new 9-year Basic Education Curriculum for Social Studies and then try out your hands on how some of these techniques can be used to teach so me selected themes and topics in your classro om.
6.0: TUTOR-MARKED ASSIGNMENT Select any topic of your cho ice fr om the new Junior Secondary Social Stud ies Curriculum for JS One and describe how you will use any the four techniques discussed in this Unit to teach such topic to your students.
7.0: REFERENCES/FURTHER READINGS ASESP, (1994).
Social studies curriculum and teaching resource book for Africa.
Nairo bi : ASESP Ausubel, D. et.al.
(1978).
Educational psychology: A cognitive view 2nd edition.
New Yo rk: Holt,Rinehart & Winston Barnes, D. (1970).
Helping children clarify values.
In R.H. Jo nes Social Studies Education for Young Americans Iowa: Kendal Hunt Pub.
Dubey, D. et al, (1982).
Social Studies for our nation Book 1.
Ikeja: Thomas Nelson Nig.Ltd.
Goldmark, B.
(1989).
Social Studies: A method of inquiry Belmont, Calf:Wadsworth Hunkins, F. P. (1970).
Review of research in Social Studies education Washington: NCSS Lawal, M. B.
(1989).Social Studies: Getting it all together at the college of education level Seminar Paper Presented at LACOED Otto/Ijanik in Lawal M. B.
(1995).
Principles and concepts of Social Studies.
A Monograph 64  Lawal M. B.
(1999).
Values clarification, concept mapping strategies and students’ learning outcomes in junior secondary Social Studies Unpublished doctoral dissertation, University of Ibadan Lawal, M. B.
(2003).
Foundations of Social Studies.
A Monograph Lawal, M.B.
& Oyeleye, A. S. (2004) A pedagogy handbook for Social Studies pre- service and in- service teachers.
Lago s: A Triad Associates Metcalf, L. E. ed.
( 1971).
Values education: Rationale, strategies and procedures.
The NCSS 41st Year Book.
Washington, D.C. :National Council for Social Studies Michaelis, J.U.
(1972).
Social Studies for children in a democracy.
5th ed.
Englewood Cliffs, N.J.: Prentice-Hall NERDC, (1988).
Teaching methodologies in Population Education: Population Education self learning module 12 Lagos: Population Education Dept.
Nwosu, S.& Corbin, H. (1977).
Handbook for Social Studies teachers Ike ja : Lo ngman Pub.
Ogunjimi, R.
A.(1996).
Values clarification as an instructional technique for teaching Home Economics Paper presented at a Training Workshop for Lagos State Secondar y School Teachers Raths, L.E., Harmin M. & Simon, S.B.
(1966).
Values and teaching: working with values in the classroom Ohio: Charles E. Merrill 65  UNIT 3: TECHNIQUES OF TEACHING SOCIAL STUDIES II 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objectives 3.
0 Main Content 3.1: Dramatisatio n Technique and its Application in Social Studies Teaching 3.2: Simulation Technique and its Application in Social Studies Teaching 3.3: Discussion Technique and its Application in Social Studies Teaching 3.4: Self Assessment Exercise 4.
0: Conclusio n 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutor Marked Assignments 7.0 References/Further Readings 1.0: INTRODUCTION In the preceding Unit, you wer e g iven an o ppo rtunity to acquir e the knowledge and sk ills fo r using instructional techniques such as role play, inquiry, values clar ification and case studies in the Social Studies classroom.
It is however impo rtant at this ju ncture to let you understand the fact that there are still some o ther techniques that can be used to promote effective teaching o f Social Studies in your classroo m. Some of these techniques are equally presented in this Unit in additio n to the ones you have learnt about in Unit 2 of this Module.
2.
0: OBJECTIVES By the end of your inter action with this Unit, you should be able to: 1.
Descr ibe dramatisation technique and app ly it to the teaching of Social Studies in your classroom.
2.
Descr ibe simulation technique and apply it to the teaching of Social Studies in your classroom.
3.
Descr ibe discu ssion technique and apply it in various for ms to the teaching o f So cial Studies in yo ur classroom.
3.0: MAIN CONTENT 3.1: Dramatization Technique and its Application in the Social Studies Classroom Dramatizatio n is an instructio nal technique that allows learner s to be creative and understand better what is being taught.
Dramatization has been described by Oroge (1995) as a techn ique u sed by the teacher to insp ire activities such as memo rization, development of imagination, imageries and drama in students.
66  It provides lear ners with opportunities for independent activ ities, actions, analysis, interpr etation o f facts and lo gical argument.
It is one o f the mo st effective techniques for stimulating lear ners in what they are to lear n. The technique, Corbin and Akinlaye (1983) observe, enco urages the immed iate invo lvement of learner s in the learning activities.
It allows fo r a great deal o f particip ation by lear ners and it enlivens the routine pr ocedures of teaching and learning.
Dramatizatio n provides an active situatio n in which the learner not o nly participates but a lso interprets his feeling and attitudes thereby reinforcing knowledge.
It has been described by ASESP (1994) as a good technique to focus quality time on a task.
When the content of a lesson is dry or uninteresting, dramatization may be an effective way of attracting and ho ld ing the attentio n of lear ners.
Acting which is a majo r compo nent of the technique develops the co gnitive, affective and psychomotor do mains.
Dramatizatio n can come in fo rm of miming, p lay-let, monologue, dialogue or puppetry.
When it is miming, it involves acting out something without using words.
This allows emp hasis to be placed on body language.
That is, the actor is understood only by his/her body movement, gestures and actions.
The who le bo dy o f the actor or actr ess is used to produce a situation or a character.
In miming, exaggerated motion o f the eyes, head, hands ( including each finger) and feet is of the greatest importance.
Miming can be used to act out an event or an experience.
It may present a character ization of some person or natio n. Miming is a very useful teaching technique as it encourages both slo w learners and learners with speech d ifficulties or shy ones to participate easily in a teaching-learning endeavo ur.
3.2: Simulation/Instructional Game Technique and its Application in the Social Studies Classroom Simulatio n/Instructional games are interesting and rewarding teaching techniques that have not been too popular with our cotemporary Social Studies in most Niger ian schools.
They are dynamic and lively ways o f pr esenting thought-provoking ideas and problems in our social life.
The Teacher Explo rer Centre of the UNO, (2003) describes simulation as attempt to appro ximate reality as closely as possible.
They are not only effective in skill development, but also, help students to gain insight and understanding of things they would not otherwise get a chance to exper ience.
Corbin et al, (1983) noted that the wo rd simulation comes from the Latin word "simular s" which means "to co py" or "similis" meaning like.
Hence, simulations are lik e real-life situation.
They allow lear ners to act out the same roles and make the same kind of decisio ns as are made in real life but o n a mini- scale.
They can come in form of historical simulations, simu lation activities and simu lation games.
The latter is ho wever, the mo st commonly used by the few teachers who try their hands out on the instructional technique.
67  Simulation games as an instructional technique has been descr ibed by Preston and Her man Jnr.
(1981) as a scaled down simplified model of an important process of institution.
Its main characteristic is the ability to place the learner in a situation that simulates real life.
The technique offers unique opportunities for decision making, negotiating, problem solving, analytic reaso ning, reacting to opponents’ tricks and plans.
Unlike real game which people play to win in a contest, simulation game as an instructional technique involves pretence and imitation (Muyanda-Mutebi and Yiga Matovu, (1994).
It could therefore be seen as involving role playing on imaginary event using a set of rules.
They went further to observe that the most important characteristic of simulatio n game is that the rules and instructio ns have an in- bu ilt potential fo r conflict of interest o r alternative actions.
These they said call for practices that can help achieve affective teaching.
Some of these practices ar e also said to include self- directing, accommo dating, integrating, challenging, giving feedback and rewards with elements of chance prominent.
It is therefore a technique that is very good fo r generating creative thinking, formatio n of opinions and effective learning.
It is quite motivational as learners usually enjo y it and thus they tend to have positive attitude towards it.
It is a good tool for education through entertainment that is "Enter-Educate".
Scholars like Crist, (1972) Preston & Herman Jnr.
, ( 1981) and NERC, (1983) have however reported that in spite of the popular ity of the technique and the hig h interest gener ated by its use in schools, it has been found to be quite expensive to provide for all, and quite unacceptable fo r a conventional classroom.
Furthermore, Crist (1972) is of the opinion that the results of exper imental studies with the technique have been mixed.
In sp ite of these o bservations, simulatio n games, if well utilized, where they ar e affordable, are capable of enhancing effective teacher-student and student-student interactions.
The game is not supposed to be used to see which team o r who wins.
I n situation where this is do ne, it will render the technique worthless.
Rather, the game as a technique of teaching is expected to be played as a means of understand ing the topic or issue under discussion.
This will in turn assist the learner s to identity useful concepts and subject matter or ideas based on the gains of such game.
In as much as simulations are still a relatively new p henomeno n in o ur scho ol settings, it is expected that for anybody tr ying to design one, the fo llowing points should be considered.
a. Goals/Objectives of the game mu st be selected in what do you want to use it to teach?
b.
A process that would fit the set go als must be constructed.
c. Roles and sections to be exemplified must be identified and selected.
d. The behaviours expected to be exhib ited must be made as much like real life as possible.
e. Negotiating terms must be established, that is what do you use to negotiate, is it mo ney, goods, cards and so on?
f. Select the goals for which the nego tiation takes place, that is, what wo uld happen before I start negotiating and what do I gain from such negotiation?
68  g. Set rules for which behaviours or players h. Make pro visio ns fo r chances.
i.
Establish the limits of the game.
Teacher s would therefo re be expected to develo p values games that focus o n simulated rep lication of social problems, international relations and governmental functioning.
Application When teaching a topic like `problem o f teenage motherhood in our society", the teacher would be expected to work with his/her students to identify the causes, effects and prevention of accidents bo th at home and on our roads.
This is because; by the time he/she decid es to use simulatio n game to teach this topic, if he/she is not fully ar med with these areas o f focus he/she might not be able to carry the students along with him/her .
In constructing the pro cess that fits the set net go als, all the cau ses, effects and control measur es will co me into play on the bo ard game.
This will be in fo rm of an action demanding a response o f reaction.
So that at the end of the g ame developed and played, students would have learnt about why there is a high pr evelance of teenage motherho od inn their locality, what can be done to reduce the incidence, and their effects.
3.3: Discussion Technique and its Application in the Social Studies Classroom Discu ssio n as an instructional technique is verbal exchange led by the teacher or participants abo ut a specific topic.
Like Quartey (1984), rightly observes, discussion technique basically emphasises group interactio n. This is becau se it is oper ated within the premise of the fact that the knowledge and ideas of several people are mor e likely to find solutio ns o r answers to specified problems or issues.
Adeyoyin, (1988) sees the technique as tying together processes which fosters co-operation in learning.
This co-o peratio n beco mes essentially possible if the teacher creates opportunities for the exchange of pleasur able emotional experiences in the class, and allows for a warm and friendly relationship within the students.
The purpose of discussion as an instructional technique makes it a ver y important teaching- lear ning tool.
Kochnar, (1988) observes that it can be used to lay p lans fo r new work, share informatio n, clarif y ideas, in spite interests and make decisio n concerning future actions.
Oroge, (1995) also opines that discu ssion technique is a process o f free or gu ided interchange between member s of a group.
It o perates on the princip le that the knowledge and ideas of several people pooled together have a great mer it than those o f a sing le per son.
However, Lawal, (1999) noted that scholars like Corbin and Nwosu, (1980) are of the opinio n that in spite of its advantages and capability of contr ibuting meaningfully to learning, it mig ht create serious problem for learner s where the teacher or leader lacks imaginatio n and orga niz at ional abil it y.
When using this technique, we all have to bear in mind that the teacher should not necessar ily be the leader.
This implies that the lead er might be chosen by the group, the class teacher 69  himself/herself or his/her appointee.
For any discu ssion to be meaningful and successfu l, it is impo rtant that the follo wing are no ted and ensured: a.
Identify the leader right fro m the o nset; b.
Define the issue clearly at the onset; c. Prepare well for the discussio n; d. Stick to the topic as discu ssion pro gresses; e. Respect the view po ints of others (no `blind argu ments"); f. Be attentive to others contributions; g. Be o bjective (do not be emo tional); h. Use facts to suppo rt your statements; i.
Allow as many people as possible to take part; j.
Do not allow individuals to dominate the discussio n; k. Ask questions to clarify your doubts.
However, discussio n may take different fo rms; fo r example, we may have large group discussion, small group discussion, which incidentally can also be in form of pa ne l discussio n, brainstorming or round table.
Large Group Discussion: The teacher using this is expected to ensure the participation or involvement of every member of the group.
This could be by ensuring that the students sit in circle, semi-circle or even square, so that they would face each o ther during the discu ssion.
This will make it possible for non-participating students to be easily identified.
Small Group Discussion: This instructional technique is described by Quartey (1984), as that “which involves the breaking of the class into small gr oups to enable each person co ntribute effectively to a selected topic, an issue, a problem or a question".
The teacher is not expected to start using small g roup discussio n technique until he/she has exposed his/her students enough to working in committees.
This is because, this technique requ ir es independent working of students in groups, with assigned leaders, secr etary, and other participating students handling one responsibility or the other .
When this technique involves panel discussion, it is more or less a situatio n where panel members make so me presentations befo re a free d iscussio n sessio n is commenced.
Such free discussion session would involve the member s of the audience in constant questioning of the panel members.
It is ver y for mal.
Roundtable: Unlike the pr eceding one, the technique is quite informal altho ugh they have a lot of things in co mmon.
It is usually conducted in a more r elaxed atmosp here, where a moderator who is expected to be well informed will intro duce the problems, and keep the discussio n on.
He/she is equally expected to su mmarize the view points of the contributor s, and state the co nclusions arrived at.
In bo th cases, the size of the gro up is usually small (between three and eight).
70  Brainstorming: This could also be referred to a Buzz Group Technique.
Here, there is free flowing exchange of ideas on a given to pic.
The teacher or a student is expected to pose a problem, dilemma or issue.
The learners are expected to suggest in brief whatever answers or ideas they can think of.
All these responses or answer will first be accepted and reco rded by a fast writer.
By the time the brainsto rming exercise is over, the group will evaluate the ideas to gether in o rder to identify those they consider mo st realistic o r useful.
When forming any group, the teacher should endeavour to do it by interest gro up and let the class know that he/she will be asking for evaluatio n at the end of the exercise.
For any o f these techniques, it is impo rtant for the teacher using it to allo w himself/herself to be guided by those essentials alread y o utlined.
Application Any to pic or even controver sial issues in the Junior Secondar y Social Studies curricu lum can be taught with any of these discussion techniques provided the identified guidelines are respected.
3.4: Self Assessment Exercise 1.
What is simulatio n technique in Social Studies teaching?
2.
List any three discussion techniques.
3.
Highlig ht tho se essential factors that must be considered by a teacher using dramatisation as an instructional technique if he/she must successfu lly teach with it in class.
4.0: CONCLUSION Dramatisation, simulation and discussion techniques of teaching Social Studies demand versatility and commitment on the side of the teacher.
In situatio ns where he/she cannot generate relevant scripts for dramatisatio n, he/she is free to contact colleagues in the school who may be Eng lish Studies, Yoruba or Drama Educatio n specialists who will serve as resource person for this purpose.
Effective use of discussio n technique requires teacher's competence in the determination of the size of the students and space to be used.
It also involves making the right selection(s) from a mong t he va rious forms of discussio n technique ear lier d iscu ssed.
Simulation technique is one of the major techniques used in Social Studies to promote value oriented teaching.
Teachers have to develop keen interest in do ing a lot of classroom presentatio ns for them to effectively use this technique.
It demands the u se o f real life exper iences, which are replicated in the classroom for interaction.
The cho ice of post- presentatio n questio ns in form o f debriefing also matters.
It is po intless cho osing only co gnitive based questions; rather o ne expects the teacher to use mo re affective-based questions.
5.0: SUMMARY 71  In this Unit you have further lear nt about some other instr uctional techniques that help facilitate effective teaching and learning in the So cial Studies classr oom.
These techniques- dramatisation, simulation/instructional game and discussion are very useful for promoting learning in the three domains- co gnitive, affective and psychomotor.
Each demands specific actions and responsibilities fro m both the teacher and the learners.
It is therefore expected that you will take time o ff to lo ok at the So cial Studies curricu lum and attempt to put into practice these techniques by preparing dummy lesson plans showing how you will use each of them in your class.
6.0: TUTOR-MARKED ASSIGNMENT 1.
Describe the process you will adopt to produce a relevant instructional simulation board game to be used in a Social Studies class.
2.
Attempt a description of the different forms which discussion could take as a technique of teaching in Social Studies.
7.0: REFERENCES/FURTHER READINGS Adeyoyin, F. A.
(1988).
Teaching methodologies in Population Education Lagos: NERDC ASESP, (1994).
Social studies curriculum and teaching resource book for Africa.
Nairo bi : ASESP Lawal M. B.
(1999).
Values clarification, concept mapping strategies and students’ learning outcomes in junior secondary Social Studies Unpublished doctoral dissertation, University of Ibadan Lawal, M.B.
& Oyeleye, A. S. (2004) A pedagogy handbook for Social Studies pre- service and in- service teachers.
Lagos: A Triad Asso ciates Muyanda-Mutebi, P. & Yiga-Matovu, M. (1994) Social Studies curriculum and teaching resource book for Africa Na irobi:ASESP Secretariat NERC, (1983) .
Nigeria Primary Social Studies programme.
A working document on preparing what to teach for the Kano State ERC workshop.
NERDC (1988).
Teaching methodologies in Population Education: Population Education self learning module 12 Lagos: Population Education Dept.
Oroge, S. A.
(1995) .
An overview of teaching methodologies in Population/Family Life Education In NERDC, A POP/FLE handbook for classroom teachers Lagos: NERDC Preston, R. C. & Herman, W. L. Jnr.
, (1981).
Current research in elementary Social Studies New Yo rk: Crowell-Co llier-Macmillan Quartey, S. M. (1984).
A method book for Social Studies teachers Lago s: Refield Pub.
72  The Teacher Explorer Centre o f the UNO, (2003) 73  UNIT 4: PLANNING FOR EFFECTIVE TEACHING OF SOCIAL STUDIES CONTENTS 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objectives 3.
0 Main Content 3.1: What Co nstitutes Effective Teaching in Social Studies?
3.2: Lesso n Delivery Essentials in Social Studies Teaching 3.3: Self Assessment Exercise 4.0: Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutor Marked Assignments 7.0 References/Further Readings 1.0: INTRODUCTION By administr ative instrument Social Studies has become a core subject of offer ing at Basic Education level of Nigeria’s educational system.
This Unit will prepare yo u towards effective handling of the su bject at the Basic Education ( pr imary and junior secondar y school levels).
Specifically, it will acquaint yo u with what you need to sour ce for and do before you can confidently say that you are correctly teaching the subject- So cial St ud ies, in your c lassro om.
2.
0: OBJECTIVES By the end of your inter action with this Unit you should be able to: 1.
Identify tho se features that can be used to describe effective teaching in a Social Studies class.
2.
Identify the essentials of lesson planning for Social Studies teaching.
3.
Practically pr epare yourself for effective teaching of Social Studies at either the pr imar y or junior seco ndary level 3.0: MAIN CONTENT 3.1: What Constitute Effective Teaching of Social Studies?
Co mpr ehensive Guide Ltd., (1994) observes that in preparing any teaching programme, Social Studies inclusive there are usually six majo r components that should be considered.
These are: (i) Nature, Philo sophy and goals of the subject (ii) Objectives (iii) Conte nt -subject matter and learning experiences 74  (iv) Met hodology - strategies, techniques, scheme o f work and lesso n preparation (v) Resources - mater ia l and hum an (vi) E valua t io n - co ntinuous assessment and record keeping For instance, if o ne is preparing to teach Social Studies, the teacher must ask himself or herself for the nature, philo sophy and goals o f the discipline.
This can be fo und in the new 9-year Basic Education Curriculum document prescribed for the subject by the Nigerian Educational Research and Development Council (NERDC).
It is from such do cument that o ne would obtain the themes, topics, performance objectives, conte nt s, me thodology in terms of teacher and learners’ activities and recommended evaluatio n techniques.
The teacher is therefore expected to properly and adequately familiar ize himself/ herself with this document for effective and efficient preparation and performance on the jo b. His/her responsibilities also include breaking down curriculum topics/contents into teachable periods and schemes of work.
This is in terms of what is to be learned in a period of say thirty or forty minutes and in a week.
The Social Studies teacher would be able to boast of promoting effective teaching where he uses all the above in accordance with the goals and objectives of the subject.
He /she needs to have a clear view of the concept for each topic, the positive values, attitudes and skills to be developed through the teaching.
Effective teaching of Social Studies also demands that the teacher should have that ability to help develop in the learners, relevant situations that w ill make to reason and reflect on their thoughts before they take decisions.
3.2: Lesson Delivery Essentials To deliver lessons properly as laid out in the new 9- year Basic Educatio n C urr icu lum, there is need for the Social Studies teacher to plan his/her lesson.
When a teacher stands before his/her class to deliver a lesson, he/she must be clear in his/her mind what objectives he/ she intends to achieve.
Hence, he/she must prepare a detailed lesson plan containing preliminary information as regards the: Class Grade of students - which determines the choice of teachers and language of instruction.
Topic/sub- to pic 75  Concepts in focus Behavioural objectives Entr y behaviour - which must necessarily have a direct link w ith the new topic.
Contents -with emphasis on the three domains of learning depending on subject areas.
Instructional Resources Procedural steps - which must describe vividly the methodology, strategies, techniques and materials to be used in teaching the content and how such will be done.
Evaluatio n - In terms of specific items that will be used to test how well the students have learnt what has been taught.
Concrete efforts must be made to promote the evaluation of learning at the three domains (cognitive, affective and psychomotor) Follow up or Ass ignment - This will allow for students to be more active after learning any topic.
It must however not be a general task.
Rather make it specific and measurable.
Hence, in preparing any teaching programme, it is important for the teacher to raise three basic questions viz: 1. Who will be learning?
2.
What exactly will they learn?
3.
How will they learn?
The answers to these questions w ill go a long way in putting the teacher into a state of mind that will facilitate the process of the lesson.
All his/her choices of objectives, techniques and strategies must be SMART.
That is Specific, Measurable, Acceptable, Rewarding and Timely.
Once these have been considered, then the weekly lesson plan as well as the daily ones can then be prepared in any of the formats presented here i.e.
vertical or horizontal pr esentation.
76  SAMPLE WEEKLY LESSON PLAN TOPIC: ORGANISATION AND CO-OPERATION CLASS: J. S.S. TWO INSTRUCT TEACHER PUPILS' PERFORMAN CONCEP CONTENT IONAL S TOPIC CE TS S ACTIVITE OBJCTIVES RESOURC ACTIVITI S ES ES Organizati By the end of E ve ry 1.
Meaning of Pictures -Introducing - Answering on and the soc ie t y is o rganization showing the lesson raised Cooperatio lesson, students characteriz 2.
Meaning of v ar ious wit h questions n- shou ld be able ed cooperation cooperative act relevant - Reacting to Meaning to: by 3.
T ype s in d ifferent question.
p ic ture s. And Types 1.explain what or ganizatio o rganizat iono rganization - is meant by ns, 4.
Ways o f Part icip ati n organization.
which Promoting g 2. explain the promote or Cooperation in the meaning of de mote any discussio n cooperatio n. coo perative o rga ni sa tio n -Presenting and 3. list some living.
relevant asking type s of pict ur es to questions.
organization.
and - Answeri 4.describe ho w exp lain the ng cooperatio n can concepts of evaluation be promoted in o rganization- questions.
any organization - Guiding d iscussion on ways of pro mot ing cooperation in any o rganization - Evaluatin g the lesson using so me question s Organisatio By the end of The 1.Bene fits of Cases for -Introduce -Answering n the lesso n, success of living together study the lesson ra ised and students should any 2.
Importance with relevant q uestions.
Cooperatio be able to: of a good questions.
- 77  n- 1.
List the organisat io or ga nisat io n .
Present two -Listening Impo rtancei m portance of n is 3.
Proble m of cases to and people working living for stude nts cases determined problem together as a Together to presented by the group.
4.
Ways of study as by the amount of 2.
Explain why solvi ng the regards to teacher and coo peratio n a good problem t h e b e nefits reacting to orga nisat io n that exist of living t hem.
is necessary wit hi n it.
together and among people importance -Answering living together.
of a good questio ns organization.
o n - Questioning p roblems the students and the problem providing of living solutions to together and problems how such identified.
could be resolved.
- Part icipa tin - Evalua tin g in g t he evaluation.
lesson through some questions.
78  SAMPLE LESSO N NOTE DATE: 12th December 2009, SCHOOL: ABU GUMEL HIGH SCHOOL CLASS: J.S.S 3A-E KANO SUB JECT: SOCIAL STUDIES, TIME: 40minutes ENTRY BEHAVIOUR: Major ity of the students belong to groups and are used to seeing peo ple other than those in their group.
T O B C C M I P E D V A N OPIC BJCTIVES EHAVIOURA ONCEPTS ONTENT ATERIALS STRUCTION RESENTATIO VALUATION ES ALUES/ATTI SSIGNMENT L AL N TU S Cult u By the 1.
Meanin a. a.
Teacher Teacher The Ask the re e nd of Ide nt ifyin g of Different links the asks the topic students and the g cult ure.
pictures students students should to ide nt i lesson, wit h t he Cult ure showing w ith the the help compile ty the o nes means a var io us new topics fo llo wi the a list of student c ul ture particul c ul tural using the ng studen other should makes ar t raits entry objectiv ts cu ltural be able more group's and behaviour e d evelo tr aits to: permanen total instances asking the questio p which 1. t way of of following ns values so me explain 2. life.
cultural questions: taken like: ethnic what is Cult ural ident it y.
1 .
Can fro m a) groups Meanin you tell us Refield Respe use to meant appr eciati g of b.
Cases your Model ct for identify by on ide nt ity.
f or groups?
Objecti one's with is an It is a class 2.What ve cultur their culture ind icator physical study special Questio e b) dressin and of way of festivals ns Pr ide gs cultural showing do your and in mor es, ide ntit ide nt ity.
o ne's people Answer one's foods y. belongi do ?
s past hab its, 2. ng 3.What fo r JSS c) languag ide ntif to a language by Readi e etc.
y group s do your Lawal ness so me people & to Impo rta Cult ural speak?
Quartey d efen nce of cultura T raits , (1989) d the identify l trait s STEP II: 2.
With cultur ing with of Teacher one’s al one’s 79  the ir explains cultu re, p racti cu lture.
own the d emo nst ces of It loc alit y. meaning r ate one's allows 3. of culture so me lo calit the discuss and acts that y. cu lture how it ident ity depict to be is using how one respecte r esponse.
can d. import ident ify Preserv ant to with his ation of STEP III: cultu re.
cu ltural ide ntit Teacher heritage y shows the .
student s s ome pictures of different cultural traits and he asks them to react to t he m. STEP IV: He uses t he student s' response s to e xplain cultural traits and identity.
STEP V: He prese nt s a case on the importance of cult ur al identity for the student react to.
A brief session in form of quest ions l ike: 80  1................ .......... 2................ .......... 3................ ........... is conducted To turn any o f these tabular for m plans, into prose format, the teacher would just need to write it out in prose i.e remove it from the tabulation for m. 3.3: Self Assessment Exercise 1.
Highlight any five things you can use to confir m that your Social Studies teaching is an effective o ne.
2.
What are the essentials o f instructio nal delivery in Social Studies class?
4.0: CONCLUSION Effective teaching in Social Studies demands a high degree of commitment fr om the teacher.
This is in ter ms of his o r her ability to prepare regularly, detailed weekly and d aily lesson pla ns.
Ther e are equally some essential co mponents that mu st regularly reflect in such teaching plans, so that even when the teacher who prepared such lesson plans happens to be 81  unavo idably absent in class, somebody else who is equally qualified can effectively handle the class.
5.0: SUMMARY This Unit has offered you an opportunity to sharpen your skills in planning to teach the subject very effectively in your class.
From the interaction yo u had with this Unit it is clear that as So cial Studies teacher s you need to understand the definition, nature and philo sophy of the subject as well as tho se techniques and strategies for o rganizing the curricu lum co ntents to be delivered to your students, using the essential components of a good lesson pla n. 82  6.0: TUTOR-MARKED ASSIGNMENT a.
What is the important o f the acronymn SMART in lesson prepar atio n in Social Studies?
b.
Prepare a weekly lesson plan on a junior secondary Social Studies topic of your choice and a daily lesso n p lan on one of the sub-topic s. 7.0: REFERENCES/FURTHER READINGS Lawal, M. B.
& Oyeleye, A. S. (2004).
A pedagogy handbook for Social Studies pre-service and in-service teachers Lagos: A-Triads Associate Quartey, S. M. & Lawal, M. B.
(1989) Refeild model objective questions and answers for Social Studies Lagos: Refeild Pub.
83  MODULE THREE: INSTRUCTIONAL RESOURCE MATERIALS FOR EFFECTIVE SOCIAL STUDIES TEACHING Unit 1: Meaning and Pr inciples Guid ing the Selection and Utilisation of Instructional Resour ce Materials Unit 2: Types of Instruction Resource Mater ials and their Application in Social Stud ies C la ssroo ms Unit 3: Improvisation of Instructional Reso ur ce Materials in Social Studies Classrooms Unit 4: The Co mmunity as a Learning Resource in Social Stud ies UNIT 1: MEANING AND PRINCIPLES GUIDING THE SELECTION AND UTILISATION OF INSTRUCTIONAL MATERIALS CONTENTS 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objectives 3.
0 Main Content 3.1: Meaning of Instructional Reso urce Materials 3.2: Principles Guiding the Selection and Utilisation of Instructional Resource Materials 3.3: Facto rs that can Promote Effective Use of Instructional Resource Materials in Social Studies 3.4: Self Assessment Exercise 4.
0: Conclusio n 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutor Marked Assignments 7.0 References/Further Readings 1.0: INTRODUCTION Effective teaching in So cial Studies is of par amount importance at any po int in the classroom.
This is however impossible where the teacher is not ready to get familiar ised with a variety of instructional resource materials that can help reduce the number o f “teacher talk” times during a teaching-learning event.
It is therefor e expected that as teachers o f Social Studies yo u will beco me mo re co nversant with the variety o f instructional med ia you can choose from in order to make your interaction with the lear ners more meaning ful.
2.
0: OBJECTIVES By the end of your inter action with this Unit, you should be able to: 1.
Explain in simp le term the concept of instr uctio nal media o r instructional material reso urce.
2.
Identify the pr inciples guiding the selection and effective utilisation of instructional resource mat eria ls in the Soc ial St ud ies cla ssroom.
84  3.
Identify those factors that can pro mo te effective use of instructional material resources in the So cial St ud ies cla ssroom 3.0.
MAIN CONTENT 3.1: Meaning of Instructiona l Resource Mat erials Instru ctional r esource mater ials are so ftware and hardwar e that are used to mak e lessons more mean ingfu l and clearer to learners.
They are devises that appeal to multi model senses which help the learners conceive, perceive, inter nalize, interpr et and transfer the experiences gained to similar or different learning situations.
These materials and equ ipment, cou ld be those that appeal to the sense of hearing -known as audio material/ equipment those of seeing called visual materials/equipment and those that combine the two senses called audio-v isu al mater ials.
Olatunde (2006) quoting Schramm (1977) further descr ibes instructio nal reso ur ce materials as “infor mation carrying technologies that ar e used for instructional pur poses with the hope of delivering educational information ver y quickly and widely”.
Instructio nal mater ials or media is the mo der n term used for teach ing mater ials.
The med ia are the channels for communication used by both the teacher and the learners in and out of the classroom for effective teaching and lear ning.
W it h instructional media in use in a class, the teacher talks less while passing an intended message(s) in the class in a more effective and meaningful manner.
The So cial Stud ies teachers ar e therefor e exp ected to co nsid er and use these mater ials and equ ipment if effective lear ning must evo lve on a r egu lar basis in the classr oom.
3.2: Principles Guiding the Selection and Effective Utilisation of Instructional Resource Materials in the Social Studies Classroom Effective utilization of these instructional media demands that the Social Studies teacher must consid er six basic princip les, which are: 1.
Objective specification: That is, what do you hope to achieve by using the media/mediu m. Such objective create prop er learn ing enviro nment by g iving the learners clear and definite direction as well as providing scientific basis for valid evaluation instruments.
2.
Optimum fit: No o ne instru ctional material is best for all pur poses, and at all times to all learners.
So choose instructional mater ials that are appropr iate to instructional tasks and that can benefit as many learners as possible.
3.
Multi-media presentation: Wise and cr eative u se o f a var iety of media at different levels of lesson development can be effective in achieving various instructional objectives.
This allows for a var iety of lear ners to be reached easily.
However, too many instructio nal media that are not well coordinated and methodologically presented can create confusion in the classroo m. 4.
Environmental conditions/const raints: These could be physical, social or cultur al.
They are co nditions in which the instr uctional materials are utilized for learning and they have significant impact on the effectiveness of such mater ials.
85  5.
Preparation & preview: It is important for the teacher to prepare himself/herself well in advance, if the instructional media must be effectively utilized.
The materials must of necessity be previewed, sequentially arr anged in order of presentation.
6.
Evaluation: Instructional media needed to be evaluated in ter ms of suitability to the objectives, appeal to the learner s, cost-effectiveness and learner-achievement level.
Once all the pr inciples are considered before Social Studies teacher sets out for a lesso n, it is not impossible that his/her lesson will be quite fruitfu l. This is because, much is learnt and remembered when learners watch TV, read and see slides, discuss issues and engage in peer teaching using a var iety of instructional med ia.
3.3: Factors that Promote Effectiv e use of Instructional Media in Social Studies Effective utilizatio n o f any o r a combinatio n of these instructional r esource materials depends on a lot of factors, so me of which Akinmoyewa (2000) identifies as includ ing: 1.
Appropriat eness: That is, are they okay to the learner s’ ag e, so cio- cultural background, level of academic competence, and technological skill, so that it will be easier for the learners to acquire the behaviour the teacher intends them to exhibit?
2.
Levels of sophistication: This has to do with the class, the vocabulary, the rate at which content is presented, the type of visualization and the approach of the sub ject matter, in an effort to make sure that the material is suitable for the class and its sophistication does not obscure its usefulness.
3.
Availability: As a Social Studies teacher, one may know a number of good and even appropriate materials that can be used but these may not be available.
So it is important to consider the possibility of the material going round the students or its being available before considering and selecting such for use in the class.
4.
Technical quality: That is, carrying the message it is supposed to carr y.
If p ictur es are to be used, they must be clear and visible.
The use of electrically operated teaching materials such as slides, radio, video and television should ensure technical quality, hence, the intention could be counterproductive.
Having co nsider ed these factors, it is also important for the teachers to raise and answer the following q uestio ns befor e a final selectio n of the materials is mad e. These include: a.
Do I have a clear knowledge of the instructional media/ medium I want to use?
b.
Is the classroom envir onment suitable fo r the use of the media/mediu m?
c. Are the instru ctional med ia capable o f ensurin g the achievement o f the stated objectives?
d. Will the instructional media make the lesson clearer and more meaningful?
e. Are the instructio nal media in line with the methods or strategies selected?
It must however be noted that not every instructional media will be available at the disposal o f the Social Studies teachers.
Hence, he or she must acquire some skills in the impr ovisation o f instruc t io na l mat erials.
You will learn mo re about the concept o f impro visatio n in one of the Units after this one.
86  3.4: Self Assessment Exercise 1.
Define the term instructional media.
2.
Use the list of instructio nal materials provided in this Unit to categorise them into audio, visual and audio-visua l type s. 3.
List those factors that will guide yo u in the selectio n and utilization of instructional resour ce materials in yo ur class.
4.0: CONCLUSION Instructional media come in different forms and they exist for use in classroom for the purpose of making real what would have loo ked abstract before the learners.
The cho ice and use demand co nsiderations such as appropriateness and level of sophistication, so that the teacher does not end up complicating the lear ning situation for the students.
As Socia l St udie s teacher s, you need to be versatile in the choice and hand ling o f these resources for you to contribute meaningfully to teaching and learning in your class.
The teacher also needs to learn how to impro vise in areas where he or she cannot easily lay his or her hands o n alr eady provided ones either because they are costly o r they are not easily accessible.
5.0: SUMMARY You will agree with the writer of this Unit that effective teaching in Social Studies class requires making the experience real fo r the learners and that this will be near po ssible where the teacher does not consider the choice of a combination of instructional resource materials.
These mat erials come in a ud io, visua l a nd a udi o-visua l forms.
For you to effectively handle any o f them you need to follow some guiding principles and allow some essential factors to guide your choice and utilization.
6.0: TUTOR-MARKED ASSIGNMENT Effective use of instructional media in Social Studies demand s a conscious consideration of so me facto rs.
Discuss.
7.0: REFERENCES/FURTHER READINGS Olatunde, F. (2006).
Primary school Social Studies curriculum and methods Lago s: NOUN Lawal, M. B.
& Oyeleye, A. S. (2004).
A pedagogy handbook for Social Studies pre-service and in-service teachers Lagos: A-Triads Associate 87  UNIT 2: TYPES OF INSTRUCTION RESOURCE MATERIALS AND THEIR APPLICATION IN SOCIAL STUDIES CLASSROOMS CONTENTS 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objectives 3.
0 Main Content 3.1: Audio Reso urce Materials and their Use in Social Studies Classrooms.
3.2: Visua l Resource Materials and their Use in So cial Studies Classroo ms. 3.3: Audio- Visual Resource Materials and their Use in Social Studies C lassroo ms. 3.4: Self Assessment Exercise 4.
0: Conclusio n 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutor Marked Assignments 7.0 References/Further Readings 1.0: INTRODUCTION In the last Unit, you learnt about the meaning of instructio nal reso ur ce material, the principles guiding its usage and the factors yo u need to co nsider while selecting and using it.
As a follow up t o this, you need to be conversant with the variety of instructional r eso urce materials from which you would r egularly need to choo se fro m. This is exactly what this Unit is going to tell you abo ut.
You will learn abo ut the categories and characteristics of each o f the instructional resource materials and ho w to use them in your class.
2.
0: OBJECTIVES By the end o f your interaction with this Unit, you should be able to: 1.
Describe audio resource materials and use some o f t hem in the Social Studies classro om.
2.
Describe visual resource materials and use so me of them in the Social Studies classroo m. 3.
Describe audio -visual r eso urce materials and use some of them in the Social Studies classroo m. 3.0: MAIN CONTENT 3.1: Audio Resource Materials and their Use in Social Studies Classrooms Audio instructional resource materials are aids that promote effective and meaning ful listening as part of learning experiences in and out of the classroom.
They are teaching and learning resources that appeal to learner s’ sense of hearing.
The po ssibilities o f making dramatic, vivid presentation of So cial Studies content through sound give significance to available audio transcriptions, either on magnetic or audio cassette tapes or discs.
88  The audio resour ce mater ials therefore co me in fo rm of reco rdings fro m speeches, accounts of impo rtant histor ical events, and musical selectio ns.
Tape recorders, record players and rad io allow children to exercise to the fullest their listening comprehensio n. Teachers are will not be expected to neg lect the use o f these r eso urces as learning media.
For instance, getting childr en to listen to cultural programmes su ch as co ncerts, dr amatic productions, broadcast of historical events and news items from radio stations would go a long way in complementing classroom teaching as well as build in the learners an interest and awareness in current events.
Tape recorders can be used effectively for slow learner s and for improving the co mmunicatio n skills of the learners.
The teacher must ho wever prepare his/her learners adequately for the use of audio mater ials by particu larly ensur ing that there is no distraction.
3.2: Visual Resource Materials and their Use in Social Studies Classrooms These are instructional resour ce mater ials asso ciated with the learners’ sense of seeing (sig ht).
The use of visual materials is based on the wise saying that “ a picture is worth thousands of words”.
They could be symbols, images, sketches and drawings which the lear ners can see and get the necessar y message(s) being passed by the teacher.
They pr ovide direct first hand experience for the learners.
Examp les o f these include; the chalkboard, magic/marker board, flannel graph, wall charts, graphs, maps, d iagrams, pictures, newspaper cuttings, flash cards, bu lletin boar d, posters, collage, globes, sand table and salt maps.
The Social Stud ies teacher attempting to use any of these visual materials must make sure that they are p laced in strategic po sitions in the classr oom so that every lear ner can have access to it.
They must be made co lourfu l, attractive, interesting and less clumsy.
For them to be effectively used in the class, the teacher must be resourceful.
That is, he/she must be ready to search fo r the relevant ones either personally or through his/her students.
He/she must necessarily assist the learners in their understand ing of the natural setting of the visual reso urce particu larly when it is an o bject.
It does not hurt if the teacher decides to get the learners to construct some o f these visual reso urce mater ials for class use.
For instance, children can be made to learn how to construct and interpret graphs based on data they are studying o r collected.
Preston and Herman Jnr.
(1981) observed that children ar e often intrigued by cross-sectio nal diagra ms. After studying the diagrams, pupils may be encouraged to dr aw sections of structur es about which they are learning or about which they have detailed knowledge through fir st-hand o bser vatio n. This will ho wever depend on the age and level of the lear ners.
3.3: Audio-Visual Resource Materials and their Use in Social Studies Classrooms Learning and remembering can be better pr omoted where the teacher uses audio-visual instructional resource mater ials.
These are aids which encourage the use of more sensory organs such as sight, hearing, touching and even feeling.
The fact that Social Studies teaching 89  appeals to the three do mains of learning-cognitive, affective and psychomotor, there is that dire need for co ncrete illustrations which only audio-visual resour ce materials can provide.
The resource materials in this case are both audible and visible.
Typical examples include the t elevision, video cassettes, digital video discs (DVDs), video co mpact discs ( VCDs), and film strip projectors.
Effective use of any of these calls for a systematic planning.
When thinking about what will be appr opriate for your class it is important to consider the following: i.
The number o f students to use the resource( s).
ii.
The age of the students.
iii.
How abstract the content to be lear ned.
iv.
How complex is it to create or use the instructional resource material.
v. What instructional materials are available at home, in the schoo l or co mmunity from which the teacher can equally dr aw from with less stress.
So as So cial Studies teachers yo u will expected to use the instructio nal resource materials skillful ly wit h the le arners by ensuring t hat eno ugh time is given fo r discussion before and or after the presentation or involvement of the learner s. Yo u would also need to encourage your students to note the important messages being passed acr oss so that they could summarise the main points at the end of their interactio ns with the resource materials.
It is important to also note that computer and internet sources have now become very useful instructional r eso urce materials which cannot be directly categorized as done in the preceding paragraphs.
These are resources that provide active individual instruction at student’s pace and they give instant feedback.
There ar e also pheno menal which could be described as instr uctional media.
These include events, things featur es, settings and other co mmun ity resour ces that are dir ectly or indirectly apprehended by the learner s at their natur al or semi-natur al setting.
You will learn more about this in the last Un it o f this Mo du le 3.4: Self Assessment Exercise 1.
Differentiate between a visual resource material and an audio-visual t ype with co ncrete examples.
2.
What is an audio instructio nal resource material?
Cite any three examples.
4.0: CONCLUSION This Unit has been presented in such a way that teachers must necessarily accept the fact that the mor e concrete a learning experience is, the more it is likely to help learning and reme mber ing.
The various instructional resource materials presented in this Unit should therefore be accepted as effective tools of changing learning experience from being abstract to being concrete.
Teachers ho wever need to be more co nscious of the fact that they cannot derive maximum benefit from these instructional resource materials unless they kno w how to use them properly and what all of their possibilities are.
90  91  5.0: SUMMARY In this Unit, you have learnt about the various catego ries of instructional resource materials and the different ways of using them in the classroo ms.
Specifically, the categories discussed include audio, visual audio-visual and computer/internet sources.
They demand skilful usage and high degr ee of preparatio n from the teacher.
As So cial Studies teacher s it is expected you will demonstra te your mastery of their usage by combining a variety in your class witho ut necessarily cr eating confusion among your learners.
6.0: TUTOR-MARKED ASSIGNMENT a.
Select any visual and audio-visual med ia and describe ho w you will use the two to teach a Social Studies to pic of your cho ice at the junior seco ndary level.
7.0: REFERENCES/FURTHER READINGS Olatunde, F. (2006).
Primary school Social Studies curriculum and methods Lagos: NOUN Lawal, M. B.
& Oyeleye, A. S. (2004).
A pedagogy handbook for Social Studies pre- service and in-service teachers Lagos: A-Triads Associate Preston, R.C.
& Herman, W.L.
Jnr.
(1981).
Teaching Social Studies in the elementary school 5th ed.
New Yo rk: Ho lt, Rinehart and Winston 92  UNIT 3: IMPROVISATION OF INSTRUCTIONAL RESOURCE MATERIALS IN SOCIAL STUDIES CLASSROOMS CONTENTS 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objectives 3.
0 Main Content 3.1: The Concept of Improvisation in Social Studies 3.2: The Need and Importance o f I mprovisatio n in Socia l St ud ie s Cla ssrooms 3.3: Skills for Improvising Instructional Resource Materials in Social Stud ies C lassro oms 3.4: Self Assessment Exercise 4.
0: Conclusio n 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutor Marked Assignments 7.0 References/Further Readings 1.0: INTRODUCTION The quality of instructional resources available for any learner goes a long way to determine how mo tivated and active he/she would be in the teaching-learning process.
But experiences in the recent times have shown that it is beco ming increasing ly difficult fo r practising teacher s of mo st school subjects (social studies inclusive) to source fo r and utilise appr opriate instructional materials in their respective classrooms.
In this Unit, opportunity will be provided for you to have a detail insight into ho w you can acquire the skills necessar y fo r procur ing and improvising r elevant instructional resources for teaching social stud ies.
93  2.0: OB JECTIVES By the end of your interaction with this Unit, you should be able to: 1.
Define the concept of improvisation.
2.
Highlig ht the importance of impr ovisatio n towards the effective teaching o f Social Studies.
3.
Identify and descr ibe so me o f the sk ills needed by the teacher fo r impr ovising instructional resource materials in So cial Studies classro oms.
3.0: MAIN CONTENT 3.1: The Concept of Improvisation Hornby (1978) in the 3rd edition of Oxford Advanced Learner s’ Dictio nary of Curr ent English defines impr ovisation as “providing, making, or doing quickly in time of need, using whatever happens to be available”.
The proposed contextual usage o f the concept of improvisation would however not allow one to totally succumb to Hornby’s definition.
Hence, impro visatio n could ther efore be specially seen as an activity, embarked upon or initiated by a teacher purposely to address problems o f scarcity of instructio nal materials either due to economic or logistic reasons.
Alonge (1993) while sharing the same view, d escribes improvisation as “an activity in promoting curiosity, cr eating, excitement, alertness and endurance amo ng lear ner”.
It therefore implies that impro visation embr aces activities invented by a Social Studies teacher to ensure that a replica of scarce or costly instructio nal mater ials are produced or caused to be made pur po sely to promote effective teaching- learning.
Along this line, Eniayeju (1983) describes improvisation as the act of using alternative materials and resources to facilitate instruction whenever there is lack or sho rtage of some specific first hand teaching aids.
Such activity is a way o f minimizing cost o n equipment and materials.
Likewise, it is a means of local replication of the univer sality of some ideas.
This is coup led with the fact that it is an inexpensive method of widening the scope of inquir y in preparing for any teaching-learning activity.
94  3.2: The Need and Importance of Improvisation in Social St udies Class The teacher’s role in the development of a piece of learning material or apparatus is extremely important.
But the question is, when do es it beco me extr emely impo rtant fo r such teacher to embark on the develop ment o f such lear ning materials?
In find ing solution to this question, one needs to consider the present situation in the countr y.
In the first instance, the state o f the econo my in Nigeria today cannot be described as that which is capable of helping the schoo l system to source and sto re instructional materials for ready access by practising teachers.
Funds have become so scarce that all the government now strives to fulfill as a majo r obligatio n is the payment o f staff salar ies.
School administrators are therefore finding it difficult to stock their school audio-visual or educational technological centre with relevant instructional materials and equipment which teacher s can regularly fetch for use.
So practising Social Studies teacher s are expected to be less dependent on what the gover nment or school can pro vide in terms of teaching aids.
They are therefor e expected to be very alert, outward-loo king very creative, and be ready to produce relevant instructio nal mater ials for use in their classr ooms.
Closel y linked with this state of the natio n’ s economy is the dispositio n of the government towards procureme nt of imported instructional mater ials or equivalent e.g.
slides mounts, slide projecto rs, for use by teachers.
So it beco mes pertinent for teachers of Social Studies to think of improvising any instructional material which they could not get due to this reason.
Fur ther mo re, when teachers discover ed that the equipment or material they are sour cing looks too foreign or sophisticated for the group of learners they are relating with, there could also be the need to localise such resource for the benefit o f the lear ners.
By so doing, the inability of the learner s o r teachers to use the resource for technical or cultural reasons would have been addressed.
One other major sit ua t ion t ha t re gul arly ca lls for impr ovisation of resource materials in Social Studies class or any other class for that matter is the inability of the instructional material to go round the students’ population.
The pr actising So cial Studies teacher will not be expected to give up hope, but rather he/she will be expected to learn mo re to fabricate similar materials from ind igenous materials to compliment the few available o nes.
95  3.3: Skills for Improvising Instructional Resources The skills requir ed for improvising instructional resources in any So cial Studies class are shro uded in the phrase “cop ing with limited resources”.
That is, it is only a skilful teacher who is capable o f deter mining when resources are limited that he/she can effectively impr ovise and still make his/her students learn.
However, effective impr ovisation in the Social Studies class requires a detail and in-depth co ntent analysis of the curriculum in use.
This is with the desire to acquaint him/herself with the recommended instructional materials.
Such acquaintances will o ffer the teacher the opportunity to discover early enough, equipment or material requiring improvisation.
This will therefo re allow actions to be stepped up on time fo r the procurement and development of such scarce or co stly instructional material( s) or equipment.
A quick rundown of Social Stud ies instructional mater ials that might requ ire improvisation as co ntained in the relevant curriculum include: film strips, slides, maps/charts, commercial but educative posters, models, transparencies etc.
To improvise any o f these materials effectively in class, the teacher must be read y to raise and answer the following questions during and after improvisation exercise.
These include: a.
What does the improvised material seek to promote?
b.
Will it further the interest and cur iosity of the lear ners?
c. Will it provide the desired skills in the learner s?
d. Is it simple, dur able and read ily rep licable?
e. What is the aesthetic rating of the improvised material or equipment?
f. Is the classr oom envir onment suitable for the use of the improvised materials?
These are all pertinent questions, the answer s to which are capable of facilitating an ef fective teaching- lear ning process in Social Studies.
96  Nevertheless, the teacher tr ying to improvise still needs to acquire some basic sk ills, the acronym of which Lawal (1997) tagged “MR.
GLOPPOC”.
That is: • Mechanical Manipulation: which allows one to draw, sketch, cut, glaze and paint if need be.
• Reflective Thinking: which allows one to think fast but critically, about alternative r eso urces in case of scarcity and their suitability.
• Gathering: which puts one at an advantage to “scout round” for relevant mater ials to be put together to pro duce improvised mater ial.
• Locating Information: which is a demonstration of currency as regards source(s) of information and materials that could be useful for pr ompt and easy development of the improvised teaching aids.
• Observation: this concer ns the alertness that could help to regular ly discover the need for improvisation.
• Planning: which concer ns ability to reco gnise the need fo r impro visatio n and work towards it systematically.
It facilitates the successful production of the mater ials.
• Problem-Solving: It is the “mother of all the skills”.
This is because it is that which enco mpasses all other skills.
A goo d use of this skill increases the chances of producing usefu l and relevant improvised instructional materials.
• Organising: This is closely related to the skill of planning.
It depicts the teacher ’s capability to put ever ything being developed in proper shape for eventual use.
• Controlling situation: This is the skill that assists the teacher in managing crisis situation that has to do with limited or scarce instructional resour ces.
With this sk ill, the teacher will no t unnecessar ily panic.
The utility value o f each and all of these skills can be demo nstrated with the following typical examples of impr ovising i nst ruc t ional ma te rials in a So cia l Studies classro om.
97  Slides/slide film improvisation: Procuring slides mounts and films might beco me a major problem for a Social Studies teacher.
But if he/she has the sk ill of pr oblem solving, lo cating infor matio n, gathering and manipu lation, these can be easily addressed within a very short time.
Fo r instance, the teacher could pro cure cheap board of low grammage or cardboard which co uld be cut into strip s to make the frame of the normal size of a slide mo unt.
These stripes can be glued to form a 2” X”2 slide mount.
As for the slide films, one could employ the procedure recommend ed by the African Social and Environmental Studies Pr ogramme (ASESP, 1994) in one of its publications.
The materials reco mmended fo r use shall include: i. clear adhesive paper o r tape (o ne or two-inc h wide ).
i i. thin glass square 2” X”2 iii.
scissors iv.
bowl o f water v. pr inted matter or pictures from paper such as magazines or catalogues that stick.
Procedure i. Co ver the printed matter or picture with ad hesive paper or tape a little larger than two -inch square.
i i.
Place a piece of paper over the tape (to protect it from scratches) and rub with f lat stick pressing fairly hard to rub out all the little air bu bbles under the tape.
This seals the tape to the picture.
iii.
Cut the picture cover ed with tape into two-inch square (the size of a slide).
iv.
Lay the p icture covered with tape in a bowl o f water and allo w to soak for at least one or two minute(s) until yo u can begin to rub off the back of the picture o n the tape.
v. Gently rubbing the back o f the tape, the paper residu e will rub off, leaving the transfer printed matter or picture on the sticky tape.
vi.
When all residue is remo ved, place the adhesive tape with the image (stick y side do wn) on the 2” X”2 thin glass square.
vi.
B lot away excess water , and place a clean p iece of paper over image to the slide.
The slide is ready to be placed on the slide pro jector.
If however you don’t have a slide pr ojector, a clean scho ol windo w where the sun can shine thro ugh it beco mes your projector.
Transpa rencies: These can be made u sing the same procedure employed fo r slide films, pro vided the teacher is quite sk ilful.
But this time, a wider adhesive paper or tape 98  is required.
Rather than placing the produced transparency on 2” X”2 thin glass square, the produced transparency could be laid on a thin acrylic sheet or a piece of clean plastic grocery bag (Nylon).
The same impr ovised pro jector could also be used in case the teacher cannot lay his hand on an overhead projecto r ( OHP).
Other instructional materials that could be impro vised using similar skill include-d isp lay boar ds, like bulletin board, posters and co llage thr ee-d imensional materials lik e mo del, a mo bi le, a di o-rama, and graphic materials like maps, charts and graph.
3.4: Self Assessment Exercise 1.
Give a simple definition o f improvisation.
2.
State four reasons that can make you support improvisatio n of resource materials in Socia l St udie s c lass.
4.0: CONCLUSION Effective teaching o f So cial Studies at any level requires that a var iety of instr uctio nal resource materials must be considered and used.
However, we are also aware that it might not be easy at all times for the teacher to access ever y mater ial needed to promo te meaningfu l teaching in his/her class.
It is therefore expected that improvised materials will be sourced by the teacher to co mplement existing and easier sourced instructio nal resource materials.
It is ho ped that as Social Studies teachers you will consider factors like appropriateness, level of sophistication, cost of effectiveness and technical qu ality o f materials to be improvised before embarking on such activities for any teaching- learning process.
5.0: SUMMARY In this Unit, you have interacted with the concept of impr ovisation and the need for effective teaching in the schoo l system through impro visatio n o f instructio nal mater ials.
A crit ica l attempt was mad e to examine the reaso ns that could regularly demand improvisation from the Socia l Studies teacher .
The need to carry out a content analysis o f the curr iculu m and the reco mmended instr uctio nal materials in order to be mo re read ily available for the demand of 99  improvisation was emphasised.
Attempt was also made to acquaint you with the sk ills requ ired fo r effective improvisation.
Typical application o f su ch skills was demonstrated using slides and transparencies.
6.0: TUTOR-MARKED ASSIGNMENT 1.
Establish the ratio nale for getting involved in the production of improvised instr uctional resource materials.
2.
What skills wou ld you need to effectively carr y out impr ovisatio n o f instr uctio nal resource materials for meaningful learning in a Social Studies class?
7.0: REFERENCES/FURTHER READINGS Alonge, E. I.
(1983): Improvisation in integrated science: A practical demonstration.
Science Teacher Associatio n of Nigeria.
24th Annual Conference Proceedings pa 171 – 181 ASESP (1994).
Social studies curriculum and teaching resource book for Africa Nairo bi: ASESP Secretariat Eniayeju, A.
(1983): Improvisation in integrated science: A practical demonstration.
Science Teachers Association o f Nigeria – 24th Annual Conference Proceedings 187- 190 Federal Ministr y of Education (1992).
Training Guide for Master Trainers in Social Studies.
Ibadan Comprehensive Guide Limited.
Hornby, A. S. (1978): Advanced Learner’s Dictionary of Current English.
3rd Edition.
Oxfo rd University Press.
Lawal, M. B.
(1997).
Enhancing in-service teachers’ skill in procuring and improving instructional resources for junior secondary studies.
Journal of Continuing Education (1) 1 June 36-44.
100  UNIT 4: THE COMMUNITY AS A LEARNING RESOURCE IN SOCIAL STUDIES CONTENTS 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objectives 3.
0 Main Content 3.1: Catego ries of Community Resources for Social Studies Teaching 3.2: Importance of Commu nity Reso ur ces fo r So cial Studies Teaching 3.3: Self Assessment Exercise 4.0: Conclusio n 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutor Marked Assignments 7.0 References/Further Readings 1.0: INTRODUCTION Scho ols and centres exist within particular communities, and each community has much to offer as a resource to teachers planning curriculum for young children.
Teachers need to assess and access what the community can provide.
In this Unit , you will ac quir e mor e knowledge and skills for addressing any inadequacy that might be experienced while sour cing for instr uc tio na l mat erials for So cial Studies teaching.
This is in t erms o f impr ovising resource materials where it is difficult to get the actual resource materials that may be required fo r meaningful teaching and learning in Social Studies.
2.0:OBJECTIVES By the end of your inter action with this Unit you should be able to: 1.
Describe the categories of co mmunity resources that can be used for Social Studies teaching 2.
Highlight the impo rtance of community resources for Social Studies teaching 3.0: MAIN CONTENT 3.1: Categories of Community Resources for Social Studies Teaching Carol Gestwick i (2007) categor ized commu nity resources into three main gro ups which are; natural reso urces, people resources, and materials resour ces.
Natural Resources Within reach fro m a school, teachers may find business, shopping areas, transportation systems and depots, co nstruction sites, police and fire stations, parts and recreation areas, churches, zoos, museums, and residential streets.
Each one of these offers countless learning exper iences.
It is a 101  useful exercise for the So cial Studies teacher to walk the areas within ten minutes walking distance of his/her school, to discover all the places that might be intr iguing from a young child’s point of view.
There mig ht be, fo r example, a tr adi t io na l instit ut io n or pa lac e where childr en could vi sit and inter view the rulers o r keepers o n topics relevant to what they are go ing to be or have been taugh t. They could also visit hi st orica l sit es, natio nal parks, zoos, game reser ve and other places where they would be opportune to have direct and first-hand experiences that ar e of direct relevance to the contents of their curricu lum in So cial Studies.
Alert teachers are therefor e expected to use these natural community reso urces to desig n curricu lum outside and inside the classroom.
People Resources Every neighbourhood has its own socioeconomic and cultural composition.
Teachers who familiarise themselves with the custo ms and life-styles of the people in the co mmunity surrounding their school, may find r ichness and diversity to share with the childr en.
Parents themselves may be the link to assist teachers in learning the community’s peo ple resources, as they d isclose aspects of their home lives.
For example, teachers may find neighbour s experienced in ethnic coo king or traditional music who co uld share their interest with the children.
Many co mmunity service agencies have representatives prepared to explain the agency to young children e.g.
a fire-fig hter, complete with bo ots, hat, and heavy co at; a medical doctor in his/her ful l pr ofessio nal out fit kit ted to enter a theatre etc.
Teachers who notice the people in neighbourhoods surrounding their school, may d isco ver others who wo uld have interest in spending time with young children e.g.
a retired chief matron would enj oy ta lking to children on how to avo id incidence of teenage motherhood and pregnancy.
People reso urces of all types can enrich the school Material Resources Gestwicki (2007) remarks that teachers who make “co mmunity connectio ns” can find their classrooms rec ip ients of many objects children can use.
Manufacturing co mpanies located that are contiguo us to the school commu nity can be contacted to donate materials needed for practical teaching o f so me to pics in the So cial Studies class.
Sawmill industries may be contacted to provide scraps usable in constructing models that can be used as instructional materials in the class.
The GSM netwo rk companies such as GLO, MTN o r ZAIN may o ffer old telephone sets, more inviting for their r ealism.
Large packing cases fr om the local appliance o r furniture store can be transformed into storage o r play spaces.
The decorating shop’s wall paper, and samp le boo ks can be used in dozens of ways by creative So cial Studies teacher s. Teachers sho uld make lists of all co mmunity businesses and then brainstorm all possible material reso urces.
Most businesses like to fee l they can make a contribution.
Parents are often helpful connections in identifying and obtaining material resources.
All o f these “commu nity connections” can enr ich curriculum offer ing s, as well as convey evidence of commu nity interest and suppo rt for teachers and families.
102  3.2: Importance of Community Resources for Social Studies Teaching Instructional media such as events, things, features, settings, festivals and other community resources that are d ir ectly appr ehended by the lear ners at their natural or semi-natural setting constitute part of what can be descr ibed as pheno menals.
Usually, community resources help to br ing the learners in d irect co ntact with learning experiences.
They help pro vide the lear ners with fir st-hand experience of the realities of their social and physical environments.
Co mmunity resources such as resource per sons, museu ms, aquarium, zoo s, farms, beaches, caves, warm spr ings, and historical site s facilitate learning experiences that can leave more lasting impressions in the learners’ mind s. Commu nity reso urces equally assist the teacher to easily overcome the limitations of the classroo m, by making the inaccessib le accessible.
Fo r a very resour ceful Social Studies teacher, his/her ability to explore the use o f commu nity resources reduces the financial costs of go ing to procure instructional resource materials which sometimes might even be d ifficu lt to access.
The use also makes it possible for the lear ners to operate in familiar ter rain manipulating familiar situations and relating with situations that will not necessar ily be too complex for them to hand le.
Commu nity reso ur ces also stimulate aesthetic talents, they pro mote tactile stimulus and enhance identification and attachment not to only nature but also with the particular learning situation they facilitate socialisatio n pr ocess.
This class of media deals mo stly with the affective but does not preclude the psychomotor and the cognitive domains.
The effects o f direct contact on the lear ners can hard ly be under estimated.
3.3: Self Assessment Exercise 1.
List any three categories o f commu nity resources.
2.
Give any three reasons why the u se o f community resources should be embraced by the Social Studies teacher.
103  4.0: CONCLUSION Commu nity resources are essential instructional reso urce materials which Socia l St udie s teacher s must lear n to so urce for if he/she must contribute effectively to meaningful learning in the classroo m. They co me in different fo rms and are in abundance for the teacher to explore, provided he/she is ver y reflective in his thoughts and actions so that it will be easier to identify these resources and make r elevant cho ices regu larly.
Ever y place, event, festival, pr ofessio nal and other lo cal r esources of interest are therefo re of relevance when we talk o f co mmunity resour ces that can be used for teaching different co ntent areas in the Social Stud ies curriculum at different levels of Niger ia’s educatio nal syst em.
5.0: SUMMARY You have learnt about the var ious categories o f commu nity resources and their impo rtance in the teaching and learning of Social Studies.
They could be natural r eso urces, peo ple resources and mater ial resources.
Teacher s must accept that these r esources are of paramount impo rtance particu larly when it is remembered that other instructional resource materials co uld be expensive to pro cure and sometimes inaccessib le.
6.0: TUTOR-MARKED ASSIGNMENT Attempt a categorizatio n of commu nity resources and establish why it is important for the Social Studies teacher to consider their usage in his/her class.
7.0: REFERENCES/FURTHER READINGS Esu, A.
E.O., Umoh, S. J.
& Obi, F. B.
(1995).
Pedagogy of environmental education Lagos: Macmillan Pub.
Gest wicki, C. (2007).
Home, school and community relations USA: Delmar Cengag e Learning 104  105
