ELEMENTS OF ENG 162 DRAMA Course GuideCOURSE GUIDE ENG162 COURSE GUIDE ENG162 ELEMENTS OF DRAMA Course Developer/Writer Onyeka Iwuchukwu National Open University of Nigeria Lagos.
Course Editor Prof. A.R.
Yesufu National Open University of Nigeria Lagos Programme Leader Christine Ofulue Ph D. National Open University of Nigeria Victoria Island, Lagos NATIONAL OPEN UNIVERSITY OF NIGERIA iiCOURSE GUIDE ENG162 National Open University of Nigeria Headquarters 14/16 Ahmadu Bello Way Victoria Island Lagos Abuja Office No 5 Dar es Salam Street Off Aminu Kano Crescent Wuse II, Abuja Nigeria e-mail: centralinfo@nou.edu.ng URL: www.nou.edu.ng Published by: National Open University of Nigeria First Printed 2008 ISBN: 978-058-149-9 All Rights Reserved iiiNoneCOURSE GUIDE ENG162 CONTENTS PAGE Introduction ............................................................................ 1 Course Aims ........................................................................... 1 Course Objectives ................................................................... 1 Working Through this Course................................................. 1 – 2 Course Materials..................................................................... 2 Study Units ………………………………………………… 2 – 3 Text Book and References...................................................... 3 Assessment File… .................................................................. 3 Tutor-Marked Assignments .................................................... 3 Final Examination and Grading ............................................. 3 Course Marking Scheme…………………………………….
4 Presentation Schedule............................................................. 4 Course Overview and Presentation………………………….
4 – 5 How to Get the Most from this Course ….............................. 5 – 7 Tutor and Tutorials ................................................................. 7 Summary…………………………………………………….
7 iiiNoneCOURSE GUIDE ENG162 Introduction Welcome to ENG162: Elements of Drama This course is a two unit course available in the second semester of the first year BA English Language programme.
The course serves as a foundation course in the study of dramatic literature.
It exposes you to forms, theories and concepts.
You will also read some plays which are used to illustrate the above.
The materials have been developed with the Nigerian context in view.
This course guide provides information on the organization and requirements of the course.
Course Aims The aims are to help you understand the concept of drama and the function of drama in the society.
These broad aims will be achieved by: (i) Introducing you to the study of drama as a literary genre (ii) Familiarizing you with the unique characteristics of drama (iii) Acquainting you with techniques that will enable you read, appreciate and analyze plays.
(iv) Preparing you for further studies in drama Course Objectives There are twenty units in the course and each unit has its objectives.
You should read the objectives of each unit and bear them in mind as you go through the unit.
On your successful completion of this course, you should be able to: (a) Define drama.
(b) Understand the concepts and principles that you need for the study and enjoyment of a play.
(c) Recognize and explain the elements of drama.
(d) Explain the dramatic genres (e) Recognize the dramatic techniques in a play (e) Analyse dramatic texts (f) Enjoy and appreciate any dramatic performance.
Working Through this Course To complete this course, you are required to read the study units, the recommended plays and other related materials.
You will be required to undertake some exercises for which you need a pen, a note-book, and other materials that will be listed in this guide.
At the end of each unit, 1COURSE GUIDE ENG162 you will be required to submit written assignments for assessment purposes.
At the end of the course, you will write a final examination.
Course Materials The major materials you will need for the course are: 1.
Course Guide 2.
Study Units 3.
Textbooks 4.
Assignments File 5.
Presentation Schedule Study Units The breakdown of the twenty study units are as follows: Module 1 Concepts and Definition Unit 1 Drama as a Genre of Literature Unit 2 Origin and Functions of Drama Unit 3 Elements of Drama: Imitation.
Unit 4 Elements of Drama: Plot.
Unit 5 Elements of Drama: Action Unit 6 Elements of Drama: Dialogue.
Module 2 Conventions and Techniques Unit 1 Dramatic Technique: Characterization.
Unit 2 Other Dramatic Techniques.
Unit 3 Dramatic Conventions.
Module 3 Dramatic Genres Unit 1 Forms/ Types of Drama: Tragedy, Comedy, Tragi-Comedy, Melodrama Module 4 Textual Analysis Unit 1 Analysis of Texts Unit 2 Textual Analysis: Oedipus Rex by Sophocles Unit 3 Textual Analysis: Hamlet by William Shakespeare Unit 4 Textual Analysis: Death of a Salesman by Arthur Miller 2COURSE GUIDE ENG162 Module 5 Textual Analysis Unit 1 Textual Analysis: Song of a Goat by J. P. Clark Unit 2 Textual Analysis: Arms and The Man by George Bernard Shaw Unit 3 Textual Analysis: The Marriage of Anansewa by Efua Sutherland Unit 4 Textual Analysis: The Lion and the Jewel.
Textbooks and Other References Every unit contains a list of references and further readings.
Try to get as many as possible of those textbooks and materials listed.
The textbooks and materials are meant to deepen your knowledge of the course.
Assessment File An assessment file and a marking scheme will be made available to you.
In the assessment file, you will find details of the works you must submit to your tutor for marking.
There are two aspects of the assessment of this course; the tutor marked and the written examination.
The marks you obtain in these two areas will make up your final marks.
The assignment must be submitted to your tutor for formal assessment in accordance with the deadline stated in the presentation schedule and the assignment file.
Tutor-Marked Assignment You will have to submit a specified number of the Tutor-Marked Assignment.
Every unit is this course has a tutor marked assignment.
You are required to attempt all questions, and you will be assessed on all of them but the best four performances from the Tutor-Marked Assignment will be used for your 30% grading.
When you have completed each assignment, send it together with a Tutor-Marked Assignment form, to your tutor.
Make sure each assignment reaches your tutor on or before the deadline for submissions.
If for any reason, you cannot complete your work on time, contact your tutor for a possible extension.
Extensions will not be granted after the due date unless under exceptional circumstances.
Final Examination and Grading The final examination will be a test of two hours and you will be examined in all areas of the course.
Find time to read the units all over before your examination.
The final examination will constitute 70% of your final grade and you will be required to answer three questions.
3COURSE GUIDE ENG162 Course Marking Scheme The following table lays out how the actual course mark allocation is broken down.
Assessment Marks Assignment 1-4 (the best four of Four assignments, marked out of 10% all assignments submitted) totaling 30% Final Examination 70% of overall course score Total 100% of course score Presentation Schedule The dates for the submission of all assignments will be communicated to you.
You will also be told the date of completing the study units and dates for examinations.
Course Overview and Presentation Unit Title of work Weeks Assessment Activity (End of Unit) Course NATURE OF Guide DRAMA: CONCEPTS AND Module 1 DEFINITIONS Unit 1 Drama as a Genre of Week 1 Assignment 1 Literature Unit 2 Origin and Functions of Week 2 Assignment 2 Drama Unit 3 Elements of Drama: Week 3 Assignment 3 Imitation Unit 4 Elements of Drama: Plot Week 3 Assignment 4 Unit 5 Elements of Drama: Week 4 Assignment 5 Action Unit 6 Elements of Drama: Week 4 Assignment 6 Dialogue Module 2 CONVENTIONS AND TECHNIQUES Unit 1 Dramatic Technique: Week 5 Assignment 1 Characterization Unit 2 Dramatic Technique: Week 5 Assignment 2 Foreshadowing, Setting, Planting, Flashback etc.
Unit 3 Dramatic Conventions Week 6 Assignment 3 4COURSE GUIDE ENG162 Module 3 FORMS/ TYPES Unit 1 Tragedy, Comedy, Week 7 Assignment 1 Tragi-Comedy, Melodrama, Farce Module 4 TEXTUAL ANALYSIS I Unit 1 Analysis of Texts Week 8 Assignment 1 Unit 2 Oedipus Rex by Week 9 Assignment 2 Sophocles Unit 3 Hamlet by William Week 10 Assignment 3 Shakespeare Unit 4 Death of a Salesman by Week 11 Assignment 4 Arthur Miller Module 5 TEXTUAL ANALYSIS II Unit 1 Song of a Goat by Week 12 Assignment 1 J.P.Clark Unit 2 Arms and the Man by Week 13 Assignment 2 George Bernard Shaw Unit 3 The Marriage of Week 14 Assignment 3 Anansewa by Efua Sutherland Unit 4 The Lion and the Jewel Week 15 Assignment 4 by Wole Soyinka How to Get the Most from this Course You will be required to study the units on your own.
However, you may arrange to meet with your tutor for tutorials on an optional basis at a study centre.
Also you can organize interactive sessions with your course mates.
In distance learning, the study units replace the university lecture.
This is one of the great advantages of distance learning; you can read and work through specially designed study materials at your own pace, and at a time and place that suits you best.
Think of it as reading the lecture instead of listening to the lecturer.
In the same way a lecturer might give you some reading to do, the study units tell you when to read, and which are your text materials or set books.
You are provided exercises to do at appropriate points, just as a lecturer might give you an in-class exercise.
Each of the study units follows a common format.
The first item is an introduction to the subject matter of the unit, and how a particular unit is integrated with the other units and the course as a whole.
Next to this is a set of learning objectives.
These objectives let you know what you should be able to do by the time you have completed the unit.
These learning objectives are meant to guide your study.
The moment a unit is finished, 5COURSE GUIDE ENG162 you must go back and check whether you have achieved the objectives.
If this is made a habit, then you will significantly improve your chances of passing the course.
The main body of the unit guides you through the required reading from other sources.
This will usually be either from your set books or from a Reading section.
The following is a practical strategy for working through the course.
If you run into any trouble, telephone your tutor.
Remember that your tutor's job is to help you.
When you need assistance, do not hesitate to call and ask your tutor to provide it.
1 Read this course guide thoroughly, it is your first assignment.
2 Organise a study schedule.
Design a 'Course Overview' to guide you through the Course.
Note the time you are expected to spend on each unit and how the assignments relate to the units.
Important information, e.g.
details of your tutorials, and the date of the first day of the semester is available from the study centre.
You need to gather all the information into one place, such as your diary or a wall calendar.
Whatever method you choose to use, you should decide on and write in your own dates and schedule of work for each unit.
3 Once you have created your own study schedule, do everything to stay faithful to it.
The major reason that students fail is that they get behind with their course work.
If you get into difficulties with your schedule, please, let your tutor know before it is too late for help.
4 Turn to Unit 1, and read the introduction and the objectives for the unit.
5 Assemble the study materials.
You will need your set books and the unit you are studying at any point in time.
6 Work through the unit.
As you work through the unit, you will know what sources to consult for further information.
7 Keep in touch with your study centre.
Up-to-date course information will be continuously available there.
8 Well before the relevant due dates (about 4 weeks before due dates), keep in mind that you will learn a lot by doing the assignment carefully.
They have been designed to help you meet the objectives of the course and, therefore, will help you pass the examination.
Submit all assignments not later than the due date.
9 Review the objectives for each study unit to confirm that you have achieved them.
If you feel unsure about any of the objectives, review the study materials or consult your tutor.
10 When you are confident that you have achieved a unit's objectives, you can start on the next unit.
Proceed unit by unit through the course and try to pace your study so that you keep yourself on schedule.
11 When you have submitted an assignment to your tutor for marking, do not wait for its return before starting on the next unit.
Keep to 6COURSE GUIDE ENG162 your schedule.
When the Assignment is returned, pay particular attention to your tutor's comments, both on the tutor-marked assignment form and also the written comments on the ordinary assignments.
12 After completing the last unit, review the course and prepare yourself for the final examination.
Check that you have achieved the unit objectives (listed at the beginning of each unit) and the course objectives (listed in the Course Guide).
Tutors and Tutorials Information relating to the tutorials will be provided at the appropriate time.
Your tutor will mark and comment on your assignments, keep a close watch on your progress and on any other difficulties you might encounter and provide assistance to you during the course.
You must take your tutor marked assignments to the study centre well before the due date (at least two working days are required).
They will be marked by your tutor and returned to you as soon as possible.
Do not hesitate to contact your tutor if you need help.
Contact your tutor if: you do not understand any part of the study units or the assigned readings; you have difficulty with the exercises; you have a question or problem with and assignment, with your tutor’s comment on an assignment.
You should try your best to attend the tutorials.
This is the only chance to have face-face contact with your tutor and ask questions which are answered instantly.
You can raise any problem encountered in the course of your study.
To gain the maximum benefit from course tutorials, prepare a question list before attending them.
You will learn a lot from participating in discussions actively.
Summary The course guide gives you an overview of what to expect in the course of this study.
The course teaches you the concept of drama, its origins, its elements, the basic techniques and how these techniques are applied in textual analysis.
It also acquaints you with dramatic conventions, how to analyze plays.
Finally in this course, you will read seven plays.
We wish you success in the course and hope that you will find it both interesting and useful.
7
