 NATIONAL OPEN UNIVERSITY OF NIGERIA SCHOOL OF MANAGEMENT SCIENCE ANALYSIS FOR BUSINESS DECISIONS COURSE CODE: BUS 406 COURSE TITLE: BUS 406: ANALYSIS FOR BUSINESS DECISIONS 1  COURSE GUIDE Course Writer: KINGSLEY U. UTAM School of Management Science, National Open University of Nigeria, Victoria Island, Lagos.
Course Editor: Programme Leader: Dr. O. J. Onwe School of Management Science, National Open University of Nigeria, Victoria Island, Lagos.
Course Coordinator: Dr. James Obi School of Management Science, National Open University of Nigeria, Victoria Island, Lagos.
2 1.0 INTRODUCTION BUS 406: Analysis For Business is a three credit course for students offering B.Sc.
Business Administration in the School of Management Science.
The course will consist of sixteen (16) units, that is, four modules of four (4) units for each module.
The material has been developed to suit undergraduate students in Business Administration at the National Open University of Nigeria (NOUN) by using an approach that treats Analysis for Business Decisions.
A student who successfully completes the course will surely be in a better position to manage operations of organizations in both private and public organizations.
The course guide tells you briefly what the course is about, what course materials you will be using and how you can work your way through these materials.
It suggests some general guidelines for the amount of time you are likely to spend on each unit of the course in order to complete it successfully.
It also gives you some guidance on your tutor-marked assignments.
Detailed information on tutor-marked assignment is found in the separate assignment file which will be available in due course.
2.0 WHAT YOU WILL LEARN IN THIS COURSE This course will introduce you to some fundamental aspects of Analysis for Business Decisions, Elements of Decision Analysis, Types of Decision Situations, Decision Trees, Operational Research, Approach to Decision Analysis, System Analysis, Modelling in OR, Simulation, Cases for OR Analysis, Mathematical Programming, Transportation Model, Assignment Model, Game Theory, Project Management, Inventory Control, Sequencing.
3.0 COURSE AIMS The course aims, among others, are to give you an understanding of the intricacies of Business Decision Analysis and how to apply such knowledge in making real life decisions, and managing production and operations units in both private and public enterprises.
The Course will help you to appreciate Rationale behind Analysis for Business Decisions , Elements of Decision Analysis, Types of Decision Situations, Decision Trees, Operational Research, Approach to Decision Analysis, System Analysis, Modelling in OR, Simulation, Cases for OR Analysis, Mathematical Programming, 3 Transportation Model, Assignment Model, Game Theory, Project Management, Inventory Control, Sequencing.
The aims of the course will be achieved by your ability to:  Identify and explain Elements of Decision Analysis;  Identify and use various criteria for solving problems in different decision situations;  discuss the decision tree and solve problems involving the general decision tree and the secretary problem;  Trace the history and evolution of operation research OR;  Explain the different approaches to decision analysis;  discuss the concept of system analysis and identify the various categories of systems;  Describe model and analyse the different types of models;  Defined simulation and highlight the various types of simulation models;  Solve different types of problems involving Linear Programming;  Explain what transportation problem is all about and solve transportation problems;  Discuss the elements of assignment problem solve decision problems using various assignment methods;  Apply various techniques in solving gaming problems.
 Solving inventory problem using the Critical Path Methods (CPM) and the Programme evaluation and Review Techniques (PERT);  Identify and solve problems using the sequencing techniques.
4.0 COURSE OBJECTIVES By the end of this course, you should be able to:  Identify and explain Elements of Decision Analysis;  Identify and use various criteria for solving problems in different decision situations;  discuss the decision tree and solve problems involving the general decision tree and the secretary problem;  Trace the history and evolution of operation research OR;  Explain the different approaches to decision analysis;  discuss the concept of system analysis and identify the various categories of systems;  Describe model and analyse the different types of models;  Defined simulation and highlight the various types of simulation models; 4  Solve different types of problems involving Linear Programming;  Explain what transportation problem is all about and solve transportation problems;  Discuss the elements of assignment problem solve decision problems using various assignment methods;  Apply various techniques in solving gaming problems.
 Solving inventory problem using the Critical Path Methods (CPM) and the Programme evaluation and Review Techniques (PERT);  Identify and solve problems using the sequencing techniques.
5.0 WORKING THROUGH THIS COURSE To complete this course, you are required to read all study units, attempt all the tutor marked assignments at the end of each study unit.
You would need to study carefully, the principles and concepts guiding each of the topics in the course in this material Analysis for Business Decisions provided by the National Open University of Nigeria (NOUN).
You will also need to undertake practical exercises for which you need access to a personal computer running a suitable Windows for which you have command over.
Each unit contains self-assessment exercises, and at certain points during the course, you will be expected to submit assignments.
At the end of the course is a final examination.
The course should take you about a total of 20 weeks to complete.
Below are the components of the course, what you have to do, and how you should allocate your time to each unit in order to complete the course successfully on time.
6.0 COURSE MATERIALS Major components of the course are:  Course Guide  Study Units  Textbooks  Assignment file 5 7.0 STUDY UNITS The study units in this course are as follows: MODULE 1 Unit 1: Elements of Decision Analysis Unit 2: Approaches to Decision Analysis Unit 3: Types of Decision Situations Unit 4: Decision Trees MODULE 2 Unit 5 : Operations Research (OR) Unit 6: Modelling In Operations Research Unit 7: Simulation Unit 8: Systems Analysis MODULE 3 Unit 9: Mathematical Programming (Linear Programming) Unit 10: The Transportation Model Unit 11: Assignment Model Unit 12: Project Management MODULE 3 Unit 13: Sequencing Unit 14: Games Theory Unit 15: Inventory Control Unit 16: Case Analysis 8.0 ASSIGNMENT FILE In this course, you will find all the details of the work you must submit to your tutor for marking.
The marks you obtain for these assignments will count towards the final mark you obtain for this course.
Further information on assignments will be found in the assignment file itself and later in the section on assessment in this course guide.
There are 16 tutor-marked assignments in this course; the student should attempt all the 16.
9.0 PRESENTATION SCHEDULE The presentation schedule included in your course materials gives you the important dates for this year for the completion of tutor-marked assignments (TMAs) and attending tutorials.
Remember, you are required to submit all your 6 assignments by the due date.
You should guard against falling behind in your work.
10.0 ASSESSMENTS There are two aspects to the assessment of the course: first are the tutor-marked assignments; and second is a written examination.
In tackling the assignments, you are expected to apply information, knowledge and techniques gathered during the course.
The assignments must be submitted to your tutor for formal assessment in accordance with the deadlines stated in the PresentationSchedule and the Assignment File.
The work you submit to your tutor will count for 30% of your total course mark.
At the end of the course, you will need to sit for a final written examination of ‘three hours’ duration.
This examination will also count for 70% of your total course mark.
11.0 TUTOR-MARKED ASSIGNMENT (TMAs) There are fifteen tutor-marked assignments in this course and you are advised toattempt all.
Aside from the course material provided, you are advised to read and research widely using other references (under further reading) which will give you a broader viewpoint and may provide a deeper understanding of the subject.
Ensure all completed assignments are submitted on schedule before set deadlines.
If for any reasons, you cannot complete your work on time, contact your tutor before the assignment is due to discuss the possibility of an extension.
Unless in exceptional circumstances, extensions may not be granted after the due date for the submission of assignments.
12.0 FINAL EXAMINATION AND GRADING The final examination for this course will be of ‘three hours’ duration and have a value of 70% of the total course grade.
All areas of the course will be assessed and the examination will consist of questions, which reflect the type of self-testing, practice exercises and tutor-marked problems you have previously encountered.
All areas of the course will be assessed.
Utilise the time between the conclusion of the last study unit and sitting for the examination to revise the entire course.
You may find it useful to review your self-assessment tests, tutor-marked assignments and comments on them before the examination.
13.0 COURSE MARKING SCHEME The work you submit will count for 30% of your total course mark.
At the end of the course, you will be required to sit for a final examination, which will also count for 70% of your total mark.
The table below shows how the actual course marking is broken down.
7 Table 1: Course Marking Scheme ASSESSMENT MARKS Assignment 4 (TMAs) 4 assignments, best 3 will be used for the Continuous Assessment = 10 x 3 = 30% Final Examination 70% of overall course marks Total 100% of course marks 14.0 ASSIGNMENT FILE Unit Title of work Weeks Activity Unit Title of work Weeks Assessment activity (end of unit) 1 Elements of Decision Analysis 1 2 Approaches to Decision 1 Analysis 3 Types of Decision Situations 1 4 Decision Trees 1 5 Operations Research (Or) 1 6 Modelling In Operations 1 Research 7 Simulation 1 8 Systems Analysis 1 9 Mathematical programming 1 (Linear Programming) 10 The Transportation Model 1 11 Assignment Model 1 12 Project Management 1 13 Sequencing 1 14 Games Theory 1 15 Inventory Control 1 16 Case Analysis 1 Revision Total 16 15.0 TUTORS AND TUTORIALS There are 15 hours of tutorials provided in support of this course.
You will be notified of the dates, times and location of these tutorials, together with the names and phone numbers of your tutor, as soon as you are allocated a tutorial group.
8 Your tutor will mark and comment on your assignments, keep a close watch on your progress and on any difficulties you might encounter as they would provide assistance to you during the course.
You must submit your tutor-marked assignments to your tutor well before the due date (at least two working days are required).
They will be marked by your tutor and returned to you as soon as possible.
Do not hesitate to contact your tutor by telephone, e-mail, or discussion group if you need help.
The following might be circumstances in which you would find help necessary, when:  you do not understand any part of the study units or the assigned readings.
 you have difficulty with the self-tests or exercises.
 you have a question or problem with an assignment with your tutor’s comment on an assignment or with the grading of an assignment.
You should try your possible best to attend the tutorials.
This is the only chance to have face-to-face contact with your tutor and to ask questions which are answered instantly.
You can raise any problem encountered in the course of your study.
To gain the maximum benefit from course tutorials, prepare a question list before attending them.
You will learn a lot from participations in discussions.
16.0 SUMMARY BUS 406: Analysis for Business Decisions intends to expose the undergraduate students to the fundamental tools and techniques for analysing business decision problems.
Upon completing the course, you will be equipped with the necessary knowledge required to produce a good research work.
We hope you enjoy your acquaintances with the National Open University of Nigeria (NOUN).
We wish you every success in your academic endeavour.
9 BUS 406 ANALYSIS FOR BUSINESS DECISIONS COURSE GUIDE Course Writer: KINGSLEY U. UTAM School of Management Science, National Open University of Nigeria, Victoria Island, Lagos.
Course Editor: Programme Leader: Dr. O. J. Onwe School of Management Science, National Open University of Nigeria, Victoria Island, Lagos.
Course Coordinator: Dr. James Obi School of Management Science, National Open University of Nigeria, Victoria Island, Lagos.
10 TABLE OF CONTENTS MODULE 1 Unit 1: Elements of Decision Analysis Unit 2: Approaches to Decision Analysis Unit 3: Types of Decision Situations Unit 4: Decision Trees MODULE 2 Unit 5 : Operations Research (OR) Unit 6: Modelling In Operations Research Unit 7: Simulation Unit 8: Systems Analysis MODULE 3 Unit 9: Mathematical Programming (Linear Programming) Unit 10: The Transportation Model Unit 11: Assignment Model Unit 12: Project Management MODULE 3 Unit 13: Sequencing Unit 14: Games Theory Unit 15: Inventory Control Unit 16: Case Analysis 11 MODULE 1 UNIT 1: ELEMENTS OF DECISION ANALYSIS 1.0 INTRODUCTION 2.0 OBJECTIVES 3.0 MAIN CONTENT 3.1 WHAT IS A DECISION?
3.2 WHO IS A DECISION MAKER?
3.3 DECISION ANALYSIS 3.4 COMPONENTS OF DECISION MAKING 3.4.1 DECISION ALTERNATIVES 3.4.2 STATES OF NATURE 3.4.3 THE DECISION 3.4.4 DECISION SCREENING CRITERIA 3.5 PHASES OF DECISION ANALYSIS 3.6 ERRORS THAT CAN OCCUR IN DECISION MAKING 4.0 CONCLUSION 5.0 SUMMARY 6.0 TUTOR MARKED ASSIGNMENT 7.0 REFERENCES 1.0 INTRODUCTION Business Decision Analysis takes its roots from Operations Research (OR).
Operation Research as we will learn later is the application of scientific method by interdisciplinary teams to problems solving and the control of organized (Man- Machine) systems so as to provide solution which best serve the purpose of the organization as a whole (Ackoff and Sisieni 1991).
In other words, Operations Research makes use of scientific methodsand tools to provide optimum or best solutions to problems in the organization.
Organisations are usually faced with the problem of deciding what to do; how to do it, where to do it, for whom to do it etc.
But before any action can be taken, it is important to properly analyse a situation with a view to finding out the various alternative courses of action that are available to an organization.
Operations Research helps the organisation with the job of critically analysing a situation and finding out the various alternatives available to choose from.
OR also helps the organization to identify the best alternative available there by enabling the enterprise to make the most rational decision after having identified and analysed all available alternatives.
12 In the light of the above, it could be said that Operations Research provides the scientific process, tools, techniques, and procedure for optimum decision in business analysis.
In this chapter, we shall concern ourselves with those critical elements and tools that organisations utilise to make sound decisions.
2.0 OBJECTIVES By the end of this study unit, you should be able to: 1.
Define a decision 2.
Define a decision maker 3.
Describe the components of Decision making 4.
Outline the structure of a decision problem 5.
Differentiate between States of nature and alternatives 6.
Identify the errors that occur in decision making 7.
Describe the phases in decision analysis 8.
Explain different approaches to making good decisions 3.0 MAIN CONENT 3.1 WHAT IS A DECISION?
A decision can be defined as an action to be selected according to some pre- specified rule or strategy, out of several available alternatives, to facilitate a future course of action.
This definition suggests that there are several alternative courses of action available, which cannot be pursued at the same time.
Therefore, it is imperative to choose the best alternative base on some specified rule or strategy.
Decision making is the process of selecting the best out of several alternatives.
3.2 WHO IS A DECISION MAKER?
A decision maker is one who takes decision.
It could be an individual or a group of individuals.
It is expected that a good decision maker should be skilled in art of making decisions.
He is also expected to apply all necessary procedure, rules and techniques in arriving at the best alternative which will either maximize wellbeing or profit, or minimize losses, or help to achieve any other objective or goal that has been set.
3.3 DECISION ANALYSIS Decision making is a very important and necessary aspect of every human endeavour.
In life, we are faced with decision problems in everything we do.
Individuals make decisions daily on what to do, what to wear, what to eat etc.
13 Every human being is assumed to be a rational decision maker who takes decisions to improve his/her wellbeing.
In business, management have to make decision on daily bases on ways to improve business performance.
But unlike individual decision making, organizational or business decision making is a very complex process considering the various factors involved.
It is easy to take decision for simple situation but when it gets complex, it is better not to rely on intuition.Decision theory proves useful when it comes to issues of risk and uncertainty (Adebayo et al 2010).
When making decisions involving risk and uncertainty, it is important to apply complex rules, techniques and procedures in analysing the various factors involved in the decision situation.This is where the question of decision analysis comes in.
Decision Analysis has been defined as a logical procedure of balancing the factors that influence a decision.
According to Howard (2004), the procedure incorporates uncertainties, values, and preferences in a basic structure that involves the decision.
Typically, it includes technical, marketing, competitive, and environmental factors.
Considering risk and uncertainty factors in the process of decision making and applying relevant methods to manipulate these factors enable organizations to make sound decisions.
Adebayo et al(2010) describe decision analysis as a scientific technique that consists of a collection of principles and methods whose principal objectives is the aid decision making by individuals, groups of individuals, management of organization and others who have to make one decision or the other.
In decision analysis, complex decision problems are broken down into smaller elements which may be probabilistic, differential or value oriented.
3.4 COMPONENTS OF DECISION MAKING Earlier, we stated that complex decision problem involve risk and an uncertainty and as such, certain logic, rules, procedures should be applied when analysing such situation.
The major components that constitute risk and uncertainty in decision making are:  Decision alternatives  States of Nature  The decision itself  Decision screening criteria We now briefly discourse each of these components.
3.4.1 DECISION ALTERNATIVES These are alternative courses of action available to the decision maker.
The alternatives should be feasible, and evaluating them will depend on the availability 14 of a well-defined objective.
Alternative courses of action may also be seen as strategies or options from which the decision maker must choose from.
It is due to the existence of several alternatives that the decision problem arises.
If there were only one course of action, then there will be no decision problem.
Alternatives present themselves as: (a) Choices of products to manufacture, (b) Transportation roots to be taken, (c) Choice of customer to serve, (d) Financing option for a new project, (e) How to order job into machines,etc.
3.4.2.
STATES OF NATURE A state of nature is a future occurrence for which the decision maker has no control over.
All the time a decision is made, the decision maker is not certain which states of nature will occur in future, and he has no influence over them (Taylor III, 2007).
For instance, if a company has a contract to construct a 30km road, it may complete the construction of the full stretch of road in six months in line with a laid down plan.
But this plan will be hinged on the possibility that it does not rain in the next six months.
However, if there is consistent heavy rain for the first three months, it may delay the progress of work significantly and as a result, prolong the completion date of the project.
But if actually there is no occurrence of heavy rainfall, the company is likely to complete the road as scheduled.
In this situation, the state of nature is the occurrence of heavy rainfall and no rainfall.Therefore, the state of nature that occurred after a decision has been made will determine the outcome of the decision.
States of nature could be market conditions, economic conditions, customer taste, state of goods, competition, political situation, weather condition, and other future occurrences that are not known to the decision maker and which he neither has control over nor could manipulate.
3.4.3.
THE DECISION The decision itself is a choice which is arrived at after considering all alternatives available given an assumed future state of nature.
In the view of Dixon-Ogbechi (2001), “A good decision is one that is based on logic, considers all available data, and possible alternative and employs quantitative technique” she further noted that, occasionally, a good decision may yield a bad result, but if made properly, may result in successful outcome in the long run.
15 3.4.4 DECISION SCREENING CRITERIA In the section above, we mentioned that the decision itself is a choice which is arrived at after considering all other alternatives.
Consideration of alternative courses of action is not done arbitrarily, it is done using some standardize logic or methodology, or criterion.
These criteria form the basis upon which alternatives are compared.
The strategy or alternative which is finally selected is the one associated with the most attractive outcome.
The degree of attractiveness will depend on the objective of the decision maker and the criterion used for analysis (Ihemeje 2002).
They could be a variety of objectives of the decision maker.
The most prominent among business objectives include maximization of profit, and minimization of cost.
We shall see how all these will be put into action later.
IN TEXT QUESTION (1) Define a decision.
(2) Who is a decision maker?
(3) What do you understand by states of nature?
(4) What is decision analysis?
(5) List the two most prominent business objectives.
3.5 PHASES OF DECISION ANALYSIS The process of analysing decision can be grouped into four phases.
These four phases from what is known as the decision analysis cycle.
They are presented as follows:  Deterministic Analysis Phase: This phase accounts for certainties rather than uncertainties.
Here, graphical and diagrammatic models like influence diagrams and flow charts can be translated into mathematical models.
Necessary tools are used for predicting consequences of alternatives and for evaluating decision alternatives.
 Probabilistic Analysis: Probabilistic analyses cater for uncertainties in the decision making process.
We can use the decision tree as a tool for probabilistic analysis.
 Evaluation Phase: At the phase, the alternative strategies are evaluated to enable one identify the decision outcomes that correspond to sequence of decisions and events.
 Choice Activity Phase: This is the final phase of the decision analysis cycle.
It is the judgemental stage where the decision maker decides on the best strategy to adopt having carefully analyses all other options.
3.6 ERRORS THAT CAN OCCUR IN DECISION MAKING The following are possible errors to guide against when making decisions.
16  Inability to identify and specify key objectives: Identifying specific objectives gives the decision maker a clear sense of direction.
 Focusing on the wrong problem:This could create distraction and will lead the decision maker to an inappropriate solution.
 Not giving adequate thoughts to trade-offs which may be highly essential to the decision making process.
 Not taking uncertainty and risk into consideration.
 Lack of foresight about plan especially when decision has some risk over time.
4.0 CONCLUSION In life, decisions are made every moment a human being acts or refuses to act.
Decision can be made either as single individuals or as group of individuals or as organizations.
Those decisions are made in order to meet laid down goals and objectives which in most cases are aim to bring about improvement in fortunes.
However, most organizational decisions are complex and cannot be made using common sense.
In that case, scientific methods, tools, procedures, techniques and processes are employed to analyse the problems with a view to arriving at optimum solution that will meet the objectives of the organization.
Therefore, Business decision analysis as a field takes care of the process of analysing complex decision situation using scientific methods and arriving at the best possible solution.
5.0 SUMMARY In this unit, the elements of decision analysis were discussed.
It began with defining a decision, and who a decision maker is.
Further, it considers the components of Decision making, structure of a decision problem and finally errors that can occur in decision making.
This unit provides us with concepts that will help us in understanding the subsequent units and modules.
6.0 TUTOR MARKED ASSIGNMENT (1) Who is a Decision Maker?
(2) Define Decision Analysis.
(3) List and explain the components of decision.
(4) Identify and explain the phases in the decision analysis cycle.
(5) What are the errors that can occur in making decisions?
17  7.0 REFERENCES Ackoff, R. and Sisieni, M. (1991), Fundamentals of Operations Research, New York: John Wiley and Sons Inc. Adebayo, O.A., Ojo, O., and Obamire, J. K. (2006), Operations Research in Decision Analysis, Lagos: Pumark Nigeria Limited.
Churchman, C.W.
et al (1957), Introduction to Operations Research, New York: John Wiley and Sons Inc. Howard, A (2004) Speaking of Decisions: Precise Decision Language.
Decision Analysis, Vol.
1 No.
2, June).
Ihemeje, J.C. (2002) Fundamentals of Business Decision Analysis, Ibadan: Sibon Books Limited.
Shamrma, J.K (2009) Operations Research Theory & Application 18  UNIT 2: APPROACHES TO DECISION ANALYSIS 1.0 INTRODUCTION 2.0 OBJECTIVES 3.0 MAIN CONTENT 3.1 MAIN APPROACHES TO DECISION ANALYSIS 3.1.1 QUALITATIVE APPROACH TO DECISION MAKING 3.1.2 QUANTITATIVE APPROACH 3.2 OBJECTIVE OF DECISION MAKING 3.3 STEPS IN DECISION THEORY APPROACH 3.4 DECISION MAKING CRITERIA 3.4.1 MAXIMAX CRITERION (CRITERION OF OPTIMISM) 3.4.2 MAXIMIN CRITERION (CRITERION OF PESSIMISM) 3.4.3 MINIMAX REGRET CRITERION (SAVAGE CRITERION) 3.4.4 EQUALLY LIKELY OF LAPLACE CRITERION (BAYES’ OR CRITERION OF RATIONALITY 3.4.5 HURWICZ CRITERION (CRITERION OF REALISM) 4.0 CONCLUSION 5.0 SUMMARY 6.0 TUTOR MARKED ASSIGNMENT 7.0 REFERENCES 1.0 INTRODUCTION In unit 1, we discussed what the subject Decision Analysis is all about we defined a decision, decision maker, business decision analysis and threw light on various components involved in Business Decision Analysis.
In this unit, we shall proceed to explaining the different approaches used in analysing a decision problem.
Two key approaches present themselves – Qualitative Approach, and the Quantitative Approach.
These two broad approaches from the core of business decision analysis.
They will be broken down into several specific methods that will be discussedthroughout in this course of study.
2.0 OBJECTIVES After studying this unit, you should be able to: (1) Identify the qualitative and quantitative approaches to decision analysis.
(2) Identify the qualitative and quantitative tools of analysis.
19 (3) Use the Expected monetary value (EMV) and Expected opportunity (EOL) techniques in solving decision problems.
(4) Solve decision problems using the different criteria available.
2.0 MAIN CONTENT 3.1 MAIN APPROACHES TO DECISION ANALYSIS As identified earlier, the two main approaches to decision analysis are the qualitative and quantitative approaches.
3.1.1 QUALITATIVE APPROACH TO DECISION MAKING Qualitative approaches to decision analysis are techniques that use human judgement and experience to turn qualitative information into quantitative estimates (Lucey 1988) as quoted by Dixon – Ogbechi 2001).
He identified the following qualitative decision techniques (1) Delphi Method (2) Market Research (3) Historical Analogy According to Akingbade (1995), qualitative models are often all that are feasible to use in circumstances, and such models can provide a great deal of insight and enhance the quality of decisions that can be made.
Quantitative models inform the decision maker about relationships among kinds of things.Knowledge of such relationships can inform the decision maker about areas to concentrate upon so as to yield desired results.
Akingbade (1995) presented the following examples of qualitative models: (1) Influence diagrams.
(2) Cognitive maps.
(3) Black box models.
(4) Venn Diagrams.
(5) Decision trees.
(6) Flow charts etc.
(Dixon – Ogbechi 2001) Let us now consider the different qualitative approaches to decision making.
Delphi Method: The Delphi method is technique that is designed to obtain expert consensus for a particular forecast without the problem of submitting to pressure to conform to a majority view.
It is used for long term forecasting.
Under this method, a panel is made to independently answer a sequence of questionnaire 20 which is used to produce the next questionnaire.
As a result, any information available to a group of experts is passed on to all, so that subsequent judgements are refined as more information and experience become available (Lucey 1988).
Market Research: These are widely used procedures involving opinion surveys; analysis of market data, questionnaires designed to gage the reaction of the market to a particular product, design, price, etc.
It is often very accurate for a relatively short term.
Historical Analogy: Historical Analogy is used where past data on a particular item are not available.
In such cases, data on similar subjects are analysed to establish the life cycle and expected sales of the new product.
This technique is useful in forming a board impression in the medium to long term.
(Lucey (1988) as quoted by Dixon-Ogbechi (2001)).
3.1.2 QUANTITATIVE APPROACH This technique or approach lends itself to the careful measurement of operational requirements and returns.
This makes the task of comparing one alternative with another very much more objective.
Quantitative technique as argued by Dixon- Ogbechi (2001), embraces all the operational techniques that lend themselves to quantitative measurement.
Harper (1975) presents the following quantitative techniques.
(a) Mathematics: Skemp (1971) defined Mathematics as “a system of abstraction, classification and logical reasoning.
Generally, Mathematics can be subdivided into two i.
Pure Mathematics ii.
Applied Mathematics Pure Mathematics is absolutely abstract in not concerning itself with anything concrete but purely with structures and logical applications, implications and consequences of such structures.
Applied Mathematics is the application of proved abstract generalization (from pure Mathematics) to the physical world (Akingbade, 1996) Both pure and applied Mathematics can be broken into the following subdivisions.
(1) Arithmetic (2) Geometry (3) Calculus (4) Algebra (5) Trigonometry 21 (6) Statistics (b) Probability: Probability is widely used in analysing business decisions, Akingbade (1996) defined probability as a theory concerned with the study of processes involving uncertainty.
Lucey (1988) defined probability as “the quantification of uncertainty”.
Uncertainty may be expressed as likelihood, chance or risk.
(c) Mathematical Models: According to Dixon-Ogbechi (2001), A Mathematical model is a simplified representation of a real life situation in Mathematical terms.
A Mathematical model is Mathematical idealization in the form of a system proposition, formula or equation of a physical, biological or social phenomenon (EncartaPremium, 2009).
(d) Statistics: Statistics has been described as a branch of Mathematics that deals with the collection, organization, and analysis of numerical data and with such problems as experiment design and decision making (Microsoft Encarta Premium, 2009).
3.2 OBJECTIVE OF DECISION MAKING Before a decision maker embarks on the process of decision making he/she must set clear objectives as to what is expected to be achieved at the end of the process.
In Business decision analysis; there are two broad objectives that decision makers can possible set to achieve.These are:  Maximization of profit, and  Minimization of Loss Most decisions in business fall under these two broad categories of objectives.
The decision criterion to adopt will depend on the objective one is trying to achieve.
In order to achieve profit maximization, the Expected Monetary Value (EMV) approach is most appropriate.
As will be seen later, the Expected Value of the decision alternative is the sum of highlighted pay offs for the decision alternative, with the weight representing the probability of occurrence of the states of nature.
This approach is possible when there are probabilities attached to each state of nature or event.
The EMV approach to decision making is assumed to be used by the optimistic decision maker who expects to maximize profit from his investment.
The technique most suitable for minimization of loss is the Expected opportunity loss (EOL) approach.
It is used in the situation where the decision maker expects to make a loss from an investment and tries to keep the loss as minimum as possible.
22 This type of problem is known as minimization problem and the decision maker here is known to be pessimistic.
The problem under the EMV approach is known as a maximization problem as the decision maker seeks to make the most profit from the investment.
These two approaches will be illustrated in details in the next section.
3.3 STEPS IN DECISION THEORY APPROACH Decision theory approach generally involves four steps.
Gupta and Hira (2012) present the following four steps.
Step 1: List all the viable alternatives The first action the decision maker must take is to list all viable alternatives that can be considered in the decision.
Let us assume that the decision maker has three alternative courses of action available to him a, b, c. Step 2: Identify the expected future event The second step is for the decision maker to identify and list all future occurrences.
Often, it is possible for the decision maker to identify the future states of nature; the difficulty is to identify which one will occur.
Recall, that these future states of nature or occurrences are not under the control of the decision maker.
Let us assume that the decision maker has identified four of these states of nature: i, ii, iii, iv.
Step 3: Construct a payoff table After the alternatives and the states of nature have been identified, the next task is for the decision maker to construct a payoff table for each possible combination of alternative courses of action and states of nature.
The payoff table can also be called contingency table.
Step 4: Select optimum decision criterion Finally, the decision maker will choose a criterion which will result in the largest payoff or which will maximize his wellbeing or meet his objective.
An example of pay off table is presented below.
Contingency table 1 Alternative States of nature i ii iii iv a a a a a i ii iii iv b b b b b i ii iii iv c c c c c i ii iii iv 23 Fig2.1: An example of the payoff table.
As we can see from the payoff table above, a,b,c are the alternative strategies, i, ii, iii, iv are the states of nature.
Therefore the decision maker has identified four states of nature and three alternative strategies.
Apart from the alternative strategy column and the raw representing the states of nature, other cells in the table are known as condition outcomes.
They are the outcomes resulting from combining a particular strategy with a state of nature.
Therefore we can say that the contingency table shows the different outcomes when the states of nature are combined with the alternatives.
3.4 DECISION MAKING CRITERIA There are five criteria with which a decision maker can choose among alternatives given different states of nature.
Gupta and Hira (2012) are of the view that choice of a criterion is determined by the company’s policy and attitude of the decision maker.
They are: (1) Maximax Criterion or Criterion of Optimism (2) Maximin Criterion or Criterion of Pessimism (Wald Criterion) (3) Minimax Regret Criterion (Savage Criterion) (4) Laplace Criterion or Equally likely criterion or criterion of Rationality (Bayes’ Criterion) (5) Hurwicz Criterion or Criterion of Realism Now let us see how we can solve problems using the above criteria.
Example 2.1: Consider the contingency matrix given below Contingency table 2 Alternative Market Demand Products High Moderate Low (N) (N) (N) Body 500 250 -75 Cream Hair Cream 700 300 -60 Hand 400 200 -50 Lotion Fig2.2: Pay-off table.
The matrix above shows the payoffs of an investor who has the choice either investing in the production of Body Cream, or Hair cream, or hand lotion.
Whichever of the three products he decides to produce; he will encounter three 24 types of market demand.
It may turn out that the market demand for any of the product is high, or moderate of low.
In other words, the production of body cream, or hair cream, or hand lotion represent the alternative courses of action or strategies available to the investor, while the occurrence of either high demand, or moderate demand, or low demand represent the states of nature for which the investor has no control over.
Now, how would the investor arrive at the choice of product to manufacture?
We are going to analyse the decision problem using the five criteria earlier listed below.
3.4.1 MAXIMAX CRITERION (CRITERION OF OPTIMISM) The maximax criterion is an optimistic criterion.
Here, the decision maker aims to maximize profit or his outcome.
It involves an optimistic view of future outcomes.
This is done by selecting the largest among maximum payoffs.
However, the disadvantage of this criterion is that it does not make use of all available information in getting the quantitative values.
This is not often the case on real life situations.
The criterion has also been criticises for being too optimistic and assumes that the future will always be rosy.
(Adebayo et al, 2006) Contingency table 3 Alternative Market Demand Max Maxi max Products High (N) Low Colum (N) (N) Moderate (N) n (N) Body Cream 500 250 -75 500 Hair Cream 700 300 -60 700 700 Hand Lotion 400 200 -50 400 Fig2.3: Pay-off table.
Let us now try to solve the decision problem in the matrix above using the maximax criterion.
Step 1: Create and additional column to the right hand side of the matrix and call it max column as shown below.
Step 2: Identify the maximum pay-off in each alternative course of action (i.e.
Either the role for Body Cream, or Hair Cream, or Hand Lotion) and place it in the corresponding cell on the maximum column.
25 Step 3: Identify and select the pay-off with the highest value on the maximum column.
This value becomes your optimal value using the maximax criterion.
Step 4: Make recommendations.
As we can see from Contingency table 3 above, the maximax value is N700.
Recommendation: Using the maximax decision criterion, the decision maker should manufacture hair cream to maximize worth N700.
3.4.2 MAXIMIN CRITERION (CRITERION OF PESSIMISM) Under the maximin Criterion, the decision maker is assumed to be pessimistic.
The objective here is to maximize the minimum possible outcome.
It is a decision situation where the decision maker tries to make the most of bad situations and avoids taking risks and incurring huge losses.
According to Adebayor et al (2006), the weakness of this criterion is that the result may not always be unique.It has also been criticized for being an unduly careful.
However, it has the advantage of helping one to be in the best possible condition in case the worst happens.
In analysing a decision situation using this criterion, we use the following steps.
Step 1: Create an additional column to the rights hand side of your pay-off matrix- minimum column.
Step 2: Select the minimum pay-off from each alternative and place on the corresponding call in the minimum column.
Step 3: Identify and select the maximum pay-off in the minimum column Step 4: Make recommendation Using data in contingency matrix 2 Minimum Maximin Col (N) (N) - 75 - 60 - 50 - 50 Fig.Fig2.4: Payoff table- Minimum And Maximum Columns.
26 Recommendation: Using the maximin decision criterion, the decision maker should manufacture hand lotion with a pay-off of - N50.
3.4.3 MINIMAX REGRET CRITERION (SAVAGE CRITERION) This decision criterion was developed by L.J.
Savage.
He pointed out that the decision maker might experience regret after the decision has been made and the states of nature i.e.
events have occurred.
Thus the decision maker should attempt to minimize regret before actually selecting a particular alternative (strategy) (Gupta and Hira, 2011).
The criterion is aimed at minimizing opportunity loss.
The following steps are used to solve problems using this criterion.
Step 1: For each column, identify the highest payoff Step 2: Subtract the value from itself every other pay-off in the column to obtain the regret matrix.
Step 3: Create an additional column to the right of your regret matrix and call it maximum column.
Step 4: Identify and select the maximum value from each alternative strategy Step 5: Find the minimum value in the maximum column created.
Step 6: Make recommendations.
Example 2.2 Contingency table 4 Alternative Market Demand Products High Moderate Low (N) (N) (N) Body Cream 500 250 -75 Hair Cream 700 300 -60 Hand Lotion 400 200 -50 Fig.2.5: Payoff table.
27 Regret matrix 1 Alternative Market Demand Max Mini Products High Moderate Low Colum max (N) (N) (N) n Body Cream 200 50 25 200 Hair Cream 0 0 10 10 10 Hand Lotion 300 100 0 300 Fig.2.6: Regret matrix.
Recommendation: Using the minimax regrets criterion, the decision maker should manufacture hair cream to minimize loss worth N10.
3.4.4 EQUALLY LIKELY OF LAPLACE CRITERION (BAYES’ OR CRITERION OF RATIONALITY This criterion is based upon what is known as the principle of insufficient reasons.
Since the probabilities associated with the occurrence of various events are unknown, there is not enough information to conclude that these probabilities will be different.
This criterion assigns equal probabilities to all the events of each alternative decision and selects the alternative associated with the maximum expected payoff.
Symbolically, if “n” denotes the number of events and “s” denotes the pay-offs, then expected value for strategy, say s is i 1/N[P + P + ….
+ P ] 1 2 n or simply put P + P + ….. + P 1 2 n n The steps to follow are: Step 1: Compute the average for each alternative using the above formula.
Step 2: Select the maximum outcome from the calculation in step 1 above Step 3: Make recommendations 28 Example 2.3 Contingency table 5 Alternative Market Demand Max Products High Moderate Low Average Column Col. (N) (N) (N) Body Cream 500 250 -75 500 +250 + 75 = 675 3 3 = 225 Hair Cream 700 300 -60 700 + 300 – 60 = 940 313.3 3 3 =313.3 Hand Lotion 400 200 -50 400 + 200 – 5 = 550 30 3 =183.3 Fig.
2.7: Payoff table.
Recommendation:Using the equally likely criterion, the decision should manufacture Hair Cream worth N313.3 3.4.5 HURWICZ CRITERION (CRITERION OF REALISM) This criterion is also called weighted average criterion.
It is a compromise between the maximax (optimistic) and maximin (Pessimistic) decision criteria.
This concept allows the decision maker to take into account both maximum and minimum for each alternative and assign them weights according to his degree of optimism or pessimism.
The alternative which maximises the sum of these weighted pay-offs is then selected.
(Gupta and Hira, 2012) The Hurwicz Criterion Comsprises the following steps: Step 1: Choose an appropriate degree of optimism  ( lies between zero and one (0 <<1)), so that (1-) represents the degree of pessimism.
is called coefficient or index of optimism.
Step 2: Determine the maximum as well as minimum value of each alternative course of action.
Step 3: Determine the criterion of realism using the following formula CRi =  (Max in Row) + (1 - ) (Min in Row) i i Step 4: Select the maximum outcome in step 3 above Step 5: Make Recommendation 29 Example 2.4 EXAMPLE: Using the contingency table 3 above, Maximum Min in Row 500 -75 700 -60 400 -50 Fig.
2.8: Max.
And Min.
Rows.
For alternative Body Cream (b) (R =  (Maxim Row ) + (1 - ) (min in Row ) b b b Let us assume  = 0.5 CR = 0.5 (500) + (1 – 0.5) (-75) bc = 0.5 (500) + 0.5 (-75) = 250 – 37.5 = 212.5 For alternative Hair Cream CR = 0.5 (700) + (0.5) (-60) hc = 350 + (- 30) = 350 – 30 = 320 For alternative Hand Lotion CR = 0.5 (400) + (0.5) (-50) hl = 200 – 25 = 177 Therefore CR =N212.5 bc CR = N320 hc CR = N175 hl Recommendation: Using the Hurwicz Criterion, the decision maker should manufacture Hair Cream worthN320.
We have seen how interesting and simple it is to use the five criteria in analysing decision problems.
However, the above analysis can only be used under a situation of uncertainty where the decision maker neither knows the future states of nature nor have the probability of occurrence of the states of nature.
This will be discussed in greater detail in the next unit.
30 4.0 Conclusion Every individual, group of individuals, as well as organizations are faced with decision problems every day.
An individual or a small group of people faced with simple decision may apply common sense in solving their problems.
However, this is not the case with big corporate organizations which are faced with very complex decision problems.
An application of common sense in such complex situations will not be appropriate as it will lead mostly to wrong decisions.Complex decision problems demand the use of specialized tools and techniques for analysis of problem and eventual arrival at the best alternative.
5.0 Summary This unit outlines briefly some approaches to decision analysis.
It identifies two basic approaches to decision analysis: Qualitative and Quantitative approaches.
The Qualitative approach includes: Delphi Method, Market Research and Historical Analogy.
The Quantitative technique includes the use of Mathematics, Probability, Mathematical models and statistics to analyse decision problems.
Finally, we discuss the five criteria for solving problems under the condition of uncertainty: maximax, maximin, laplace’s, minimax regret, and Hurwicz criterion.
6.0 TUTOR MARKET ASSIGNMENT (1) Differential between qualitative and quantitative techniques.
(2) List and explain four qualitative techniques of decision analysis.
(3) What do your understanding by a state of Nature?
(4) Differentials between the Expected monetary value (EMV) and the Expected opportunity Loss (EOL) techniques.
(5) Consider the payoff matrix below and analyse the decision problem completely.
Contingency table 6 State of nature Alternatives S S S 1 2 3 d 15,000 35,000 200 1 d 75,000 15,000 -100 2 d 20,000 45,000 -1,000 3 Hint: Whenever you are asked to analyse a problem completely, it means you should use the five criteria early discussed for analyse the decision problem.
31 7.0 REFERENCE Adebayo O.A.
et al (2006), Operations Research in Decision and Production Management.
Akingbade, F. (1995), Practical Operational Research for Developing Countries: A Process Framework approach, Lagos: Panaf Publishing Inc. Dixon – Ogbechi, B.N (2001), Decision Theory in Business, Lagos: Philglad Nig.
Ltd. Gupta, P.K and Hira, D.S., (2012), Operations Research, New – Delhi: S. Chand & Company.
Harper, W.M.
(1975), Operational Research, London: Macdonald & Evans Ltd. Lucey, T. (1988), Quantitative Techniques: An Instructional Manual, London: DP Publications.
Microsoft Encarta Premium, (2009).
Skemp, R.R.
(1991), the Psychology of Learning Mathematics, Harmonds Worth: Penguin Book.
32 UNIT 3: TYPES OF DECISION SITUATIONS 1.0 INTRODUCTION 2.0 OBJECTIVES 3.0 MAIN CONTENT 3.1 ELEMENTS OF DECISION SITUATION 3.2 TYPES OF DECISION SITUATIONS 3.2.1 DECISION MAKING UNDER CONDITION OF CERTAINTY 3.2.2 DECISION MAKING UNDER CONDITIONS OF UNCERTAINTY 3.2.3 DECISION MAKING UNDER CONDITIONS OF RISK 3.2.4 DECISION UNDER CONFLICT 4.0 CONCLUSION 5.0 SUMMARY 6.0 TUTOR MARKED ASSIGNMENT 7.0 REFERENCES 1.0 INTRODUCTION Recall that in the previous unit we presented five decision criteria – Maximax, Maximin, Laplace’s, Minimax Regret, and Hurwicz criterion.
We also stated that the criteria are used foranalysing decision situations under uncertainty.
In this unit, we shall delve fully into considering these situations and learn how we can use different techniques in analysing problems in certian decision situations i.e Certainty, Uncertainty, Risk, and Conflict situations.
2.0 OBJECTIVES After studying this unit, you should be able to (1) Identify the four conditions under which decisions can be made (2) Describe each decision situation (3) Identify the techniques for making decision under each decision situation (4) Solve problems under each of the decision situation 3.0 MAIN CONTENT 3.1 ELEMENTS OF DECISION SITUATION Dixon – Ogbechi (2001) presents the following elements of Decision Situation: 1 The Decision Maker: The person or group of persons making the decision.
2 Value System: This is the particular preference structure of the decision maker.
33 3 Environmental Factors: These are also called states of nature.
They can be i.
Political v Cultural factors ii.
Legal vi.
Technological factors iii.
Economic factors viii Natural Disasters iv.
Social factors 4 Alternative: There are various decision options available to the decision maker.
5 Choice: The decision made.
6 Evaluation Criteria: These are the techniques used to evaluate the situation at hand.
3.2 TYPES OF DECISION SITUATIONS According to Gupta and Hira (2012), there are four types of environments under which decisions can be made.
These differ according to degree of certainty.
The degree of certainty may vary from complete certainty to complete uncertainty.
The region that lies between corresponds to decision making under risk.
3.2.1 DECISION MAKING UNDER CONDITION OF CERTAINTY In this environment, only one state of nature exits for each alternative.Under this decision situation, the decision maker has complete and accurate information about future outcomes.
In other words, the decision maker knows with certainty the consequence of every alternative course of action.
It is easy to analyse the situation and make good decisions.
Since the decision maker has perfect knowledge about the future outcomes, he simply chooses the alternative with the optimum payoff.
The approach to analysing such decision problem is deterministic.
Decision techniques used here include simple arithmetic for simple problem, and for complex decision problems, methods used include cost-volume analysis when information about them is precisely known, linear programming, transportation and assignment models, deterministic inventory models, deterministic quelling models and network model.
We shall discuss these models later.
3.2.2 DECISION MAKING UNDER CONDITIONS OF UNCERTAINTY Here, more than one state of nature exists, but the decision maker lacks sufficient knowledge to allow him assign probabilities to the various state of nature.
However, the decision maker knows the states of nature that may possibly occur but does not have information which will enable him to determine which of these states will actually occur.
Techniques that can be used to analyse problem under this condition include the Maximax criterion, Equally likely or Laplace’s criterion, 34 and Hurwicz criterion or Criterion of Realism.
These techniques have earlier been discussed.
We shall consider a more difficult problem for further illustration.
EXAMPLE3.1- Word Problem A farmer is considering his activity in the next farming season.
He has a choice of three crops to select from for the next planting season – Groundnuts, Maize, and Wheat.Whatever is his choice of crop; there are four weather conditions that could prevail: heaving rain, moderate rain, light rain, and no rain.
In the event that the farmer plants Ground nuts and there is heavy rain, he expects to earn a proceed of N650,000 at the end of the farming season, if there is moderate rain N1,000,000, high rain – N450,000 and if there is no rain – (-N1,000)If the farmer plants Maize, the following will be his proceeds after the harvest considering the weather condition: heavy rain – N1,200,000, moderate rain – N1,500,000, Light rain – N600,000 and no rain N2000.
And if the farmer decides to plant wheat, he expects to make the following: heavy rain – N1,150,000, moderate rain – N1,300,000, Light rain- N800,000 and No rain – N200 -000.
The farmer has contact you, an expert in OR to help him decide on what to do.
Question: Construct a payoff matrix for the above situation, analyse completely and advise the farmer on the course of action to adopt.
Assume  = 0.6.
Solution First, construct a contingency matrix from the above problem.
Contingency Matrix 1a Alterative Weather conditions Crops Heavy Moderate Light Rain No Rain Rain (S ) Rain (S ) (S ) (S ) 1 2 3 4 N N N N Groundnut 750,000 1,000.000 450,000 -1,000 (d ) 1 Maize (d ) 1,200,000 1,500,000 600,000 2000 2 Wheat (d ) 1,150,000 1,300,000 800,000 -200,000 3 Fig.
3.1a: Pay- off Table 35 Contingency Matrix 1b Alterative Weather conditions Crops S S S S Max Min 1 2 3 4 col Col (N’000) (N’000) (N’000) (N’000) d 750 1,000 450 -1 1,000 -1 1 d 1,200 1,500 600 2 1,500 2 2 d 1,150 1,300 800 -200 1,300 -200 3 Fig.
3.1b: Pay- off Table Regret Matrix 1 Alterative Weather conditions Crops S S S (S ) Ma Min 1 2 3 4 (N’000) (N’000) (N’000) (N’000) x Col col d 1200 – 750 1500-1000 800-450 2-(1) 500 1 450 500 350 3 d 1200 – 1200 1500-1500 800-600 2-2 200 200 2 0 0 200 0 d 1200-1150 1500-1300 800-800 2-(-200) 202 3 50 200 0 202 Col max 1200 1500 800 2 Fig.
3.2: Regret Matrix1 1.
Maximax Criterion Alt.
Max Col. d 1,000 1 d 1,500 2 d 1,300 3 Recommendation: Using the maximax criterion, the farmer should select alternative d and plant maize worth N1500,000.
2 36  2.
Maximin criterion Alt.
Min.
Col. d -1 1 d 2 2 d -200 3 Recommendation: Using the maximum criterion, the farmer should select alternative d and plant maize worth N2,000.
2 3.
Minimax Regret Criterion Choice Weather conditions of crops S S S (S ) Max Min 1 2 3 4 Col Col d 450 500 350 3 500 1 d 0 0 200 0 200 200 2 d 50 200 0 202 202 3 Fig.
3.3: Pay- off Table Recommendation: Using the Mini Max Regret Criterion, the decision maker should select alternative d and plant maize to minimize loss worth N200,000 2 4.
Laplace Criterion d1 = 750 + 1000 + 450 – 1 = 549.75 4 d2 = 1200 + 1500 + 600 + 2 =825.50 4 d3 = 1150 + 1300 + 800 – 200= 762.50 4 Recommendation: Using the Equally Likely or Savage Criterion, the farmer should select alternative d to plant maize worth N825,500.
2 (5) Hurwicz Criterion 37   = 0.6, 1 -  = 0.4 CRi = (max in row) + (1-) (min in row) CR = 0.6 (1000) + (0.4) (-1) = 600 + (-0.4) = 599.6 1 CR = 0.6 (1500) + (0.4) (2) = 900 + 0.8 = 900.8 2 CR = 0.6 (1300) + (0.4) (-200) = 780 + (-80) = 700 3 Recommendation: Using the Hurwicz criterion the farmer should select alternative d2 and cultivate maize worth N900,800.00.
3.2.3 DECISION MAKING UNDER CONDITIONS OF RISK Under the risk situation, the decision maker has sufficient information to allow him assign probabilities to the various states of nature.
In other words, although the decision maker does not know with certainty the exact state of nature that will occur, he knows the probability of occurrence of each state of nature.
Here also, more than one state of nature exists.
Most Business decisions are made under conditions of risk.
The probabilities assigned to each state of nature are obtained from past records or simply from the subjective judgement of the decision maker.
A number of decision criteria are available to the decision maker.
These include.
(i) Expected monetary value criterion (EMV) (ii) Expected Opportunity Loss Criterion (EOL) (iii) Expected Value of Perfect Information (EVPI) (Gupta and Hira, 2012) We shall consider only the first two (EMV and EOL) criteria in details in this course.
i.
EXPECTED MONETARY VALUE (EMV) CRITERION To apply the concept of expected value as a decision making criterion, the decision maker must first estimate the probability of occurrence of each state of nature.
Once the estimations have been made, the expected value of each decision alternative can be computed.
The expected monetary value is computed by multiplying each outcome (of a decision) by the corresponding probability of its occurrence and then summing the products.
The expected value of a random variable is written symbolically as E(x), is computed as follows: (Taylor III, 2007) 38 EXAMPLE3.2 A businessman has constructed the payoff matrix below.
Using the EMV criterion, analyse the situation and advise the businessman on the kind of property to invest on.
Contingency Matrix 2 Decision to invest State of Nature Good Poor Economic Turbulent Economic Economic Condition Condition Conditions (N) (N) (N) Apartment building (d ) 50,000 30,000 15,000 1 Office building (d ) 100,000 40,000 10,000 2 Warehouse (d ) 30,000 10,000 -20,000 3 Probabilities 0.5 0.3 0.2 Fig.
3.4: Pay- off Table.
Adapted from Taylor, B.W.
III (2007) Introduction to Management Science, New Jersey: Pearson Education Inc.
SOLUTION EVd = 50,000 (0.5) + 30,000 (0.3) + 15,000 (0.2) 1 = 25,000 + 9,000 + 3,000 = N37,000 EVd = 100,000 (0.5) + 40,000 (0.3) + 10,000 (0.2) 2 =N50,000 +12,000 + 2000 =N64,000 EVd = 30,000 (0.5) + 10,000 (0.3) + (-20,000(0.2) 3 = 15,000 + 3000 - 4000 = N14,000 Recommendation: Using the EMV criterion, the businessman should select alternative d and invest in office building worth N64,000.
2 Under this method, the best decision is the one with the greatest expected value.
From the above EXAMPLE, the alternative with the greatest expected value is EVd which has a monetary value of N37,000.
This does not mean that N37,000 1 will result if the investor purchases apartment buildings, rather, it is assumed that one of the payoffs values will result in N25,000 or N9,000 or N 3,000.
The expected value therefore implies that if this decision situation occurs a large 39 number of times, an average payoff of N37,000 would result, Alternatively, if the payoffs were in terms of costs, the best decision would be the one with the lowest expected value.
ii.
EXPECTED OPPORTUNITY LESS (EOL) The expected opportunity Loss criterion is a regret criterion.
It is used mostly in minimization problems.
The minimization problem involves the decision maker either trying to minimize loss or minimize costs.
It is similar the Minimax Regret Criterion earlier discussed.
The difference however, is that is has probabilities attached to each state of nature or occurrence.
The difference in computation between the EMV and EOL methods is that, unlike the EMV methods, a regret matrix has to be constructed from the original matrix before the EOL can be determined.
EXAMPLE3.3 We shall determine the best alternative EOL using contingency matrix 2 above First, we construct a regret matrix from contingency matrix 2 above.
Remember how the Regret matrix table is constructed?
Ok. Let us do that again here.
Quick Reminder To construct a regret matrix, determine the highest value in each state of nature and subtract every payoff in the same state of nature from it.
Your will observe that most of the payoff will become negative values and zero.
Regret Matrix 2 Decision to invest State of Nature (N) (N) (N) Apartment building (d ) (100,000 - 50,000) (40,000 - 30,000) (15,000 – 15,000) 1 50,000 10,000 0 Office building (d ) (100,000 -100,000) (40,000 – 40,000) (15,000 -10,000) 2 0 0 5,000 Warehouse (d ) (100,000 – 30,000) (40,000 – 40,000) (15,000+20,000) 3 70,000 30,000 35,00 Probabilities 0.5 0.3 0.2 Fig.
3.3: Regret Matrix 2 EOLd = 50,000 (0.5) + 10,000 (0.3) + 0(2) 1 = 25,000 + 3,000+0 = N28,000 40 EOLd = 0.
(0.5) + 0(0.3) + 5,000 (0.2) 2 = 0 + 0 + 1,000 = N1,000 EOLd = 70,000 (0.5) + 30,000 (0.3) + 35,000 (0.2) 3 = 35,000 + 9,000 + 7,000 = N51,000 Recommendation: Using the EOL criterion, the decision maker should select alternative d and invest in office building worth N1,000.
2 The Optimum investment option is the one which minimizes expected opportunity losses, the action calls for investment in office building at which point the minimum expected loss will be N1,000.
You will notice that the decision rule under this criterion is the same with that of the Minimax Regret criterion.
This is because both methods have the same objectives that is, the minimization of loss.
They are both pessimistic in nature.
However, loss minimization is not the only form minimization problem.
Minimisation problems could also be in the form ofminimisation of cost of production or investment.
In analysinga problem involving the cost of production you do not have to construct a regret matrix because the pay-off in the table already represents cost.
NOTE: It should be pointed out that EMV and EOL decision criteria are completely consistent and yield the same optimal decision alternative.
iii EXPECTED VALUE OF PERFECT INFORMATION Taylor III (2007) is of the view that it is often possible to purchase additional information regarding future events and thus make better decisions.
For instance, a farmer could hire a weather forecaster to analyse the weather conditions more accurately to determine which weather condition will prevail during the next farming season.
However, it would not be wise for the farmer to pay more for this information than he stands to gain in extra yield from having this information.
That is, the information has some maximum yield value that represents the limit of what the decision maker would be willing to spend.
This value of information can be computed as an expected value – hence its name, expected value of perfect information (EVPI).
41 The expected value of perfect information therefore is the maximum amount a decision maker would pay for additional information.
In the view of Adebayo et al (2007), the value of perfect information is the amount by which the profit will be increased with additional information.
It is the difference between expected value of optimum quantity under risk and the expected value under certainty.
Using the EOL criterion, the value of expected loss will be the value of the perfect information.
Expected value of perfect information can be computed as follows EVPI = EVwPI – EMV max Where EVPI = Expected value of perfect information EVwPI = Expected value with perfect information EMV = Maximum expected monetary valueor Expected value without perfect max information (Or minimum EOL for a minimization problem) EXAMPLE3.4 Using the data on payoff matrix 3 above, Decision to invest State of Nature Good Poor Turbulent (N) (N) (N) Apartment building 50,000 30,000 15,000 (d ) 1 Office building (d ) 100,000 40,000 10,000 2 Warehouse (d ) 30,000 10,000 -20,000 3 Probabilities 0.5 0.3 0.2 Fig.
3.3: Pay-off Tale EVwPI = P x best out on each state of nature (S).
j j The expected value with perfect information can be obtained by multiplying the best outcome in each state of nature by the corresponding probabilities and summing the results.
We can obtain the EVwPI from the table above as follows.
EVwP1 = 100,000 x 0.5 + 40,000 x 0.3 + 15,000 x 0.2 = 50,000 + 12,000 + 3,000 = N65,000 42  Recall that our optimum strategy as calculated earlier was N64,000.
EVP1 = EVwP1 – EMV max = N65000 - 64,000 = N1,000 The expected value of perfect information (EVPI) isN1000.
This implies that the maximum amount the investor can pay for extra information is N1000.
Because it is difficult to obtain perfect information, and most times unobtainable, the decision maker would be willing to pay some amount less than N1000 depending on how accurate the decision maker believes the information is.
Notice that the expected value of perfect information (N1000) equals our expected opportunity loss (EOL) of N1000 as calculated earlier.
Taylor III (2007) provides a justification for this.
According to him, this will always be the case, and logically so, because regret reflects the difference between the best decision under a state of nature and the decision actually made.
This is the same thing determined by the expected value of perfect information.
3.2.4 DECISION UNDER CONFLICT Decision taken under conflict is a competitive decision situation.
This environment occurs when two or more people are engaged in a competition in which the action taken by one person is dependent on the action taken by others in the competition.
In a typical competitive situation the player in the competition evolve strategies to outwit one another.
This could by way intense advertising and other promotional efforts, location of business, new product development, market research, recruitment of experienced executives and so on.
An appropriate techniques to use in solving problems involving conflicts is the Game Theory (Adebayo et al 2007).
Practice Exercise (1) Identify and discuss the situations under which decision are made.
(2) An investor is confronted with a decision problem as represented in the matrix below.
Analyse the problem Using the EMV and EOL criteria and advise the decision maker on the best strategy to adopt.
43 State of Nature Alternatives Expand Construct Subcontract Prob.
High (N) 50,000 70,000 30,000 0.5 Moderate (N) 25,000 30,000 15,000 03 Low (N) 25,000 -40,000 -1,000 0.15 Nil (N) -45,000 -80,000 -10,000 0.05 Hint: Note that the positions of the states of nature and the alternative strategies have changed.
4.0 CONCLUSION Business Organisations are confronted with different situations under which they make decisions.
There are different ways to approach a situation; the technique for analysing a particular decision problem depends upon the prevailing situation under which problem presents itself.
It is important for decision makers to always identify the situations they are faced with and fashion out the best technique for analysing the situation in order to arrive at the best possible alternative course of action to adopt.
5.0 SUMMARY In this unit, we have discussed the different situations under which a decision maker is faced with decision problems.
These decision situations include Certainty, Uncertainty, Risk and Conflict situation.
Decision situations could also be referred to as decision environments.
We have also identified and discussed various techniques used in solving problems under these situations.
The deterministic approach to decision analysis which includes simple arithmetic techniques for simple problems and cost-volume analysis, linear programming, transportation model, assignment models quenching modes etc.
for complex problems could be used to solve problems under situation of certainty.Techniques that can be used to solve problem under uncertainty include: Maximax criterion,Minimax criterion Minimax Regret criterion, Equally-Likely or Laplace criterion, and Hurwicz criterion.
Decisions under Risk Situations can be analysed using the Expected Monetary Value (EMV) or Expected Opportunity Loss (EOL) criterion.
Finally, Game theory can be used to analyse decision under conflict with is a situation that involve competition.
6.0 TUTOR MARKED ASSIGNMENT (1) Who is a decision maker?
(2) Identify and explain the environmental factors or states of Nature that affect a decision situation.
44 (3) List and explain four situations under which decisions can be made.
(4) Identify the techniques that can be used to analyse decision problems under the following situations (i) Certainty (ii) Uncertainty (iii) Risk (iv) Conflict (5) Consider the contingency matrix below States of Nature Alternatives S1 (N) S (N) S (N) 2 3 A 100,000 75,000 1000 1 A 625,000 12,000 920 2 A 11,900 750 -73 3 Analyse the situation completely and advise the decision maker on the optimal strategy to adopt under each criterion.
(6) Using the table in question (5) above, assume that strategy S = Strong Economic Growth, with a probability of 0.45 1 S = Weak Economic Growth, with a probability of 0.3 2 S = Economic Recession, with a probability of 0.25 3 Assuming also, that the decision maker has the opportunity of purchasing extra information which will help him take perfect decisions, A = Build new manufacturing plant 1 A = Increase present plant size 2 A = Employ more professionals to run present plant 3 (i) What is the optimal investment strategy using the EMV technique?
(ii) Using the EOL techniques to analyse the situation and advise the investor on the course of action to adopt.
(iii) What is the maximum amount that the investor can pay for additional information?
45 7.0 REFERENCE Adebayo O.A.
et al (2006), Operations Research in Decision and Production Management.
Dixon – Ogbechi, B.N (2001), Decision Theory in Business, Lagos: Philglad Nig.
Ltd. Gupta, P.K and Hira, D.S., (2012), Operations Research, New – Delhi: S. Chand & Company.
Taylor III, Bernard W. (2007), Introduction to Management Science, 9th Edition.
New Jersey: Pearson Education Inc. 46 UNIT 4: DECISION TREES 1.0 INTRODUCTION 2.0 OBJECTIVES 3.0 MAIN CONTENT 3.1 DEFINITION 3.2 BENEFITS OF USING DECISION TREE 3.3 DISADVANTAGE OF THE DECISION TREE 3.4 COMPONENTS OF THE DECISION TREE 3.5 STRUCTURE OF A DECISION TREE 3.6 HOW TO ANALYSE A DECISION TREE 3.7 THE SECRETARY PROBLEM 3.7.1 ADVANTAGES OF THE SECRETARY PROBLEM OVER THE GENERAL DECISION TREE 3.7.2 ANALYSIS OF THE SECRETARY PROBLEM 4.0 CONCLUSION 5.0 SUMMARY 6.0 TUTOR MARKED ASSIGNMENT 7.0 REFERENCES 1.0 INTRODUCTION So far, we have been discussing the techniques used for decision analysis.
We have demonstrated how to solve decision problems by presenting them in a tabular form.
However, if decision problems can be presented on a table, we can also represent the problem graphically in what is known as a decision tree.
Also the decision problems discussed so far dealt with only single stage decision problem.
That is, the payoffs, alternatives, state of nature and the associated probabilities were not subject to change.
We now consider situations that involve multiple stages.
They are characterized by a sequence of decisions with each decision influencing the next.
Such problems, called sequential decision problems, are analysed best with the help of decisions trees.
2.0 OBJECTIVES After studying this unit, you should be able to 1 Describe a decision tree 2 Describe what Decision nodes and outcome nodes are 3 Represent problems in a decision trees and perform the fold back and tracing forward analysis 4 Calculate the outcome values using the backward pass 5.
Identify the optimal decision strategy 47  3.0 MAIN CONTENT 3.1 DEFINITION A decision tree is a graphical representation of the decision process indicating decision alternatives, states of nature, probabilities attached to the states of nature and conditional benefits and losses (Gupta & Hira 2012).
A decision tree is a pictorial method of showing a sequence of inter-related decisions and outcomes.
All the possible choices are shown on the tree as branches and the possible outcomes as subsidiary branches.
In summary, a decision tree shows: the decision points, the outcomes (usually dependent on probabilities and the outcomes values) (Lucey, 2001).
The decision tree is the simplest decision making model in the face of an uncertain future.
In such a model, a plan of action must account for all contingencies (Chance outcome) that can arise.
A decision tree represents the uncertainty of choice graphically.
This makes it easy to visualize the contingency plans which are called strategies (Denardo, 2002).
3.2 BENEFITS OF USING DECISION TREE Dixon-Ogbechi (2001) presents the following advantages of using the decision tree - They assist in the clarification of complex decisions making situations that involve risk.
- Decision trees help in the quantification of situations.
- Better basis for rational decision making are provided by decision trees.
- They simplify the decision making process.
3.3 DISADVANTAGE OF THE DECISION TREE - The disadvantage of the decision tree is that it becomes time consuming, cumbersome and difficult to use/draw when decision options/states of nature are many.
3.4 COMPONENTS OF THE DECISION TREE It is important to note the following components of the structure of a decision problem - The choice or Decision Node: Basically, decision trees begin with choice or decision nodes.
The decision nodes are depicted by square ( ).
It is a point in the decision tree were decisions would have to be made.
Decision nodes are immediately by alternative courses of action in what can be referred to as the decision fork.
The decision fork is depicted by a square with arrows or 48 lines emanating from the right side of the square ( ).The number of lines emanating from the box depend on the number of alternatives available.
- Change Node: The chance node can also be referred to as state of nature node or event node.
Each node describes a situation in which an element of uncertainty is resolved.
Each way in this uncertainty can be resolved is represented by an arc that leads rightward from its chance node, either to another node or to an end-point.
The probability on each such arc is a conditional probability, the condition being that one is at the chance node to its left.
These conditional probabilities sum to 1 (0ne), as they do in probability tree (Denardo, 2002).
The state of nature or chance nodes are depicted by circles ( ), it implies that at this point, the decision maker will have to compute the expected monetary value (EMV) of each state of nature.
Again the chance event node is depicted this ( ) 3.5 STRUCTURE OF A DECISION TREE The structure and the typical components of a decision tree are shown in the diagram below.
49 Action B 1 X m e 1 D o 2 c u t O Action B 2 Outcome X 2 A n o 1 Outcome X ti A c 3 D 1 Outcome Y 1 Action A 2 c n 1 o c ti A c Acti on 2 D Outcome Y 3 2 Actio nc 3 Fig.13: Adapted from Lucey, T (2001), Quantitative Techniques, 5th London: Continuum The above is a typical construction of a decision tree.
The decision tree begins with a decision node D signifying that the decision maker is first of all presented with a 1 decision to make.
Immediately after the decision node, there are two courses of Action A and A .If the decision maker chooses A1, there are three possible 1 2 outcomes – X X , X .
And if chooses A , there will be two possible outcomes Y 1 2 3 2 1 and Y and so on.
2 3.6 HOW TO ANALYSE A DECISION TREE The decision tree is a graphical representation of a decision problem.
It is multi- state in nature.As a result, a sequence of decisions are made repeatedly over a period of time and such decisions depend on previous decisions and may lead to a set of probabilistic outcomes.
The decision tree analysis process is a form of probabilistic dynamic programming (Dixon-Ogbechi, 2001).
50 Analysing a decision tree involves two states i. Backward Pass: This involves the following steps - starting from the right hand side of the decision tree, identify the nearest terminal.
If it is a chance event, calculate the EMV (Expected Monetary Value).
And it is a decision node, select the alternative that satisfies your objective.
- Repeat the same operation in each of the terminals until you get to the end of the left hand side of the decision tree.
ii.
Forward Pass: The forward pass analysis involves the following operation.
- Start from the beginning of the tree at the right hand side, at each point, select the alternative with the largest value in the case of a minimization problem or profit payoff, and the least payoff in the case of a minimization problem or cost payoff.
- Trace forward the optimal contingency strategy by drawing another tree only with the desired strategy.
These steps are illustrate below EXAMPLE 4.1 Contingency Matrix 1 Alternatives Probability States of Nature Stock Rice Stock Maize (A ) (A ) 1 2 High demand 8,000 12,000 0.6 (S ) (N) 1 Low demand 4,000 -3,000 0.4 (S ) (N) 2 Fig.
4.1: Pay-off Matrix Question: Represent the above payoff matrix on a decision tree and find the optimum contingency strategy.
51  We can represent the above problem on a decision tree thus: S (high demand) 1 8,000 0.6 6400 A (stock rice)S (low demand) 1 2 0.4 4,000 6400 S (high demand) 1 12,000 A (stock maize) 0.6 2 6000 S (high demand) 2 -3,000 0.4 Fig.
4.2: A Decision Tree.
Next, we compute the EMY for alternatives A and A .
1 2 EMV = 8,000 x 0.6 + 4,000 x 0.4 = 6400 A1 = 4800 x 1,600 EMV = 12,000 x 0.6 + (-3,000) x 0.4 A2 = 7,200 – 1,200 = N6,000 EMV gives the highest payoff A1 We can now draw our optimal contingency strategy thus: 52 8,000 S 1 0.6 6400 S 2 A 0.
1 4 4,000 6400 Fig.
4.3: Optimal Contingency Strategy The above decision tree problem is in its simplest form.
They also could be word problem to be represented on a decision tree diagram unlike the above problem that has already been put in tabular form.
Let us try one of such problems.
EXAMPLE 4.2 A client has contracted NOUNCIL, a real estate firm to help him sell three properties A,B,C that he owns in Banana Island.
The client has agreed to pay NOUNCIL 5% commission on each sale.
The agent has specified the following conditions: NOUNCIL must sell property A first, and this he must do within 60days.
If and when A is sold, NOUNCIL receives 5% commission on the sale, NOUNCIL can then decide to back out on further sale or go ahead and try to sell the remaining two property B and C within 60 days.
If they do not succeed in selling the property within 60days, the contract is terminated at this stage.
The following table summarises the prices, selling Costs (incurred by NOUNCIL whenever a sale is made) and the probabilities of making sales Property Prices of Selling Probability property Cost A 12,000 400 0.7 B 25,000 225 0.6 C 50,000 450 0.5 Fig.
4.3: Pay-off Matrix (i) Draw an appropriate decision tree representing the problem for NOUNCIL.
(ii) What is NOUNCIL’s best strategy under the EMV approach?
53 (Question Adapted from Gupta and Hira (2012)) SOLUTION Hint: Note that the probabilities provided in the table are probabilities of sale.
Therefore, to get the probability of no sale, we subtract the prob.
Of sale from 1 Prob.
of no Sales = 1 – prob.
of sales NOUNCIL gets 5% Commission if they sell the properties and satisfy the specified conditions.
The amount they will receive as commission on sale of property A,B, and C are as follows Commission on A = 5/100 x 12,000 = N6000 Commission on B = 5/100 x 25,000 = N1250 Commission on C = 5/100 x 50,000 = N2500 The commission calculated above are conditional profits to NOUNCIL.
To obtain the actual profit accrued to NOUNCIL from the sale of the properties, we subtract the selling cost given in the table above from the commission.
NOUNCIL’S Actual profit A = N600 – N400 = N200 B = N1250 - N225 = N1025 C = N2500 – N450 = N2050 We now construct our decision tree 54 0) 5 0 2 C ( N 3 S ells 0.5 B S ells B ( N ) 0.1,6 025 Doe0s.5 not sell C(N o) D 1 Accept 0A.7 A S eDllos 0eAs.
3( n2o0t00 ).s7ell A (N 2 0) TTalakks eB C C 0S .e l4Dloseo se0C .s n(5 on 0N.ot2 5s0t e5sl0el) lBl C(N( O4) SDelloes s0B .n 4(o N t) 0s.1e,6l0l 2B5()N) N O) R eje ct A Fig.
4.4: A Decision Tree BACKWARD PASS ANALYSIS EMV of Node 3 = N (0.5 2050 + 0.5 x0) = N1025 EMV of Node 4 = N (0.6 x 1,025 + 0.4 x 0) =N615 EMV of Node B = [0.6 (1025 + 1025) + 0.4 x 0] = 1230 Note: 0.6 (EMV of node 3 + profit from sales of B at node B) EMV of Node C = [0.5 (2050 + 615) + 0.5 x 0] = N1332.50 Note: same as EMV of B above EMV of Node 2 =N1332.50 (Higher EMV at B and C) EMV of Node A = N[0.7 (200 + 1,332.50) + 0.3 x 0] = N1072.75 EMV of Node 1 =N1072.75 55 Optimal contingency strategy Sells B Sells A,N 200 takes C sells C N1025 Sell A 1332.5 N 2050 615 1072.75 0.7N 1072.75 1332.5 0.5 Fig.
4.4b: Optimal Contingency Strategy The optimal contingency strategy path is revealed above.
Thus the optimum strategy for NOUNCIL is to sell A, if they sell A, then try sell C and if they sell C, then try sell B to get an optimum expected amount of N1072.75.
Let us try another example as adapted from Dixon – Ogbechi (2001).
EXAMPLE 4.3 The management of the school of Basic Remedial and Vocational Studies of NOUN is contemplating investing in two diploma programmes- Diploma in Business and Diploma in Law.
DipBus.will cost N9millionwith 0.6 chance of success.
DipLaw will cost N 4.5million, but has only 0.35 chance of success.In the event of success, management has to decide whether or not to advertise the product heavily or lightly.
Heavy advertisement will cost N3,600,000 but has 0.65 probability of full acceptance as against partial acceptance by the market while light advertising will cost N1,200,000 and has a probability of 0.45 of full acceptance.
Full acceptance in DipBus Programme would be worth N36million while that of DipLaw programme would be worth 27 million.
Partial market acceptance will worth N21 million and N24 million respectively.
Advise the management of the school of Remedial and Vocational Studies on the diploma programme and level of advertising to embark on.
56 SOLUTION We begin by drawing the decision tree.
Full Accept.
C 36 23.4 0.65 N30.75m Heavy Advert.
N4.5m 0.3521 8.4 Par.
Accept.
N30.75m A Success Light Advert.Full Accept.
0.63N 1.2m 0.45 36 25.8 N 18.45m N27.
75m DipBus D 0.55 21 10.8 Par.
Accept.
N9m 2 N 18.45m Failure 0, -9 0.4 N4.5m DipLawFull Accept.
InvestE0.65 27 18.9 4Heavy Advert N25.95m B Success N3.6m0.35 24 15.9 N25.9m N9.082m Par.
Accept.
Light Advert N1.2mFull Accept.
N 18.45m 0.65 27 21.3 N25.35m 1 0.35 F Par.
Accept.24 18.3 Failure 0 -4.5 Do not invest 0 Fig.
4.5: A Decision Tree BACKWARD PASS ANALYSIS EMV of Node C = N36,000,000 x 0.65 + 21,000,000 x N0.36 = N23,400,000 + 7,350,000 = N30750,000 EMV of Node D = N36,000,000 x 0.45 + N21,000,000 x 0.55 57  = N16,200,000 + N11,500,000 = 27,750,000 EMV of Node E =N27,000,000 x 0.65+ N24,000,000 x 0.35 = N17,550,000 + N8,400,000 = N25,950,000 EMV of Node F =N27,000 x 0.45 + 24,000,000 x 0.55 = N12,150,000 + 13,200,000 = N25,350,000 EMV of Node A =N30,750,000 x 0.6 + N0 + 0.4 = N18,450,000 + N0 = N18,450,000 EMV of Node B = N25,950,000 x 0.35 + N0 x 0.65 = N9082500 + 0 = N9,082,500 Note: Decision made at each of the decision nodes were arrived at by comparing the values in each chance event nodes and selecting the highest value.
Optimal Contingency Strategy Full Accept C 0.65 N36m 3Heavy Advert N30.75m N3.6m 0.35 A N30.75m SuccessPartial Accept N21m 0.6 N18.45m 2 DipBus N 18.45m 1 N 18.45m Failure 0.4 N 0 Fig.
4.6: The Optimum Contingency Strategy 58 Recommendation: Using the EMV method, the management of school of Remedial and vocational studies should invest in DipBus and embark on heavy advertisement to get on optimum expected amount of N18,450,000.
3.7 THE SECRETARY PROBLEM The secretary problem was developed to analyse decision problems that are complex and repetitive in nature.
This type of decision tree is a modification upon general decision tree in that it collapses the branches of the general tree and once an option is jettisoned, it cannot be recalled.
3.7.1 Advantages of the Secretary Problem Over the General Decision Tree In addition to the advantages of the general decision try the secretary problem has the following added advantages (1) It is easy to draw and analyse.
(2) It saves time.
3.7.2 Analysis of the Secretary Problem The analysis of a secretary decision tree problem is similar to that of the general decision tree.
The only difference is that since the multi stage decision problem could be cumbersome to formulate when the branches become too many, the secretary problem collapses the different states of nature into one.
This will be demonstrated in the example below.
EXAMPLE The management of Bureau for public Enterprises (BPE) has invited bids for the Distribution arm of the power holding company of Nigeria (PHCN) PLC.
Three categories of bids are expected – high, fair, and low.
High bid is worth N100m, a fair bid is worth N60m and a low bid is worth N30M.
The probabilities of the first prospective bidder are 0.5; 0.3; 0.2 for high; fair; and low respectively.
Those of the second prospective bidder are 0.5; 0.2; and 0.3 respectively, while those of the third bidder are 0.4; 0.2; 0.4 respectively.
Question (i) Formulate the problem as: (a) A general decision tree (b) A secretary problem (ii) Analyse the situation completely (iii) What is the optimal contingency strategy?
(Dixon – Ogechi, 2001) 59  100M H 0.4 Solution F 60M 3rd 0.2 L30M H0.5 0.4 2nd F 3rd 0.2 0.3 L 3rd High 0.5 3rd H 0.5 1st Fair2nd F3 rd 0.3 0.2 L 0.3 3rd Low 0.2 3rd H 0.5 2nd F3rd 0.2 0.3 L 3rd Fig.
4.7: A general Formulation of a Secretary Problem The bids and their corresponding probabilities, and worth are to be repeated throughout the 3rd chance event fork like has been done in the first.
You can try that in your note and see how it would look like You can see how cumbersome the general decision tree formulation of the above problem is.
It is very time consuming to formulate because it has too many 60 branches.
As a result, the secretary formulation was developed to help analyse decision problems of this nature without going through the process as indicated above.
Now let us see the secretary formulation of the same problem.
Stop = 100m Stop = 100m 2 3 100m N64m N53m H 0.52nd H 0.5 3rd H 0.4 1 AB C 1stF 2nd F 3rd F 60m N 48.4m N48.4m N53m N 53m N60m N 64m 0.3 0.3 0.2 0.2L 2nd 0.3 L 3rd 0.4 L N30m N30m 30m Stop= 30m Stop = 30m Fig.
4.8: Formulation of a Secretary Problem EMV =100 X 0.4 + 60 X 0.2 + 30 X 0.4 C 40 + 12 + 12 = N64m EmV =64 x 0.5 + 60 x 0.2 + 30 x 0.3 B = 32 + 12 + 9 = N53M EMV = 64 x 0.5 + 60 x 0.2 + 30 x 0.3 B = 32 + 12 + 9 = N53M EMV = 53 x0.5 + 53 x0.3 + 30 x 0.2 A 61  = 26.5 + 15.9 + 6 = N48.4M Optimal contingency Strategy 2 3 100m N64m N53m H 0.5 2nd H 0.5 3rd H 0.4 1 A B C 1st F 2nd F 3rd F 60m N 48.4m N48.4m N53m N 53m N60m N 64m 0.3 0.3 0.2 0.2 L 0.3 L 0.4 L N30m N30m 30m Fig.
4.9: Optimal Contingency Strategy We can see that the major difference between the secretary formulation and the general decision tree formulation is that at decision nodes, instead of the tree of proceed to different chance event nodes and develop different branches, the branches are collapsed into one from the three decision nodes to form one change event node.
4.0 CONCLUSION Decision trees provide a graphical method of presenting decision problems.
The problems are represented in a form of a tree diagram with the probabilities and payoffs properly labelled for easier understanding, interpretation, and analysis.
Once a decision problem can be represented in tabular form, it can also be presented in form of a decision tree.
However, the general decision tree could become complex and cumbersome to understand and analysed if the nature of the problem is also complex and involves a large number of options.
The secretary formulation method of the general decision tree was developed as an improvement upon the general formulation to be used for analysing complex and cumbersome decision problems.
Generally, the 62 decision tree provides a simple and straight forward way of analysing decision problems.
5.0 SUMMARY Now let us cast our minds back to what we have learnt so far in this unit.
We learnt that the decision tree is mostly used for analysing a multi-stage decision problem.
That is, when there is a sequence of decisions to be made with each decision having influence on the next.
A decision tree is a pictorial method of showing a sequence of inter-related decisions and outcomes.
It is a graphical representation that outlines the different states of nature, alternatives courses of actions with their corresponding probabilities.
The branches of a decision tree are made up of the decision nodes at which point a decision is to be made, and the chance node at which point the EMV is to be computed.
The decision tree assist the clarification of a complex decision problem, it helps in the quantification of a decision situation, and to simplify the decision making process.
On the other hand, the decision tree could become time consuming, cumbersome and difficult to use or draw when the options and states of nature are too many.
In order to tackle this problem of the decision tree becoming too cumbersome, the secretary formulation of the decision tree was developed.
The secretary formulation of the decision tree collapses the different states of nature into one in situation where the states of nature are repetitive in nature.
Whichever formulation of the tree diagram, be it the general or the secretary formulation, the decision tree has two methods of analysis – the backward pass and the forward pass.
6.0 TUTOR MARKED ASSIGNMENT 1 What do you understand by the term decision tree?
2 Identify the two formulations of the decision tree and give the difference between them.
3 Outline the advantages and disadvantage of a decision tree.
4 Write short notes on the following: i Decision Node ii Chance Even Node 5 Identify and discuss the two method of analysis of a decision tree 6 Consider the matrix below 63  States of Nature Decision to purchase Good Poor Economic Economic condition Condition Apartment N50,000 N30,000 Building Office Building 100,000 - 40,000 Warehouse 30,000 10,000 Probability 0.60 0.40 Adapted from: Taylor III (2007, P. 490) Formulate the above decision problem as a decision tree, obtain the optimal contingency strategy, and advice the decision maker on the strategy to adopt.
7 Ajaokuta steel company is confronted with the choice of selecting between three operational options: (i) Produce commercially (ii) Build pilot plant, and (iii) Stop operating the steel plant.
The management has estimated the following probabilities- if the pilot plant is built, it has a 0.8 chance of high yield and 0.2 chance of low yield.
If the pilot plant does show a high yield, management estimates a probability of 0.75 that the commercial plant will have a high yield.
If the pilot plant shows a low yield, there is only a 0.1 chance that the commercial plant will show a high yield.
Finally, management’s best assessment of the yield on a commercial size plant without building a pilot plant first has a 0.6 probability of high yield.
A pilot plant will cost N3,000,000.
The profits earned under high and low yields conditions are N12,000,000 and – N1,200,000 respectively.
Find the optimum decision for the company.
(Cupta & Hira 2012: 777) Hint: The above problem is relatively simple.
Start with a decision node Draw three branches from the decision representing the three alternative decisions.
From the branch representing commercial production, draw a chance event node and put the corresponding probabilities and profits and stop.
From the branch representing Pilot plant, draw a chance event fork with two branches representing high and low yields with their probabilities.
From each of the chance event branches, construct another decision fork representing commercial production on one branch and stop at the other.
64 Finally, construct a chance event fork in each of the commercial production branches with the probabilities well represented, then put the profits for both high and low yields.
Form the third branch emanating from the first decision fork, label it stop operation.
Do not continue construction because it has no yields.
7.0 REFERENCES Dixon – Ogbechi, B.N (2001), Decision Theory in Business, Lagos: Philglad Nig.
Ltd. Denardo, Eric V. (2002), The Schience of Decision making: A Problem-Based Approach Using Excel.
New York: John Wiley.
Gupta, P.K and Hira, D.S., (2012), Operations Research, New – Delhi: S. Chand & Company.
Lucey, T. (1988), Quantitative Techniques: An Instructional Manual, London: DP Publications.
65 MODULE 2 UNIT 5 OPERATIONS RESEARCH (OR) 1.0 INTRODUCTION 2.0 OBJECTIVES 3.0 MAIN CONTENT 3.1 DEVELOPMENT OF OPERATIONS RESEARCH 3.2 DEFINITION OF OPERATIONS RESEARCH 3.3 CHARACTERISTICS OF OR 3.4 SCIENTIFIC METHOD IN OPERATIONS RESEARCH 3.4.1 THE JUDGEMENT PHASE 3.4.2 THE RESEARCH PHASE 3.4.3 THE ACTION PHASE 3.5 NECESSITY OF OPERATIONS RESEARCH IN INDUSTRY 3.6 SCOPE OF OPERATIONS RESEARCH 3.7 SCOPE OF OPERATIONS RESEARCH IN FINANCIAL MANAGEMENT 4.0 CONCLUSION 5.0 SUMMARY 6.0 TUTOR MARKED ASSIGNMENT 7.0 REFERENCES 1.0 INTRODUCTION We mentioned in Unit 1, module 1, that the subject Business Decision Analysis takes its root from the discipline Operations Research or Operational Research (OR).
This unit is devoted to giving us background knowledge of OR.
It is however, not going to be by any way exhaustive as substantial literature been developed about quantitative approaches to decision making.
The root of this literature are centuries old, but much of it emerged only during the past half century in tandem with the digital computer (Denardo, 2002).
The above assertion relates only to the development of the digital computer for use in solving OR problems.
The proper roots of OR can be traced to the early 1800s.
But it was in 1885 when Ferderick Taylor emphasized the application scientific analysis to methods of production, that it really began (Gupta & Hira 2012).
This unit provides only an overview of OR with emphasis on the definition of OR, characteristics, Scope, application, objectives, and phases of OR.
66  2.0 OBJECTIVES At the end of this study unit, you should be able to: 1 Briefly trace the development of OR.
2 Define OR.
3 Outline the characteristics of OR.
4 Give reasons why operations research is necessary in industries.
5 Discuss the scope of OR.
6 List and explain the areas of application of OR.
7 Outline the objectives of OR.
3.0 MAIN CONTENT 3.1 DEVELOPMENT OF OPERATIONS RESEARCH Gupta and Hira (2012) traced the development of Operations Research (OR) thus: i THE PERIOD BEFORE WORLD WAR II The roots of OR are as old as science and society.
Though the roots of OR extend to even early 1800s, it was in 1885 when Ferderick, W. Taylor emphasized the application of scientific analysis to methods of production, that the real start took place.
Taylor conducted experiments in connection with a simple shovel.
His aim was to find that weight load of Ore moved by shovel would result in the maximum amount of ore move with minimum fatigue.
After many experiments with varying weights, he obtained the optimum weight load, which though much lighter than that commonly used, provided maximum movement of ore during a day.
For a “first-class man” the proper load turned out to be 20 pounds.
Since the density of Ore differs greatly, a shovel was designed for each density of Ore so as to assume the proper weight when the shovel was correctly filled.
Productivity rose substantially after this change.
Henry L. Gantt, also of the scientific management era, developed job sequencing and scheduling methods by mapping out each job from machine to machine, in order to minimize delay.
Now, with the Gantt procedure, it is possible to plan machine loading months in advance and still quote delivery dates accurately.
Another notable contributor is A.K.
Erlang a Danish Mathematician who published his work on the problem of congestion of telephone traffic.
During that period, operators were unable to handle the calls the moment they were made, resulting in 67 delayed calls.
A few years after its appearance, his work was accepted by the British Post Office as the basis calculating circuit facilities.
Other early contributors include F.W.
Harris, who published his work in the area of inventory control in 1915, H.C. Levinson an American Astronomer who applied scientific analysis to the problems of merchandizing.
However, the first industrial Revolution was the main contributing factor towards the development of OR.
Before this period, most of the industries were small scale, employing only a handful of men.
The advent of machine tools – the replacement of man by machine as a source of power and improved means of transportation and communication resulted in fast flourishing industries.
If became increasingly difficult for a single man to perform all the managerial functions (Planning, sales, purchasing production, etc).
Consequently, a division of management functions took place.
Managers of production marketing, finance, personal, research and development etc.
began to appear.
For example, production department was sub- divided into sections like maintenance, quality control, procurement, production planning etc.
ii WORLD WAR II During War II, the military management in England called on a team of scientists to study the strategic and tactical problems of air and land defence.
This team was under the leadership of Professor P. M. S. Blackett of University of Manchester and a former Naval Officer.
“Blackett’s circus”, as the group was called, includedthree Physiologists, two Mathematical Physicists, oneAstrophysicist, one Army officer, one Surveyor, one general physicist and two Mathematicians.
The objective of this team was to find out the most effective allocation of limited military resources to the various military operations and to activities within each operation.
The application included effective use of newly invented radar, allocation of British Air Force Planes to missions and the determination best patters for searching submarines.
This group of scientist formed the first OR team.
The name Operations Research (or Operational Research) was coined in 1940 because the team was carrying out research on military operations.
The encouraging results of the team’s efforts lead to the formation of more of such teams in the British Armed services and the use of such scientific teams soon spread to the western allies – United States, Canada, and France.
Although the science of Operations Research originated in England, the United States soon took the lead.
In the United States, OR terms helped in developing strategies for mining operations, inventing new flight patterns, and planning of sea mines.
68  iii POST WORLD WAR II Immediately after the war, the success of military teams attracted the attention of industrial mangers who were seeking solutions to their problems.
Industrial operations research in U.K and USA developed along different lines, and in UKthe critical economic efficiency and creation of new markets.
Nationalisation of new key industries further increased the potential field for OR.
Consequently OR soon spread from military to government, industrial, social and economic planning.
In the USA, the situation was different impressed by is dramatic success in UK, defence operations research in USA was increased.
Most of the war-experienced OR workers remained in the military services.
Industrial executives did not call for much help because they were returning to peace and many of them believed that it was merely a new applicati0on of an old technique.
Operations research has been known by a variety of names in that country such as Operational Analysis, Operations Evaluation, Systems Analysis, Systems Evaluation, Systems Research, Decision Analysis, Quantitative Analysis, Decision Science, and Management Science.
In 1950, OR was introduced as a subject for academic study in American Universities.
They were generally schools of Engineering, Public Administration, Business Management, Applied Mathematics, Economics, Computer Sciences, etc.
Since this subject has been gaining ever increasing importance for the student in Mathematics, statistics, commerce, Economics, Management and Engineering, to increase the impact of operations research, the Operations Research Society of America (ORSA) was formed in 1950.
In 1953 the Institute of Management Science (IMS) was established.
Other countries followed suit and in 1959, International Federation of OR Societies was established, and in many countries, International Journals OR began to appear.
Today, the impact of Operations Research can be felt in many areas.
This is shown by the ever increasing member of educational institutions offering it at degree level.
The fast increase in the number of management consulting firms speak of the popularity of OR.
Lately, OR activities have spread to diverse fields such as hospitals, libraries, city planning, transportations systems, crime investigation etc.
3.2 DEFINITION OF OPERATIONS RESEARCH Many definitions of OR have been suggested by writers and experts in the field of operations Research.
We shall consider a few of them.
69 1 Operations Research is the applications of scientific methods by inter disciplinary teams to problems involving the control of organized (Man-Machine) Systems so as to provide solutions which best serve the purpose of the organization as a whole (Ackoff & Sasieni, 1991).
2 Operations Research is applied decision theory.
It uses any scientific, Mathematical or Logical means to attempt to cope with the problems that confront the executive when he tries to achieve a thorough going rationality in dealing with his decision problems (Miller and Starr, 1973).
3 Operations research is a scientific approach to problem solving for executive management (Wagner, 1973).
4 Operations Research is the art of giving bad answers to problems, to which, otherwise, worse answers are given (Saaty, 1959).
5 OR, in the most general sense, can be characterized as the application of scientific methods, tools, and techniques to problems involving the operations of systems so as to provide those in control of the operations with optimum solutions to the problems.
(Churchman, Ackoff, and Arnoff, 1957).
It could be noticed that most of the above definitions are not satisfactory.
This is because of the following reasons.
i They have been suggested at different times in the development of operations research and hence emphasis only one other aspect.
ii The interdisciplinary approach which is an important characteristic of operations research is not included in most of the definitions.
iii It is not easy to define operations research precisely as it is not a science representing any well-defined social, biological or physical phenomenon.
3.3 CHARACTERISTICS OF OR Ihemeje (2002) presents four vital characteristics of OR.
1 The OR approach is to develop a scientific model of the system under investigation with which to compare the probable outcomes of alternative management decision or strategies.
2 OR is essentially an aid to decision making.
The result of an operation study should have a direct effect on managerial action, management decision based on the finding of an OR model are likely to be more scientific and better informed.
70 3 It is based on the scientific method.
It involves the use of carefully constructed models based on some measurable variables.
It is, in essence, a quantitative and logical approach rather than a qualitative one.
The dominant techniques of OR are mathematical and statistical.
4 OR model will be constructed for a particular “problem area”.
This means that the model has “boundaries” and only considers a small part of a large organization or system.
This may result in sub-optimisation of solution to a problem.
An OR project is often a team effort involving people drawn from many different backgrounds including accountants, economists, engineers as well as OR experts themselves.
Other characteristics of OR are: 5 It is system (Executive) Oriented 6 It makes use of interdisciplinary teams 7 Application of scientific method 8 Uncovering of new problems 9 Improvement in quality of decision 10 Use of computer 11 Quantitative solution 12 Human factors (Gupta & Hira, 2012) 3.4 SCIENTIFIC METHOD IN OPERATIONS RESEARCH Of these three phases, the research phase is the longest.
The other two phases are equally important as they provide the basis of the research phase.
We now consider each phase briefly as presented by Gupta & Hira (2012).
3.4.1THE JUDGEMENT PHASE The judgement phases of the scientific method of OR consists of the following: A Determination of the Operation: An operation is the combination of different actions dealing with resources (e.g men and machines) which form a structure from which an action with regards to broader objectives is maintained.
For example an act of assembling an engine is an operation.
B Determination of Objectives and Values Associated with the operation: In the judgement phase, due care must be given to define correctly the frame of references of operations.
Efforts should be made to find the type of situation, e.g manufacturing, engineering, tactical, strategic etc.
71  C Determination of Effectiveness Measures: The measure of effectiveness implies the measure of success of a model in representing a problem and providing a solution.
It is the connecting link between the objectives and the analysis required for corrective action.
D Formulation of the Problem Relative to the Objective: Operation analysis must determine the type of problem, its origin, and causes.
The following are some types of problems: i Remedial type with its origin in actual or threatened accidents e.g.
air crashes, job performance hazards.
ii Optimization type e.g.
performing a job more efficiently.
iii Transference type consisting of applying the new advances, improvements and inventions in one field to other fields.
iv Prediction typee.g.
forecasting and problems associated with future developments and inventions 3.4.2 THE RESEARCH PHASE The research phase of OR includes the following: a.
Observation and Data Collection: This enhances better understanding of the problem.
b. Formulation of Relevant Hypothesis: Tentative explanations, when formulated as propositions are called hypothesis.
The formulation of a good hypothesis depends upon the sound knowledge of the subject–matter.
A hypothesis must provide an answer to the problem in question.
c. Analysis of Available Information and Verification of Hypothesis: Quantitative as well as qualitative methods may be used to analyse available data.
d. Prediction and Generalisation of Results and Consideration of Alternative Methods: Once a model has been verified, a theory is developed from the model to obtain a complete description of the problem.
This is done by studying the effect of changes in the parameters of the model.
The theory so developed may be used to extrapolate into the future.
3.4.3 THE ACTION PHASE The action phase consists of making recommendations for remedial action to those who first posed the problem and who control the operations directly.
These 72 recommendations consists of a clear statement of the assumptions made, scope and limitations of the information presented about the situation, alternative courses of action, effects of each alternative as well as the preferred course of action.
A primary function of OR group is to provide an administrator with better understanding of the implications of the decisions he makes.
The scientific method supplements his ideas and experiences and helps him to attain his goals fully.
3.5 NECESSITY OF OPERATIONS RESEARCH IN INDUSTRY Having studied the scientific methods of operations research, we now focus on why OR is important or necessary in industries.
OR came into existence in connection with war operations, to decide the strategy by which enemies could be harmed to the maximum possible extent with the help of the available equipment.
War situations required reliable decision making.
But the need for reliable decision techniques is also needed by industries for the following reasons.
 Complexity: Today, industrial undertakings have become large and complex.
This is because the scope of operations has increased.
Many factors interact with each other in a complex way.
There is therefore a great uncertainty about the outcome of interaction of factors like technological, environmental, competitive etc.
For instance, a factory production schedule will take the following factors into account: i Customer demand.
ii Raw material requirement.
iii Equipment Capacity and possibility of equipment failure.
iv Restrictions on manufacturing processes.
It could be seen that, it is not easy to prepare a schedule which is both economical and realistic.
This needs mathematical models, which in addition to optimization, help to analyse the complex situation.
With such models, complex problems can be split into simpler parts, each part can be analysed separately and then the results can be synthesized to give insights into the problem.
 Scattered Responsibility and Authority: In a big industry, responsibility and authority of decision-making is scattered throughout the organization and thus the organization, if it is not conscious, may be following inconsistent goals.
Mathematical quantification of OR overcomes this difficulty to a great extent.
73  Uncertainty: There is a lot of uncertainty about economic growth.
This makes each decision costlier and time consuming.
OR is essential from the point of view of reliability.
 Knowledge Explosion: Knowledge is increasing at a very fast pace.
Majority of industries are not up-to-date with the latest knowledge and are therefore, at a disadvantage.
OR teams collect the latest information for analysis purpose which is quit useful for the industries.
3.6 SCOPE OF OPERATIONS RESEARCH We now turn our attention towards learning about the areas that OR covers.
OR as a discipline is very broad and is relevant in the following areas.
 In Industry: OR is relevant in the field or industrial management where there is a chain of problems or decisions starting from the purchase of raw materials to the dispatch of finished goods.
The management is interested in having an overall view of the method of optimizing profits.
In order to take scientific decisions, an OR team will have to consider various alternative methods of producing the goods and the returns in each case.
OR should point out the possible changes in overall structure like installation of a new machine, introduction of more automation etc.
Also, OR has been successfully applied in production, blending, product mix, inventory control, demand forecast, sales and purchases, transportation, repair and maintenance, scheduling and sequencing, planning, product control, etc.
 In Defence: OR has wide application in defence operations.
In modern warfare, the defence operations are carried out by a number of different agencies, namely – Air force, Army, and Navy.
The activities perfumed by each of these agencies can further be divided into sub-activities viz: operations, intelligence, administration, training, etc.
There is thus a need to coordinate the various activities involved in order to arrive at an optimum strategy and to achieve consistent goals.
 In Management: Operations Research is a problem-solving and decision- making science.
It is a tool kit for scientific and programmable rules providing the management a qualitative basis for decision making regarding 74 the operations under its control.
Some of the area of management where OR techniques have been successfully applied are as follows: A Allocation and Distribution i Optimal allocation of limited resources such as men, machines, materials, time, and money.
ii Location and size of warehouses, distribution centres retail depots etc iii Distribution policy B Production and Facility Planning i Selection, location and design of production plants, distribution centre and retail outlets.
ii Project scheduling and allocation of resources.
iii Preparation of forecast for the various inventory items and computing economic order quantities and reorder levels.
iv Determination of number and size of the items to be produced.
v Maintenances policy and preventive maintenance.
vi Scheduling and sequencing of production runs by proper allocation of machines.
C Procurement i What, how, and when to purchase at minimum purchase cost.
ii Bidding and replacement policies.
iii Transportation planning and vendor analysis.
D Marketing i Product selection, timing, and competitive actions.
ii Selection of advertisement media.
iii Demand forecast and stock levels.
iv Customer preference for size, colour and packaging of various products.
v Best time to launch a product.
E Finance i Capital requirement, cash-flow analysis.
ii Credit policy, credit risks etc.
iii Profit plan for the organisation.
iv Determination of optimum replacement policies.
v Financial planning, dividend policies, investment and portfolio management, auditing etc.
75 F Personnel i Selection of personnel, determination of retirement age and skills.
ii Recruitment policies and assignment of jobs.
iii Wages/salaries administration.
G Research and Development i Determination of areas for research and development.
ii Reliability and control of development projects.
iii Selection of projects and preparation of budgets.
3.7 SCOPE OF OPERATIONS RESEARCH IN FINANCIAL MANAGEMENT The scope of OR in financial management covers the following areas i Cash Management: Linear programming techniques are helpful in determining the allocation of funds to each section.
Linear programming techniques have also been applied to identify sections having excess funds; these funds may be diverted to the sections that need them.
ii Inventory Control: Inventory control techniques of OR can help management to develop better inventory policies and bring down the investment in inventories.
These techniques help to achieve optimum balance between inventory carrying costs and shortage cost.
They help to determine which items to hold, how much to hold, when to order, and how much to order.
iii Simulation Technique: Simulation considers various factors that affect and present and projected cost of borrowing money from commercial banks, and tax rates etc.
and provides an optimum combination of finance (debt, equity, retained earnings) for the desired amount of capital.
Simulation replaces subjective estimates, judgement and hunches of the management by providing reliable information.
iv Capital Budgeting It involves evaluation of various investment proposals (viz, market introduction of new products and replacement of equipment with a new one).
Often, decisions have been made by considering internal rate of return or net present values.
Also the EMV method as discussed early can be used to evaluate investment proposals/project.
4.0 CONCLUSION Operations Research as we know it today, as developed duringWar II, when the military management in England called on a team of scientists to study the 76 strategic and tactical problems of air and land defence.
Ever since that period,the impact of Operations Research can be felt in many areas.
This is shown by the ever increasing member of educational institutions offering it at degree level.
The fast increase in the number of management consulting firms speak of the popularity of OR.
Lately, OR activities have spread to diverse fields such as hospitals, libraries, city planning, transportations systems, crime investigation etc.
In business, Operations Research has been used as a problem-solving and decision-making science.
It is a tool kit for scientific and programmable rules providing the management a qualitative basis for decision making regarding the operations under its control.
OR techniques have been successfully applied in areas ofAllocation and Distribution, Production and Facility Planning, Procurement, Marketing, Finance, Personnel and, Research and Development.
5.0 SUMMARY This has provided us with background information on the area of Operations Research.
As stated in the opening unit of this study material, the discipline Business Decision Analysis or Analysis for Business Decisions takes its root from operations research.
The History and Development of operations research which is as old as science and society.
Though the roots of or extend to even early 1800s, it was in 1885 when Ferderick, w. Taylor emphasized the application of scientific analysis to methods of production, that the real start took place.
Taylor conducted experiments in connection with a simple shovel.
However, Operations Research as we know it today can be traced to the period during War II, when the military management in England called on a team of scientists to study the strategic and tactical problems of air and land defence.
This team was under the leadership of Professor P. M. S. Blackett of University of Manchester and a former Naval Officer.
Immediately after the war, the success of military teams attracted the attention of industrial mangers who were seeking solutions to their problems.
Industrial operations research in U.K and USA developed along different lines, and in UK the critical economic efficiency and creation of new markets.
The modern day Operations Research is defined as the applications of scientific methods by inter disciplinary teams to problems involving the control of organized (Man- Machine) Systems so as to provide solutions which best serve the purpose of the organization as a whole (Ackoff & Sasieni, 1991).
The Characteristics of OR include the fact that its approach is to develop a scientific model of the system under investigation with which to compare the probable outcomes of alternative management decision or strategies.
77 6.0 TUTOR MARKED ASSIGNMENT 1.
Trace the history and development of operations to the founding fathers of the field of management.
2.
Give two definitions of operations research with identified authors.
3.
Identify the four main characteristics of operations research.
4.
Identify and briefly discuss the phases involved in the Scientific Method in Operations research.
5.
Give reason why reliable decision techniques are needed by industries.
6.
Identify and discuss the areas where operations research is relevant.
7 Highlight the key areas where operations research is important in Financial Management.
7.0 REFERENCES Ackoff, R. and Sisieni, M. (1991), Fundamentals of Operations Research, New York: John Wiley and Sons Inc. Churchman, C. W., Ackoff, R. L., and Arnoff, E. L.(1957), Introduction to Operations Research, New York: John Wiley and Sons Inc. Denardo, Eric V. (2002), The Schience of Decision making: A Problem-Based Approach Using Excel.
New York: John Wiley.
Gupta, P.K and Hira, D.S., (2012), Operations Research, New – Delhi: S. Chand & Company.
Ihemeje, J. C. (2002), Fundamentals of Business Decision Analysis, Lagos- Sibon Books Miller, D. W. and Starr, M. K. (1973), Executive Decision and Operations Research, 2nd ed., New Jersey, Englewood Cliff: Prentice-Hall, Inc. Saaty, T. L. (1959), Mathematical models of Operations Research, New York: McGraw-Hill Boom Co. Wagner, H. M. (1973), Principles of Operations Research, New Delhi- India: Prentice-Hall 78 UNIT 6: MODELLING IN OPERATIONS RESEARCH 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objectives 3.0 Main Content 3.1 Definition 3.2 Classification of Models 3.3 Characteristics of Good models 3.4 Advantages of Models 3.5 Limitations of Models 3.6 model Construction 3.7 Approximation (Simplification) of Models 3.8 Types of mathematical Models 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 References 7.0 Tutor Marked Assignment 1.0 Introduction The construction and use of models is at the core of operations research.
Operations research is concerned with scientifically deciding how to best design and operate man-machine systems, usually under conditions requiring the allocation of scarce resources.
Modelling is a scientific activity that aims to make a particular part or feature of the world easier to understand, define, quantify, visualize, or simulate.Models are typically used when it is either impossible or impractical to create experimental conditions in which scientists can directly measure outcomes.
Direct measurement of outcomes under controlled conditions will always be more reliable than modelled estimates of outcomes.
This unit introduces us to the subject of modelling and exposes us to characterisation, classification, uses, and construction of scientific models.
2.0 OBJECTIVES At the end of this unit, you should be able to 1.
Define a Model 2.
Describe modelling 3.
Give a classification of models 4.
Outline the advantages and disadvantages of models 5.
Explain the limitations of model 6.
Describe how models are constructed 79 3.0 Main Content 3.1 Definition Scientific modelling is an activity the aim of which is to make a particular part or feature of the world easier to understand, define, quantify, visualize, or simulate.
It requires selecting and identifying relevant aspects of a situation in the real world and then using different types of models for different aims, such as conceptual models to better understand, operational models to operationalize, mathematical models to quantify, and graphical models to visualize the subject (http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Scientific_modelling ) Adebayo et al (2010) define Modelling as a process whereby a complex life problem situation is converted into simple representation of the problem situation.
They further described a model as a simplified representation of complex reality.
Thus, the basic objective of any model is to use simple inexpensive objects to represent complex and uncertain situations.
Models are developed in such a way that they concentrate on exploring the key aspects or properties of the real object and ignore the other objects considered as being insignificant.
Models are useful not only in science and technology but also in business decision making by focusing on the key aspects of the business decisions(Adebayo et al, 2010).
A model as used in Operations Research is defined as an idealised representation of real life situation.
It represents one of the few aspects of reality.
Diverse items such as maps, multiple activity charts, an autobiography, PERT network, break- even equations, balance sheets, etc, are all models because they each one of them represent a few aspects of the real life situation.
A map for instance represents the physical boundaries but ignores the heights and the various places above sea levels (Gupta and Hira, 2012).
According to Reeb and Leavengood (1998), Models can be defined as representations of real systems.
They can be iconic (made to look like the real system), abstract, or somewhere in between.
3.2 Classification of Models The following are the various schemes by which models can be classified: i.
By degree of abstraction ii.
By function iii.
By structure iv.
By nature of the environment v. By the extent of generality vi.
By the time horizon 80 Let us now briefly discuss the above classifications of mosels as presentedby Gupta and Hira (2012) i.
By Degree of Abstraction.
Mathematical models such as Linear Programming formulation of the blending problem, or transportation problem are among the most abstract types of models since they require not only mathematical knowledge, but also great concentration to the real idea of the real-life situation they represent.
Language models such as languages used in cricket or hockey match commentaries are also abstract models.
Concrete models such as models of the earth, dam, building, or plane are the least abstract models since they instantaneously suggest the shape or characteristics of the modelled entity.
ii.
By Function The types of models involved here include Descriptive models which explain the various operations in non-mathematical language and try to define the functional relationships and interactions between various operations.
They simply describe some aspects of the system on the basis of observation, survey, questionnaire, etc.
but do not predict its behaviour.
Organisational charts, pie charts, and layout plan describe the features of their respective systems.
Predictive models explain or predict the behaviour of the system.
Exponential smoothing forecast model, for instance, predict the future demand Normative or prescriptive modelsdevelop decision rules or criteria for optimal solutions.
They are applicable to repetitive problems, the solution process of which can be programmed without managerial involvement.
Liner programming is also a prescriptive or normative model as it prescribes what the managers must follow.
iii.
By Structure  Iconic or physical models In iconic or physical models, properties of real systems are represented by the properties themselves.
Iconic models look like the real objects but could be scaled downward or upward, or could employ change in materials of real object.
Thus, iconic models resemble the system they represent but differ in size, they are 81 images.
They thus could be full replicas or scaled models like architectural building, model plane, model train, car, etc.
 Analogue or Schematic Models Analogue models can represent dynamic situations and are used more often than iconic models since they are analogous to the characteristics of the system being studied.
They use a set of properties which the system under study possesses.
They are physical models but unlike iconic models, they may or may not look like the reality of interest.
They explain specific few characteristics of an idea and ignore other details of the object.
Examples of analogue models are flow diagrams , maps, circuit diagrams, organisational chart etc.
 Symbolic or mathematical models Symbolic models employ a set of mathematical symbols (letters, numbers etc.)
to represent the decision variables of the system under study.
These variables are related together by mathematical equations/in-equations which describe the properties of the system.
A solution from the model is, then, obtained by applying well developed mathematical techniques.
The relationship between velocity, acceleration, and distance is an example of a mathematical model.
Similarly, cost- volume-profit relationship is a mathematical model used in investment analysis.
iv.
By Nature of Environment  Deterministic models In deterministic models, variables are completely defined and the outcomes are certain.
Certainty is the state of nature assumed in these models.
They represent completely closed systems and the parameters of the systems have a single value that does not change with time.
For any given set of input variables, the same output variables always result.
E.O.Q model is deterministic because the effect of changes in batch size on total cost is known.
Similarly, linear programming, transportation, and assignment models are deterministic models.
 Probabilistic Models These are the products of the environment of risk and uncertainty.
The input and/or output variables take the form of probability distributions.
They are semi-closed models and represent the likelihood of occurrence of an event.
Thus, they represent to an extent the complexity of the real world and uncertainty prevailing in it.
As a example, the exponential smoothing method for forecasting demand a probabilistic model.
82 v. By Extent of Generality  General Models: Linear programming model is known as a general model since it can be used for a number of functions e.g.
product mix, production scheduling, and marketing of an organisation.
 Specific Models: Sales response curve or equation as a function of advertising is applicable to the marketing function alone.
vi.
By the Time Horizon a. Static Models: These are one time decision models.
They represent the system at specified time and do not take into account the changes over time.
In this model, cause and effect occur almost simultaneously and the lag between the two is zero.
They are easier to formulate, manipulate and solve.
EOQ is a static model.
b.
Dynamic Models: These are models for situations for which time often plays an important role.
They are used for optimisation of multi-stage decision problems which require a series of decisions with the outcome of each depending upon the results of the previous decisions in the series.
Dynamic programming is a dynamic model 3.3 Characteristics of Good Models The following are characteristics of good models as presented by Gupta and Hira (2012) 1.
The number of simplifying assumptions should be as few as possible.
2.
The number of relevant variables should be as few as possible.
This means the model should be simple yet close to reality.
3.
It should assimilate the system environmental changes without change in its framework.
4.
It should be adaptable to parametric type of treatment.
5.
It should me easy and economical to construct.
3.4 Advantages of a Model 1 It provides a logical and systematic approach to the problem.
2.
It indicates the scope as well as limitation of the problem.
3.
It helps in finding avenues for new research and improvement in a system.
4.
It makes the overall structure of the problem more comprehensible and helps in dealing with the problem in its entirety.
5.
It permits experimentation in analysis of a complex system without directly interfering in the working and environment of the system 83 3.5 Limitations of a Model 1.
Models are more idealised representations of reality and should not be regarded as absolute in any case.
2.
The reality of a model for a particular situation can be ascertained only by conducting experiments on it.
3.6 Constructing a Model Formulating a problem requires an analysis of the system under study.
This analysis shows the various phases of the system and the way it can be controlled.
Problem formulation is the first stage in constructing a model.
The next step involves the definition of the measure of effectiveness that is, constructing a model in which the effectiveness of the system is expressed as a function of the variables defining the system.
The general Operations Research form is E = f(x, y), i i Where E = effectiveness of the system, x = controllable variables, i y = uncontrollable variables but do affect E. i Deriving a solution from such a model consists of determining those values of control variables xi, for which the measure of effectiveness is measure of effectiveness is optimised.
Optimised includes both maximisation (in case of profit, production capacity, etc.)
and minimisation (in case of losses, cost of production, etc.).
The following steps are involved in the construction of a model 1.
Selecting components of the system 2.
Pertinence of components 3.
Combining the components 4.
Substituting symbols 3.7 Types of Mathematical Models The following are the types of mathematical models available: 1.
Mathematical techniques 2.
Statistical techniques 3.
Inventory models 4.
Allocation models 5.
Sequencing models 6.
Project scheduling by PERT and CPM 7.
Routing models 84 8.
Competitive models 9.
Queuing models 10.
Simulation techniques.
4.0 Conclusion We have seen that models and model construction are very critical in the practice of operations research because they provide the process whereby a complex life problem situation is converted into simple representation of the problem situation.
They further described a model as a simplified representation of complex reality.
The basic objective of any model is to use simple inexpensive objects to represent complex and uncertain situations.
Models are developed in such a way that they concentrate on exploring the key aspects or properties of the real object and ignore the other objects considered as being insignificant.
Models are useful not only in science and technology but also in business decision making by focusing on the key aspects of the business decisions.
As a result, no meaningful progress can be done in the field of operations research without representing a problem in the form of a model.
5.0 Summary This unit introduced us to the concept of models.
We have learnt about the importance of models to operations research.
The unit opened with a consideration of various definitions of models.
Among the definitions is that by Adebayo et al (2010) who defined modelling as a process whereby a complex life problem situation is converted into simple representation of the problem situation.
A model as used in Operations Research is defined as an idealised representation of real life situation.
It represents one of the few aspects of reality.
Next, we gave the following categorisation of models- by degree of abstraction, by structure, by nature of the environment, by the extent of generality, by the time horizon.
Further, we considered the advantages of a model, limitations of a model, characteristics of good model, constructing a model, and types of mathematical models.
The above topics have helped us in developing introductory knowledge of models, how they are constructed, their uses and characteristics.
In subsequent chapters, we shall consider in details, some models and how they are applied in solving practical problems in operations research.
6.0 Tutor Marked Assignment 1.
Differentiate between model and modelling.
2.
List the different classifications of models we have.
85 3.
List and explain the classification of models by structure.
4.
Outline five characteristics of a good model.
5.
List the advantages of a model.
6.
Formulate and clearly describe a simplified version of and OR model.
7.
List the types of mathematical models you know.
7.0 References Adebayo O.A.
et al (2006), Operations Research in Decision and Production Management.
Gupta, P.K and Hira, D.S., (2012), Operations Research, New – Delhi: S. Chand & Company.
Reeb,J., and Leavengood , S. (1998) “Operations Research, Performance Excellence in the Wood Products Industry”, October EM 8718 86 UNIT 7: SIMULATION 1.0 INTRODUCTION 2.0 OBJECTIVES 3.0 MAIN CONTENT 3.1 Definition 3.2 Advantages of Simulation Technique 3.3 Application of Simulation 3.4 Limitations of Simulation Technique 3.5 Monte Carlo Simulation 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 References 7.0 Tutor Marked Assignment 1.0 Introduction Simulation is primarily concerned with experimentally predicting the behaviour of a real system for the purpose of designing the system or modifying behaviour (Budnick et al., 1988).
The main reason for a researcher to resort to simulation is twofold.
First of all, simulation is probably the most flexible tool imaginable.
Take queuing as an example.
While it is very difficult to incorporate reneging, jumping queues and other types of customer behaviour in the usual analytical models this presents no problem for simulation.
A systemmay have to run for a very long time to reach a steady state.
As a result, a modeller may be more interested in transient states, which are easily available in a simulation.
The second reason is that simulation is very cheap.
Building a model that simulates the opening of a new restaurant will most certainly be a lot less expensive than trying it out.
Even if costs are no subject, the time frame can be compressed in a simulation.
For instance, if we were to observe the demand structure of a product, a long time would be required, so that results would probably be available when the product has become technologically obsolete anyway (Eiselt and Sandblom, 2012).
This unit exposes us to the subject of simulation, and its various components.
2.0 OBJECTIVES At the end of this unit, you should be able to 1.
Define Simulation 2.
Identify when to use simulation 87 3.
Outline the advantages of simulation technique 4.
Identify the areas of application of simulation 5.
Describe the limitations of simulation 6.
Explain the Monte Carlo Simulation 4.0 Main Content 3.1 Definition According Budnick et al (1988), Simulation is primarily concerned with experimentally predicting the behaviour of a real system for the purpose of designing the system or modifying behaviour.In other words, simulation is a tool that builds a model of a real operation that is to be investigated, and then feeds the system with externally generated data.
We generally distinguish between deterministic and stochastic simulation.
The difference is that the data that are fed into the system are either deterministic or stochastic.
This chapter will deal only with stochastic simulation, which is sometimes also referred to as Monte Carlo simulation in reference to the Monte Carlo Casinos and the (hopefully) random outcome of their games of chance.
According to Gupta and Hira (2012), simulation is an imitation of reality.
“They further stated that simulation is the representation of reality through the use of models or other device which will react in the same manner as reality under given set of conditions.
Simulation has also been defined the use of a system model that has the designed characteristics of reality in order to produce the essence of actual operation.
According to Donald G. Malcom, a simulated model may be defined as one which depicts the working of a large scale system of men, machine, materials, and information operating over a period of time in a simulated environment of the actual real world condition.
A good example of simulation is a children amusement or a cyclical park where children enjoy themselves in a simulated environment like Amusement Parks, Disney Land, Planetarium shows where boats, train rides, etc.
are done to simulate actual experience.
In simulation, operational information of the behaviour of a system which aides in decision making is obtained unlike that which exist in analytical modelling technique where optimal solution attempt is made to obtain descriptive information through experimentation.
Generally, a simulation model is the totality of many simple models, and model interrelationship among system variables and components.
A model can thus, be decomposed into many simple but related 88 models.
Models can be used for predicting the behaviour of a system under varying conditions.
It focuses mainly on detailed physical or financial operations of a system.Model development through the use of computers for simulation has resulted in techniques for identifying possible optimal solution for a decision problem by evaluating various suggested alternatives and then suggesting results (Adebayo et al, 2010).
3.2 Advantages of Simulation Technique When the simulation technique is compared with the mathematical programming and slandered probability analysis, offers a number of advantages over these techniques.
Some of the advantages are: 1.
Simulation offers solution by allowing experimentation with models of a system without interfering with the real system.
Simulation is therefore a bypass for complex mathematical analysis.
2.
Through simulation, management can foresee the difficulties and bottlenecks which may come up due to the introduction of new machines, equipment or process.
It therefore eliminates the need for costly trial and error method of trying out the new concept on real methods and equipment.
3.
Simulation is relatively free from mathematics, and thus, can be easily understood by the operating personnel and non-technical managers.
This helps in getting the proposed plan accepted and implemented.
4.
Simulation models are comparatively flexible and can be modified to accommodate the changing environment of the real situation.
5.
Simulation technique is easier to use than mathematical models and its considered quite superior to mathematical analysis.
6.
Computer simulation can compress the performance of a system over several years and involving large calculation into few minutes of computer running time.
7.
Simulation has the advantage of being used in training the operating and managerial staff in the operation of complex plans.
3.3 Application of Simulation Simulation is quite versatile and commonly applied technique for solving decision problems.
It has been applied successfully to a wide range of problems of science and technology as given below: i.
In the field of basic sciences, it has been used to evaluate the area under a curve, to estimate the value of , in matrix inversion and study of particlediffusion.
ii.
In industrial problems including shop floor management, design of computer systems, design of queuing systems, inventory control, communication 89 networks, chemical processes, nuclear reactors, and scheduling of production processes.
iii.
In business and economic problems, including customer behaviour, price determination, economic forecasting, portfolio selection, and capital budgeting.
iv.
In social problems, including population growth, effect of environment on health and group behaviour.
v. In biomedical systems, including fluid balance, distribution of electrolyte in human body, and brain activities.
vi.
In the design of weapon systems, war strategies and tactics.
vii.
In the study of projects involving risky investments.
3.4 Limitations of Simulation Technique Despite the many advantages of simulation, it might suffer from some deficiencies in in large and complex problems.
Some of these limitations are given as follows: i. Simulation does not produce optimum results when the model deals with uncertainties, the results of simulation only reliable approximations subject to statistical errors.
ii.
Quantification of variables is difficult in a number of situations; it is not possible to quantify all the variables that affect the behaviour of the system.
iii.
In very large and complex problems, the large number of variables and the interrelationship between them make the problem very unwieldy and hard to program.
iv.
Simulation is by no means, a cheap method of analysis.
v. Simulation has too much tendency to rely on simulation models.
This results in application of the technique to some simple problems which can more appropriately be handled by other techniques of mathematical programming.
3.5 Monte Carlo Simulation The Monte Carlo method of simulation was developed by two mathematicians Jon Von Neumann and Stainslaw Ulam, during World War II, to study how far neurone would travel through different materials.
The technique provides an approximate but quite workable solution to the problem.
With the remarkable success of this technique on the neutron problem, it soon became popular and found many applications in business and industry, and at present, forms a very important tool of operation researcher’s tool kit.
90 The technique employs random number and is used to solve problems that involve probability and where physical experimentation is impracticable, and formulation of mathematical model is impossible.
It is a method of simulation by sampling technique.
The following are steps involved in carrying out Monte Carlo simulation.
1.
Select the measure of effectiveness (objective function) of the problem.
It is either to be minimised or maximised.
2.
Identify the variables that affect the measure of effectiveness significantly.
For example, a number of service facilities in a queuing problem or demand, lead time and safety stock in inventory problem.
3.
Determine the cumulative probability distribution of each variable selected in step 2.
Plot these distributions with the values of the variables along the x- axis and cumulative probability values along the y-axis.
4.
Get a set of random numbers.
5.
Consider each random number as a decimal value of the cumulative probability distribution.
Enter the cumulative distribution along the y-axis.
Project this point horizontally till it meets the distribution curve.
Then project the point of distribution down on the x-axis.
6.
Record the value (or values if several variables are being simulated) generated in step 5.
Substitute the formula chosen for measure of effectiveness and find its simulated value.
7.
Repeat steps 5 and 6 until sample is large enough to the satisfaction of the decision maker.
Let us consider a simple example as presented by Gupta and Hira (2012).
EXAMPLE Customers arrive at a service facility to get required service.
The interval and service times are constant and are 1.8minutes and minutes respectively.
Simulate the system for 14minutes.
Determine the average waiting time of a customer and the idle time of the service facility.
Solution The arrival times of customers at the service station within 14 minutes will be: Customer : 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 Arrival time : 0 1.8 3.6 5.4 7.2 9.0 10.8 12.6 (minutes) 91 The time at which the service station begins and ends within time period of 14 minutes is shown below.
Waiting time of customers and idle time of service facility are also calculated Customer Service Waiting time Idle time of Begins ends of customer service facility 1 0 4 0 0 2 4 8 4-1.8 = 2.2 0 3 8 12 8-3.6 = 4.4 0 4 12 16 12-5.4 = 6.6 0 The waiting time of the first four customers is calculated above.
For the remaining, it is calculated below.
Customer : 5 6 7 8 Waiting time (min) : 14 – 7.2 = 6.8 5.0 3.2 1.4 Therefore, average waiting time of a customer = 0 + 2.2 + 4.4 + 6.6 + 6.8 + 5 + 3.2 + 1.4 =29.6 = 3.7 minutes 8 8 Idle time of facility = nil.
4.0 Conclusion Simulation is a very important tool in OR.
Most times, it is seen as the last resort when all other efforts have failed, and simulation is considered as the last resort.
This is because simulating a real life system could be quite expensive and time consuming.
In simulation, operational information of the behaviour of a system which aides in decision making is obtained unlike that which exist in analytical modelling technique where optimal solution attempt is made to obtain descriptive information through experimentation.
Generally, a simulation model is the totality of many simple models, and model interrelationship among system variables and components.
A model can thus, be decomposed into many simple but related models.
Models can be used for predicting the behaviour of a system under varying conditions.
However, simulation has its own weaknesses as it does not produce optimum results when the model deals with uncertainties, the results of simulation only reliable approximations subject to statistical errors.
Quantification of variables is difficult in a number of situations; it is not possible to quantify all the 92 variables that affect the behaviour of the system.In very large and complex problems, the large number of variables and the interrelationship between them make the problem very unwieldy and hard to program.
5.0 Summary This unit provides for us an overview of simulation.
It takes us through various conceptualisations on the definition of simulation.
Simulation has been defined as the representation of reality through the use of models or other device which will react in the same manner as reality under given set of conditions.A good example of simulation is a children amusement or a cyclical park where children enjoy themselves in a simulated environment like Amusement Parks, Disney Land, Planetarium shows where boats, train rides, etc.
are done to simulate actual experience.
It is quite versatile and commonly applied technique for solving decision problems such as basic sciences, in industrial problems including shop floor management, in business and economic problems etc.
However, simulation does not produce optimum results when the model deals with uncertainties, the results of simulation only reliable approximations subject to statistical errors.Quantification of variables is difficult in a number of situations; it is not possible to quantify all the variables that affect the behaviour of the system.
Finally, we discussed the concept of Monte Carlo Simulation which was developed by two mathematicians Jon Von Neumann and Stainslaw Ulam, during World War II, to study how far neurone would travel through different materials.
The technique provides an approximate but quite workable solution to the problem.
With the remarkable success of this technique on the neutron problem, it soon became popular and found many applications in business and industry, and at present, forms a very important tool of operation researcher’s tool kit.
6.0 Tutor Marked Assignment 1.
What do you understand by the term Simulation?
2.
Explain six (6) advantages if Simulation.
3.
Identify and explain five (5) areas of application of Simulation.
4.
Give five limitations of Simulation.
5.
What is Monte Carlo Simulation?
6.
Describe the steps involved in Monte Carlo Simulation.
93 7.0 REFERENCES Adebayo O.A.
et al (2006), Operations Research in Decision and Production Management.
Gupta, P.K and Hira, D.S., (2012), Operations Research, New – Delhi: S. Chand & Company.
Jawahar, S. (2006) Overview of System Analysis & Design- Lesson Note no.
1, Ashok Educational Foundation Eiselt, H. A and Sandblom, C. ( 2012), Operations Research: A Model Based Approach, 2nd ed.,New York: Springer Heidelberg Budnick et al., 1988 94 Unit 8: SYSTEMS ANALYSIS 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objectives 3.0 Main content 3.1 Definition 3.2 The Systems Theory 3.3 Elements of a System 3.4 Types of Systems 3.5 Forms of Systems 3.5.1 Conceptual System 3.5.2 Mechanical System 3.5.3 Social System 3.5.4 Deterministic System 3.5.5 Probabilistic System 3.6 The Concept of Entropy in a System 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutor Marked Assignment 7.0 References 1.0 Introduction The word system has a long history which can be traced back to Plato (Philebus), Aristotle (Politics) and Euclid (Elements).
It had meant "total", "crowd" or "union" in even more ancient times, as it derives from the verb sunìstemi, uniting, putting together.
"System" means "something to look at".
You must have a very high visual gradient to have systematization.
In philosophy, before Descartes, there was no "system".
Plato had no "system".
Aristotle had no "system"( McLuhan.
1967) In the 19th century the first to develop the concept of a "system" in the natural sciences was the French physicist Nicolas Léonard Sadi Carnot who studied thermodynamics.
In 1824 he studied the system which he called the working substance, i.e.
typically a body of water vapour, in steam engines, in regards to the system's ability to do work when heat is applied to it.
The working substance could be put in contact with either a boiler, a cold reservoir (a stream of cold water), or a 95 piston (to which the working body could do work by pushing on it).
In 1850, the German physicist Rudolf Clausius generalized this picture to include the concept of the surroundings and began to use the term "working body" when referring to the system.
One of the pioneers of the general systems theory was the biologist Ludwig von Bertalanffy.
In 1945 he introduced models, principles, and laws that apply to generalized systems or their subclasses, irrespective of their particular kind, the nature of their component elements, and the relation or 'forces' between them.
Significant development to the concept of a system was done by Norbert Wiener and Ross Ashby who pioneered the use of mathematics to study systems.
(Cybernetics, 1948 )( Chapman& Hall, 1956) In business, System Analysis and Design refers to the process of examining abusiness situation with the intent of improving it through better procedures and methods.
System analysis and design relates to shaping organizations, improving performance and achieving objectives for profitability and growth.
The emphasis is on systems in action, the relationships among subsystems and their contribution to meeting a common goal.
2.0 Objectives After studying this unit, you should be able to 1.
Define a system 2.
Identify and describe the types of systems 3.
Highlight the different forms of systems we have 4.
Describe how a system is analysed 5.
Discuss the concept of entropy 3.0 Main content 3.1 Definition The term system is derived from the Greek word systema, which means anorganized relationship among functioning units or components.
A system exists because it is designed to achieve one or more objectives.
We come into daily contact with the transportation system, the telephone system, the accounting system, the production system, and, for over two decades, the computer system.
96 Similarly, we talk of the business system and of the organization as a system consisting of interrelated departments (subsystems) such as production, sales, personnel, and an informationsystem.
None of these subsystems is of much use as a single, independent unit.
Whenthey are properly coordinated, however, the firm can function effectively and profitably.
There are more than a hundred definitions of the word system, but most seem to have a common thread that suggests that a system is an orderly grouping of interdependent components linked together according to a plan to achieve a specific objective.
The word component may refer to physical parts (engines, wings of aircraft, car), managerial steps (planning, organizing and controlling), or a system in a multi-level structure.
The component may be simple or complex, basic or advanced.
They may be single computer with a keyboard, memory, and printer or a series of intelligent terminals linked to a mainframe.
In either case, each component is part of the total system and has to do its share of work for the system to achieve the intended goal.
This orientation requires an orderly grouping of the components for the design of a successful system.
The study of systems concepts, then, has three basic implications: 1.
A system must be designed to achieve a predetermined objective.
2.
Interrelationships and interdependence must exist among the components.
3.
The objectives of the organization as a whole have a higher priority than the objectives of its subsystems.
For example, computerizing personnelapplications must conform to the organization’s policy on privacy, confidentiality and security, as well as making selected data (e.g.
payroll) available to the accounting division on request.
(Jawahar, 2006) A system can also be defined is a collection of elements or components or units that are organized for a common purpose.
The word sometimes describes the organization or plan itself (and is similar in meaning to method, as in "I have my own little system") and sometimes describes the parts in the system (as in "computer system").
According to the International Council of Systems Engineers (INCOSE), a system can be broadly defined as an integrated set of elements that accomplish a defined objective.
People from different engineering disciplines have different perspectives of what a "system" is.
For example, software engineers often refer to an integrated set of computer programs as a "system."
Electrical engineers might refer to complex integrated circuits or an integrated set of electrical units as a "system."
As can be seen, "system" depends on one’s perspective, and the “integrated set of 97 elements that accomplish a defined objective” is an appropriate definition.
3.2 The Systems Theory The general systems theory states that a system is composed of inputs, a process, outputs, and control.
A general graphic representation of such a system is shown below.
X CONTROL TRANSFORMATION PROCESS INPUT OUTPUT Fig.
8.1: An Operational System Adapted from Ihemeje, (2002), Fundamentals of Business Decision Analysis, Lagos- Sibon Books Limited.
The input usually consists of people, material or objectives.
The process consists of plant, equipment and personnel.
While the output usually consists of finished goods, semi-finished goods, policies, new products, ideas, etc.
The purpose of a system is to transform inputs into outputs.
The system theory is relevant in the areas of systems design, systems operation and system control.
The systems approach helps in resolving organisational problems by looking at the organisation as a whole, integrating its numerous complex operations, environment, technologies, human and material resources.
The need to look at the organisation in totality is premised on the fact that the objective if the different units of the organisation when pursued in isolation conflict with one another.
For instance, the operation of a manufacturing department favours long and uninterrupted production runs with a view to minimising unit cost of production, including set-up costs.
However, this will result in large inventories, and leading to high inventory costs.
The finance department seeks to minimise costs as well as capital tied down in inventories.
Thus, there is a desire for rapid inventory turnover resulting in lower inventory levels.
The marketing department seeks favourable customer service and as a result, will not support any policy that encourages stock outs or back ordering.
Back ordering is a method of producing later to satisfy a previously unfulfilled order.
Consequently, marketing favours the maintenance of 98 high inventory levels in a wide variety of easily accessible locations which in effect means some type of capital investment in warehouse or sales outlets.
Finally, personnel department aims at stabilizing labour, minimizing the cost of firing and hiring as well as employee discontentment.
Hence, it is desirable from the point of view of personnel to maintain high inventory level of producing even during periods of fall in demand.
Therefore, pursuing the interest of a section of the organization can result in solution which will not be optional from the point of view of the total organization, yet ‘optimal’ from the point of view of the section concerned.
Such a situation is called sub-optimization.
Adoption of the systems approach will eliminate this.
The systems approach will producean optimal solution, which attempts to resolve the conflicting objectives of the various sub-units of the organization.
The adoption of the systems approach in OR methodology therefore puts its shoulder above other focus mainly on the solution of functional areas-based management problems only, i.e.
those that adopt the piecemeal approach.
3.3 Elements of a System Following are considered as the elements of a system in terms of Information systems:  Input  Output  Processor  Control  Feedback  Boundary and interface  Environment  INPUT: Input involves capturing and assembling elements that enter the system to be processed.
The inputs are said to be fed to the systems in order to get the output.
For example, input of a 'computer system' is input unit consisting of various input devices like keyboard,mouse,joystick etc.
 OUTPUT: The element that exists in the system due to the processing of the inputs is known as output.
A major objective of a system is to produce output that has value to its user.
The output of the system maybe in the form of cash,information,knowledge,reports,documents etc.the system is defined as output is required from it.
It is the anticipatory recognition of output that helps in defining the input of the system.
For example, output of a 'computer 99 system' is output unit consisting of various output devices like screen and printer etc.
 PROCESSOR(S): The processor is the element of a system that involves the actual transformation of input into output.
It is the operational component of a system.
For example, processor of a 'computer system' is central processing unit that further consists of arithmetic and logic unit(ALU), control unit and memory unit etc.
 CONTROL: The control element guides the system.
It is the decision- making sub-system that controls the pattern of activities governing input,processing and output.
It also keeps the system within the boundary set.
For example,control in a 'computer system' is maintained by the control unit that controls and coordinates various units by means of passing different signals through wires.
 FEEDBACK: Control in a dynamic system is achieved by feedback.
Feedback measures output against a standard in some form of cybernetic procedure that includes communication and control.
The feedback may generally be of three types viz.,positive,negative and informational.
The positive feedback motivates the persons in the system.
The negative indicates need of an action,while the information.
The feedback is a reactive form of control.
Outputs from the process of the system are fed back to the control mechanism.
The control mechanism then adjusts the control signals to the process on the basis of the data it receives.
Feedforward is a protective form of control.
For example, in a 'computer system' when logical decisions are taken,the logic unit concludes by comparing the calculated results and the required results.
 BOUNDARY AND INTERFACE: A system should be defined by its boundaries-the limits that identify its components,processes and interrelationships when it interfaces with another system.
For example,in a 'computer system' there is boundary for number of bits,the memory size etc.that is responsible for different levels of accuracy on different machines(like 16-bit,32-bit etc.).
The interface in a 'computer system'may be CUI (Character User Interface) or GUI (Graphical User Interface).
 ENVIRONMENT: The environment is the 'supersystem' within which an organisation operates.It excludes input,processes and outputs.
It is the source 100 of external elements that impinge on the system.
For example,if the results calculated/the output generated by the 'computer system' are to be used for decision-making purposes in the factory,in a business concern,in an organisation,in a school,in a college or in a government office then the system is same but its environment is different.
3.4 Types of Systems Systems are classified in different ways: 1.
Physical or abstract systems.
2.
Open or closed systems.
3.
'Man-made' information systems.
4.
Formal information systems.
5.
Informal information systems.
6.
Computer-based information systems.
7.
Real-time system.
Physical systems are tangible entities that may be static or dynamic in operation.
An open system has many interfaces with its environment.
i.e.
system that interacts freely with its environment, taking input and returning output.
It permits interaction across its boundary; it receives inputs from and delivers outputs to the outside.
A closed system does not interact with the environment; changes in the environment and adaptability are not issues for closed system.
3.5 Forms of systems A system can be conceptual, mechanical or social.
A system can also be deterministic or probabilistic.
A system can be closed or open.
Conceptual system A system is conceptual when it contains abstracts that are linked to communicate ideas.
An example of a conceptual system is a language system as in English language, which contains words, and how they are linked to communicate ideas.
The elements of a conceptual system are words.
Mechanical system A system is mechanical when it consists of many parts working together to do a work.
An example of a social system is a typewriter or a computer, which consists of many parts working together to type words and symbols.
The elements of the mechanical system are objects.
Social system 101 A system is social when it comprises policies, institutions and people.
An example of a social system is a football team comprising 11 players, or an educational system consisting of policies, schools and teachers.
The elements of a social system are subjects or people.
Deterministic system A system is deterministic when it operates according to a predetermined set of rules.
Its future behaviour can therefore be predicted exactly if it’s present state and operating characteristics are accurately known.
Example s of deterministic systems are computer programmes and a planet in orbit.
Business systems are not deterministic owing to the fact that they interfere with a number of in determinant factors, such as customer and supplier behaviour, national and international situations, and climatic and political conditions.
Probabilistic system A system is probabilistic when the system is controlled by chance events and so its future behaviour is a matter of probability rather than certainty.
This is true of all social systems, particularly business enterprises.
Information systems are deterministic enterprises in the sense that a pre-known type and content of information emerges as a result of the input of a given set of data.
This assumes that the information system operates according to pre-decided and formulated rules – which it generally would do.
In a broader sense, information systems can be regarded as probabilistic because the wide variability in the nature of their input introduces many indeterminate and of their future behaviour i.e.
output is not absolutely certain.
Closed system A system is closed when it does not interface with its environment i.e.
it has no input or output.
This concept is more relevant to scientific systems that to social systems.
The nearest we can get to a closed social system would be a completely self-contained community that provides all its own food, materials and power, and does not trade, communicate or come into contact with other communities.
Open system A system is open when it has many interfaces with its environment, and so needs to be capable of adopting their behaviour in order to continue to exist in changing environments.
An information system falls into this category since it needs to adapt to the changing demands for information.Similarly, a business system must be capable of reorganizing itself to meet the conditions of its environment, as detected from its input; it will more rapidly tend towards a state of disorganization.When 102 functioning properly, an open system reaches a state of dynamic equilibrium.
This is a steady state in which the system readily adapts to environmental factors by re- organizing itself according to the internal forces of its sub-systems.
With a manufacturing company, for instance, the steady state can be thought of as the purchasing of materials and productive means, and the manufacturing and selling of products.
An environmental factor could be an increase in the selling prices of its products (Ihemeje, 2002) 3.6 The Concept of Entropy in a System The term entropy is used as a measure of disorganisation.
Thus, we can regard open systems as tending to increase their entropy unless they receive negative entropy in the form of information from their environment.
In the above example, if increased cost of cost of materials were ignored, the product will become unprofitable and as a result, the organisation may become insolvent, that is, a state of disorganisation.
Systems analysis is an activity, process, or study of critically examining the ways performing frequently occurring tasks that depend on the movement processing of information by a number of people within an organisation.
System analysis may be carried out to either install a new system or overhaul an already existing one.
This implies that a system is analysed for three main purposes- system design, system operation, and system control (Ihemeje, 2002) 4.0 Conclusion In our everyday life, the word system is widely used.
It has become fashionable to attach the word system to add a contemporary flair when referring to things or processes.
People speak ofexercise system, investment system, delivery system, information system, education system, computer system etc.
System may be referred to any set of components, which function in interrelated manner for a common cause or objective.
A system exists because it is designed to achieve one or more objectives.
We come into daily contact with thetransportation system, the telephone system, the accounting system, the production system, and, for over two decades, the computer system.
Similarly, we talk of the business system and of the organization as a system consisting of interrelated departments (subsystems) such as production, sales, personnel, and an information system.
None of these subsystems is of much use as a single, independent unit.
When they are properly coordinated, however, 103 the firm can function effectively and profitably.
There are more than a hundred definitions of the word system, but most seem to have a common thread that suggests that a system is an orderly grouping of interdependent components linked together according to a plan to achieve a specific objective.
The word component may refer to physical parts (engines, wings of aircraft, car), managerial steps (planning, organizing and controlling), or a system in a multi-level structure.
The component may be simple or complex, basic or advanced.
They may be single computer with a keyboard, memory, and printer or a series of intelligent terminals linked to a mainframe.
In either case, each component is part of the total system and hasto do its share of work for the system to achieve the intended goal.
This orientation requires an orderly grouping of the components for the design of a successful system.
5.0 Summary This unit discusses the concept of systems analysis.
The origin of system analysis has been traced to the Greek word systema, which means anorganized relationship among functioning units or components.
A system exists because it is designed to achieve one or more objectives.
It can be defined is a collection of elements or components or units that are organized for a common purpose.The general systems theory states that a system is composed of inputs, a process, outputs, and control.The input usually consists of people, material or objectives.
The process consists of plant, equipment and personnel.
While the output usually consists of finished goods, semi-finished goods, policies, new products, ideas, etc.
A system consists of the following element: input, output, processor, control, feedback, boundary and interface, and environment.
Depending on the usage, a system has the following are types of systems: Physical or abstract systems, Open or closed systems, Man-made information systems, Formal information systems, Informal information systems, Computer-based information systems andReal-time system.A system can be conceptual, mechanical or social.
A system can also exist in the following forms- it can be deterministic or probabilistic, closed or open, mechanical, social, and conceptual.
It has been quite an exciting journey through the world of systems analysis.
6.0 Tutor Marked Assignment 1 What do you understand term system?
2 With the aid of a well labelled diagram, describe how a system works.
3 What understand by the concept of entropy of a system?
4 List and explain the elements of a system.
5 Differentiate between an open and a closed system.
104 6 Identify the elements that make up the process component of a system.
7.0 References Ihemeje, J. C. (2002), Fundamentals of Business Decision Analysis, Lagos- Sibon Books INCOSE Systems Engineering Handbook (2000), International Council on Systems Engineering Handbook Working Group Version 2.0 (Approved) July Jawahar, S. (2006) Overview of System Analysis & Design- Lesson Note no.
1, Ashok Educational Foundation 105 MODULE 3 UNIT 9: MATHEMATICAL PROGRAMMING (LINEAR PROGRAMMING) 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objectives 3.0 Main Content 3.1 Requirements for Linear Programming Problems 3.2 Assumptions in Linear Programming 3.3 Application of Linear Programming 3.4 Areas of Application of Linear Programming 3.5 Formulation of Linear Programming Problems 3.6 Advantages Linear Programming Methods 3.7 Limitation of Linear programming Models 3.8 Graphical Methods of Linear Programming Solution 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutor Marked Assignment 7.0 References 1.0 INTRODUCTION Linear programming deals with the optimization (maximization or minimization) of a function of variables known as objective function, subject to a set of linear equations and/or inequalities known as constraints.
The objective function may be profit, cost, production capacity or any other measure of effectiveness, which is to be obtained in the best possible or optimal manner.
The constraints may be imposed by different resources such as market demand, production process and equipment, storage capacity, raw material availability, etc.
By linearity is meant a mathematical expression in which the expressions among the variables are linear e.g., the expression a x + a x + a x + ... + ax is linear.
Higher powers of the 1 1 2 2 3 3 ⁿ ⁿ variables or their products do not appear in the expressions for the objective function as well as the constraints (they donot have expressions like x 3, x 3/2, x x , 1 2 1 2 a x + a log x , etc.).
The variables obey the properties of proportionality (e.g., if a 1 1 2 2 product requires 3 hours of machining time, 5 units of it will require 15 hours) and additivity (e.g., amount of a resource required for a certain number of products is equal to the sum of the resource required for each).
106 It was in 1947 that George Dantzig and his associates found out a technique for solving military planning problems while they were working on a project for U.S. Air Force.
This technique consisted of representing the various activities of an organization as a linear programming (L.P.) model and arriving at the optimal programme by minimizing a linear objective function.
Afterwards, Dantzig suggested this approach for solving business and industrial problems.
He also developed the most powerful mathematical tool known as “simplex method” to solve linear programming problems.
2.0 OBJECTIVES At the end of this study unit, you should be able to 1.
Explain the requirements for Linear Programming 2.
Highlight the assumptions of Linear Programming 3.
Identify the Areas of application of Linear Programming 4.
Formulate a Linear Programming problem 5.
Solve various problems using Linear Programming 3.0 MAIN CONTENT 3.1 REQUIREMENTS FOR A LINEAR PROGRAMMING PROBLEM All organizations, big or small, have at their disposal, men, machines, money and materials, the supply of which may be limited.
If the supply of these resources were unlimited, the need for management tools like linear programming would not arise at all.
Supply of resources being limited, the management must find the best allocation of its resources in order to maximize the profit or minimize the loss or utilize the production capacity to the maximum extent.
However this involves a number of problems which can be overcome by quantitative methods, particularly the linear programming.
Generally speaking, linear programming can be used for optimization problems if the following conditions are satisfied: 1.
There must be a well-defined objective function (profit, cost or quantities produced) which is to be either maximized or minimized and which can be expressed as a linear function of decision variables.
2.
There must be constraints on the amount or extent of attainment of the objective and these constraints must be capable of being expressed as linear equations or inequalities in terms of variables.
107 3.
There must be alternative courses of action.
For example, a given product may be processed by two different machines and problem may be as to how much of the product to allocate to which machine.
4.
Another necessary requirement is that decision variables should be interrelated and nonnegative.
The non-negativity condition shows that linear programming deals with real life situations for which negative quantities are generally illogical.
5.
As stated earlier, the resources must be in limited supply.
For example, if a firm starts producing greater number of a particular product, it must make smaller number of other products as the total production capacity is limited.
3.2 ASSUMPTIONS IN LINEAR PROGRAMMING MODELS A linear programming model is based on the following assumptions: 1.
Proportionality: A basic assumption of linear programming is that proportionality exists in the objective function and the constraints.
This assumption implies that if a product yields a profit of #10, the profit earned from the sale of 12 such products will be # (10 x 12) = #120.
This may not always be true because of quantity discounts.
Further, even if the sale price is constant, the manufacturing cost may vary with the number of units produced and so may vary the profit per unit.
Likewise, it is assumed that if one product requires processing time of 5 hours, then ten such products will require processing time of 5 x 10 = 50 hours.
This may also not be true as the processing time per unit often decreases with increase in number of units produced.
The real world situations may not be strictly linear.
However, assumed linearity represents their close approximations and provides very useful answers.
2.
Additivity: It means that if we use t hours on machine A to make product 1 and 1 t hours to make product 2, the total time required to make products 1 and 2 on 2 machine A is t + t hours.
This, however, is true only if the change-over time from 1 2 product 1 to product 2 is negligible.
Some processes may not behave in this way.
For example, when several liquids of different chemical compositions are mixed, the resulting volume may not be equal to the sum of the volumes of the individual liquids.
3.
Continuity: Another assumption underlying the linear programming model is that the decision variables are continuous i.e., they are permitted to take any non- negative values that satisfy the constraints.
However, there are problems wherein variables are restricted to have integral values only.
Though such problems, strictly speaking, are not linear programming problems, they are frequently solved by 108 linear programming techniques and the values are then rounded off to nearest integers to satisfy the constraints.
This approximation, however, is valid only if the variables have large optimal values.
Further, it must be ascertained whether the solution represented by the rounded values is a feasible solution and also whether the solution is the best integer solution.
4.
Certainty: Another assumption underlying a linear programming model is that the various parameters, namely, the objective function coefficients, R.H.S.
coefficients of the constraints and resource values in the constraints are certainly and precisely known and that their values do not change with time.
Thus the profit or cost per unit of the product, labour and materials required per unit, availability of labour and materials, market demand of the product produced, etc.
are assumed to be known with- certainty.
The linear programming problem is, therefore, assumed to be deterministic in nature.
5.
Finite Choices: A linear programming model also assumes that a finite (limited) number of choices (alternatives) are available to the decision-maker and that the decision variables are interrelated and non-negative.
The non-negativity condition shows that linear programming deals with real-life situations as it is not possible to produce/use negative quantities.
Mathematically these non-negativity conditions do not differ from other constraints.
However, since while solving the problems they are handled differently from the other constraints, they are termed as non-negativity restrictions and the term constraints is used to represent constraints other than non-negativity restrictions and this terminology has been followed throughout the book.
3.3 APPLICATIONS OF LINEAR PROGRAMMING METHOD Though, in the world we live, most of the events are non-linear, yet there are many instances of linear events that occur in day-to-day life.
Therefore, an understanding of linear programming and its application in solving problems is utmost essential for today’s managers.
Linear programming techniques are widely used to solve a number of business, industrial, military, economic, marketing, distribution and advertising problems.
Three primary reasons for its wide use are: 1.
A large number of problems from different fields can be represented or at least approximated to linear programming problems.
2.
Powerful and efficient techniques for solving L.P. problems are available.
109 3.
L.P. models can handle data variation (sensitivity analysis) easily.
However, solution procedures are generally iterative and even medium size problems require manipulation of large amount of data.
But with the development of digital computers, this disadvantage has been completely overcome as these computers can handle even large L.P. problems in comparatively very little time at a low cost.
3.4 AREAS OF APPLICATION OF LINEAR PROGRAMMING Linear programming is one of the most widely applied techniques of operations research in business, industry and numerous other fields.
A few areas of its application are given below.
1.
INDUSTRIAL APPLICATIONS (a) Product mix problems: An industrial concern has available a certain production capacity (men, machines, money, materials, market, etc.)
on various manufacturing processes to manufacture various products.
Typically, differents products will have different selling prices, will require different amounts of production capacity at the several processes and will, therefore, have different unit profits; there may also be stipulations (conditions) on maximum and/or minimum product levels.
The problem is to determine the product mix that will maximize the total profit.
(b) Blending problems: These problems are likely to arise when a product can be made from a variety of available raw materials of various compositions and prices.
The manufacturing process involves blending (mixing) some of these materials in varying quantities to make a product of the desired specifications.
For instance, different grades of gasoline are required for aviation purposes.
Prices and specifications such as octane ratings, tetra ethyl lead concentrations, maximum vapour pressure etc.
of input ingredients are given and the problem is to decide the proportions of these ingredients to make the desired grades of gasoline so that (i) maximum output is obtained and (ii) storage capacity restrictions are satisfied.
Many similar situations such as preparation of different kinds of whisky, chemicals, fertilisers and alloys, etc.
have been handled by this technique of linear programming.
(c) Production scheduling problems: They involve the determination of optimum production schedule to meet fluctuating demand.
The objective is to meet demand, keep inventory and employment at reasonable minimum levels, while minimizing the total cost Production and inventory.
110 (d) Trim loss problems: They are applicable to paper, sheet metal and glass manufacturing industries where items of standard sizes have to be cut to smaller sizes as per customer requirements with the objective of minimizing the waste produced.
(e) Assembly-line balancing: It relates to a category of problems wherein the final product has a number of different components assembled together.
These components are to be assembled in a specific sequence or set of sequences.
Each assembly operator is to be assigned the task / combination of tasks so that his task time is less than or equal to the cycle time.
(f) Make-or-buy (sub-contracting) problems: They arise in an organisation in the face of production capacity limitations and sudden spurt in demand of its products.
The manufacturer, not being sure of the demand pattern, is usually reluctant to add additional capacity and has to make a decision regarding the products to be manufactured with his own resources and the products to be sub- contracted so that the total cost is minimized.
2.
MANAGEMENT APPLICATIONS (a) Media selection problems: They involve the selection of advertising mix among different advertising media such as T.V., radio, magazines and newspapers that will maximize public exposure to company’s product.
The constraints may be on the total advertising budget, maximum expenditure in each media, maximum number of insertions in each media and the like.
(b) Portfolio selection problems: They are frequently encountered by banks, financial companies, insurance companies, investment services, etc.
A given amount is to be allocated among several investment alternatives such as bonds, saving certificates, common stock, mutual fund, real estate, etc.
to maximize the expected return or minimize the expected risk.
(c) Profit planning problems: They involve planning profits on fiscal year basis to maximize profit margin from investment in plant facilities, machinery, inventory and cash on hand.
(d) Transportation problems: They involve transportation of products from, say, n sources situated at different locations to, say, m different destinations.
Supply position at the sources, demand at destinations, freight charges and storage costs, etc.
are known and the problem is to design the optimum transportation plan that minimizes the total transportation cost (or distance or time).
111 (e) Assignment problems: They are concerned with allocation of facilities (men or machines) to jobs.
Time required by each facility to perform each job is given and the problem is to find the optimum allocation (one job to one facility) so that the total time to perform the jobs is minimized.
(f) Man-power scheduling problems: They are faced by big hospitals, restaurants and companies operating in a number of shifts.
The problem is to allocate optimum man-power in each shift so that the overtime cost is minimized.
3.
MISCELLANEOUS APPLICATIONS (a) Diet problems: They form another important category to which linear programming has been applied.
Nutrient contents such as vitamins, proteins, fats, carbohydrates, starch, etc.
in each of a number of food stuffs is known.
Also the minimum daily requirement of each nutrient in the diet as well as the cost of each type of food stuff is given and the problem is to determine the minimum cost diet that satisfies the minimum daily requirement of nutrients.
(b) Agriculture problems: These problems are concerned with the allocation of input resources such as acreage of land, water, labour, fertilisers and capital to various crops so as to maximize net revenue.
(c) Flight scheduling problems: They are devoted to the determination of the most economical patterns and timings of flights that result in the most efficient use of aircrafts and crew.
(d) Environment protection: They involve analysis of different alternatives for efficient waste disposal, paper recycling and energy policies.
(e) Facilities location: These problems are concerned with the determination of best location of public parks, libraries and recreation areas, hospital ambulance depots, telephone exchanges, nuclear power plants, etc.
Oil refineries have used linear programming with considerable success.
Similar trends are developing in chemical industries, iron and steel industries, aluminium industry, food processing industry, wood products manufacture and many others.
Other areas where linear programming has been applied include quality control inspection, determination of optimal bombing patterns, searching of submarines, design of war weapons, vendor quotation analysis, structural design, scheduling military tanker fleet, fabrication scheduling, steel production scheduling, balancing of assembly lines and computations of maximum flows in networks.
112 In fact linear programming may be used for any general situation where a linear objective function has to be optimised subject to constraints expressed as linear equations/inequalities.
3.5 FORMULATION OF LINEAR PROGRAMMING PROBLEMS First, the given problem must be presented in linear programming form.
This requires defining the variables of the problem, establishing inter-relationships between them and formulating the objective function and constraints.
A model, which approximates as closely as possible to the given problem, is then to be developed.
If some constraints happen to be nonlinear, they are approximated to appropriate linear functions to fit the linear programming format.
In case it is not possible, other techniques may be used to formulate and then solve the model.
EXAMPLE 9.1 (Production Allocation Problem) A firm produces three products.
These products are processed on three different machines.
The time required to manufacture one unit of each of the three products and the daily capacity of the three machines are given in the table below.
TABLE 9.1 Machine Time per unit (minutes) Machine capacity Product Product Product (minutes/day) 1 2 3 M 2 3 2 440 1 M 4 - 3 470 2 M 2 5 - 430 3 It is required to determine the daily number of units to be manufactured for each product.
The profit per unit for product 1, 2 and 3 is #4, #3 and #6 respectively.
It is assumed that all the amounts produced are consumed in the market.
Formulate the mathematical (L.P) model that will maximize the daily profit.
113 Formulation of Linear Programming Model Step 1: From the study of the situation find the key-decision to be made.
It this connection, looking for variables helps considerably.
In the given situation key decision is to decide the extent of products 1, 2 and 3, as the extents are permitted to vary.
Step 2: Assume symbols for variable quantities noticed in step 1.
Let the extents.
(mounts) of products, 1, 2 and 3 manufactured daily be x , x and x units respectively.
1 2 3 Step 3: Express the feasible alternatives mathematically in terms of variables.
Feasible alternatives are those which are physically, economically and financially possible.
In the given situation feasible alternatives are sets of values of x , x and x , 1 2 3 where x , x , x= ≥ 0, 1 2 since negative production has no meaning and is not feasible.
Step 4: Mention the objective quantitatively and express it as a linear function of variables.
In the present situation, objective is to maximize the profit.
i.e., maximize Z = 4x + 3x + 6x .
1 2 3 Step 5: Put into words the influencing factors or constraints.
These occur generally because of constraints on availability (resources) or requirements (demands).
Express these constraints also as linear equations/inequalities in terms of variables.
Here, constraints are on the machine capacities and can be mathematically expressed as 2x + 3x + 2x ≤ 440, 1 2 3 4x + 0x +3x ≤ 470, 1 2 3 2x + 5x + 0x ≤ 430.
1 2 3 114 EXAMPLE 9.2 (Diet Problem) A person wants to decide the constituents of a diet which will fulfil his daily requirements of proteins, fats and carbohydrates at the minimum cost.
The choice is to be made from four different types of foods.
The yields per unit of these foods are given in table 2.2.
TABLE 9.2 Food type Yield per unit Cost per unit (#) 1 3 2 6 45 2 4 2 4 40 3 8 7 7 85 4 6 5 4 65 Minimum 800 200 700 requirement Formulate linear programming model for the problem.
Formulation of L.P Model Let x , x , x and x4 denote the number of units of food of type 1, 2, 3 and 4 1 2 3 respectively.
Objective is to minimize the cost i.e., Minimize Z = #(45x + 40x + 85x + 65x ).
1 2 3 4 Constraints are on the fulfilment of the daily requirements of the various constituents.
i.e., for protein, 3x + 4x + 8x + 6x ≥ 800, 1 2 3 4 for fats, 2x + 2x + 7x + 5x ≥ 200, 1 2 3 4 and for carbohydrates, 6x + 4x + 7x + 4x ≥ 700, 1 2 3 4 115 EXAMPLE 9.3 (Blending Problem) A firm produces an alloy having the following specifications: (i) specific gravity ≤ 0.98, (ii) chromium ≥ 8%, (iii) melting point ≥ 450°C.
Raw materials A, B and C having the properties shown in the table can be used to make the alloy.
Table 9.3 Property Properties of raw material A B C Specific gravity 0.92 0.97 1.04 Chromium 7% 13% 16% Melting point 440OC 490OC 480OC Costs of the various raw materials per ton are: #90 for A, #280 for B and #40 for C. Formulate the L.P model to find the proportions in which A, B and C be used to obtain an alloy of desired properties while the cost of raw materials is minimum.
Formulation of Linear Programming Model Let the percentage contents of raw materials A, B and C to be used for making the alloy be x , x and x respectively.
1 2 3 Objective is to minimize the cost i.e., minimize Z = 90x + 280x + 40x .
1 2 3 Constraints are imposed by the specifications required for the alloy.
They are 0.92x + 0.97x + 1.04x ≤ 0.98, 1 2 3 7x + 13x + 16x ≥ 8, 1 2 3 116  440x + 490x + 480x ≥ 450, 1 2 3 and x + x + x = 100, 1 2 3 as x , x and x are the percentage contents of materials A, B and C in making the 1 2 3 alloy.
Also x , x , x , each ≥ 0.
1 2 3 EXAMPLE 9.4 (Advertising Media Selection Problem) An advertising company wishes to plan its advertising strategy in three different media television, radio and magazines.
The purpose of advertising is to reach as large a number of potential customers as possible.
Following data have been obtained from market survey: TABLE 9.4 Television Radio Magazine Magazine II I Cost of an advertising # 30,000 # 20,000 # 15,000 # 10,000 unit No.
of potential 200,000 600,000 150,000 100,000 customers reached per unit No.
of female customers 150,000 400,000 70,000 50,000 reached per unit The company wants to spend not more than #450,000 on advertising.
Following are the further requirements that must be met: at least I million exposures take place among female customers, advertising on magazines be limited to #150,000, at least 3 advertising units be bought on magazine I and 2 units on magazine II, the number of advertising units on television and radio should each be between 5 and 10.
117 Formulation of Linear Programming Model Let x , x , x and x4 denote the number of advertising units to be bought on 1 2 3 television, radio, magazine I and magazine II respectively.
The objective is to maximize the total number of potential customers reached.
i.e., maximize Z = 10 (2x + 6x + 1.5x + x ).
1 2 3 4 Constraints are on the advertising budget: 30,000x +20,000x +15,000x +10,000x ≤ 450,000 1 2 3 4 or 30x +20x +15x +10x ≤ 450, 1 2 3 4 on number of female customers reached by the advertising campaign: 150,000x +400,000x +70,000x +50,000x = ≥ 100,000 1 2 3 4 or 15x +40x +7x +5x ≥ 100 1 2 3 4 on expenses on magazine advertising: 15,000x +10,000x ≤ 150,000 or 15x +10x ≤ 150 3 4 3 4 on no.
of units on magazines: x ≥ 3, 3 x ≥ 2, 4 on no.
of units on television: : 5 ≤ x ≤ 10 or x ≥ 5, x ≤ 10 1 1 1 on no.
of units on radio: 5 ≤ x ≤ 10 or x ≥ 5, x ≤ 10 2 2 2 where x , x , x , x , each ≥ 0.
1 2 3 4 EXAMPLE 9.5 (Inspection Problem) A company has two grades of inspectors, I and II to undertake quality control inspection.
At least 1,500 pieces must be inspected in an 8-hour day.
Grade I inspector can check 20 pieces in an hour with an accuracy of 96%.
Grade II inspector checks 14 pieces an hour with an accuracy of 92%.
Wages of grade I inspector are #5 per hour while those of grade II inspector are #4 per hour.
Any error made by an inspector costs #3 to the company.
If there are, in all, 10 grade I inspectors and 15 grade II inspectors in the company find the optimal assignment of inspectors that minimizes the daily inspection cost.
118 Formulation of L.P Model Let x and x denote the number of grade I and grade II inspectors that may be 1 2 assigned the job of quality control inspection.
The objective is to minimize the daily cost of inspection.
Now the company has to incur two types of costs: wages paid to the inspectors and the cost of their inspection errors.
The cost of grade I inspector/hour is # (5 + 3 x 0.04 x 20) = #7.40.
Similarly, cost of grade II inspector/hour is # (4 + 3 x 0.08 x 14) = #7.36.
.
:The objective function is minimize Z = 8(7.40x + 7.36x ) = 59.20x + 58.88x .
1 2 1 2 Constraints are on the number of grade I inspectors : x ≤ 10, 1 on the number of grade II inspectors : x ≤ 15, 2 on the number of pieces to be inspected daily: 20 X 8x + 14 X 8x ≥ 1,500 1 2 or 160x + 112x ≥ 1,500, 1 2 where x ,x ≥ 0.
1 2 EXAMPLE 9.6 (Product Mix Problem) A chemical company produces two products, X and Y.
Each unit of product X requires 3 hours on operation I and 4 hours on operation IL while each unit of product Y requires 4 hours on operation I and 5 hours on operation II.
Total available time for operations I and 11 is 20 hours and 26 hours respectively.
The production of each unit of product Y also results in two units of a by-product Z at no extra cost.
Product X sells at profit of #I0/unit, while Y sells at profit of #20/unit.
By-product Z brings a unit profit of #6 if sold; in case it cannot be sold, the destruction cost is # 4/unit.
Forecasts indicate that not more than 5 units of Z can be sold.
Formulate 119 the L.P. model to determine the quantities of X and Y to be produced, keeping Z in mind, so that the profit earned is maximum.
Formulation of L.P Model Let the number of units of products X, Y and Z produced be x , x , x , where 1 2 Z x = number of units of Z produced Z = number of units of Z sold + number of units of Z destroyed = x + x (say).
3 4 Objective is to maximize the profit.
Objective function (profit function) for products X and Y is linear because their profits (#10/unit and #20/unit) are constants irrespective of the number of units produced.
A graph between the total profit and quantity produced will be a straight line.
However, a similar graph for product Z is non-linear since it has slope +6 for first part, while a slope of -4 for the second.
However, it is piece-wise linear, since it is linear in the regions (0 to 5) and (5 to 2Y).
Thus splitting x into two parts, viz, the number of units of Z sold (x ) and number of units of Z destroyed (x ) makes the objective function for 3 4 product Z also linear.
Thus the objective function is maximize Z= l0x + 20x + 6x - 4x .
1 2 3 4 Constraints are on the time available on operation I: 3x + 4x ≤ 20, 1 2 on the time available on operation II: 4x + 5x ≤ 26, 1 2 on the number of units of product Z sold: x ≤ 5, 3 on the number of units of product Z produced: 2Y = Z or 2x = x + x or -2x + x +x = 0, 2 3 4 2 3 4 where x , x , x , x , each ≥ 0.
1 2 3 4 EXAMPLE 9.7 (Product Mix Problem) A firm manufactures three products A, B and C. Time to manufacture product A is twice that for B and thrice that for C and if the entire labour is engaged in making product A, 1,600 units of this product can be produced.
These products are to be 120 produced in the ratio 3: 4: 5.
There is demand for at least 300, 250 and 200 units of products A, B and C and the profit earned per unit is #90, #40 and #30 respectively.
Formulate the problem as a linear programming problem.
TABLE 9.5 Raw material Requirement per unit of product (kg) Total availability kg A B C P 6 5 2 5,000 Q 4 7 3 6,000 Formulation of L.P. Model Let x , x and x denote the number of units of products A, B and C to be 1 2 3 manufactured.
Objective is to maximize the profit.
i.e., maximize Z = 90x + 40x + 30x .
1 2 3 Constraints can be formulated as follows: For raw material P, 6x + 5x + 2x ≤ 5,000, 1 2 3 and for raw material Q, 4x + 7x + 3x ≤ 6,000.
2 3 Product B requires 1/2 and product C requires 1/3rd the time required for product A.
Let t hours be the time to produce A.
Then t/ and t/ are the times in hours to 2 3 produce B and C and since 1,600 units of A will need time 1,600t hours, we get the constraint, t x +t/2 x +t/3x ≤ 1,600t or x + x /2 + x /3 ≤ 1,600.
1 2 3 1 2 3 Market demand requires.
x ≥ 300, 1 121 x ≥ 250, 2 and x ≥ 200.
3 Finally, since products A, B and C are to be produced in the ratio 3: 4: 5, x : x : 1 2 x :: 3: 4: 5 3 or x /3 = x /4, 1 2 and x /4 = x /5.
2 3 Thus there are two additional constraints 4x - 3x =0, 1 2 5x - 4x = 0, 2 3 where x , x , x ≥ 0.
1 2 3 EXAMPLE 9.8 (Trim Loss Problem) A paper mill produces rolls of paper used in making cash registers.
Each roll of paper is 100m in length and can be used in widths of 3, 4, 6 and 1 (km.
The company production process results in rolls that are 24 cm in width.
Thus the company must cut its 24cm roll to the desired widths.
It has six basic cutting alternatives as follows: Cutting alternatives Width of rolls (cm) Waste (cm) 3 4 6 10 1 4 3 - - - 2 - 3 2 - - 3 1 1 1 1 1 4 - - 2 1 2 5 - 4 1 - 2 6 3 2 1 - 1 122 The minimum demand for the four rolls is as follows: Roll width (cm) Demand 2 2,000 4 3,600 6 1,600 10 500 The paper mill wishes to minimize the waste resulting from trimming to size.
Formulate the L.P model.
Formulation of L.P. Model Key decision is to determine how the paper rolls be cut to the required widths so that trim losses (wastage) are minimum.
Let x, (j = 1, 2, ..., 6) represent the number of times each cutting alternative is to be used.
These alternatives result/do not result in certain trim loss.
Objective is to minimize the trim losses.
i.e., minimize Z =x +2x +2x +x .
3 4 5 6 Constraints are on the market demand for each type of roll width: For roll width of 3cm, 4x + x + 3x ≥ 2,000, 1 3 6 for roll width of 4 cm, 3x + 3x + x + 4x + 2x ≥ 3,600, 1 2 3 5 6 for roll width of 6cm, 2x + x + 2x + x + x ≥ 1,600, 2 3 4 5 6 and for roll width of 10cm, x + x ≥ 500.
3 4 Since the variables represent the number of times each alternative is to be used, they cannot have negative values.
:.
x , x , x , x , x , x , each ≥ 0.
1 2 3 4 5 6 123 EXAMPLE 9.9 (Production Planning Problem) A factory manufactures a product each unit of which consists of 5 units of part A and 4 units of part B.
The two parts A and B require different raw materials of which 120 units and 240 units respectively are available.
These parts can be manufactured by three different methods.
Raw material requirements per production run and the number of units for each part produced are given below.
TABLE 9.6 Method Input per run (units) Output per run (units) Raw material 1 Raw material Part A Part B 2 1 7 5 6 4 2 4 7 5 8 3 2 9 7 3 Formulate the L.P model to determine the number of production runs for each method so as to maximize the total number of complete units of the final product.
Formulation of Linear Programming Model Let x , x , x represent the number of production runs for method 1, 2 and 3 1 2 3 respectively.
The objective is to maximize the total number of units of the final product.
Now, the total number of units of part A produced by different methods is 6x + 5x + 1 2 7x and for part B is 4x + 8x + 3x .
Since each unit of the final product requires 5 3 1 2 1 units of part A and 4 units of part B, it is evident that the maximum number of units of the final product cannot exceed the smaller value of 6x +5x +7x and 4x +8x +3x 1 2 3 1 2 3 5 4 Thus the objective is to maximize Z= Minimum of 6x +5x +7x , 4x +8x +3x 1 2 3 1 2 3 5 4 124 Constraints are on the availability of raw materials.
They are, for raw material 1, 7x + 4x + 2x ≤ 120, 1 2 3 and raw material 2, 5x + 7x + 9x ≤ 240.
1 2 3 The above formulation violates the linear programming properties since the objective function is non-linear.
(Linear relationship between two or more variables is the one in which the variables are directly and precisely proportional).
However, the above model can be easily reduced to the generally acceptable linear programming format.
Let y = 6x +5x +7x , 4x +8x +3x 1 2 3 1 2 3 5 4 It follows that 6x + 5x + 7x ≥ y and 4x + 8x + 3x ≥ y 1 2 3 1 2 3 5 4 i.e., 6x + 5x + 7x - 5y ≥ 0, and 4x + 8x + 3x - 4y ≥ 0.
1 2 3 1 2 3 Thus the mathematical model for the problem is Maximize Z = y, subject to constraints 7x + 4x + 2x ≤ 120, 1 2 3 5x + 7x + 9x ≤ 240, 1 2 3 6x + 5x + 7x - 5y ≥ 0, 1 2 3 4x + 8x + 3x - 4y ≥ 0, 1 2 3 wherex , x , x , y ≥ 0.
1 2 3 EXAMPLE 9.10 (Fluid Blending Problem) An oil company produces two grades of gasoline P and Q which it sells at #30 and #40 per litre.
The company can buy four different crude oils with the following constituents and Costs: TABLE 2.7 Crude oil Constituents Price/litre (#) A B C 1 0.75 0.15 0.10 20.00 2 0.20 0.30 0.50 22.50 3 0.70 0.10 0.20 25.00 4 0.40 0.10 0.50 27.50 125  Gasoline P must have at least 55 per cent of constituent A and not more than 40 per cent of C. Gasoline Q must not have more than 25 per cent of C. Determine how the crudes should be used to maximize the profit.
Formulation of Mathematical Model Key decision to be made is how much of each crude oil be used in making each of the two grades of gasoline.
Let these quantities in litres be represented by x , IJ where i = crude oil 1, 2, 3, 4 and j = gasoline of grades P and Q respectively.
Thus x = amount in litres of crude oil 1 used in gasoline of grade P 1p x = amount in litres of crude oil 2 used in gasoline of grade P 2p … … … … … … … … … … … … … … … … … … … … … … … … … … … … … … … … … … … … … … … … … … … … … … x = amount in litres of crude oil 1 used in gasoline of grade Q 1q X = amount in litres of crude oil 2 used in gasoline of grade Q 2q … … … … … … … … … … … … … … … … … … … … … … … … … … … … … … … … … … … … … … … … … … … … … … Objective is to maximize the net profit.
i.e., maximize Z = # [30(x + x + x , + x ) + 40( + x + x + x ) ip 2p 3p 4p xiq 2q 3q 4q -20(x +X ) - 22.50 (x +x ) - 25 (x x ) - 27.50(x - x ) 1p ia 2p 2q 3p 3q 4p 4q or maximize Z = #[10x + 7.50x + 5x , + 2.50x + 20 + l7.50x + l5x ) 1p 2p 3p 4p 1q 2q 3q Constraints are on the quantities of constituents A and C to be allowed in the two grades of gasoline.
i.e., 0.75x + 0.20x + 0.70x + 0.40x ≥ 0.55 (x , + x + x + x ), 1p 2p 3p 4p 1p 2p 3p 4p 0.10x + 0.50x + 0.20x + 0.50x ≤ 0.40 ( + x + x +x ), 1p 2p 3p 4p x1 2p 3p 4p and 0.10x + 0.50x + 0.20x + 0.50x ≤ 0.25 (x + x + x + x ), 1q 2q 3q 4q 1q 2q 3q 4q where x , x , x ,x , x , x , x , x , each ≥ 0.
1p 2p 3p 4p 1q 2q 3q 4q 126  EXAMPLE 9.11 (Production Planning Problem) A company manufacturing air coolers has, at present, firm orders for the next 6 months.
The company can schedule its production over the next 6 months to meet orders on either regular or overtime basis.
The order size and production costs over the next six months are as follows: Month : 1 2 3 4 5 6 Orders : 640 660 700 750 550 650 Cost/unit (#) for regular production : 40 42 41 45 39 40 Cost/unit (#) for overtime production : 52 50 53 50 45 43 With 100 air coolers in stock at present, the company wishes to have at least 150 air coolers in stock at the end of 6 months.
The regular and overtime production in each month is not to exceed 600 and 400 units respectively.
The inventory carrying cost for air coolers is #12 per unit per month.
Formulate the L.R model to minimize the total cost.
Formulation of L.P. Model Key decision is to determine the number of units of air coolers to he produced on regular as well as overtime basis together with the number of units of ending inventory in each of the six months.
Let x be the number of units produced in month j (j = 1, 2, ..., 6), on a regular or ij overtime basis (i = 1, 2).
Further let y represent the number of units of ending j inventory in month j (j= 1, 2, ..., 6).
Objective is to minimize the total cost (of production and inventory carrying).
i.e., minimize Z = (40 + 42 + 41 + 45 + 39 + 40 ) x11 x12 x13 x14 x15 x16 + (52 + 50 + 53 + 50 + 45 + 43 ) x21 x22 x23 x24 x25 x26 +12(y + y + y + y + y + y ) 1 2 3 4 5 6 127 Constraints are for the first month, 100 + x + x - 640 = y , 11 21 1 for the second month, y + x + x - 660 = y , 1 12 22 2 for the third month, y + x + x – 700 = y 2 13 23 3 for the fourth month, y + x + x – 750 = y 3 14 24 4 for the fifth month, y + x + x – 550 = y 4 15 25 5 and for the sixth month, y + x + x – 650 = y 5 16 26 6 Also, the ending inventory constraint is Y ≥ 150 6 Further, since regular and overtime production each month is not to exceed 600 and 400 units respectively, x , x , x , x , x , x , each ≤ 600, 11 12 13 14 15 16 and x , x , x , x , x , x , each ≤ 400.
21 22 23 24 25 26 Also x ≥ 0 (i=1, 2; j=1, 2,..., 6), y ≥ 0. ij j EXAMPLE 9.12 (Transportation Problem) A dairy firm has two milk plants with daily milk production of 6 million litres and 9 million litres respectively.
Each day the firm must fulfil the needs of its three distribution centres which have milk requirement of 7, 5 and 3 million litres respectively.
Cost of shipping one million litres of milk from each plant to each distribution centre is given, in hundreds of naira below.
Formulate the L.P model to minimize the transportation cost.
Distribution Centres 1 2 3 Supply 2 3 11 6 1 9 6 9 Plants 7 5 3 Demand 128 Formulation of L.P Model Key decision is to determine the quantity of milk to be transported from either plant to each distribution centre.
Let x , x be the quantity of milk (in million litres) transported from plant I to 1 2 distribution centre no.
1 and 2 respectively.
The resulting table representing transportation of milk is shown below.
Distribution Centres 1 2 3 x x 6-x -x 1 2 1 2 7-x 5-x 9-(7-x ) 1 2 1 (5-x ) 2 7 5 3 Objective is to minimize the transportation cost.
i.e., minimize Z = 2x + 3x + 11(6 – x – x ) + (7 - x ) + 9(5 - x ) 1 2 1 2 1 2 + 6[9 - (7 - x ) - (5 - x )] = 100 - 4x - llx .
1 2 1 2 Constraints are 6 – x - x ≥ 0 or x + x ≤ 6, 1 2 1 2 7 - x ≥ 0 or x ≤ 7, 1 1 5 - x ≥ 0 or x ≤ 5, 2 2 and 9 - (7 - x ) - (5 - x )≥0 or x +x ≥ 3, 1 2 1 2 where x ,x ≥ 0.
1 2 EXAMPLE 9.13 (Product Mix Problem) A plant manufactures washing machines and dryers.
The major manufacturing departments are the stamping department, motor and transmission deptt.
and assembly deptt.
The first two departments produce parts for both the products 129 while the assembly lines are different for the two products.
The monthly deptt.capacities are Stamping deptt.
: 1,000 washers or 1,000 dryers Motor and transmission deptt.
: 1,600 washers or 7,000 dryers Washer assembly line : 9,000 washers only Dryer assembly line : 5,000 dryers only.
Profits per piece of washers and dryers are #270 and #300 respectively.
Formulate the L.P model.
Formulation of Linear Programming Model Let x and x represent the number of washing machines and dryers to be 1 2 manufactured each month.
The objective is to maximize the total profit each month.
i.e.
maximize Z = 270x + 300x .
1 2 Constraints are on the monthly capacities of the various departments.
For the stamping deptt.,x + x ≤ 1, 1 2 1,000 1,000 For the motor and transmission deptt., x + x ≤ 1 1 2 1,600 7,000 for the washer assembly deptt., x ≤ 9,000 1 and for the dryer assembly deptt., x ≤ 5,000 2 where x ≥ 0, x ≥ 0.
1 2 EXAMPLE 9.14 (Product Mix Problem) A certain farming organization operates three farms of comparable productivity.
The output of each farm is limited both by the usable acreage and by the amount of water available for irrigation.
Following are the data for the upcoming season: 130 Farm Usable acreage Water available in acre feet 1 400 1,500 2 600 2,000 3 300 900 The organization is considering three crops for planting which differ primarily in their expected profit per acre and in their consumption of water.
Furthermore, the total acreage that can be devoted to each of the crops is limited by the amount of appropriate harvesting equipment available.
Crop Minimum acreage Water consumption in Expected profit acre feet per acre per acre A 400 5 # 400 B 300 4 # 300 C 300 3 # 100 However, any combination of the crops may be grown at any of the farms.
The organization wishes to know how much of each crop should be planted at the respective farms in order to maximize expected profit.
Formulate this as a linear programming problem.
Formulation of Linear Programming Model The key decision is to determine the number of acres of each farm to be allotted to each crop.
Let x, (i = farm 1, 2, 3; j = crop A, B, C) represent the number of acres of the ith farm to be allotted to the jth crop.
The objective is to maximize the total profit.
i.e., maximize Z = # 400 ∑x + 300∑x + 100∑x .
1A 1B 1C Constraints are formulated as follows: For availability of water in acre feet, 5x + 4x + 3x ≤ 1,500, 1A 1B 1c 131 5x + 4x2 + 3x ≤ 2,000, 2A B 2C 5x + 4x + 3x ≤ 900.
3A 3B 3C For availability of usable acreage in each farm, x + x + x ≤ 400, 1A 1B 1C x + x + x ≤ 600, 2A 2B 3C x + x + x ≤ 300.
3A 3B 3C For availability of acreage for each crop, x + x + x ≥ 400, 1A 2A 3A x + x + x ≥ 300, 1B 2B 3B x + x + x ≥ 300.
1C 2C 3C To ensure that the percentage of usable acreage is same in each farm, x + x + x X 100 = x + x + x X 100 = x + x + x X 100 1A 1B 1C 2A 2B 2C 3A 3B 3C 400 600 300 or 3(x + x + x ) = 2(x + x + x ), 1A 1B 1C 2A 2B 2C and (x + x + x ) = 2(x + x + x ).
2A 2B 2C 3A 3B 3C where x , x , x , x , x , x , x , x , x , each ≥ 0.
1A 1B IC 2A 2B 2C 3A 3B 3C The above relations, therefore, constitute the L.P. model.
EXAMPLE 9.15 (Product Mix Problem) Consider the following problem faced by a production planner in a soft drink plant.
He has two bottling machines A and B.
A is designed for 8-ounce bottles and B for 16-ounce bottles.
However; each can be used on both types of Bottles with some lass of efficiency.
The following data are available: Machine 8-ounce bottles 16-ounce bottles A 100/minute 40/minute B 60/minute 75/minute 132 The machines can be run 8-hour per day, 5 days a week.
Profit on 8-ounce bottle is 15 paise and on 16-ounce bottle is 25 paise.
Weekly production of the drink cannot exceed 300,000 ounces and the market can absorb 25,000 eight-ounce bottles and 7,000 sixteen-ounce bottles per week.
The planner wishes to maximize his profit subject, of course, to all the production and marketing constraints.
Formulate this as L.P problem.
Formulation of Linear Programming Model Key decision is to determine the number of 8-ounce bottles and 16-ounce bottles to be produced on either of machines A and B per week.
Let xA1, xB1 be the number of 8-ounce bottles and xA2, xB2 be the number of 16-ounce bottles to be produced per week on machines A and B respectively.
Objective is to maximize .the weekly profit.
i.e., maximize Z = #[0.15 (x +x ) + 0.25(x +x )].
A1 B1 A2 B2 Constraints can be formulated as follows: Since an 8-ounce bottle takes 1/100minute and a 16-ounce bottle takes 1/40 minute on machine A and the machine can be run for 8 hours a day and 5 days a week, the time constraint on machine A can be written as x + x ≤ 5 X 8 X 60 A1 A2 100 40 ≤ 2,400 Similarly, time constraint on machine B can be written as x + x ≤ 2,400.
B1 B2 60 75 Since the total weekly production cannot exceed 300,000 ounces, 8(x +X ) + 16(x + x ) ≤ 300,000.
A1 B1 A2 B2 The constraints on market demand yield x + x ≥ 25,000, A1 B1 x + x ≥ 7,000, A2 B2 where x , x , x , x , each ≥ 0.
A1 B1 A2 B2 133 3.6 ADVANTAGES OF LINEAR PROGRAMMING METHODS Following are the main advantages of linear programming methods: 1.
It helps in attaining the optimum use of productive factors.
Linear programming indicates how a manager can utilize his productive factors most effectively by a better selection and distribution of these elements.
For example, more efficient use of manpower and machines can be obtained by the use of linear programming.
2.
It improves the quality of decisions.
The individual who makes use of linear programming methods becomes more objective than subjective.
The individual having a clear picture of the relationships within the basic equations, inequalities or constraints can have a better idea about the problem and its solution.
3.
It also helps in providing better tools for adjustments to meet changing conditions.
It can go a long way in improving the knowledge and skill of future executives.
4.
Most business problems involve constraints like raw materials availability, market demand, etc.
which must be taken into consideration.
Just because we can produce so many units of products does not mean that they can be sold.
Linear programming can handle such situations also since it allows modification of its mathematical solutions.
5.
It highlights the bottlenecks in the production processes.
When bottlenecks occur, some machines cannot meet demand while others.
remain idle, at least part of the time.
Highlighting of bottlenecks is one of the most significant advantages of linear programming.
3.7 LIMITATIONS OF’LINEAR PROGRAMMING MODEL This model, though having a wide field, has the following limitations: 1.
For large problems having many limitations and constraints, the computational difficulties are enormous, even when assistance of large digital computers is available.
The approximations required to reduce such problems to meaningful sizes may yield the final results far different from the exact ones.
2.
Another limitation of linear programming is that it may yield fractional valued answers for the decision variables, whereas it may happen that only integer values of the variables are logical.
For instance, in finding how many lathes and milling machines to be produced, only integer values of the decision variables, say x and x are meaningful.
Except 1 2 134 when the variables have large values, rounding the solution values to the nearest integers will not yield an optimal solution.
Such situations justify the use of special techniques like integer programming.
3.
It is applicable to only static situations since it does not take into account the effect of time.
The O.R.
team must define the objective function and constraints which can change due to internal as well as external factors.
4.
It assumes that the values of the coefficients of decision variables in the objective function as well as in all the constraints are known with certainty.
Since in most of the business situations, the decision variable coefficients are known only probabilistically, it cannot be applied to such situations.
5.
In some situations it is not possible to express both the objective function and constraints in linear form.
For example, in production planning we often have non- linear constraints on production capacities like setup and takedown times which are often independent of the quantities produced.
The misapplication of linear programming under non-linear conditions usually results in an incorrect solution.
6.
Linear programming deals with problems that have a single objective.
Real life problems may involve multiple and even conflicting objectives.
One has to apply goal programming under such situations.
When comparison is made between the advantages and disadvantages/limitations of linear programming, its advantages clearly outweigh its limitations.
It must be clearly understood that linear programming techniques, like other mathematical tools only help the manager to take better decisions; they are in no way a substitute for the manager.
3.8 GRAPHICAL METHOD OF SOLUTION Once a problem is formulated as mathematical model, the next step is to solve the problem to get the optimal solution.
A linear programming problem with only two variables presents a simple case, for which the solution can be derived using a graphical or geometrical method.
Though, in actual practice such small problems are rarely encountered, the graphical method provides a pictorial representation of the solution process and a great deal of insight into the basic concepts used in solving large L.P. problems.
This method consists of the following steps: 1.
Represent the given problem in mathematical form i.e., formulate the mathematical model for the given problem.
135 2.
Draw the x and x -axes.
The non-negativity restrictions x ≥ 0 and x ≥ 0 imply 1 2 1 2 that the values of the variables x and x can lie only in the first quadrant.
This 1 2 eliminates a number of infeasible alternatives that lie in 2nd, 3rd and 4th quadrants.
3.
Plot each of the constraint on the graph.
The constraints, whether equations or inequalities are plotted as equations.
For each constraint, assign any arbitrary value to one variable and get the value of the other variable.
Similarly, assign another arbitrary value to the other variable and find the value of the first variable.
Plot these two points and connect them by a straight line.
Thus each constraint is plotted as line in the first quadrant.
4.
1dentify the feasible region (or solution space) that satisfies all the constraints simultaneously.
For type constraint, the area on or above the constraint line i.e., away from the origin and for type constraint, the area on or below the constraint line i.e., towards origin will be considered.
The area common to all the constraints is called feasible region and is shown shaded.
Any point on or within the shaded region represents a feasible solution to the given problem.
Though a number of infeasible points are eliminated, the feasible region still contains a large number of feasible points 5.
Use iso-profit (cost) function line approach.
For this plot the objective function by assuming Z = 0.
This will be a line passing through the origin.
As the value of Z is increased from zero, the line starts moving to the right, parallel to itself.
Draw lines parallel to this line till the line is farthest distant from the origin (for a maximization problem).
For a minimization problem, the line be nearest to the origin.
The point of the feasible region through which this line passes will be optimal point;It is possible that this line may coincide with one of the edges of the feasible region.
In that case, every point on that edge will give the same maximum/minimum value of the objective function and will be the optimal point.
Alternatively use extreme point enumeration approach.
For this, find the co- ordinates each extreme point (or corner point or vertex) of the feasible region.
Find the value of the objective function at each extreme point.
The point at which objective function is maximum/minimum optimal point and its co-ordinates give the optimal solution.
4.0 CONCLUSION Linear programming involves with the optimization (maximization or minimization) of a function of variables known as objective function, subject to a set of linear equations and/or inequalities known as constraints.
The objective function may be profit, cost, production capacity or any other measure of 136 effectiveness, which is to be obtained in the best possible or optimal manner.
The constraints may be imposed by different resources such as market demand, production process and equipment, storage capacity, raw material availability and so on.
5.0 SUMMARY All organizations, big or small, have at their disposal, men, machines, money and materials, the supply of which may be limited.
If the supply of these resources were unlimited, the need for management tools like linear programming would not arise at all.
Supply of resources being limited, the management must find the best allocation of its resources in order to maximize the profit or minimize the loss or utilize the production capacity to the maximum extent.
However this involves a number of problems which can be overcome by quantitative methods, particularly the linear programming.Generally speaking, linear programming can be used for optimization problems if the following conditions are satisfied- there must be a well-defined objective function; there must be constraints on the amount or extent of attainment of the objective and these constraints must be capable of being expressed as linear equations or inequalities in terms of variables; there must be alternative courses of action;decision variables should be interrelated and nonnegative; and the resources must be in limited supply.
Linear Programming has the following assumptions- Proportionality, Additivity, Continuity, Certainty, and Finite Choices.
LP solution methods can be applied in solving industrial problems, management related problems, and a host of other problem areas.
6.0 TUTOR MARKED ASSIGNMENT 1.
Briefly discuss what linear programming involves.
2.
Identify and discuss five assumptions of linear programming.
3.
List and explain three areas where linear programming can be applied.
4.
Highlight four limitations of linear programming.
5.
Give five advantages of the linear programming method.
6.
A manufacturer has two milk plants with daily milk production of 9 million litres and 11 million litres respectively.
Each day the firm must fulfil the needs of its three distribution centres which have milk requirement of 9, 6 and 4 million litres respectively.
Cost of shipping one million litres of milk from each plant to each distribution centre is given, in hundreds of naira below.
Formulate the L.P model to minimize the transportation cost.
137 Distribution Centres 1 2 3 Supply 3 4 12 9 2 10 7 11 Plants 9 6 4 Demand 7.0 REFERENCES Dixon – Ogbechi, B.N (2001), Decision Theory in Business, Lagos: Philglad Nig.
Ltd. Denardo, Eric V. (2002), The Schience of Decision making: A Problem-Based Approach Using Excel.
New York: John Wiley.
Gupta, P.K and Hira, D.S., (2012), Operations Research, New – Delhi: S. Chand & Company.
Lucey, T. (1988), Quantitative Techniques: An Instructional Manual, London: DP Publications.
138 UNIT 10: THE TRANSPORTATION MODEL 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objectives 3.0 3.0 Main Content 3.1 Assumptions Made in the Use of the Transportation Model 3.2 Theoretical Consideration 3.3 General Procedure for Setting Up a Transportation Model 3.4 Developing an Initial Solution 3.4.1 The North West Corner Method 3.4.2 The Least Cost Method 3.4.3 Vogel’s Approximation Method (Vam) 3.5 The Unbalanced Case 3.6 Formulating Linear Programming Model for the Transportation Problem 3.7 Improving the Initial Feasible Solution Through Optimisation 3.8 Determination of the Optimal Transportation Cost Using the Stepping Stone Method 3.9 The Modified Distribution Method 3.10 Degeneracy 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutor Marked Assignment 7.0 References 1.0 INTRODUCTION We now go on to another mathematical programming problem which is a special case of linear programming model.
Unlike the linear programming method, treated in the last chapter of this book, which focuses on techniques of minimizing cost of production or maximizing profit, this special linear programming model deals with techniques of evolving the lowest cost plan for transporting product or services from multiple origins which serve as suppliers to multiple destinations that demand for the goods or services.
As an example, suppose cows are to be transported in a day from 5 towns in the northern part of Nigeria to 4 towns in the south.
Each of the five northern towns has the maximum they can supply in a day, while each of the town in the southern part also has the specified quantities they demand for.
If the unit transportation cost from a source to each of the destinations is known it is possible to compute the 139 quantity of cows to be transported from each of the northern towns to the southern towns in order to minimize the total transportation cost.
The transportation technique was first started in 1941 when Hitchcock published his study entitled “The distribution of a product from several sources to numerous locations”.
Since then other researchers have developed various techniques of solving the transportation model.
There have been many variants of the transportation model among which is the assignment method, location — allocation problem and distribution problem.
The transportation method has diverse application in various facets of life.
It is applicable in transporting petroleum products from refinery (sources) to various fuel deports (locations).
It is also applicable with military logistics problem of transporting solders and resources from various camps to various war zones.
Another practical example is the transportation problem of locating hostels on the campus in such a way as to minimize the distance that students have to walk around the campus.
This unit deals with the various techniques that can be used in solving the transportation model in order to minimize cost of transporting goods from a source to a location.
We shall also deal with the balanced and unbalanced transportation problems as well as how to express transportation model in linear programming model.
The case of degeneracy is also treated briefly.
2.0 OBJECTIVES After completing this chapter, you should be able to: 1.
Describe the nature of a transportation problem.
2.
Compute the initial feasible solution using the North West Corner method.
3.
Find the initial feasible solution using the Least Cost Method.
4.
Compute the initial feasible solution using the Vogel’s Approximation Method.
5.
Use the Stepping Stones and Modified Distribution Methods to find the optimum solution.
6.
Know the technique of solving the unbalanced transportation problem.
7.
Convert a transportation model to a linear programming model.
8.
Understand the concept of degeneracy in the transportation problem.
140 3.0 MAIN CONTENT 3.1 ASSUMPTIONS MADE IN THE USE OF THE TRANSPORTATION MODEL Thetransportationmodeldealswithaspecialclassoflinearprogrammingprobleminwhi chtheobjective is totransport a homogeneous commodity from various origins or factories to different destinationsormarketsatatotalminimumcost (Murthy, 2007) In using transportation model the following major assumptions are made.
1.
The Homogeneity of materials to be transported.
The materials or items to be transported by road, sea, air or land must be the same regardless of their specific source or specified locations.
2.
Equality of transportation cost per unit.
The transportation cost per unit is the same irrespective of which of the materials is to be transported.
3.
Uniqueness of route or mode of transportation between each source and destination.
In using the transportation model it is essential that the following information are made available • The list of each source and its respective capacity for supplying the materials • The list of each destination and its respective demand for that period.
• The unit cost of each item from each source to each destination.
3.2 THEORETICAL CONSIDERATION Suppose we have a transportation problem involving movement of items from m sources (or origins) to n location (destination) at minimum cost.
Let c be the unit ij cost of transporting an item from source i to location j; a be the quantity of items 1 available at source i and b the quantity of item demanded at location j.
Also, let x j ij be the quantity transported from ith source to jth location then total supply = ∑a , ij while total demand = ∑ b This problem can be put in tabular form as shown ij below: 141  1 2 3 ….
n Supply 1 c c c ….
n a 11 12 13 1 2 c c c ….
n a 21 22 23 2 3 c c c ….
n a 31 32 33 3 : : : : : : m c c a m1 mn m Demand b b b ….
b 1 2 3 m The linear Programming model can be formulated as follows: Subject to the constraints- 3.3 GENERAL PROCEDURE FOR SETTING UP A TRANSPORTATION MODEL Convert statement of the problem into tabular form showing the total supply and total demand for each of the sources and destinations.
• Check that total number of supply equals the total number of demand to know whether the transportation model is of the balanced or unbalanced type.
• Allocate values into the necessary cells using the appropriation techniques for the method of allocation of quantities that you have selected.
We expect the number of allocated cells to be m+n-l where m is the number of rows and n is the number of columns otherwise degenerating occurs.
.
Compute the total cost of transportation.
Solution of transportation problem comes up in two phases namely: 142  The initial feasible solution  The optimum solution to the transportation problem 3.4 DEVELOPING AN INITIAL SOLUTION When developing an initial basic feasible solution there are different methods that can be used.
We shall discuss three methods used namely; 1.
The North West Corner Method 2.
The Least Cost Method 3.
Vogel’s Approximation Method It is assumed that the least cost method is an improvement on the North West Corner method, while the Vogel’s approximation method is an improvement of the least cost method.
3.4.1 THE NORTH WEST CORNER METHOD This is the simplest and most straight forward format of the method of developing an initial basic feasible solution.
The initial solution resulting from this method usually Operations Research in Decision Analysis and Production Management results in the largest total transportation cost among the three methods to be discussed.
To explain how to use this method, we present an illustrative data of a transportation problem in the example below: Table 10.1 Supply and demand of cows Sources Lagos Akure Awka Supply Sokoto 90 85 70 600 Kano 175 110 95 1400 Maiduguri 205 190 130 1000 Demand 1600 1050 350 Example 10.1 Suppose the table above gives us the supply of cows from three sources in the north and the demands by three locations in the southern part of Nigeria.
The quantities inside the cell represent the unit costs, in naira.
of transporting one cow from one source to one location.
Use the North West Corner method to allocate the 143 cows in such a way as to minimise the cost of transportation and find the minimum cost.
Solution We observe that the total demand = 1600 + 1050 + 350 =3U00 and total supply = 600 + 1400 + 1000 = 3000.
Since demand supply we have a balanced transportation problem To use the North West Corner method to allocate all the cows supplied to the cells where they are demanded, we follow this procedure: a.
Starting from the North West Corner of the table allocate as many cows as possible to cell (1, 1).
In this case it is 600.
This exhausts the supply from Sokoto leaving a demand of 1000 cows for Lagos.
Sources Lagos Akure Awka Supply Sokoto 90 85 70 600 - - 600 Kano 175 110 95 1400 Maiduguri 205 190 130 350 100 Demand 1600 1050 350 1000 b. Allocate 1000 cows to cell (2, 1) to meet Lagos demand leaving a supply of 400 cows in Kano.
Cross out the 1000 in column 1 where the demand has been met Sources Lagos Akure Awka Supply Sokoto 90 85 70 600 - - 600 Kano 175 110 95 1400 1000 - 400 Maiduguri 205 190 130 100 Demand 1600 1050 350 1000 144 1.
Allocate 400 cows to cell (2, 2) to exhaust the supply from Kano leaving a demand of 650 in Akure.
Cross out the 1400 in row 2 which has been satisfied.
Sources Lagos Akure Awka Supply Sokoto 90 85 70 600 - - 600 Kano 175 110 95 400 1000 400 - 1400 Maiduguri 205 190 130 1000 - 650 350 Demand 1600 1050 350 1000 650 1.0 Allocate 650 cows to cell (3,2) to satisfy the demand in Akure Sources Lagos Akure Awka Supply Sokoto 90 85 70 600 - - 600 Kano 175 110 95 400 1000 400 - 1400 Maiduguri 205 190 130 350 - 650 350 1000 Demand 1600 1050 350 1000 650 3.
Allocate 350 cows to cell (3, 3) to satisfy the demand in Awka and exhaust the supply in Maiduguri.
Cross out the 350.
Location Sources Lagos Akure Awka Supply Sokoto 90 85 70 600 - - 600 Kano 175 110 95 400 1000 400 - 1400 Maiduguri 205 190 130 350 - 650 350 1000 Demand 1600 1050 350 1000 650 145 This completes the allocation.
We observe that out of the 9 cells only 5 cells have been allocated.
If m is the number of rows.n is the number of columns the total number of allocated cells in this case is m + n — 1 i.e 3+ 3 — 1 = 5.
The transportation cost is found by multiplying unit cost for each cells by its unit allocation and summing it up.
i.e.
C =∑ (unit cost x cell allocation) = (600 x 90) + (l000x 175) + (110 x 400) + (190 x 650) + (130 x 350) = 54000 + 175000 x 44000 + 123500 + 45500 = N442000 This can be summarised in tabular form as follows Cell Quantity Unit Cost Cost (1, 1) 600 90 54000 (2, 1) 1000 175 17500 (2, 2) 400 110 4400 (3, 2) 650 190 123500 (3, 3) 130 350 45500 442000 3.4.2 THE LEAST COST METHOD This method is also known as the minimum cost method.
Allocation commences with the cell that has the least unit cost and other subsequent method of allocation is similar to the North West Corner method Example 10.2 Solve example 4.1 using the Least Cost method Solution We observe that the total demand = 1600 + 1050 + 350 = 3000 and total supply = 600 + 1400 + 1000 3000.
Since demand = supply we have a balanced transportation problem.
We note that the least cost per unit in this problem is N70 in cell (1, 3).
We do the allocation as follows: 146 Step 1: Allocate 350 to cell (1, 3) to satisfy the demand at Awka and leaving a supply of 250 cows at Sokoto.
Cross out column3 that has been satisfied.
Table 10.3 Location Sources Lagos Akure Awka Supply Sokoto 90 85 70 250 - 250 350 600 Kano 175 110 95 1400 - Maiduguri 205 190 130 - - 1100 Demand 1600 1050 350 Step 2: Allocate 250 cows to cell (1, 2) that has the next smallest unit cost of N85 to complete the supply from Sokoto leaving us with demands of 800 cows at Akure.
Cross out exhausted row one.
Sources Lagos Akure Awka Supply Sokoto 90 85 70 250 - 250 350 600 Kano 175 110 95 600 - 1400 Maiduguri 205 190 130 1100 Demand 1600 1050 350 800 Step 3: Allocate 800 cows to cell (2, 2) with the next least cost leaving 110 to satisfy demand at Akure, leaving us with supply of 600 ram at Kano cross out satisfied column 2.
147  Location Sources Lagos Akure Awka Supply Sokoto 90 85 70 250 - 250 350 600 Kano 175 110 95 600 600 800 - 1400 Maiduguri 205 190 130 1100 1000 - - Demand 1600 1050 350 800 Step 4: Allocate 600 cows to cell (2, 1) which has the next least cost of 175 thereby exhausting supply from Kano, leaving 1000 cows demand in Lagos.
Cross out exhausted row 2.
Location Sources Lagos Akure Awka Supply Sokoto 90 85 70 250 - 250 350 600 Kano 175 110 95 600 600 800 - 1400 Maiduguri 205 190 130 - - 1100 Demand 1600 1050 350 1000 800 Step 5: Allocate the remaining 1000 cows to cell ( 3, 1) to exhaust the supply from Maiduguri.
This completes the allocation.
148 Location Sources Lagos Akure Awka Supply Sokoto 90 85 70 250 - 250 350 600 Kano 175 110 95 600 600 800 - 1400 Maiduguri 205 190 130 1000 - 1100 Demand 1600 1050 350 1000 800 The minimum cost of transportation is given by: (85 x 250) + (70 x 350) + (175 x 360) + (110 x 800) + (205 x 1,000) =2 1,250 + 24,500 + 105,000 + 88,000 + 205,000 = 443,750 We can represent it in a tabular form as follow Cells Quantity Unit Cost Cost (1, 2) 250 80 21250 (1, 3) 350 70 24500 (2, 1) 600 175 105000 (2, 2) 800 110 88000 (3, 1) 1000 205 205000 443750 Example 10.3 In the table below, items supplied from origins A, B, C and D and those demanded in locations 1, 2, 3 and 4 are shown.
If the figures in the boxes are the unit cost of moving an item from an origin to a destination, use the least cost method to allocate the material in order to minimize cost of transportation.
Destination Origin 1 2 3 4 Supply A 29 41 25 46 1250 B 50 27 45 33 2000 C 43 54 49 40 500 D 60 38 48 31 2750 Demand 3250 250 1750 1250 149 Solution: We check the total demand and supply.
In this case both totals are equal to 6500.
It is balanced transportation problem.
We set up the allocation as follows; Step 1 Look for the least cost.
It is 25 in cell (1, 3) Allocate 1250 to cell (1, 3) and thus exhaust the supply by A while leaving a demand of 500 in column three.
Cross out the 1250 in A and the other cells on row 1.
Step 2 Look for the least cost among the remaining empty cells.
This is 27 in cell (2,2) Allocate all the demand of 250 to that cell.
Cross out the 250 in column 2 and the 2000 supply in row 2 becomes 1750.
Cross out the empty cells in column 2.
Step 3 Once again identify the cell with the least cost out of the remaining empty cells.
This is 31 in cell (4, 4).
Allocate all the 1250 in column 4 to this cell to satisfy the demand by column 4.
This leaves a supply of 1500 for row D. Cross out all the other cells in column 4.
Step 4.
Identify the cell having the least cost among the remaining cell.
This is 43 in cell (3, 1).
Allocate all the 500 supply to this cell and cross out the 500 in satisfied row 3 as well as any empty cell in that row.
Also cross out the 3250 row and replace with 3250 — 500 = 2750.
Step 5 Identify the cell with the least cost among the empty cell.
This is 45 in cell (2,3).
Since column 3 needs to exhaust 500 we allocate this to cell (2, 3).
Cross out the 500 and any empty cell in that column.
Row 2 needs to exhaust 1250 quantity.
Step 6 Examine the remaining empty cells for the cell with the least cost.
This is cell (2, 1) with N50.
Allocate all the 1250 into this cell.
Cross out 2750 in column 1 and write the balance of 1500.
Step 7 The last cell remaining is (4, 1).
Allocate the remaining 1500 to this cell thus satisfying the remaining demands of row 4 and the remaining supply of column 1.
150 Destination Origin 1 2 3 4 Supply A 29 41 25 46 1250 - - 1250 - B 50 27 45 33 7501250 1250 250 500 2000 C 43 54 49 40 500 500 - - - D 60 38 48 31 27501500 1500 - - 1250 Demand 3250 250 1750 1250 2750 500 We then calculate the cost as follows Cells Quantity Unit Cost Cost (2, 1) 1250 50 62500 (3, 1) 500 43 21500 (4, 1) 1500 60 90000 (2, 2) 250 27 6750 (1, 3) 1250 25 31250 (2, 3) 500 45 22500 (4, 4) 1250 31 38750 273,250 Note that total number of cell allocations m + n -1 where m = 4 and n = number of columns = 4 3.4.3 VOGEL’S APPROXIMATION METHOD (VAM) This technique of finding an initial solution of the transportation is an improvement on both the least cost and North West corner methods.
It involves minimization of the penalty or opportunity cost.
This penalty cost is the cost due to failure to select the best alternatives.
This technique can thus be regarded as the penalty or regret method.
The steps for using the VAM method can be presented as follows.
• Check the row and column totals to ensure they are equal.
151 • Compute the row and column parallels for the unit costs.
This is done by finding the difference between the smallest cell cost and the next smallest cell cost for each row and column.
.
Identify the row or column with the highest penalty cost.
• Allocate to the cell with the least cost in the identified cell in step 3 the highest possible allocation it can take.
• Cross out all the redundant cell.
• Re compute the penalty cost and proceed to allocate as done in the previous steps until all the cells have been allocated.
• Check for the m + n — 1 requirement.
• Compute the total cost.
Example 10.4 Solve example 4.3 using the Vogel’s Approximation Method Solution (i) The first step is to check the row and column totals and since both totals equal 6500, it is a balanced transportation problem.
(ii) Next we compute the row and column penalty costs denoted by d !
and d 1 1 respectively and obtain the following table: 1 2 3 4 Supply d !
1 A 29 41 25 46 1250 4 B 50 27 45 33 2000 6 C 43 54 49 40 500 3 D 60 38 48 31 2750 7 Demand 3250 2500 1750 1250 6500 d 14 11 20 2 1 (iii) The highest penalty cost is 20; we allocate to the least unit cost in that column the highest it can take.
The least is 25 and is allocated 1250 as shown below.
(iv) The next step is to re-compute the penalty costs, d !
and d for the unbalanced 2 2 cells in both rows and column.
The results obtained are as follows.
152  1 2 3 4 Supply d !
d !
1 2 A 29 41 25 46 1250 4 - 1250 - B 50 27 45 33 2000 6 6 250 1750 C 43 54 49 40 500 3 3 - D 60 38 48 31 2750 7 7 - Demand 3250 250 1750 1250 6500 500 d 14 11 20 2 1 d 7 11 3 2 2 Since all cells in the row 1 have all been allocated d2 0 for that row.
(v) The highest penalty cost is 11.
We allocate the maximum allocation for cell (2,1).
which has the least cost of 27 which is 250.
Row 2 has a balance of 1750 to be exhausted while column 2 is satisfied.
(vi) Next we compute penalty costs d !
and d for the unallocated cells and obtain 3 3 the following.
1 2 3 4 Supply d !
d !
d !
1 2 3 A 29 41 25 46 1250 4 - - 1250 - B 50 27 45 33 2000 6 6 12 250 1750 C 43 54 49 40 500 3 3 3 - D 60 38 48 31 2750 7 7 17 - 1250 1500 Demand 3250 250 1750 1250 6500 500 d 14 11 20 2 1 d 7 11 3 2 2 d 7 - 3 2 3 153 The highest penalty cost is 17 and the unit cost is 31.
We give the cell with unit cost of 31 its maximum allocation of 1250 thereby exhausting the demand in column 3 and leaving a balance of 1500 in row 4.
(vii) We re-compute the penalty cost d !
and d and then fill up all the other cells 4 4 1 2 3 4 Supply d !
d !
d !
d !
1 2 3 4 A 29 41 25 46 1250 4 - - - - 1250 - B 50 27 45 33 2000 6 6 12 5 1750 250 1750 C 43 54 49 40 500 3 3 3 6 500 - D 60 38 48 31 2750 7 7 17 12 1000 - 500 1250 1500 Demand 3250 250 1750 1250 2750 500 d 14 11 20 2 1 d 7 11 3 2 2 d 7 - 3 2 3 d 7 - 3 - 4 The highest penalty costs is 12, we allocate cell (4, 3) having the least unit cost of 48 maximally with 500 to exhaust row 3.
All the remaining cells in column 3 are given 0 allocations since column 3 has now been exhausted.
(viii) We then allocate the remaining empty cells as follows: cell (2, 1) is given the balance of 1750 to exhaust the supply of row 2.
Cell (3, 1) is given supply of 500 to exhaust the supply of row 3 while cell (4, 1) is allocated to the balance of 1000.
(ix) A total of 7 cells have been allocated satisfying m + n — 1 criterion.
We then compute the minimum cost of allocation in the transportation model and obtain the following; 154 Cells Quantity Unit Cost Cost (1, 3) 25 1250 62500 (2, 1) 50 1750 21500 (2, 2) 27 250 90000 (3, 1) 43 500 6750 (4, 1) 60 1000 31250 (4, 3) 48 500 22500 (4, 4) 31 1250 38750 Total 269750 We observed that this value is an improvement on the value of N273, 250 obtained by the Least Cost Method.
3.5 THE UNBALANCED CASE Suppose the total number of items supplied is not equal to the total number of items demanded.
When this happens then we have an unbalanced transportation problem.
To solve this type of problem we adjust the transportation table by creating a dummy cell for source or demand column or row to balance the number.
The dummy cells created are allocated zero transportation unit cost and the problem is solved using appropriate method as before.
We have two cases, namely (1) the case when supply is greater than demand (SS>DD) (2) the case when the demand is greater than the supply (DD >SS).
The next two examples will show us how the dummy is created and how the problem is solved.
Example 10.5 The table below shows us how some items are transported from five locations A,B,C,D to four location P,Q,R,S with the unit cost of transportation in them being shown in the box.
Determine the initial feasible solution by finding minimum cost of transportation using the North West Corner method.
P Q R S Supply A 150 120 135 105 2000 B 90 140 130 140 8000 C 120 100 120 150 7000 D 180 140 200 162 3000 E 110 130 100 160 2500 Demand 1000 4000 8500 4500 155 The total from the supply is 2000 + 8000 + 7000 + 3000 + 2500 = 22500.
The total quantity demanded is 1000 + 4000 + 8500 + 4500 = 18,000.
Since the supply is more than the demand.
We then create out a new dummy variable, with column T to take care of the demand with value of 22500 - 18000 = 4500.
We now have a table with five rows and time columns.
P Q R S T Supply A 150 120 135 105 0 2000 B 90 140 130 140 0 8000 C 120 100 120 150 0 7000 D 180 140 200 162 0 3000 E 110 130 100 160 0 2500 Demand 1000 4000 8500 4500 4500 We then carry out the allocation using the usual method to get the table below.
So the table becomes.
P Q R S T Supply A 150 120 135 105 0 1000 1000 1000 2000 B 90 140 130 140 0 5000 3000 5000 8000 C 120 100 120 150 0 3500 3500 3500 7000 D 180 140 200 162 0 2000 1000 2000 3000 E 110 130 100 160 0 2500 2500 Demand 1000 4000 8500 4500 4500 3000 3500 1000 2000 The allocations are shown above.
The cost can be computed as follows 156 Cells Quantity Unit Cost Cost (1, 1) 1000 180 180000 (1, 2) 1000 120 120000 (2, 2) 3000 140 420000 (2, 3) 5000 130 650000 (3, 3) 3500 120 420000 (3, 4) 3500 150 525000 (4, 4) 1000 162 162000 (4, 5) 2000 0 0 (5, 5) 2500 0 0 Total 2477000 Example 10.6 Find the minimum cost of this transportation problem using the North West Corner method.
1 2 3 Supply A 10 8 12 150 B 16 14 17 200 C 19 20 13 300 D 0 0 0 250 Demand 300 200 400 900 Solution Total for demand = 300 + 200 + 400 = 900 Total for supply is 150 + 200 + 300 = 650 Here Demand is greater than Supply.
According to Lee (1983) one way of resolving this is to create a dummy variable to make up for the 900 — 600 = 250 difference in the supply and to assign a value of 0 to this imaginary dummy variable.
We then end up with 4 x 3 table as shown below: The cells are now allocated using the principles of North West Corner method 157  1 2 3 Supply A 10 8 12 150 150 - - B 16 14 17 200 150 50 - 150 C 19 20 13 300 - - 150 - 150 D 0 0 0 250 - - 250 Demand 300 200 400 900 150 150 150 The cost can be computed as follows Cells Quantity Unit Cost Cost (1, 1) 150 10 1500 (2, 1) 150 16 2400 (2, 2) 50 14 700 (3, 2) 150 20 3000 (3, 3) 150 13 1950 (4, 3) 250 0 0 Total 9550 3.6 FORMULATING LINEAR PROGRAMMING MODEL FOR THE TRANSPORTATION PROBLEM The linear programming model can also be used for solving the transportation problem.
The method involves formulating a linear programming model for the problem using the unit costs and the quantities of items to be transported.
In case the decision variables are the quantities to be transported, we may represent the decision variable for cell 1 column 1 as x , cell 2 column 2 as x e.t.c.
Constraints 11 22 are created for both rows (supply) and column (demand).
There is no need of constraints for the total.
For the balanced case we use equality for the supply and demand constants.
For the unbalanced case we use equality for the lesser quantity between supply and demand while the greater of the two will use the symbol “less than or equal to (≤)“.
Dummy variables will be created to balance the requirements for demand and supply.
158 Example 10.7 Formulate a linear programming model for the transportation problem Ofada Ewokoro Abeokuta Supply Ikeja 5 8 2 250 Yaba 4 3 7 100 Agege 9 6 5 450 Lagos 3 4 6 300 Demand 600 200 300 Solution Total demand 600 + 200 + 300 = 1100 while Total supply 250 + 100 + 450 + 300 = 1100.
This is a balanced transportation problem.
We therefore use equality signs for the supply and demand constraints.
Let X , X , X be the quantities for row 1.
The other quantities for the remaining 11 12 13 rows are similarly defined.
The objective function consists of all the cell costs as follows Minimize 5X + 8X + 2X + 4X + 3X + 7X + 9X + 6X + 5X + 3X + 11 12 13 21 22 23 31 32 33 41 4X + 6X 42 43 The constraints are Supply (Row) X + X + X = 250 11 12 13 X +X +X = 100 21 22 23 X +X +X = 450 31 32 33 X +X +X = 300 41 42 43 Demands (column) X + X + X = 600 11 11 11 X +X +X =200 21 22 23 X + X + X = 300 31 32 33 159 3.7 IMPROVING THE INITIAL FEASIBLE SOLUTION THROUGH OPTIMISATION After the feasible solutions have been found using the North West Corner Method, the Least Cost Method and the Vogel’s Approximation Method (VAM) we move on to the next and final stage of finding the minimum transportation cost using optimisation technique on the obtain feasible solution.
Various methods have been proffered for finding this optimum solution among which are the following: 1) The Stepping Stone Method 2) The Modified Distribution Method (MOD1) which is an improvement on the stepping stone method and is more widely accepted.
3.8 DETERMINATION OF THE OPTIMAL TRANSPORTATION COST USING THE STEPPING STONE METHOD The optimal solution is found due to need to improve the result obtained by the North West Corner Method, the Least Cost Method and the Vogel’s Approximation Method.
The stepping stone method is used to improve the empty or unallocated cells by carefully stepping on the other allocated cells.
The method was pioneered by Charnes.
A and Cooper W. W, and is based on the idea of the Japanese garden which has at the center stepping stones carefully laid across the path which enables one to cross the path by stepping carefully on the stones.
The criterion of m + n - 1 number of occupied cells must be satisfied to avoid degeneracy.
The stepping stone method is similar to the simplex method in the sense that occupied cells are the basic variables of the simplex method while the empty cells are the non-basic variables.
To find the optimum solution we assess a stepping stone path by stepping on allocated cells in order to evaluate an empty cell.
The set of allocated cells that must be stepped on in order to evaluate an unallocated cell is known as the stepping stone path.
It is identical to the positive or negative variables on a non-basic column of the simplex tableau.
The critical thing to do is to find the stepping stone path in order to find out the net change in transportation by re-allocation of cells.
In re-allocating cells it is very important that the total supply and total demand is kept constant.
The following steps are essential in using the stepping stone method: • Identify the stepping stone path for all the unallocated cells.
160 • Trace the stepping stone paths to identify if transportation of one unit will incur a difference in total transportation cost.
One may need to skip an empty cell or even an occupied cell when tracing the path.
We usually represent increase with a positive sign and a decrease with negative sign.
• Using the traced stepping stone paths analyze the unit transportation cost in each cell.
Compute the Cost Improvement Index (CII) for each empty cell.
• Select the cell with the largest negative CII for allocation, bearing in mind the need to ensure that the demand and supply are both kept constant and calculate the cost of transportation.
Recompute the CII for the new table.
if all the CIls are positive then we have reached the optimum allocation otherwise the procedure is iterated until we get positive values for all the CIIs in the transportation table.
The following points should be noted when using the stepping stone method: • It will be observed that if iteration is necessary the transportation cost in cacti of the subsequent table will reduce until we obtain the optimum solution.
• Only sources transport goods to destinations.
Re-allocation is done using horizontal movements for rows and vertical movement columns.
• Every empty cell has a unique stepping stone path.
• The stepping stone path consists of allocated cells.
Example 10.8 You are given the following transportation table.
Find (a) the initial basic feasible solution using the Least Cost Method (b) the optimum solution using the Stepping Stone.
Method Abuja Bauchi Calabar Supply Ibadan 6 7 9 70000 Jos 5 8 7 10000 Kano 7 9 6 150000 Demand 130000 90000 110000 161 Solution This is a case of unbalanced transportation problem since the total demand is 330,000 while the total supply is 230,000.
We therefore create a dummy row of 100,000 to balance up.
The result obtained by the Least Cost Method is shown in the table below; Abuja Bauchi Calabar Supply Ibadan 6 7 9 70000 70000 Jos 5 8 7 10000 10000 Kano 7 9 6 50000 100000 150000 Dummy 0 0 0 90000 10000 100000 Demand 130000 90000 110000 330000 Minimum cost is given as follows Cell Quantity Unit cost Cost (1,1) 70000 6 420000 (2,1) 10000 5 50000 (3,1) 50000 7 350000 (3,3) 100000 6 600000 (4,2) 90000 0 0 (4,3) 10000 0 0 1420000 (b) We now find the optimum solution using the result obtained by the Least Cost Method.
We first identify the empty cells in the table of initial feasible solution.
The cells are Cell (1,2), Cell (1, 3), Cell (2,2), Cell (2,3) and Cell (4,1) Next we evaluate empty cells to obtain the stepping stone path as well as the Cost Improvement indices (CII) as follows: Cell (1,2): The Stepping Stone Path for this cell is + (1,2) - (4,2) + (4,3) - (1,1)+(3,l) - (3,3) 162  Abuja Bauchi Calabar Supply Ibadan (-) 6 (+) 7 9 70000 70000 Jos 5 8 7 10000 10000 Kano (+) 7 9 (-) 6 120000 30000 150000 Dummy 0 (‐) 0 (+) 0 20000 80000 100000 Demand 130000 90000 110000 330000 The CII for cell (1,2) is +7 – 0 + 0 – 6 + 7 = +2 Cell (1,3) The Stepping Stone Path for this cell is +(1,3) — (1,1) + (3,1) — (3.3).
The allocation matrix for this cell is shown below: Abuja Bauchi Calabar Supply Ibadan (-) 6 7 (+)9 70000 70000 70000 Jos 5 8 7 10000 10000 Kano (+) 7 9 (-)6 120000 30000 150000 Dummy 0 0 0 90000 10000 100000 Demand 130000 90000 110000 330000 CII is given as +9 – 6 + 7 – 6 = +4 Cell (2,2) the stepping stone path for the cell is +(2,2) – (4,2) + (4,3) – (3,3) + (3,1) – (2,1) the obtained matrix is as follows 163  Abuja Bauchi Calabar Supply Ibadan 6 7 9 70000 70000 Jos (-5)5 (+)8 7 10000 Kano (+) 7 9 (-)6 60000 90000 150000 120000 30000 150000 Dummy 0 (‐) 0 (+) 0 8000 20000 100000 Demand 130000 90000 110000 330000 The cell CII for cell (2, 2) is given as +8 – 0 + 0 – 6 + 7 – 5 = +4 Cell (2, 3) the stepping stone path is + (2, 3) – (3, 3) + (3,1) – (2,1) The allocation matrix for the cell is as follows Abuja Bauchi Calabar Supply Ibadan 6 7 9 70000 70000 Jos (-)5 8 (+)7 10000 10000 Kano (+) 7 9 (-) 6 60000 90000 150000 Dummy 0 (-)0 0 20000 10000 100000 Demand 130000 90000 110000 330000 The CII for cell (2, 3) is given by +7 - 6 + 7 – 5 = +3 Cell (3, 2) the stepping stone Path is +(3,2) – (4,2) + (4,3) – (3,3).
The matrix of the allocation is shown below 164  Abuja Bauchi Calabar Supply Ibadan 6 7 9 70000 70000 Jos 5 8 7 10000 10000 Kano (+) 7 (+)9 (-) 6 50000 10000 90000 150000 Dummy 0 (-)0 0 80000 20000 100000 Demand 130000 90000 110000 330000 The CII for cell (3, 2) is given by +9–0 + 0 – 6 = +3 Cell (4, 1) the stepping stone Path is +(4,1) – (3,1) + (3,3) – (4,3).
The allocation matrix is given below Abuja Bauchi Calabar Supply Ibadan 6 7 9 70000 70000 Jos 5 8 7 10000 10000 Kano (-) 7 (+)9 (-) 6 40000 110000 150000 Dummy (+)0 0 (-)0 10000 90000 100000 Demand 130000 90000 110000 330000 The CII for cell (4,1) is given as +0-7+6-0=-1 Since cell (4,1) has negative CII the optimum solution has not been reached.
We need to compute the CII for the un allocated cells in the table for cell (4,1) shown above.
The empty cells are Cell (1,2); Cell (1,3); Cell (2,2); Cell (2,3); Cell (3,2) and Cell (4,3) For Cell (1,2) The Stepping Stone Path is +(1,2) - (4,1) + (4,2) - (1,1).
The CIl =+7 – 0 + 0 – 6 =+1 165 For Cell(1,3)The Stepping Stone Path is +(1,3)-(1,1)+(3,1) - (3,3) The CII =+9 – 6 + 7 - 6 =+4 For Cell (2,2) The Stepping Stone Path is + (2,2) - (4,2) + (4,1) - ( 2,1) The CIl =+8 – 0 + 0 - 7= +3 For Cell (2,3) The Stepping Stone Path is +(2,3) - (3,3) + (3,1) - (2,1) The CIl = +7 – 6 +7 – 5 = +3 For Cell (3,2) The Stepping Stone Path is +(3,2) — (4,2) + (4,1) — (3,1) TheCil For Cell (4,3) The Stepping Stone Path is + (4,3)— (3,3) + (3,1) — (4,1) The CIl =+0—6+7-0=1 Since the CIIs are all positive an optimal solution has been found in the last table Abuja Bauchi Calabar Supply Ibadan 6 7 9 70000 70000 Jos 5 8 7 10000 10000 Kano 7 9 6 40000 110000 150000 Dummy 0 0 0 10000 90000 100000 Demand 10000 90000 110000 330000 Ibadan to Abuja 70,000 @ N6 = 70,000 x 6= 420,000 From Jos to Abuja 1,000 @ N5 = 10,000 x 5 = 50,000 From Kano to Abuja 40,000 @ N7 = 40,000 x 7 = 280,000 From Kano to Calabar 110,000 @ N6 = 110,000 x 6= 660,000 Dummy to Abuja 10,000 @ NO = 10,000 x 0=0 Dummy to Bauchi 90,000 @ NO = 90,000 x 0=0 1,410,000 166 We observe that the minimum cost of 1, 420, 000 obtained by the Least Cost Method has been reduced by the stepping stone method to give s the optimum transportation cost of 1,410, 000.
3.9 THE MODIFIED DISTRIBUTION METHOD This method is usually applied to the initial feasible solution obtained by the North West Corner method and the Least Cost method since the initial feasible solution obtained by the Vogel’s Approximation Method, is deemed to be more accurate than these two.
To use this method we take the following steps: Step 1: Using the obtained feasible solution, compute the row dispatch unit cost r 1 and the column reception unit cost c at location j for every cell with allocation ij using C = r+c ij i j Conventionally, r = 0 i Note that r is the shadow cost of dispatching a unit item from source to cell k i ij while c is the shadow cost of receiving a unit of the item from location j to cell k j ij and c is the cost of transporting a unit of the item from source i to location j in the ij corresponding cell k .
ij If we have a 3 x 3 cell we obtain r , r , r , c ,c , and c respectively.
1 2 3 1 2 3 Step 2 Compute the unit shadow costs for each of the empty unallocated cells using the various obtained c and r i i Step 3 Obtain the differences in unit costs for the unallocated cells using C1 =c (r+c) ij ij- i j If these differences are all positive for the empty cells the minimum optimum solution has been obtained.
If we have one or more records of any negative difference then it implies that an improved solution can still be obtained and so we proceed to step 167 4.Step4 We select the cell with the highest negative value of C .
If more than one of them ij have the same negative C (i.e.
the unit shadow cost is greater than the actual cost), ij that is a tie occurs we select any one of them arbitrarily for transfer of units.
Step 5 Transfer to the empty cells the minimum value possible from an allocated cell, taking care that the values of the demand and supply are unaffected by the transfer and that no other empty cell is given allocation.
Step 6 Develop a new solution and test if it is the optimum solution Step 7 If it is not, repeat the procedures by starting from step 1 until the optimum solution is obtained.
Example 10.9 In the transportation table given below: (a) Find the initial feasible solution using (i) the least cost method (ii) the Vogel’s approximation method.
Use the modified Distribution method to find the optimum solution using the initial feasible solution obtained by the Least Cost Method.
1 2 3 Supply X 9 11 15 400 Y 15 7 17 500 Z 11 5 7 600 Demand 500 450 550 Solution We use the least cost method to obtain this table 1 2 3 Supply X 9 11 15 400 - - 400 Y 15 7 17 100 - 400 500 Z 11 5 7 - 450 150 600 Demand 500 450 550 The Least Cost value is (400 x 9) + (100 x 15) + (450 x 5) + (400 x 17) + (550 x 7) 168 = 3600+1500+2250+6800+1050= 15200 Minimum cost by least cost = 15200 ii.
Using the Vogel approximation method, X Y Z Supply d d d 1 2 3 A 9 11 15 400 - - 400 2 6 6* B 15 7 17 50 450 - 500 8* 2 2 C 11 5 7 50 - 550 600 2 4 - Demand 150 100 130 d 2 2 8 11 d 2 - 8* 21 d 6 - 2 31 The cost by the Vogel Approximation method is (400 x 9) + (50 x 15) + (50 x 11) + (550 x7) =3600+750÷550+ 3150+3850=11900 (b) Using the Modified Distribution Method on the Least Cost Risk (c) We now use the Modified Distribution method on the initial solution obtained by the Least Cost Method We follow the steps allowed as shown below Step 1 Reproduce the obtained feasible solution by least cost method 1 2 3 Supply X 9 11 15 400 - - 400 Y 15 7 17 100 - 400 500 Z 11 5 7 - 450 150 600 Demand 500 450 550 169 Minimum cost by least cost = 15200 We then compute the unit shown costs for each of the allocated cells as follows By convention r =0 1 In cell (1,1) r +c =9 ….. c =9 1 1 1 In cell (2,1) r +c =15 :.r = 15 – 9 =6 2 1 2 In cell (2,3) r +c = 17 :.c = 17 – 6 =11 2 3 3 In cell (3,3) r +c =7 :.r = 7 – 11 =-4 3 3 3 In cell (3,2) r + c = 5 :.c = 5 - (-4) = 9 3 2 2 We summarise as follows r = 0 c =9 1 1 r = 6 c =9 2 2 r = -4 c =11 3 3 Steps 2 and 3 We compute the difference in unit cost for the unoccupied cells as follows For cell (1,2) c = 11 - (r + c ) = 11 - 9 = 2 12 1 2 For cell (1,3) c = 15 - (r +c ) = 15 - 11= 4 13 1 3 For cell (2,2) c = 7 - (r +c) = 7 – 15 = -8* 22 2 For cell (3,1) c = 11 - (r +c ) = 11 – 5 = 6 31 3 1 Step 5 The negative value in asterisk implies we have to do some transfer to cell (2,2) while ensuring that the supply and demand quantities are kept constant and no other empty cell expect (2,2) is given allocation.
We must also ensure that the m + n — 1 criterion is maintained to avoid degeneracy.
We obtain the table below.
170  1 2 3 Supply X 9 11 15 400 - - 400 Y 15 7 17 100 - 400 500 Z 11 5 7 - 450 150 600 Demand 500 450 550 Cost =(400x9)+(100x15)+(400x7)+(50x5)+(550x7) = 3600 + 1500 + 2800 + 250 + 3850 = 12000 Which is less than 15200.
However, we need to check if this is an optimum value Step 6 This is done by computing the ci and ci or the new table.
If none of the c is ij ij ij negative then it Is the optimum value.
As before we get For allocated cells r =0, 1+c =9 :.c =9 1 1 1 r +c =15 :.r =15 – 9 = 6 2 1 2 r +c =7 :,c =7-6 =1 2 2 2 r +c =5 :.r =5-1=4 3 2 3 r +c =7 :.c =7-4=3 3 3 3 We summarise and get the following r =0 c =9 1 1 r =6 c =1 2 2 r =4 c =3 3 3 For unallocated cells we have the following 171 For cell (1,2) we have c = 11 - (r + c ) = 11 - 1 = l0 for cell (1,3) we have c = 12 1 2 13 15 - r ÷c )=15 - 13=2 1 3 For cell (1,3) we have ci = 15 - (r + c ) = 15 - 13 = 2 13 1 3 For cell (2,3) we have ci = 17 - (r + c ) = 17 - (6+3) = 17 - 9 = 8 23 2 3 For cell (3,1) we have ci = 11 - (r + c )= 11(4 + 9) = 11 - 13 = -2* 31 3 1 Since (3,1)has negative ci value of -2 we do some transfer to (3,1) in the usual 31 member together.
1 2 3 Supply X 9 11 15 400 400 - - Y 15 7 17 500 50 450 Z 11 5 7 600 50 550 Demand 500 450 550 Cost= (400x9)+(50x15)+(50x11)+(450x7)+(550x7) =3600+70+550+3150+3850= 11,900 We check if this is the optimum solution by computing the differences in the unit costs an unit shadow costs c in the usual way.
ij For allocated cells r =0, 1+c = 9 .
: c = 9 1 1 1 r + c = 15 .
: r = 15 – 9 = 6 2 1 2 r + c = 7 .
: c = 7 – 6 = 1 2 2 2 r +c = l1 .
: r = 11 – 9 = 2 3 1 3 r +c = 7 .
: c = 7 – r = 7 – 2 = 5 3 3 3 3 We summarise and get r = 0 c =9 1 1 r =6 c =1 2 2 172 r =2 c =5 3 3 For unallocated cells (1,2) we have c = 11 - (0+1) = 10 12 for(1,3)we have c =15 - (0+5)=10 13 for (2,3) we have c =17 - (6+5)=6 23 for cell (3,2) we have c = 5 - (2 + 1) = 2 32 Since all these values are positive then the last table is the optimum assignment.
The optimum assignment is thus 1 2 3 Supply X 400 - - 400 Y 50 450 - 500 Z 50 - 550 600 Demand 500 450 550 The optimum cost is N11,900 We observe that the value obtained is the same as that of Vogel’s Approximation method so Vogel is the best of all the methods.
3.10 DEGENERACY This condition arises when the number of allocated cell does not satisfy the m + n — 1 criterion Degeneracy prevents us from utilizing the optimisation technique to get the minimization cost of the transportation model.
Exanp1e 10.10 Find the initial feasible solution of the transportation problem below using the Vogel s Approximation Method.
Comment on your result.
173  1 2 3 Supply X 8 7 6 40 Y 16 10 9 120 Z 19 18 12 90 Demand 130 15 25 Solution 1 2 3 Supply d d d 1 2 3 X 8 7 6 40 - - 400 1 - - Y 16 10 9 25 - 95 25 120 1 1 1 Z 19 18 12 90 - - 90 6 6 7 Demand 130 15 25 d 8* 3 3 1 d 3 8* 3 2 d 3 - 3 3 Correct: Only 4 cells are allocated.
So degeneracy occurs.
The feasible solution can be obtained as follows 40 x 8 = 320 95 x 10 = 950 90 x 19 = 1710 25 x 9 = 225 N3,205 Let us compute the shadow costs By convention r = 0 1 r +c = 8 .
: r = 8 1 1 1 r +c = l0 2 2 r +c = 9 2 3 174 r +c =19 :r =19 – 8 =11 3 1 3 Due to degeneracy we cannot get enough information to enable us calculate r+, c+ and c .
This implies that we cannot determine the needed row and column values 3 for the unallocated cells.
The way out is to create a dummy allocated cell which is assigned a value of 0.
Others advocate adding a small value to an empty cell and then proceeding with using MODI to obtain the optimum solution in the usual way.
4.0 CONCLUSION The transportation technique was first started in 1941 when Hitchcock published his study entitled “The distribution of a product from several sources to numerous locations”.
Since then other researchers have developed various techniques of solving the transportation model.
There have been many variants of the transportation model among which is the assignment method, location — allocation problem and distribution problem.
The transportation method has diverse application in various facets of life.
It is applicable in transporting petroleum products from refinery (sources) to various fuel deports (locations).
It is also applicable with military logistics problem of transporting solders and resources from various camps to various war zones.
Another practical example is the transportation problem of locating hostels on the campus in such a way as to minimize the distance that students have to walk around the campus.
5.0 SUMMARY Thetransportationmodeldealswithaspecialclassoflinearprogrammingprobleminwhi chtheobjective is totransport a homogeneous commodity from various origins or factories to different destinationsormarketsatatotalminimumcost.
In this unit, we discussed the following issues- assumptions of the transportation model which include the Homogeneity of materials to be transported, equalityof transportation cost per unit, uniqueness of route or mode of transportation between each source and destination.
It also discussed extensively, various methods of solving the transportation problem viz:the north west corner method, the least cost method, Vogel’s approximation method (vam), the unbalanced case, formulating linear programming model for the transportation problem, and determination of the optimal transportation cost using the stepping stone method.
175 6.0 TUTOR MARKED ASSIGNMENT 1.
Give four assumptions of the transportation model.
2.
Present a theoretical consideration of the transportation model 3.
What are the general procedures for setting up a transportation model?
4.
List three methods used in developing a transportation solution.
5.
In the table below, items supplied from origins A, B, C and D and those demanded in locations 1, 2, 3 and 4 are shown.
If the figures in the boxes are the unit cost of moving an item from an origin to a destination, use the least cost method to allocate the material in order to minimize cost of transportation.
Destination Origin 1 2 3 4 Supply A 29 41 25 46 1250 B 50 27 45 33 2000 C 43 54 49 40 500 D 60 38 48 31 2750 Demand 3250 250 1750 1250 7.0 REFERENCES Murthy, Rama P. (2007) Operations Research 2nded.
New Delhi: New Age International Publishers.
Dixon – Ogbechi, B.N (2001), Decision Theory in Business, Lagos: Philglad Nig.
Ltd. Denardo, Eric V. (2002), The Schience of Decision making: A Problem-Based Approach Using Excel.
New York: John Wiley.
Gupta, P.K and Hira, D.S., (2012), Operations Research, New – Delhi: S. Chand & Company.
Lucey, T. (1988), Quantitative Techniques: An Instructional Manual, London: DP Publications.
176  UNIT 11: ASSIGNMENT MODEL 177 1.0 INTRODUCTION 2.0 OBJECTIVES 3.0 MAIN CONTENT 3.1 The Problem 3.2 COMPARISION BETWEEN TRANSPORTATION PROBLEM AND ASSIGNMENT PROBLEM 3.3 APPROACH TO SOLUTION 4.0 CONCLUSION 5.0 SUMMARY 6.0 TUTOR MARKED ASSIGNMENT 7.0 REFERENCES 1.0 INTRODUCTION Basically assignment model is a minimization model.
If we want to maximize the objective function, then there are two methods.
One is to subtract all the elements of the matrix from the highest element in the matrix or to multiply the entire matrix by –1 and continue with the procedure.
For solving the assignment problem we use Assignment technique or Hungarian method or Flood's technique.
All are one and the same.
Above, it is mentioned that one origin is to be assigned to one destination.
This feature implies the existence of two specific characteristics in linear programming problems, which when present, give rise to an assignment problem.
The first one being the pay ofmatrix for a given problem is a square matrix and the second is the optimum solution (or any solution with given constraints) for the problem is such that there can be one and only one assignment in a given row or column of the given payoff matrix.
The transportation model is a special case oflinear programming model (Resource allocation model) and assignment problem is a special case oftransportation model, therefore it is also a special case of linear programming model.
Hence it musthave all the properties of linear programming model.
That is it must have: (i) an objective function, (ii)it must have structural constraints, (iii) It must have non- negativity constraint and (iv) The relationshipbetween variables and constraints must have linear relationship.
In our future discussion, we will seethat the assignment problem has all the above properties.
(Murthy, 2007) 2.0 OBJECTIVE 178 After reading this unit, you should be able to 1 Identify types of assignment problems, 2 Draw a comparison between an assignment and a transportation problem.
3 Use the different solution techniques to solve assignment problems.
3.1 The Problem There are various types in assignment problem.
They are: (i) Assigning the jobs to machines when the problem has square matrix to minimize the time required to complete the jobs.
Here the number of rows i.e.
jobs are equals to the number of machines i.e.
columns.
The procedure of solving will be discussed in detail in this section.
(ii) The second type is maximization type of assignment problem.
Here we have to assign certain jobs to certain facilities to maximize the returns or maximise the effectiveness.
(iii) Assignment problem having non-square matrix.
Here by adding a dummy row or dummy columns as the case may be, we can convert a non-square matrix into a square matrix and proceed further to solve the problem.
This is done in problem number.5.9.
(iv) Assignment problem with restrictions.
Here restrictions such as a job cannot be done on a certain machine or a job cannot be allocated to a certain facility may be specified.
In such cases, we should neglect such cell or give a high penalty to that cell to avoid that cell to enter into the programme.
(v) Traveling sales man problem (cyclic type).
Here a salesman must tour certain cities starting from his hometown and come back to his hometown after visiting all cities.
This type of problem can be solved by Assignment technique and is solved in problem 5.14.
Let us take that there are 4 jobs, W, X, Y and Z which are to be assigned to four machines, A, B, C and D. Here all the jobs have got capacities to machine all the jobs.
Say for example that the job W is to drill a half and inch hole in a Wooden plank, Job X is to drill one inch hole in an Aluminium plate and Job Y is to drill half an inch hole in a Steel plate and job Z is to drill half an inch hole in a Brass plate.
The machine A is a Pillar type of drilling machine, the machine B is Bench type of drilling machine, Machine C is radial drilling machine and machine D is an 179 automatic drilling machine.
This gives an understanding that all machines can do all the jobs or all jobs can be done on any machine.
The cost or time of doing the job on a particular machine will differ from that of another machine, because of overhead expenses and machining and tooling charges.
The objective is to minimize the time or cost of manufacturing all the jobs by allocating one job to one machine.
Because of this character, i.e.
one to one allocation, the assignment matrix is always a square matrix.
If it is not a square matrix, then the problem is unbalanced.
Balance the problem, by opening a dummy row or dummy column with its cost or time coefficients as zero.
Once the matrix is square, we can use assignment algorithm or Flood's technique or Hungarian method to solve the problem.
Mathematical Model: Jobs Machine Time (hours) Availability A B C D W C11 C12 C13 C14 1 X C21 C22 C23 C24 1 Y C31 C32 C33 C34 1 Z C41 C42 C43 C44 1 REQUIREMENT 1 1 1 1 Mathematical Model:  Subject to: Xij = (Xij)2i and j = 1 to n For i and j = 1 to n (Each machine to one job only) (Each job to one machine only) And Xij = 0 for all values of j and i. Non-negativity constraint.
3.2 COMPARISION BETWEEN TRANSPORTATION PROBLEM AND ASSIGNMENT PROBLEM 180 Now let us see what are the similarities and differences between Transportation problem and Assignment Problem.
Similarities 1.
Both are special types of linear programming problems.
2.
Both have objective function, structural constraints, and non-negativity constraints.
And the relationship between variables and constraints are linear.
3.
The coefficients of variables in the solution will be either 1 or zero in both cases.
4.
Both are basically minimization problems.
For converting them into maximization problem same procedure is used.
Differences Transportation Problem Assignment Problem.
1.
The problem may have rectangular 1.The matrix of the problem must be a matrix or square matrix.
square matrix.
2.The rows and columns may have any 2.The rows and columns must have number of allocations depending on one to one allocation.
Because of this the rim conditions.
property, the matrix must be a square 3.The basic feasible solution is matrix.
obtained by northwest corner method 3.The basic feasible solution is or matrix minimum method or VAM obtained by Hungarian method or 4.The optimality test is given by Flood's technique or by Assignment stepping stone method or by MODI algorithm.
method.
4.Optimality test is given by drawing 5.The basic feasible solution must minimum number of horizontal and have m + n – 1 allocations.
vertical lines to cover all the zeros in 6.The rim requirement may have any the matrix.
numbers (positive numbers).
5.Every column and row must have at 7.In transportation problem, the least one zero.
And one machine is problem deals with one commodity assigned to one job and vice versa.
being moved from various origins to 6.
The rim requirements are always 1 various destinations each for every row and one each for every column.
7.Here row represents jobs or machines and columns represents machines or jobs.
Fig11.1: Difference between transportation and Assignment models.
Source: Murthy, Rama P. (2007) Operations Research 2nded.
New Delhi: New Age International Publishers 3.3 APPROACH TO SOLUTION 181 Let us consider a simple example and try to understand the approach to solution and then discuss complicated problems.
1.
Solution by visual method In this method, first allocation is made to the cell having lowest element.
(In case of maximization method, first allocation is made to the cell having highest element).
If there is more than one cell having smallest element, tie exists and allocation may be made to any one of them first and then second one is selected.
In such cases, there is a possibility of getting alternate solution to the problem.
This method is suitable for a matrix of size 3 × 4 or 4 × 4.
More than that, we may face difficulty in allocating.
Problem 5.1.
There are 3 jobs A, B, and C and three machines X, Y, and Z.
All the jobs can be processed on all machines.
The time required for processing job on a machine is given below in the form of matrix.
Make allocation to minimize the total processing time.
Machines (time in hours) Jobs X Y Z A 11 16 21 B 20 13 17 C 13 15 12 Allocation: A to X, B to Y and C to Z and the total time = 11 + 13 +12 = 36 houN (Since 11 is least, Allocate A to X, 12 is the next least, Allocate C to Z) 2.
Solving the assignment problem by enumeration Let us take the same problem and workout the solution.
Machines (time in hours) Jobs X Y Z A 11 16 21 B 20 13 17 C 13 15 12 S/N Assignment Total Cost in N 1 AX BY CZ 11 + 13 + 12 = 36 2 AX BZ CY 11 + 17 + 15 = 43 3 AY BX CZ 16 + 20 + 12 = 48 4 AY BZ CX 16 + 17 + 13 = 46 182  5 AZ BY CX 21 + 13 + 13 = 47 6 AZ BX 21 + 20 + 15 CY = 56 Like this we have to write all allocations and calculate the cost and select the lowest one.
If more than one assignment has same lowest cost then the problem has alternate solutions.
3.
Solution by Transportation method Let us take the same example and get the solution and see the difference between transportation problem and assignment problem.
The rim requirements are 1 each because of one to one allocation Machines (Time in hours) Jobs X Y Z Available A 11 16 21 1 B 20 13 17 1 C 13 15 12 1 Req.
1 1 1 3 By using northwest corner method the assignments are: Machines (Time in hours) Jobs X Y Z Available A 1 E 1 B 1 ∈ 1 C 1 1 Req.
1 3 As the basic feasible solution must have m + n – 1 allocation, we have to add 2 epsilons.
Next we have to apply optimality test by MODI to get the optimal answer.
4.0 CONCLUSION Basically assignment model is a minimization model.
If we want to maximize the objective function, then there are two methods.
One is to subtract all the elements of the matrix from the highest element in the matrix or to multiply the entire matrix by –1 and continue with the procedure.
For solving the assignment problem we use Assignment technique or Hungarian method or Flood's technique.
All are one and the same.
Above, it is mentioned that one origin is to be assigned to one 183 destination.
This feature implies the existence of two specific characteristics in linear programming problems, which when present, give rise to an assignment problem.
The first one being the pay ofmatrix for a given problem is a square matrix and the second is the optimum solution (or any solution with given constraints) for the problem is such that there can be one and only one assignment in a given row or column of the given payoff matrix.
5.0 SUMMARY There various types of assignment problems these include:assigning the jobs to machines when the problem has square matrix to minimize the time required to complete the jobs, the second type is maximization type of assignment problem.
Here we have to assign certain jobs to certain facilities to maximize the returns or maximise the effectiveness, Assignment problem having non-square matrix, Assignment problem with restrictions, Traveling sales man problem, etc.
there exist some similarities between assignment problems and transportation problems.
Some of the similarities include the fact that both are special types of linear programming problems, both have objective function, structural constraints, and non-negativity constraints.
And the relationship between variables and constraints are linear, the coefficients of variables in the solution will be either 1 or zero in both cases and both are basically minimization problems.
For converting them into maximization problem same procedure is used.
On the other hand, the major difference between them is that while the transportation problem may have rectangular matrix or square matrix, the matrix of the assignment problem must be a square matrix.
6.0 TUTOR MARKED ASSIGNMENT 1.
List and explain five types of assignment problems.
2.
Give three similarities between an assignment problem and a transportation problem.
3.
Highlight the differences between an assignment problem and a transportation problem.
7.0 REFERENCES 184  Murthy, Rama P. (2007) Operations Research 2nded.
New Delhi: New Age International Publishers.
Denardo, Eric V. (2002), The Schience of Decision making: A Problem-Based Approach Using Excel.
New York: John Wiley.
Gupta, P.K and Hira, D.S., (2012), Operations Research, New – Delhi: S. Chand & Company.
Lucey, T. (1988), Quantitative Techniques: An Instructional Manual, London: DP Publications.
UNIT 12: PROJECT MANAGEMENT 185 1.0 INTRODUCTION 2.0 OBJECTIVES 3.0 MAIN CONTENT 3.1 What is Project Management?
3.2 International Standards and Guidelines 3.3 Project Management Processes 3.4 Project vs.
Product Life Cycles 3.5 What is the Value of Project Management?
3.6 How Project Management Relates to Other Disciplines 3.7 The Project Management Profession 3.8 Project Planning 3.9 Programme Evaluation and Review Technique and Critical Path Method (PERT and CPM) 4.0 CONCLUSION 5.0 SUMMARY 6.0 TUTOR MARKED ASSIGNMENT 7.0 REFERENCES 1.0 INTRODUCTION This unit is designed to introduce you to the basic concepts and definitions associated withproject management.
You will learn about the triple constraints of scope, time and cost; the nine functional knowledge areas associated with project management and the four major phases of a project.
You will also learn about the skills and tools used to integrate all of the knowledge areas throughout a project’s lifecycle.
You will also learn how to use the CPM and PERT techniques in solving project related problems.
2.0 OBJECTIVES At the end of this unit, you should be able to 1.
Define project management 2.
Identify the “body of knowledge areas” in project management.
3.
List and explain the processes involved in project management.
4.
Describe the project vs product cycle.
5.
Define the value of project management.
6.
Discuss the concept of project planning.
7.
Solve problems using PERT and CPM techniques.
3.0 MAIN CONTENT 186  3.1 What is Project Management?
Project Management has been called an accidental profession.
In many organisations in the past, project managers typically stumbled or fell into project management responsibilities.
The world has since changed and project management is now recognised globally as a formal discipline, with international standards and guidelines and a growing knowledge base of best practices.
Project management is the application of skills and knowledge and the use of tools and techniques applied to activities in a project to complete the project as defined in the scope.
Project management is not only the use of a scheduling tool such as Microsoft Project, Scheduler Plus, etc.
Many organisations still do not understand that the ability to use a scheduling tool is not enough to successfully manage a project.
The use of a tool is only one part of the equation.
Project management requires a high level of skill in both the people and technical side of the discipline for successful projects to result.
If we consider that the tasks in a project are completed by people, this then sheds an entirely different light to the concept of project management and should make it clear that for successful project management the right combination of skills can impact on success and project outcomes.
The world is changing very rapidly with added complexities, increased expectations and constant change.
Project Management is an effective process for organisations to address business needs to get products and services to market more quickly and preferably before the competition!
3.2 International Standards and Guidelines Project Management is a formal discipline with international standards and guidelines developed by the Project Management Institute (PMI).
A significant body of knowledge has been accumulated specifically over the past 5 years relating to effective project management practices, tools, techniques and processes across industries.
PMI is recognised as the international body providing guidance and direction for the discipline.
PMI has developed the “Project Management Body of Knowledge” or “PMBOK” the essential knowledge areas and processes required to effectively manage projects.
There are nine “body” of knowledge areas within the standards and guidelines.
• Integration Management – Processes to ensure that the elements of the project are effectively coordinated.
Integration management involves making decisions throughout the project in terms of objectives and alternative approaches to meet or exceed stakeholder expectations.
187 • Scope Management - processes to ensure that all the work required to complete the project is defined.
Defining what is or is not in scope.
• Time Management – all processes required to ensure that the project completes on time (defined schedule).
Cost Management – all processes required to ensure the project is completed within the budget approved for the project.
• Quality Management – processes to ensure that the project delivers the need for which it was undertaken.
Includes all quality processes such as quality policy, objectives, and responsibility and implements these through quality planning, quality assurance, quality control and quality improvement.
• Risk Management – all processes involved in identifying, assessing/analysing, responding and controlling project risk.
• Human Resource Management – all processes required to make the most effective use of people resources in a project, including sponsor, stakeholders, partners, team etc.
• Communications Management – all processes to ensure timely and appropriate distribution of project information, includes providing links between key people in the project, generating, collecting, disseminating, storing and archival of project information.
• Procurement Management – processes to acquire goods and services for the project outside of the organisation.
3.3 Project Management Processes Project Management processes define, organise and complete the work defined for the project.
There are five project management process areas that apply to most projects and are defined in the PMBOK: • Initiating Processes – authorising the project or phase.
• Planning Processes – defining the project objectives and selecting the most appropriate approach for the project to attain the objectives.
• Executing Processes – managing the resources required to carry out the project as defined in the plan.
• Controlling Processes – ensuring that project objectives are met as defined by 188 monitoring, measuring progress against plan, identifying variance from plan and taking corrective action.
• Closing Processes – formalising acceptance of a phase and or the project and closing all associated activities.
Project management is integrative and to effectively manage a project, a project manager uses all of the body of knowledge areas and all of the processes throughout the life cycle of a project.
The following diagram is a sample of a standard four phase project life cycle.
THE PROJECT CYCLE N TIME INITIATION PLANNING IMPLEMENTATION CLOSE OUT INITIAL CHARTER PLAN DELIVERABLE P. I. R Fig.
12.1:Tthe product cycle 3.4 Project vs.
Product Life Cycles Those of you involved in information technology fields have likely heard of the systems development life cycle (SDLC) – a framework for describing the phases 189 involved in developing and maintaining IT systems.
This is an example of a product life cycle.
The project life cycle applies to all projects (regardless of product produced) whereas a product life cycle varies depending on the nature of the product.
Many products (such as large IT systems) are actually developed through a series of several different projects.
Large projects are seldom given full funding and approval from the beginning.
Usually a project has to successfully pass through each of the project phases before continuing to the next.
The practice of ‘progressive resource commitment’ also means you only get the money for the next phase after the prior phase has been completed and there is an opportunity for management review to evaluate progress, probability of success and continued alignment with organisational strategy.
These management points are often called phase exits, killpoints or stage gates.
3.5 What is the Value of Project Management?
Project Management increases the probability of project success.
Project Management is change facilitation, and used effectively with appropriate processes, tools, techniques and skills will: • Support the Business • Get the product or service to market effectively, efficiently and to quality standards • Provide common approach to project management • Improve service Project management is the application of knowledge, skills, tools, and techniques to project activities in order to meet or exceed stakeholder needs and expectations from a project.
3.6 How Project Management Relates to Other Disciplines Project management overlaps with general management knowledge and practice, as well aswith the project's application areas, knowledge, and practice.
Project managers focus onintegrating all the pieces required for project completion.
General managers or operational managers tend to focus on a particular discipline or functional area.
In this respect, projectmanagement tends to be a cross- functional role, often involving people from various business areas and divisions.
While project management requires some fundamental understanding of the knowledge area of the project itself, the project manager does not have to be an expert in that field.
You don’t need to be a certified carpenter, plumber, and electrician in to manage the construction of your house, but you do need to have a least a fundamental understanding of each trade or 190 discipline.
3.7 The Project Management Profession The Project Management Institute (PMI) provides certification as a project management professional (PMP).
The requirements include verification of from 4500 to 7500 hours of project management experience (depending on education level), adherence to a Code of Ethics, and obtaining a score of 70% or higher on a 200-question multiple choice certification exam.
For further information see the PMI Internet website at http://www.PMI.org.
3.8 Project Planning We are going to take a quick look at the elements of project planning, starting with the project life cycle and then examine the importance of detailed planning to the overall success of the project.
Without a clear definition of the project, it's impossible to discern what should be delivered as a result.
If requirements are not clear, your project will be impossible to control, and it will become unmanageable.
We will review the fundamentals of planning and then move on to the importance of developing a comprehensive work breakdown structure.
Today’s organisations are running at a fast pace.
More so than ever, organisations are faced with increasing global competition and as such, want products and services delivered yesterday!
Organisations are struggling with multiple projects, tight deadlines and fewer skilled resources available to manage these projects.
Project managers are struggling with the concepts of best practices and the reality of life in a corporation.
Often, insufficient time is provided for planning the project appropriately and as a result projects consistently fail to produce the expected results, have cost or time overruns, or just plain fail.
In such cases, the project manager can usually look back on his or her experiences and see what went wrong, vowing never to make the same mistake again.
Sometimes, however, the cycle continues.
Whether you manage a small, medium or large size project, effective planning of the project is the single most critical step to success.
Too many project managers either neglect or spend too little time and effort planning.
The tendency is to rush to implementation before a clear picture is developed.
The project definition must be clear and understood by the stakeholders and the team.
Often the directive from the project sponsor is “Just do it” or “We need this in place by next week”, “we don’t have the luxury to spend time planning, we need to do the project”, not allowing the time up front to conduct proper planning activities.
Failure to plan, however, usually results in failure to survive.
Without a clearly defined scope, the project has no sustainable basis for success.
191  Building a detailed project plan forces the team and the stakeholders to realistically assess the proposed project.
What will the outcome be when the project is finished?
What will you have?
– product, service?
What will the product/service look like?
What are the must have, nice to have features of the product/service?
What is the current situation?
What is the desired outcome?
What are the obstacles keeping you from closing the gap?
Who are the primary and secondary stakeholders?
What is the problem/change?
What are the assumptions/constraints and objectives of the project?
The planning stage of the project includes setting broad-based goals and designing strategies and action plans to reach these goals.
E2 Project Management, Block Two Page 3 of 22 Project planning is a dynamic, "cyclical" process that continues throughout the project life cycle.
Planning must take place to deal with problems, change or risks as they occur in the project.
Planning begins with the identified and agreed to requirements in mind.
It is critical to the success of the project to understand your destination when you start.
You will know where you are going and you will have developed plans to arrive at the goal and complete the project successfully.
Project managers must learn how to develop a project strategy and plan regarding how to implement that plan.
Your organisation, team and stakeholders depend on it.Project planning is a cycle that is repeated on an on-going basis.
For the duration of the project, it is never a finished process.
Why?
Because resources change or move, factors in the organisation may change causing project objectives to change, unknown risks can occur, or technology may change, requiring project managers to continually monitor and manage this process throughout the life of the project.
The following diagram illustrates the “Project Life Cycle” and the cyclical nature of planning activities.
192  T HE PROJECT CYCLE PROJECT DEFINITION FORECSTING W B S EVALUATION DEVELOPMENT PROJECT CYCLE CHANGE ESTIMATE MANAGEMENT SCHEDULING PROJECT BASELINE Fig.
12.2: The project cycle 3.9 PROGRAMME EVALUATION AND REVIEW TECHNIQUE AND CRITICAL PATH METHOD (PERT AND CPM) Programme Evaluation and Review Technique (PERT) and Critical Path Method (CPM) are two techniquesthat are widely used in planning and scheduling the large projects.
A project is a combination of variousactivities.
For example, Construction of a house can be considered as a project.
Similarly, conductinga public meeting may also be considered as a project.
In the above examples, construction of a houseincludes various activities such as searching for a suitable site, arranging the finance, purchase ofmaterials, digging the foundation, construction of superstructure etc.
Conducting a meeting includes, printing of invitation cards, distribution of cards, arrangement of platform, chairs for audience etc.
Inplanning and scheduling the activities of large sized projects, 193 the two network techniques — PERT andCPM — are used conveniently to estimate and evaluate the project completion time and control theresources to see that the project is completed within the stipulated time and at minimum possible cost.Many managers, who use the PERT and CPM techniques, have claimed that these techniques drasticallyreduce the project completion time.
But it is wrong to think that network analysis is a solution to all badmanagement problems.
In the present chapter, let us discuss how PERT and CPM are used to schedulethe projects.
Initially, projects were represented by milestone chart and bar chart.
But they had little use in controlling the project activities.
Bar chart simply represents each activity by bars of length equal tothe time taken on a common time scale as shown in figure 15. l. This chart does not show interrelationshipbetween activities.
It is very difficult to show the progress of work in these charts.
An improvement inbar charts is milestone chart.
In milestone chart, key events of activities are identified and eachactivity is connected to its preceding and succeeding activities to show the logical relationship betweenactivities.
Here each key event is represented by a node (a circle) and arrows instead of bars representactivities, as shown in figure the figures below.
The extension of milestone chart is PERT and CPM networkmethods.
Y 1 2 3 A 4 5 B 6 7 C Fig.
12.3a: Bar Chart Fig.
4.3b: Milestone Chart.
In PERT and CPM the milestones are represented as events.
Event or node is either starting of anactivity or ending of an activity.
Activity is represented by means of an arrow, which is resourceconsuming.
Activity consumes resources like time, money and materials.
Event will not consume anyresource, but it simply represents either starting or ending of an activity.
Event can also be representedby rectangles or triangles.
When all activities and events in a project are connected logically 194 andsequentially, they form a network, which is the basic document in network- based management.
Thebasic steps for writing a network are: (a) List out all the activities involved in a project.
Say, for example, in building construction, theactivities are: (i) Site selection, (ii) Arrangement of Finance, (iii) Preparation of building plan, (iv) Approval of plan by municipal authorities, (v) Purchase of materials, (vi) Digging of foundation, (vii) Filling up of foundation, (viii) Building superstructure, (ix) Fixing up of doorframes and window frames, (x) Roofing, (xi) Plastering, (xii) Flooring, (xiii) Electricity and water fittings, (xiv) Finishing.
(b) Once the activities are listed, they are arranged in sequential manner and in logical order.
For example, foundation digging should come before foundation filling and so on.
Programme Evaluation and Review Technique and Critical Path Method (PERT and CPM) (c) After arranging the activities in a logical sequence, their time is estimated and written against each activity.
For example: Foundation digging: 10 days, or 1½ weeks.
(d) Some of the activities do not have any logical relationship, in such cases; we can start those activities simultaneously.
For example, foundation digging and purchase of materials do not have any logical relationship.
Hence both of them can be started simultaneously.
Suppose foundation digging takes 10 days and purchase of materials takes 7 days, both of them can be finished in 10 days.
And the successive activity, say foundation filling, which has logical relationship with both of the above, can be started after 10 days.
Otherwise, foundation digging and purchase of materials are done one after the other; filling of foundation should be started after 17 days.
(e) Activities are added to the network, depending upon the logical relationship to complete the project network.
195  Some of the points to be remembered while drawing the network are (a) There must be only one beginning and one end for the network, as shown in figures bellow.
A A 1 6 2 1 2 6 7 B B 1 3 3 7 4 I I 4 6 3 6 3 J 5 6 J 5 6 6 RIGHT WRONG Fig.
12.
4:Writing the network.
(b) Event number should be written inside the circle or node (or triangle/square/rectangle etc).
Activity name should be capital alphabetical letters and would be written above the arrow.
The time required for the activity should be written below the arrow as in the figure below.
A i j 7 Fig .12.5:Numbering and naming the activities.
(c) While writing network, see that activities should not cross each other.
And arcs or loops as in figures above should not join Activities.
196  1 3 2 4 WRONG Fig .12.6: Crossing of activities not allowed (d) While writing network, looping should be avoided.
This is to say that the network arrows should move in one direction, i.e.
starting from the beginning should move towards the end, as in figure 15.6.
2 1 4 3 WRONG Fig .12.7: Looping is not allowed.
(e) When two activities start at the same event and end at the same event, they should be shown by means of a dummy activity as in figure 15.7.
Dummy activity is an activity, which simply shows the logical relationship and does not consume any resource.
It should be represented by a dotted line as shown.
In the figure, activities C and D start at the event 3 and end at event4.
C and D are shown in full lines, whereas the dummy activity is shown in dotted line.
197  C C 3 4 3 4 5 Dummy 3 D D 5 WRONG RIGHT Fig .
12.8: Use of Dummy activity.
(f) When the event is written at the tail end of an arrow, it is known as tail event.
If event iswritten on the head side of the arrow it is known as head event.
A tail event may have any number of arrows (activities) emerging from it.
This is to say that an event may be a tail event to any number of activities.
Similarly, a head event may be a head event for anynumber of activities.
This is to say that many activities may conclude at one event.
This isshown in figure 15.8.
Head Event Tail Event Fig .12.9: Tail event and Head event The academic differences between PERT network and CPM network are: (i ) PERT is event oriented and CPM is activity oriented.
This is to say that while discussing about PERT network, we say that Activity 1-2, Activity 2-3 and so on.
Or event 2 occurs after event 1 and event 5 occurs after event 3 and so on.
While 198 discussing CPM network, we say that Activity A follows activity B and activity C follows activity B and so on.
Referring to the network shown in figure 9, we can discuss as under.
PERT way: Event 1 is the predecessor to event 2 or event 2 is the successor to event 1.
Events 3 and 4 are successors to event 2 or event 2 is the predecessor to events 3 and 4.
CPM way: Activity 1-2 is the predecessor to Activities 2-3 and 2-4 or Activities 2-3 and 2-4 are the successors to activity 1-2.
(ii) PERT activities are probabilistic in nature.
The time required to complete the PERT activity cannot be specified correctly.
Because of uncertainties in carrying out the activity, the time cannot be specified correctly.
Say, for example, if you ask a contractor how much time it takes to construct the house, he may answer you that it may take 5 to 6 months.
This is because of his expectation of uncertainty in carrying out each one of the activities in the construction of the house.
Another example is if somebody asks you how much time you require to reach railway station from your house, you may say that it may take 1 to 1½ hoursThis is because you may think that you may not get a transport facility in time.
Or on the way to station, you may come across certain work, which may cause delay in your journey from house to station.
Hence PERT network is used when the activity times are probabilistic.
3 B A D 2 1 C 4 Fig.
12.10.Logical relationship in PERT and CPM 199  Y X t t t 0 L P Fig.
12.11:Three Time Estimates.
There are three time estimates in PERT, they are: (a) OPTIMISTIC TIME: Optimistic time is represented by t .
Here the estimator 0 thinks that everything goes on well and he will not come across any sort of uncertainties and estimates lowest time as far as possible.
He is optimistic in his thinking.
(b) PESSIMISTIC TIME: This is represented by t .
Here estimator thinks that P everything goes wrong and expects all sorts of uncertainties and estimates highest possible time.
He is pessimistic in his thinking.
(c) LIKELY TIME: This is represented by t .
This time is in between optimistic L and pessimistic times.
Here the estimator expects he may come across some sort of 200 uncertainties and many a time the things will go right.
So while estimating the time for a PERT activity, the estimator will give the three time estimates.
When these three estimates are plotted on a graph, the probability distribution that we get is closely associated with Beta Distribution curve.
For a Beta distribution curve as shown in figure 6.10, the characteristics are: Standard deviation = (tP – tO)/6 = , t – t is known as range.
P O Variance = {(t – t )/6}2 = 2 P O Expected Time or Average Time = t = (tO + 4t + t ) / 6 E L P These equations are very important in the calculation of PERT times.
Hence the student has to remember these formulae.
Now let us see how to deal with the PERT problems.
(d) Numbering of events: Once the network is drawn the events are to be numbered.
In PERT network, as the activities are given in terms of events, we may not experience difficulty.
Best in case of CPM network, as the activities are specified by their name, is we have to number the events.
For numbering of events, we use D.R.
Fulkerson’s rule.
As per this rule: An initial event is an event, which has only outgoing arrows from it and no arrow enters it.
Number that event as 1.
Delete all arrows coming from event 1.
This will create at least one more initial event.
Number these initial events as 2, 3 etc.
Delete all the outgoing arrows from the numbered element and which will create some more initial events.
Number these events as discussed above.
Continue this until you reach the last event, which has only incoming arrows and no outgoing arrows.
While numbering, one should not use negative numbers and the initial event should not be assigned ‘zero’.
When the project is considerably large, at the time of execution of the project, the project manager may come to know that some of the activities have been forgotten and they are to be shown in the current network.
In such cases, if we use skip numbering, it will be helpful.
Skip numbering means, skipping of some numbers and these numbers may be made use to represent the events forgotten.
We can skip off numbers like 5, 10, 15 etc.
or 10, 20 and 30 or 2, 12, 22 etc.
Another way of numbering the network is to start with 10 and the second event is 20 and so on.
This is a better way of numbering the events.
Let now see how to write network and find the project completion time by solving some typical problems.
201  Example 12.1.
A project consists of 9 activities and the three time estimates are given below.
Find the project completion time (TE).
1.
Write the network for the given project and find the project completion time?
Activities Activities Days I j T T T 0 L P 10 20 5 12 17 10 30 8 10 13 10 40 9 11 12 20 30 5 8 9 20 50 9 11 13 40 60 14 18 22 30 70 21 25 30 60 70 8 13 17 60 80 14 17 21 70 80 6 9 12 Solution In PERT network, it is easy to write network diagram, because the successor and predecessorevent relationships can easily be identified.
While calculating the project completion time, we have tocalculate t i.e.
expected completion time for e each activity from the given three-time estimates.
In case we calculate project completion time by using to or tor t separately, we will have three completion l p times.
Hence it is advisable to calculate t expected completion time for each e activity and then the project completion time.
Now let us work out expected project completion time.
202  Predecessor Successor Time in days TE = Range S.D ((cid:31)) Variance event event (tO + 4tL + tP)/6 tP – tO (tP – tO) /6 (cid:31)2 10 20 5 12 17 9.66 (10) 12 2 4 10 30 8 10 13 10.17 (10) 5 0.83 0.69 10 40 9 11 12 10.83 (11) 3 0.5 0.25 20 30 5 8 9 7.67 ( 8 ) 4 0.66 0.44 20 50 9 11 13 11.00 (11) 4 0.66 0.44 40 60 14 18 22 18.00 (18) 8 1.33 1.78 30 70 21 25 30 25.18 (25) 9 1.5 2.25 60 70 8 13 17 12.83 (13) 9 1.5 2.25 50 80 14 17 21 17.17 (17) 7 1.16 1.36 70 80 6 9 12 9.00 ( 9 ) 6 1.0 1.0 For the purpose of convenience the t got by calculation may be rounded off to E nearest wholenumber (the same should be clearly mentioned in the table).
The round off time is shown in brackets.In this book, in the problems, the decimal, will be rounded off to nearest whole number.
To write the network program, start from the beginning i.e.
we have 10 – 20, 10 – 30 and 10 – 40.
Therefore from the node 10, three arrows emerge.
They are 10 – 20, 10 – 30 and 10 – 40.
Next from the node 20, two arrows emerge and they are 20 – 30 and 20 – 50.
Likewise the network is constructed.
The following convention is used in writing network in this book.
 21 10 50 20 60 T 11 38 7 80 DAYS 10 8 51 9 T L 20 7 0 10 30 10 25 TL = 0 21 18 11 11 33 40 60 203  11 12 33 Fig: 12.12.
Network for Problem Let us start the event 10 at 0th time i.e.
expected time TE = 0.
Here TE represents the occurrence time of the event, whereas tEis the duration taken by the activities.
TE belongs to event, and tEbelongs to activity.
T 10 = 0 E T 20 = T 10 + t 10– 20 = 0 + 10 = 10 days E E E T 30 = T 10 + t 10 – 30 = 0 + 10 = 10 days E E E T 30 = T 20 + t 20– 30 = 10 + 8 = 18 days E E E The event 30 will occur only after completion of activities 20–30 and 10–30.
There are two routes to event 30.
In the forward pass i.e.
when we start calculation from 1st event and proceed through last event, we have to workout the times for all routes and select the highest one and the reverse is the case of the backward pass i.e.
we start from the last event and work back to the first event to find out the occurrence time.
T 40 = T 10 + t 10 – 40 = 0 + 11 = 11 days E E E T 50 = T 20 + t 20 – 50 = 10 + 11 = 21 days E E E T 60 = T 40+ t 40 – 60 = 11 + 18 = 29 days E E E T 70 = T 30 + t 30 – 70 = 18 + 25 = 43 days E E E T 70 = T 60 + t 60 – 70 = 29 + 13 = 42 days E E E T 80 = T 70 + t 70 – 80 = 43 + 9 = 52 days E E E T 80 = T 50 + t 50 – 80 = 21 + 17 = 38 days E E E T 80 = 52 days.
Hence the project completion time is 52 days.
The path that gives E us 52 days isknown asCritical path.
Hence 10–20–30–70–80 is the critical path.
Critical path is represented by a hatched line ( ).Allother parts i.e.
10–40– 60–70–80, 10–20–50–80 and 10–30–70–80 are known as non-critical paths.All activities on critical path are critical activities.
4.0 CONCLUSION Project management is the application of skills and knowledge and the use of tools and techniques applied to activities in a project to complete the project as defined in the scope.
Project management is not only the use of a scheduling tool such as Microsoft Project and Scheduler Plus.
Project management overlaps with general management knowledge and practice, as well as with the project's application areas, knowledge, and practice.
Project managers focus on integrating all the 204 pieces required for project completion.
General managers or operational managers tend to focus on a particular discipline or functional area.
Programme Evaluation and Review Technique (PERT) and Critical Path Method (CPM) are two techniques that are widely used in planning and scheduling the large projects.
PERT is event oriented and CPM is activity oriented.
PERT activities are probabilistic in nature in the sense that the time required to complete the PERT activity cannot be specified correctly.
Because of uncertainties in carrying out the activity, the time cannot be specified correctly 5.0 SUMMARY This unit treats the concept of project management.
We defined Project management as the application of skills and knowledge and the use of tools and techniques applied to activities in a project to complete the project as defined in the scope.
Project Management is a formal discipline with international standards and guidelines developed by the Project Management Institute (PMI).
Project Management processes define, organise and complete the work defined for the project.
There are five project management process areas that apply to most projects.
They are: Initiating Processes, Planning Processes, Executing Processes, Controlling Processes, and Closing Processes.
Programme Evaluation and Review Technique (PERT) and Critical Path Method (CPM) are two techniques that are widely used in planning and scheduling the large projects.
A project is a combination of various activities.
The basic steps for writing a network are: Listing out all the activities involved in a project, once the activities are listed, they are arranged in sequential manner and in logical order, after arranging the activities in a logical sequence, their time is estimated and written against each activity, in a situation where some of the activities do not have any logical relationship can start those activities simultaneously, add activities to the network, and when two activities start at the same event and end at the same event, they should be shown by means of a dummy activity.
The academic differences between PERT network and CPM network include the fact that PERT is event oriented and CPM is activity oriented, and that PERT activities are probabilistic in nature.
6.0 TUTOR MARKED ASSIGNMENT 1.
Define project management.
2.
Discuss the interrelationship between project management and other disciplines.
3.
Identify and explain the five project management process areas that apply to most projects.
4.
Identify and discuss two techniques that are widely used in planning and scheduling the large projects.
205 5.
Differentiate between PERT and CPM.
7.0 REFERENCES Murthy, Rama P. (2007) Operations Research 2nded.
New Delhi: New Age International Publishers.
Denardo, Eric V. (2002), The Schience of Decision making: A Problem-Based Approach Using Excel.
New York: John Wiley.
Gupta, P.K and Hira, D.S., (2012), Operations Research, New – Delhi: S. Chand & Company.
Lucey, T. (1988), Quantitative Techniques: An Instructional Manual, London: DP Publications.
206  MODULE 4 UNIT 13: SEQUENCING 1.0 INTRODUCTION 2.0 OBJECTIVES 3.0 MAIN CONTENT 3.1 THE PROBLEM:(DEFINITION) 3.2 ASSUMPTIONS MADE IN SEQUENCING PROBLEMS 3.3 NATURE OF SCHEDULING 3.4 LOADING JOBS IN WORK CENTRES 3.4.1 GANTT CHARTS 3.4.2 ASSIGNMENT METHOD 3.5 PRIORITY RULES FOR JOB SEQUENCING 3.6 APPLICABILITY 3.7 TYPES OF SEQUENCING PROBLEMS 3.7.1 SEQUENCING JOBS IN TWO MACHINES 4.0 CONCLUSION 5.0 SUMMARY 6.0 TUTOR MARKED ASSIGNMENT 7.0 REFERENCES 1.0 INTRODUCTION Sequencing problems involves the determination of an optimal order or sequence of performing a series jobs by number of facilities (that are arranged in specific order) so as to optimize the total time or cost.
Sequencing problems can be classified into two groups: The first group involves n different jobs to be performed, and these jobs require processing on some or all of m different types of machines.
The order in which these machines are to be used for processing each job (for example, each job is to be processed first on machine A, then B, and thereafter on C i.e., in the order ABC) is given.
Also, the expected actual processing time of each job on each machine is known.
We can also determine the effectiveness for any given sequence of jobs on each of the machines and we wish to select from the (n!
)mtheoretically feasible alternatives, the one which is both technologically feasible and optimises the effectiveness measure.
207  The second group of problems deal with the shops having a number of machines and a list of tasks to be performed.
Each time a task is completed by a machine, the next task to be started on it has to be decided.
Thus, the list of tasks will change as fresh orders are received.
Unfortunately, types of problems are intrinsically difficult.
While solutions are possible for some simple cases of the first type, only some empirical rules have been developed for the second type till now (Gupta and Hira, 2012).
OBJECTIVES After completing this chapter, you should be able to: 1.
Explain what scheduling involves and the nature of scheduling.
2.
Understand the use of Gantt charts and assignment method for loading jobs in work centres.
3.
Discuss what sequencing involves and the use of priority rules.
4.
Solve simple problems on scheduling and sequencing.
3.1 DEFINITION Scheduling refers to establishing the timing of the use of equipment, facilities and human activities in an organization, that is, it deals with the timing of operations.
Scheduling occurs in every organization, regardless of the nature of its operation.
For example, manufacturing organizations, hospitals, colleges, airlines e.t.c.
schedule their activities to achieve greater efficiency.
Effective Scheduling helps companies to use assets more efficiently, which leads to cost savings and increase in productivity.
The flexibility in operation provides faster delivery and therefore, better customer service.
In general, the objectives of scheduling are to achieve trade-offs among conflicting goals, which include efficient utilization of staff, equipment and facilities and minimization of customer waiting tune, inventories and process times (Adebayo et al, 2006).
Job sequencing refers to the order in which jobs should be processed at each workstation.
Sequencing decisions determine both the order in which jobs are processed at various work centres and the order in which jobs are processed at individual workstations within the work centres.
For example, suppose that 20 computers are to be repaired.
In what order should they be repaired?
Should it be done on the basis of urgency or first come first served?
Job sequencing methods provide such detailed information.
Typically, a number of jobs will be waiting for 208 processing.
Priority rules are the methods used for dispatching jobs to work centres (Adebayo et al, 2006) A general sequencing problem may be defined as follows: Let there be ‘n’ jobs (J , J , J ………J ) which are to be processed on ‘m’ 1 2 3 n machines (A, B, C,………), where the order of processing on machines i.e.
for example, ABC means first on machine A, second on machine B and third on machine C or CBA means first on machine C, second on machine Band third on machine A etc.
and the processing time of jobs on machines (actual or expected) is known to us, then our job is to find the optimal sequence of processing jobs that minimizes the total processing time or cost.
Hence our job is to find that sequence out of (n!
)msequences, which minimizes the total elapsed time ( i.e.. time taken to process all the jobs).
The usual notations used in this problem are: Ai = Time taken by i th job on machine A where i = I, 2,3…n.
Similarly we can interpret for machine B and C i.e.
Bi and Ci etc.
T = Total elapsed time which includes the idle time of machines if any and set up time and transfer time.
3.2 ASSUMPTIONS MADE IN SEQUENCING PROBLEMS Principal assumptions made for convenience in solving the sequencing problems are as follows: 1 The processing times Aand Betc.
are exactly known to us and they are i i independent of order of processing the job on the machine.
That is whether job is done first on the machine,last on the machine, the time taken to process the job will not vary it remains constant.
2 The time taken by the job from one machine to other after processing on the previous machine is negligible.
(Or we assume that the processing time given also includes the transfertime and setup time).
3 Only one operation can be carried out on a machine at a particular time.
4 Each job once started on the machine, we should not stop the processing in the middle.
It isto be processed completely before loading the next job.
5 The job starts on the machine as soon as the job and the machine both become idle (vacant).
This is written as job is next to the machine and the machine is next to the job.
(This isexactly the meaning of transfer time is negligible).
209 6 No machine may process more than one job simultaneously.
(This means to say that the job once started on a machine, it should be done until completion of the processing on thatmachine).
7 The cost of keeping the semi-finished job in inventory when next machine on which the job is to be processed is busy is assumed to be same for all jobs or it is assumed that it is toosmall and is negligible.
That is in process inventory cost is negligible.
8 While processing, no job is given priority i.e.
the order of completion of jobs has no significance.
The processing times are independent of sequence of jobs.
9 There is only one machine of each type.
3.3 Nature of Scheduling Scheduling technique depends on the volume of system output, the nature of operations and the overall complexity of jobs.
Flow shop systems require approaches substantially different from those required by job shops.
The complexity of operations varies under these two situations.
1.
Flow Shop Flow shop is a high-volume system, which is characterized by a continuous flow of jobs to produce standardized products.
Also, flow shop uses standardized equipment (i.e.
special purposed machines) and activities that provide mass production.
The goal is to obtain a smooth rate of flow of goods or customer through the system in order to get high utilization of labour and equipment.
Examples are refineries, production of detergents etc.
2.
Job Shop This is a low volume system, which periodically shift from one job to another.
The production is according to customer’s specifications and orders or jobs usually in small lots.
General-purpose machines characterize Job shop.
For example, in designer shop, a customer can place order for different designeN Job-shop processing gives rise to two basic issues for schedulers: how to distribute the workload among work centre and what job processing sequence to use.
3.4 Loading Jobs in Work Centres Loading refers to the assignment of jobs to work centres.
The operation managers are confronted with the decision of assigning jobs to work centres to minimize costs, idle time or completion time.
210 The two main methods that can be used to assign jobs to work centres or to allocate resources are: 1.
Gantt chart 2.
Assignment method of linear programming 3.4.1 Gantt Charts Gantt charts are bar charts that show the relationship of activities over some time periods.
Gantt charts are named after Henry Gantt, the pioneer who used charts for industrial scheduling in the early 1900s.
A typical Gantt chart presents time scale horizontally, and resources to be scheduled are listed vertically, The use and idle times of resources are reflected in the chart.
The two most commonly used Gantt charts are the schedule chart and the load chart.
3.4.2 Assignment Method Assignment Model (AM) is concerned specifically with the problem of job allocation in a multiple facility production configuration.
That is, it is useful in situations that call for assigning tasks or jobs to resources.
Typical examples include assigning jobs to machines or workers, territories to sales people e.t.c.
One important characteristic of assignment problems is that only one job (or worker) is assigned to one machine (or project).
The idea is to obtain an optimum matching of tasks and resources.
A chapter in this book has treated the assignment method.
3.5 PRIORITY RULES FOR JOB SEQUENCING Priority rules provide means for selecting the order in which jobs should be done (processed).
In using these rules, it is assumed that job set up cost and time are independent of processing sequence.
The main objective of priority rules is to minimize completion time, number of jobs in the system, and job lateness, while maximizing facility utilization.
The most popular priority rules are: I.
First Come, First Serve (FCFS): Job is worked or processed in the order of arrivals at the work centre.
2.
Shortest Processing Time (SPT): Here, jobs are processed based on the length of processing time.
The job with the least processing time is done first.
3.
Earliest Due Date (EDD): This rule sequences jobs according to their due dates, that is, the job with the earliest due date is processed first.
4.
Longest Processing Time (LPT): The job with the longest processing time is started first.
5.
Critical Ratio: Jobs are processed according to smallest ratio of time remaining until due date to processing time remaining.
211 The effectiveness of the priority rules is frequently measured in the light of one or more performance measures namely; average number of jobs, job flow time, job lateness, make span, facility utilisation etc.
3.6 Applicability The sequencing problem is very much common in Job workshops and Batch production shops.
There will be number of jobs which are to be processed on a series of machine in a specified order depending on the physical changes required on the job.
We can find the same situation in computer centre where number of problems waiting for a solution.
We can also see the same situation when number of critical patients waiting for treatment in a clinic and in Xerox centres, where number of jobs is in queue, which are to be processed on the Xerox machines.
Like this we may find number of situations in real world.
3.7 Types of Sequencing Problems There are various types of sequencing problems arise in real world.
All sequencing problems cannot be solved.
Though mathematicians and Operations Research scholars are working hard on the problem satisfactory method of solving problem is available for few cases only.
The problems, which can be solved, are: (a) ‘n’ jobs are to be processed on two machines say machine A and machine B in the order AB.
This means that the job is to be processed first on machine A and then on machine B.
(b) ‘n’ jobs are to be processed on three machines A,B and C in the order ABC i.e.
first on machine A, second on machine B and third on machine C. (c) ‘n’ jobs are to be processed on ‘m’ machines in the given order.
d) Two jobs are to be processed on ‘m’ machines in the given order.
(Murthy, 2007)  Single Machine Scheduling Models The models in this section deal with the simplest of scheduling problems: there is only a single machine on which tasks are to be processed.
Before investigating thesolutions that result from the use of the three criteria presented in the introduction  ‘N’ Jobs and Two Machines 212 If the problem given has two machines and two or three jobs, then it can be solved by using the Ganttchart.
But if the numbers of jobs are more, then this method becomes less practical.
(For understanding about the Gantt chart, the students are advised to refer to a book on Production and Operations Management (chapter on Scheduling).
Gantt chart consists of X -axis on which the time is noted and Y-axis on which jobs or machines are shown.
For each machine a horizontal bar is drawn.
On these bars the processing of jobs in given sequence is marked.
Let us take a small example and see how Gantt chart can be used to solve the same.
EXAMPLE 13.1 There are two jobs job 1 and job 2.
They are to be processed on two machines, machine A and Machine B in the order AB.
Job 1 takes 2 hours on machine A and 3 hours on machine B.
Job 2 takes 3 hours on machine A and 4 hours on machine B.
Find the optimal sequence which minimizes the total elapsed time by using Gantt chart.
Solution Jobs.
Machines (Time in hours) A B 1 2 3 2 3 4 (a) Total elapsed time for sequence 1,2i.e.
first job 1 is processed on machine A and then onsecond machine and so on.
Draw X - axis and Y- axis, represent the time on X - axis and two machines by two bars on Yaxis.
Then mark the times on the bars to show processing of each job on that machine.
Machines Sequence 1, 2 T = Elapse Time = 9 hours (Optimal) J J 1 2 A J J 1 2 213 B 0 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 Time in hours Sequence 1, 2 T = Elapse Time = 9 hours (Optimal sequence) Machines J J 1 2 A J J 1 2 B 0 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 Time in hours Fig.
13.1: Gantt chart.
Source: Murthy, R. P. (2007), Operations Research, 2nd ed., New Delhi: New Age International (P) LimitedPublisheN Both the sequences shows the elapsed time = 9 houN The drawback of this method is for all the sequences, we have to write the Gantt chart and find the total elapsed times and then identify the optimal solution.
This is laborious and time consuming.
If we have more jobs and more machines, then it is tedious work to draw the chart for all sequences.
Hence we have to go for analytical methods to find the optimal solution without drawing charts.
1 Analytical Method A method has been developed by Johnson and Bellman for simple problems to determine a sequence of jobs, which minimizes the total elapsed time.
The method: 214 1.
‘n’ jobs are to be processed on two machines A and B in the order AB ( i.e.
each job is to be processed first on A and then on B) and passing is not allowed.
That is whichever job is processed first on machine A is to be first processed on machine B also, whichever job is processed second on machine A is to be processed second on machine B also and so on.
That means each job will first go to machine A get processed and then go to machine B andget processed.
This rule is known as no passing rule.
2.
Johnson and Bellman method concentrates on minimizing the idle time of machines.
Johnson and Bellman have proved that optimal sequence of ‘n’ jobs which are to be processed on two machines A and B in the order AB necessarily involves the same ordering of jobs on each machine.
This result also holds for three machines but does not necessarily hold for more than three machines.
Thus total elapsed time is minimum when the sequence of jobs is same for both the machines.
3.
Let the number of jobs be 1,2,3,…………n The processing time of jobs on machine A beA1, A2, A3 ………….
An The processing time of jobs on machine B beB1, B2, B3 …………..Bn Jobs Machine Time in Hours Machine A Machine B Order of Processing is AB 1 A B 1 1 2 A B 2 2 3 A B 3 3 I A B I I S A B S S T A B T T N A B N N 4.
Johnson and Bellman algorithm for optimal sequence states that identify the smallest element in the given matrix.
If the smallest element falls under column 1 i.e undermachine I then do that job first.
As the job after processing on machine 1 goes to machine2, it reduces the idle time or waiting time of machine 2.
If the smallest element falls undercolumn 2 i.e under machine 2 then do that 215 job last.
This reduces the idle time of machine1.
i.e.
if r the job is having smallest element in first column, then do the rth job first.
If s the jobhas the smallest element, which falls under second column, then do the s the job last.
Hence the basis for Johnson and Bellman method is to keep the idle time of machines as low as possible.
Continue the above process until all the jobs are over.
1 2 3……….. n-1 n r s If there are ‘n’ jobs, first write ‘n’ number of rectangles as shown.
Whenever the smallest elements falls in column 1 then enter the job number in first rectangle.
If it falls in second column, then write the job number in the last rectangle.
Once the job number is entered, the second rectangle will become first rectangle and last but one rectangle will be the last rectangle.
5.
Now calculate the total elapsed time as discussed.
Write the table as shown.
Let us assume that the first job starts at Zero th time.
Then add the processing time of job (first in the optimal sequence) and write in out column under machine 1.
This is the time when the first job in the optimal sequence leaves machine 1 and enters the machine 2.
Now add processing time of job on machine 2.
This is the time by which the processing of the job on two machines over.
Next consider the job, which is in second place in optimal sequence.
This job enters the machine 1 as soon the machine becomes vacant, i.e first job leaves to second machine.
Hence enter the time in-out column for first job under machine 1 as the starting time of job two on machine 1.
Continue until all the jobs are over.
Be careful to see that whether the machines are vacant before loading.
Total elapsed time may be worked out by drawing Gantt chart for the optimal sequence.
6.
Points to remember: (a) If there is tie i.e we have smallest element of same value in both columns, then: (i) Minimum of all the processing times is Ar which is equal to Bs i.e.
Min (Ai, Bi) = Ar = Bs then do the r th job first and s th job last.
(ii) If Min (Ai, Bi) = Ar and also Ar = Ak(say).
Here tie occurs between the two jobs having same minimum element in the same column i.e.
first column we can do either rth job or k th job first.
There will be two solutions.
When the ties occur due to element in the same column, then the problem will have alternate solution.
If more number of jobs have the same minimum element in the same column, then the problem will have many alternative solutions.
If we start writing all the solutions, it is a 216 tedious job.
Hence it is enough that the students can mention that the problem has alternate solutions.
The same is true with Bi s also.
If more number of jobs have same minimum elementinsecondcolumn theproblemwillhavealternatesolutions Example 1.2 There are five jobs, which are to be processed on two machines A and B in the order AB.
The processing times in hours for the jobs are given below.
Find the optimal sequence and total elapsed time.
(Students has to remember in sequencing problems if optimal sequence is asked, it is the dutyofthe student to find the total elapsed time also).
Jobs: 1 2 3 4 5 Machine A 2 6 4 8 10 (Time in hN) Machine B (Time in Hrs) 3 1 5 9 7 The smallest element is 1 it falls under machine B hence do this job last i.e in 5 the position.
Cancel job 2 from the matrix.
The next smallest element is 2, it falls under machine A hence do this job first, i.e in the first position.
Cancel the job two from matrix.
Then the next smallest element is 3 and it falls under machine B.
Hence do this job in fourth position.
Cancel the job one from the matrix.
Proceed like this until all jobs are over the smallest element is 1 it falls under machine B hence do this job last i.e in 5 th position.
Cancel job 2 from the matrix.
The next smallest element is 2, it falls under machine A hence do this job first, i.e in the first position.
Cancel the job two from matrix.
Then the next smallest element is 3 and it falls under machine B.
Hence do this job in fourth position.
Cancel the job one from the matrix.
Proceedlike this until all jobs are over.
1 3 4 5 2 Total elapsed time: OPTIMAL MACHINE -A MACHINE - B MACHINE IDLE JOB REMARKS IDLE SEQUENCE IN OUT IN OUT A B 217 1 0 2 2 5 2 As the 3 2 6 6 11 1 Machine B Finishes Work at 5 Th hour will be Idle for 1 Hour.
-do- 3 hr.
-do- 1 hr.
1 hr as job 4 6 14 14 23 3 finished 5 14 24 24 24 1 early 1 hr idle 2 24 30 31 32 1 2 Total elapsed time = 32 hours (This includes idle time of job and idle time of machines).
The procedure: Let Job 1 is loaded on machine Afirst at zero th time.
It takes two hours to process on the machine.
Job 1 leaves the machine A at two hours and enters the machine 2 at 2-nd hour.
Up to the time i.e first two hours, the machine B is idle.
Then the job 1 is processed on machine B for 3 hours and it will be unloaded.
As soon as the machine A becomes idle, i.e.
at 2nd hour then next job 3 is loaded on machine A.
It takes 4 hours and the job leaves the machine at 6 the hour and enters the machine B and is processed for 6 hours and the job is completed by 11 th hour.
(Remember if the job is completed early and the Machine B is still busy, then the job has to wait and the time is entered in job idle column.
In case the machine B completes the previous job earlier, and the machine A is still processing the next job, the machine has to wait for the job.
This will be shown as machine idle time for machine B.).
Job 4 enters the machine A at 6 th hour and processed for 8 hours and leaves the machine at 14 th hour.
As the machine B has finished the job 3 by 11 the hour, the machine has to wait for the next job (job 4) up to 14 th hour.
Hence 3 hours is the idle time for the machine B.
In this manner we have to calculate the total elapsed time until all the jobs are over.
Example 13.3 There are seven jobs, each of which has to be processed on machine A and then on Machine B(order of machining is AB).
Processing time is given in houN Find the optimal sequence in which thejobs are to be processed so as to minimize the total time elapsed.
JOB: 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 MACHINE: A (TIME IN HOURS).
3 12 15 6 10 11 9 MACHINE: B (TIME IN HOURS).
8 10 10 6 12 1 3 218 Solution By Johnson and Bellman method the optimal sequence is: 1 4 5 3 2 7 6 Optimal Machine:A Machine:B Machine idle time Job idle time Remarks.
Sequence In out In out A B 1 0 3 3 11 3 - 4 3 9 11 17 2 Job finished early 5 9 19 19 31 2 Machine A take more time 3 19 34 34 44 3 Machine A takes more time.
2 34 46 46 56 2 - do- 7 46 55 56 59 1 Job finished early.
6 55 66 66 67 1 7 Machine A takes more time.
Last is finished on machine A at 66 th hour.
Total Elapsed Time = 67 houN Example 13.4 Assuming eight jobs are waiting to be processed.
The processing time and due dates for the jobs are given below: Determine the sequence processing according to (a) FCFS (b) SPT (c) EDD and (d) LPT in the light of the following criteria: (i) Average flow time, (ii) Average number of jobs in the system, (iii) Average job lateness, (iv) Utilization of the workers JOB PROCESSING TIME DUE DATE (DAYS) A 4 9 B 10 18 C 6 6 D 12 19 E 7 17 F 14 20 G 9 24 H 18 28 219 Solution: (a) To determine the sequence processing according to FCFS The FCFS sequence is simply A-B-C-D-E-F-G-H- as shown below Job Processing Time Flow time Job due date Job lateness (0 of negative) A 4 4 9 0 B 10 14 18 0 C 6 20 6 14 D 12 32 19 13 E 7 39 17 22 F 14 53 20 33 G 9 62 24 38 H 18 80 28 52 80 304 172 The first come, first served rule results is the following measures of effectiveness: 1.
Average flow time = Sum of total flow time Number of jobs = 304days = 38jobs 8 2.
Average number of jobs in the system = Sum of total flow time Total processing time = 304days = 3.8jobs 80 3.
Average job lateness = Total late days = 172 x 21.5 = 22days Number of days 8 4.
Utilization = Total processing time = 80 = 0.2631579 Sum of total flow time 304 0.2631579 x 100% = 26.31579 = 26.32% (b) To determine the sequence processing according to SPT 220 SPT processes jobs based on their processing times with the highest priority given to the job with shortest time as shown below: Job Processing Time Flow Job due date Job lateness time (0 of negative) A 4 4 9 0 B 6 10 6 4 C 7 17 17 0 D 9 26 24 2 E 10 36 18 18 F 12 48 19 29 G 14 62 20 42 H 18 80 28 52 80 283 147 The measure of effectiveness are: 1.
Average flow time = Sum of total flow time = 283 Number of jobs 8 = 35.375days = 35.38 days 2.
Average number of jobs in the system = Sum of total flow time Total processing time = 283days = 3.54jobs 80 3.
Average job lateness = Total late days = 147 Number of days 8 = 18.375days =18.38days 4.
Utilization = Total processing time= 80 Sum of total flow time 283 0.2826855 x 100% = 28.27% 221 (c) To determine the sequence processing according to EDD Using EDD, you are processing based on their due dates as shown below: Job Processing Flow time Job due date Job lateness (0 of Time negative) A 6 6 6 0 B 4 10 9 1 C 7 17 17 0 D 9 27 18 9 E 10 39 19 20 F 12 53 20 33 G 14 62 24 38 H 18 80 28 52 80 294 153 The measure of effectiveness are: 1.
Average flow time = 294 = 36.75days 8 2.
Average number of jobs in the system =294 80 3.675 = 3.68days 3.
Average job lateness = 153 = 19.125 8 = 19.13days =18.38days 4.
Utilization = 80= 0.272108843 294 0.282108843 x 100 = 27.21% 222 (d) To Determine the Sequence Processing According to LPT LPT selects the longer, bigger jobs first as presented below: Job Processing Time Flow time Job due date Job lateness (0 of negative) A 18 18 28 0 B 14 32 20 12 C 12 44 19 25 D 10 54 18 36 E 9 63 24 39 F 7 70 17 53 G 6 76 6 70 H 4 80 9 71 80 437 306 The measure of effectiveness are: 1.
Average flow time = 437 = 54.625days 8 = 54.63days 2.
Average number of jobs in the system =437 = 5.4625 80 5.46days 3.
Average job lateness = 306 = 38.25days 8 4.
Utilization = 80= 0.183066361 437 0.183066361 x 100% = 18.31% 223 The summary of the rules are shown in the table below: Average Average Average job Utilization% flow time number of lateness job (days) jobs in the system FCFS 38 3.8 21.5 26.32 SPT 35.38 3.54 18.38 28.27 EDD 36.75 3.68 19.13 27.21 LPT 54.63 5.46 38.25 18.31 As it can be seen from the table, SPT rule is the best of the four measures and is also the most superior in utilization of the system.
On the other hand, LPT is the least effective measure of the three, 3.7.1 SEQUENCING JOBS IN TWO MACHINES Johnson’s rule is used to sequence two or more jobs in two different machines or work centres in the same order.
Managers use Johnson rule method to minimize total timer for sequencing jobs through two facilities.
In the process, machine total idle time is minimised.
The rule does not use job priorities.
Johnson’s rule involves the following procedures 1) List the jobs and their respective time requirement on a machine.
2) Choose the job with the shortest time.
if the shortest time falls with the first machine, schedule that job first; if the time is at the second machine, schedule the job last.
Select arbitrary any job if tie activity time occur.
3) Eliminate the scheduled job and its time 4) Repeat steps 2 and 3 to the remaining jobs, working toward the centre of the sequence until all the jobs are properly scheduled.
224 Example 13.5 Eight jobs have the following information Job Work Centre 1 Work Centre 2 Time (Hours) Time (Hours) A 9 6 B 7 10 C 12 8 D 14 14 E 11 16 F 5 5 G 15 13 H 16 4 Determine the sequence that will minimize the total completion time for these jobs.
Solution: (a) Steps Iteration 1 1st 2nd 3rd 4th 5th 6t7h 7th 8th (b) The remaining job and their time are Job Work Centre 1 Work Centre 2 Time (Hours) Time (Hours) A 9 6 B 7 10 C 12 8 D 14 14 E 11 16 G 15 13 1st 2nd 3rd 4th 5th 6t7h 7th 8th 225 (d) Liberation 3: 1st 2nd 3rd 4th 5th 6t7h 7th 8th (d) The remaining jobs and their times are Job Work Centre 1 Work Centre 2 Time (Hours) Time (Hours) D 14 14 G 15 13 There is a tie (at 14 hours) for the shortest remaining time.
We can place job D in the first work centre or second work centre.
Suppose it is placed in work centre 1.
(f) Liberation 4 1st 2nd 3rd 4th 5th 6t7h 7th 8th (g) The sequential times are: Work 5 7 11 14 15 12 9 16 centre 1 Work 5 10 16 14 13 8 6 4 Centre 2 Determination of throughput time and idle time at the work centres Thus the eight jobs will be completed in 93 hours The work centre 2 will be wait for (5) hours for its first job, and also wait for two (2), one (1) and nine (9) hours after finishing jobs F,B and A respectively.
226 METHOD 2 We can also solve this problem using the tabulation method shown below Job 1 Centre 11 111 IV V VI VII sequence 1 Centre Centre Centre 2 Centre Centre Idle Duration 1 in 1 out Duration 2 2 Out Time F 5 0 5 5 5 10 5 B 7 5 12 10 12 22 2 E 11 12 23 16 23 39 1 D 14 23 37 14 39 53 0 G 15 37 52 13 53 66 0 C 12 52 64 8 66 74 0 A 9 64 73 6 74 80 0 H 16 73 89 4 89 93 9 17  Columns I and IV are the durations for the jobs as given in the question  In column 11 the starting point for F is 0; 5 + 0 5 for job B; 7 + 5 = 12 for job 11 ± 12=23 for job D etc,  In column UT we obtain the cumulative time for I i.e first value is 5, next is+ 7 = 12 etc we can also obtain it by adding columns I and II  In column V, we realize that the job at centre 2 cannot start until the job centre 1 ends.
Thus the first value is 5 representing the duration of job F The next value is the maximum of the sum of IV and V in centre 2 and the out time for the next job in centre I i.e max (5+5,12) 12.
The value of 2 obtained next is max 10+12, 23) while the value of 39 obtained is max (16+23, 37) other values are similarly obtained using the same technique.
 Column VI is the sum of IV and V i.e 5 + 5 = 10, 10 + 12 = 22 etc.
 In column VII the first value is the duration of job F in centre I This represents the period that centre 2 has to wait before starting its first job.
The next value of 2 is obtained by subtracting the time out for F from the time in for B i.e 12 - 10 = 2.
This represents the time centre 2 will wait before starting job 13.
Similarly 23 -22 = I is the time centre 2 will wait before starting job F. All other values are obtained in a similar manner.
Total idle time = 5 + 2 + 1 ±9 = 17 Total time for completion of all the job is 93 227 Example 13.6 You arc given the operation times in Hours for 6 jobs in two machines as follow: Job Machine 1 Machines 2 Time (Hours) Time (Hours) P 20 20 Q 16 12 R 33 36 S 8 28 T 25 33 U 48 60 (a) Determine the sequence that will minimize idle times on the two machines (b) The time machine I will complete its jobs (c) The total completion time for all the jobs (d) The total idle time Solution Using the steps outlined earlier for optimum sequencing of jobs, we obtained 1st 2nd 3rd 4th 5th 6t7h S T R U E Q We then use tabular method to solve the remaining questions Job sequence 1 II III IV Machine V VI VII Machine 1 Machine 1 Machine I 2 Duration Machine 2 Machines 2 Idle Duration in Out In Out Time S 8 0 8 28 8 36 8 T 25 8 33 33 36 69 0 R 33 33 66 36 69 105 0 U 48 66 114 60 114 174 9 P 20 114 134 20 174 194 0 Q 16 134 150 12 194 206 0 (a) Machine 1 will complete his job in150 hours (b) Total completion time is 206 hours (c) Total idle time is 17 hours Note that machine 2 will wait 8 hours for its first job and also wait 9 hours after completing job R. 228 In general, idle time can occur either at the beginning of job or at the end of sequence of jobs.
In manufacturing organizations, idle times can be used to do other jobs like maintenance, dismantling or setting up of other equipment.
4.0 CONCLUSION Sequencing problems involves the determination of an optimal order or sequence of performing a series jobs by number of facilities (that are arranged in specific order) so as to optimize the total time or cost.
Sequencing problems can be classified into two groups.
The first group involves n different jobs to be performed, and these jobs require processing on some or all of m different types of machines.
The order in which these machines are to be used for processing each job (for example, each job is to be processed first on machine A, then B, and thereafter on C i.e., in the order ABC) is given.
Also, the expected actual processing time of each job on each machine is known.
We can also determine the effectiveness for any given sequence of jobs on each of the machines and we wish to select from the (n!
)mtheoretically feasible alternatives, the one which is both technologically feasible and optimises the effectiveness measure.
5.0 SUMMARY Scheduling, which occurs in every organisation, refers to establishing the timing of the use of equipment, facilities and human activities in an organization and so it deals with the timing of operations.
Scheduling technique depends on the volume of system output, the nature of operations and the overall complexity of jobs.
The complexity of operation varies under two situations, namely, Flow Shop system and Job Shop system.
Flow Shop is a high volume system while Job Shop is a low volume system.
Lading refers to assignment of jobs to work centres.
The two main methods that can be used to assign jobs to work centres are used of Gant chart and Assignment Method.
Job sequencing refers to the order in which jobs should be processed at each work station.
Priority rules enables us to select the order in which job should be done.
The main objective of priority rules is to minimize completion time, number of jobs in the system, and job lateness, while maximizing facility utilization.
In FCFS, which means First Come First Served, job is processed in the order of arrivals at work centres.
In Short Processing Time (SPT) jobs are processed based on the length of the processing time with the job with the least processing time being done first.
In Earliest Due Date (EDD) the job with the earliest due data is processed first.
In Longest Processing Time (LPT) the job with longest processing time are started first.
Johnson’s rule is used to sequence two more jobs in two different work centres in the same order.
229 6.0 TUTOR MARKED ASSIGNMENT 1.
Explain the following concepts (a) Scheduling (b) Flow shop (c) Job shop(d) Sequencing 2.
Describe two main methods used to assign jobs to work centres 3.
Define the following (a) Average flow time (b) Average number of jobs in the system (c) Utilization 4.
State the priority rules for sequencing 5.
State the procedures for using Johnson’s rules in sequencing N jobs in two machines 6.
Information concerning six jobs that are to be process at a work centre is given below.
Job Processing time Due date (days) (days) A 11 17 B 7 13 C 4 12 D 3 14 E 5 2 F 14 11 Determine the sequence processing according to i.
Average flow time ii.
Average number of jobs in the system iii.
Average job lateness iv.
Utilization of the work centre 7.
The following seven jobs are waiting to be processed at a machine centre Job Due date Processing time A 13 8 B 20 14 C 10 10 D 23 16 E 21 11 F 24 18 G 28 13 230 In what sequence would the job be ranked according to the following decision rules (1) EDD, (2) SPT, (3) LPT, (4) FCFS) 8 Given the following processing time about six jobs in two machine follows Job Machine 1 Machine 2 A 13 8 B 10 7 C 8 10 D 6 11 E 5 9 F 7 6 Determine the sequence that will minimize the total completion time for these jobs 7.0 REFERENCES Adebayo, O.A., Ojo, O., and Obamire, J. K. (2006), Operations Research in Decision Analysis, Lagos: Pumark Nigeria Limited.
Denardo, Eric V. (2002), The Schience of Decision making: A Problem-Based Approach Using Excel.
New York: John Wiley.
Gupta, P.K and Hira, D.S., (2012), Operations Research, New – Delhi: S. Chand & Company.
Gupta, P.K and Hira, D.S., (2012), Operations Research, New – Delhi: S. Chand & Company.
Lucey, T. (1988), Quantitative Techniques: An Instructional Manual, London: DP Publications.
Murthy, R. P. (2007), Operations Research, 2nd ed., New Delhi: New Age International (P) Limited Publishers 231  UNIT 14: GAMES THEORY 1.0 INTRODUCTION 2.0 OBJECTION 3.0 MAIN CONTENT 3.1 DECISIONMAKING 3.2 DESCRIPTION OF A GAME 3.3 SOME IMPORTANT DEFINITIONS IN GAMES THEORY 3.4 ASSUMPTIONS MADE IN GAMES THEORY 3.5 DESCRIPTION AND TYPES OF GAMES 3.5.1 TWO-PERSON ZERO-SUM GAME 3.5.2 PURE STRATEGIES 3.5.3 DOMINATING STRATEGIES 3.5.4 MIXED STRATEGIES 3.5.5 OPTIMAL STRATEGIES IN 2 X 2 MATRIX GAME 3.5.6 EQUILIBRIUM PAIRS 3.5.7 OPTIMAL STRATEGIES IN 2 X N MATRIX GAME 3.5.8 OPTIMAL STRATEGIES FOR M X 2 ZERO - SUM GAMES 4.0 CONCLUSION 5.0 SUMMARY 6.0 TUTOR MARKED ASSIGNMENT 7.0 REFERENCES 1.0 INTRODUCTION The theory of games (or game theory or competitive strategies) is a mathematical theory that deals with the general features of competitive situations.
This theory is helpful when two or more individuals or organisations with conflicting objectives try to make decisions.
In such a situation, a decision made by on person affects the decision made by one or more of the remaining decision makers, and the final outcome depend depends upon the decision of all the parties.
(Gupta and Hira, 2012) According to Adebayor et al (2006), Game theory is a branch of mathematical analysis used for decision making in conflict situations.
it is very useful for selecting an optimal strategy or sequence of decision in the face of an intelligent opponent who has his own strategy.
Since more than one person is usually involved in playing of games, games theory can be described as the theory of 232 multiplayer decision problem.The Competitive strategy is a system for describing games and using mathematical techniques to convert practical problems into games that need to be solved.
Game theory can be described as a distinct and interdisciplinary approach to the study of human behaviour and such disciplines include mathematics, economics, psychology and other social and behavioural sciences.
If properly understood it is a good law for studying decision- making in conflict situations and it also provides mathematical techniques for selecting optimum strategy and most rational solution by a player in the face of an opponent who already has his own strategy.
Adebayor et al (2006), attributed the development of game theory to John von Neumann, the great mathematician, in the last decade of 1940, whose first important theory, written in partnership with the great economist Oskar Morganstein is titled “the theory of games and economic behaviour”.
Oskar Morganstein brought ideas from neo-classical economics into games theory.
The key word between neo-economics and game theory is rationality, with emphasis being placed on the absolute rationality of men in making economic choice.
It specifically advocates that human beings are rational in economic choices with each person aiming at maximising each or her rewards (profit, income or other subjective benefits) in the circumstances he faces.
John von Neumann studied how players in Poker games maximize their rewards and found that they did it by bluffing and by being unpredictable.
He was able to discover anew, unique I and unequivocal answer to the question of how players can maximise their payoffs in the game without any market forces, properties right, prices or other economic indicators in the picture.
His discovery led to a very major extension to the concept of absolute rationality in neoclassical economics.
However the discovery only applied to zero sum games.
Other games theorists have since expanded the scope of the research on games theory.
The theory of games is based on the minimax principle put forward by J.
Von Neumann which implies that each competitor will act as to minimise his maximum loss (or maximise his minimum gain) or achieve best of the worst.
So far, only simple competitive problems have been analysed by this mathematical theory.
The theory does not describe how a game should be played; it describes only the procedure and principles by which players should be selected (Gupta and Hira, 2012).
2.0 OBJECTIVES By the end of this chapter, you will be able to:  Define the concept of a game 233  State the assumptions of games theory  Describe the two-person zero-sum games  Explain the concept of saddle point solution in a game  Find pure and mixed strategies in games  Use the simplex method to find the optimal strategies and value of a game 3.0 MAIN CONTENT 3.1 DECISIONMAKING Makingdecisionisanintegralandcontinuousaspectofhumanlife.Forchildoradult,ma norwoman, governmentofficialorbusinessexecutive,workerorsupervisor,participationinthepro cessofdecision- making is a common feature of everyday life.
What does this process of decision making involve?
What is a decision?
How can we analyze and systematize the solving of certain types of decision problems?
Answers of all such question are the subject matter of decision theory.Decision-making involveslistingthevariousalternativesandevaluatingthemeconomicallyandselectbe stamongthem.
Two important stages in decision-making is: (i) making the decision and (ii) Implementation of the decision.
Analytical approach to decision making classifies decisions according to the amount and nature of the available information, which is to be fed as input data for a particular decision problems.
Since futureimplementationsareintegralpartofdecision- making,availableinformationisclassifiedaccording to the degree of certainty or uncertainty expected in a particular future situation.
With this criterion in mind,threetypesofdecisionscanbeidentified.Firstoneisthatthesedecisionsaremade whenfuture can be predicted with certainty.
In this case the decision maker assumes that there is only one possible future in conjunction with a particular course of action.
The second one is that decision making under conditions of risk.
In this case, the future can bring more than one state of affairs in conjunction with a specific course of action.
The third one is decision making under uncertainty.In this case a particular course of action may face different possible futures, but the probability of such occurrencecannotbeestimatedobjectively.
234  TheGametheorymodelsdifferfromdecision-makingundercertainty(DMUC) anddecision- makingunderrisk(DMUR)modelsintworespects.Firsttheopponentthedecisionmake rinagame theory model is an active and rational opponent in DMUC and DMUR models the opponent is the passivestateofnature.Secondpointofimportanceisdecisioncriterioningamemodelist hemaximinortheminimaxcriterion.InDMUCandDMURmodelsthecriterionisthemax imizationorminimization ofsomemeasureofeffectivenesssuchasprofitorcost.
3.2 DESCRIPTION OF A GAME Inourday-to- daylifeweseemanygameslikeChess,Poker,Football,Baseballetc.Allthesegamesare pleasure-giving games, which have the character of a competition and are played according to well- structured rules and regulations and end in avictoryof one or the other team or group or a player.
But we refer to the word gamein thisunit the competition between two business organizations, which hasmoreearningcompetitivesituations.Inthischaptergameisdescribedas: Acompetitivesituationiscalledagameifithasthefollowingcharacteristics(Assumpti onmade to define a game): 1.
There is finite number of competitors calledPlayers.
This is to say that the game is played bytwoormorenumberofbusinesshouses.Thegamemaybeforcreatingnewma rket,or toincreasethemarketshareortoincreasethecompetitivenessoftheproduct.
2.
Alistoffiniteorinfinitenumberofpossiblecoursesofactionisavailabletoeachpla yer.
Thelistneednotbethesameforeachplayer.Suchagameissaidtobeinnormalfor m. To explain this we can consider two business houses A and B.
Suppose the player A has three strategies, as strategy I is to offer a car for the customer who is selected through advertising campaign.
Strategy II may be a house at Ooty for the winning customer, and strategy III may a cash prize of N10,00,000for the winning customer.
This means to say that the competitorAhasthreestrategiesorcoursesofaction.Similarly,theplayerBma yhavetwo strategies, for example strategy I is A pleasure trip to America 235 for 10 days and strategy II may be offer to spend with a cricket star for two days.
In this game A has three courses of action and B has two courses of actions.
The game can be represented by mans of a matrix asshownbelow: B I II I.A II III 3.
Aplayisplayedwheneachplayerchoosesoneofhiscoursesofactions.
Thechoicesare madesimultaneously,sothatnoplayerknowshisopponent'schoiceuntilhehasdecide dhis own course of action.
But in real world, a player makes the choices after the opponent has announcedhiscourseofaction.
Every play i.e.
combination of courses of action is associated with an outcome, known aspay off- (generally money or some other quantitative measure for the satisfaction) which determinesa set ofgains,onetoeachplayer.Herealossisconsideredtobenegativegain.Thusaftere achplayoff thegame,oneplayerpaystootheranamountdeterminedbythecoursesofactioncho sen.Forexample consider the following matrix: B I II III I 2 4 –3 A II –1 2 2 In the given matrix, we have two players.
Among these the player who is named on the left side matrix is known as winner,i.e.
here A is the winner and the matrix given is the matrix of the winner.
The player named above is known as the loser.
The loser’s matrix is the negative version of the given matrix.
In the above matrix, which is the matrix of A, a winner, we can describe as follows.
If A selects first strategy, and Bselects the second strategy, the outcome is +4 i.e.Awill get4 units of moneyandBloses4unitsofmoney.i.e.Bhastogive4unitsofmoneytoA.
SupposeAselects secondstrategyandBselectsfirststrategyA’soutcomeis–1, i.e.Alosesoneunitofmoneyandhe 236 hastogivethattoB,itmeansBwinsoneunitofmoney.
4.
Allplayersactrationallyandintelligently.
5.
Each player is interested inmaximizing his gains or minimizing his losses.
The winner, i.e.
the player on the left side of the matrix always tries to maximize his gains and is known asMaximinplayer.Heisinterestedinmaximizinghisminimumgains.Similarl y,theplayer B,whoisatthetopofthematrix,aloseralwaystriestominimizehislossesandisk nownas Minimaxplayer-i.e.whotriestominimizehismaximumlosses.
6.
Each player makes individual decisions without direct communication between the players.
Byprincipleweassumethattheplayerplayastrategyindividually,withoutknowi ngopponent's strategy.
But in real world situations, the player playstrategy after knowing the opponent's choicetomaximinorminimaxhisreturns.
7.
Itisassumedthateachplayerknowscompleterelevantinformation.
Game theory models can be classified in a number of ways, depending onsuch factors as the: (i) Numberofplayers, (ii) Algebraicsumofgainsandlosses (iii) Numberofstrategiesofeachplayer,whichdecidesthesizeofmatrix .
Number of players: If number of players is two it is known as Two-person game.
If the number of players is is‘n’ (wheren3) it is known asn-person game.
In real world two person games are morepopular.
If the number of players is ‘n’, it has to be reduced to two person game by two constant collations,andthenwehavetosolvethegame,thisisbecause,themethodofsolvingn- persongames arenotyetfullydeveloped.
Algebraic Sum of Gains and Losses:A game in which the gains of one player are the losses of otherplayerorthealgebraicsumofgainsofbothplayersisequaltozero,thegameisknow nasZero sumgame(ZSG).
In a zero sum game the algebraic sum of the gains of all players after play is bound tobezero.i.e.Ifgiasthepayoftoaplayerinan- persongame,thenthegamewillbeazerosumgame ifsumofallgiisequaltozero.
237 Ingametheory,theresultinggainscaneasilyberepresentedintheformofamatrixcalled pay– off matrixor gain matrix as discussed in3 above.A pay- off matrix isa table, which shows howpaymentsshouldbemadeatendofaplayorthegame.Zerosumgameisalsoknownas constant sumgame.Conversely,ifthesumofgainsandlossesdoesnotequaltozero,thegameisan onzero-sum game.A game where two persons are playing the game and the sum of gains and losses is equal tozero,thegameisknownasTwo-PersonZero- SumGame(TPZSG).
Agoodexampleoftwo- person game is the game of chess.
A good example of n- person game is the situation when several companiesareengagedinanintensiveadvertisingcampaigntocapturealargershareoft hemarket (Murthy, 2007) 3.1 SOME IMPORTANT DEFINITIONS IN GAMES THEORY Adebayor et al (2010) provide the following important definitions in game theory.
 Player: A player is an active participant in a game.
The games can have two persons(Two-person game) or more than two persons (Multi person or n- person game)  Moves: A move could be a decision by player or the result of a chance event.
 Game: A game is a sequence of moves that are defined by a set of rules that governs the players’ moves.
The sequence of moves may be simultaneous.
 Decision maker: A decision-maker is a person or group of people in a committee who makes the final choice among the alternatives.
A decision- maker is then a player in the game.
 Objective: An objective is what a decision-maker aims at accomplishing by means of his decision.
The decision-maker may end up with more than one objective.
 Behaviour: This could be any sequence of states in a system.
The behaviours of a system are overt while state trajectories are covert.
 Decision: The forceful imposition of a constraint on a set of initially possible alternatives.
 Conflict: A condition in which two or more parties claim possession of something they cannot all have simultaneously.
It could also be described as a state in which two or more decision-makers who have different objectives, act in the same system or share the same resources.
Examples are value conflicts, territorial conflict, conflicts of interests etc.
238  Strategy: it is the predetermined rule by which a player decides his course of action from a list of courses of action during the game.
To decide a particular strategy, the player needs to know the other’s strategy.
 Perfect information.
A game is said to have perfect information if at every move in the game all players know the move that have already been made.
This includes any random outcomes.
 Payoffs.
This is the numerical return received by a player at the end of a game and this return is associated with each combination of action taken by the player.
We talk of “expected payoff’ if its move has a random outcome.
• Zero-sum Game.
A game is said to be zero sum if the sum of player’s payoff is zero.
The zero value is obtained by treating losses as negatives and adding up the wins and the losses in the game.
Common examples are baseball and poker games.
3.2 ASSUMPTIONS MADE IN GAMES THEORY The following are assumptions made in games theory.
 Each player (Decision-maker) has available to him two or more clearly specifiedchoices or sequence of choices (plays).
 A game usually leads to a well-defined end-state that terminates the game.
The end state could be a win, a loss or a draw.
 Simultaneous decisions by players are assumed in all games.
 A specified payoff for each player is associated with an end state (eg sum ofpayoffs for zero sum-games is zero in every end-state).
 Repetition is assumed.
A series of repetitive decisions or plays results in a game  Each decision-maker (player) has perfect knowledge of the game and of his opposition i.e.
he knows the rules of the game in details and also the payoffs of all other players.
The cost of collecting or knowing this information is not considered in game theory.
 All decision-makers are rational and will therefore always select among alternatives, the alternative that gives him the greater payoff.
The last two assumptions are obviously not always practicable in real life situation.
These assumptions have revealed that game theory is a general theory of rational behaviour involving two or more decision makers who have a limit number of courses of action of plays, each leading to a well-defined outcome or ending with games and losses that can be expressed as payoffs associated with each courses of action and for each decision maker.
The players have perfect knowledge of the 239 opponent’s moves and are rational in taking decision that optimises their individual gain.
The various conflicts can be represented by a mathx of payoffs.
Game theory also proposes several solutions to the game.
Two of the proposed solutions are: 1.
Minimax or pure Strategy: In a minimax strategy each player selects a strategy that minimises the maximum loss his opponent can impose upon him.
2.
Mixed Strategy: A mixed strategy which involves probability choices.
Lot of experiments have been performed on games with results showing conditions for (i) Cooperation (ii) Defection and (iii) Persistence of conflict, 3.3 DESCRIPTION AND TYPES OF GAMES Games can be described in terms of the number of players and the type of sum obtained for each set of strategies employed.
To this end we have the following types of games:  Two-person zero-sum games.
Here two players are involved and the sum of the Pay-offs for every set of strategies by the two players is zero  Two-person non zero-sum games.
Here two players are involved and there is one strategy set for which the sum of the payoffs is not equal to zero.
 Non- Constant sum games.
The values of payoffs for this game vary.
 Multi-person non- Constant-Sum games.
Many players are involved in the game and the payoffs for the players vary.
 Cooperative Games.
In this game there is cooperation between some of the players and there are rules guiding the cooperation within the players Politics can be modelled as a cooperative game with some players forming alliance with prospective successful political parties while others defect from parties that they feel can fail in an election.
 Combinatorial games which makes use of combinatorial analysis  Stochastic Games which is probabilistic in nature  Two-person Zero-sum Stochastic Games  Stochastic multi-generation game Some other games are given interesting names to emphasise the issues being portrayed.
Operations Research in Decision Analysis and Production Management - 359 - Examples are:  Matching Penny Game 240  Prisoners Dilemma  Ultimatum  Angel Problem  Tragedy of the Commons  Majority Rule (Adebayo et al, 2006) 3.5.1 TWO-PERSON ZERO-SUM GAME This game involves two players in which losses are treated as negatives and wins as positives and the sum of the wins and losses for each set of strategies in the game is zero.
Whatever player one wins player two loses and vice versa.
Each player seeks to select a strategy that will maximise his payoffs although he does not know what his intelligence opponent will do.
A two-person zero-sum game with one move for each player is called a rectangular game.
Formally, a two-person zero-sum game can be represented as a triple (A, B, y) where A [al, a2.. .
.a and B [b 1, b2 bn] and are payoff functions, e such that y mj ij [ai bj = eij.
This game can be represented as an m x n matrix of payoffs from player 2 to player 1 as follows: [ [a , b ]  [aj, b ] ……..  [a, b ] 1 1 2 i n  (a , b ] y [a b ] ……..  [a , b ] m 1 m 2 m n The two-person zero-sum games can also be represented as follows: Suppose the choices or alternatives that are available for player 1 can be represented as l,2,3...m. While the options for player two can be represented as 1,2,3.,.n.
If player 1 selects alternative i and player 2 selects alternative j then the payoff can be written as a.
The table of payoffs is as follows: Alternatives for player 1 1 2 3 … n 1 a a a ... a 11 12 13 1n Alternative for player 2 2 a a a ... a 21 22 23 2n 3 a a a ... a 31 32 33 3n 241 .
.
m a a a … a m1 m2 m3 mn A saddle point solution is obtained if the maximum of the minimum of rows equals the minimum of the maximum of columns i.e maximin = minimax i.e max(min a9) = min(max a9) Example 2.1 Investigate if a saddle point solution exists in this matrix 2 1 -4 -3 6 2 Solution min 2 1 1 - 4 -3 6 2 - 3 Max 2 6 3 max (min ) = max (-4, -3) = -3 i ij min (max a ) = min (2,6,3) = 2 j j ij max (min a ) = min (max a ) i j ij j i ij So a saddle point solution does not exist.
Example 14.2 We shall consider a game called the “matching penny” game which is usually played by children.
In this game two players agree that one will be even and the other odd.
Each one then shows a penny.
The pennies are shown simultaneously and each child shows a head or tail.
If both show the same side “even” wins the penny from odd and if they show different sides odd wins from even.
Draw the matrix of payoffs Solution The pay-off table is as follows: Odd (Player 2) 242 Head Tail Head (1,-1) (-1, 1) Even Tail (-1, 1) (1,-1) (Player 1) The sum in each cell is zero, hence it is a zero sum game.
Now A (H, T), B (H, T) and y (H,H)= y(T,T) 1 while y (H,T)=(T,H)=-1, In matrix form, if row is for even and column is for odd we have the matrix of payoffs given to player I by players 2 as 1 -1 -1 1 SOLUTION OF TWO-PERSON ZERO-SUM GAMES Every two-person zero-sum game has a solution given by the value of the game together with the optimal strategies employed by each of the two players in the game.
The strategies employed in a two person zero sum game could be i.
Pure Strategies ii.
Dominating Strategies iii.
Mixed Strategies 3.5.2PURE STRATEGIES In pure strategy, the maximin criterionenables one to obtain a saddle point solution.
The maximin criterion states that for a two person zero sum game it is rational for each player to choose the strategy that maximises the minimum pay- off to be received by each of them.
The pair of strategies and the payoffs such that each of the players maximises the minimum payoffs is the solution to the game.
So with his strategy player 1 (row player) can guarantee that the payoff is at least v, the lower value of the game where v = sup inf (a,b) ai bj i j = max (min a ) i j ij While player 2 (column player) can guarantee that player l’s payoff is no more than v, the upper value of the game v = inf sup  (a, b) bj ai i j 243  = min (max a ) j i ij For the maximin criterion which states that a saddle point solution exists in pure strategies we have v = Sup inf (a1 , b, ) = v = inf sup  (a, b) ai bj bj ai i j max(min a ) = min(max a ) i j ij j i ij 1 1 -1 1 1 -1 -1 1 -1 -1 1 -1 2 2 1 -1 -1 -1 1 1 2 1 1 -1 Solution We find the row maximum and column minimum and then find the point where V = V as follows: Minimum of rows 1 1 -1 1 1 -1 -1 -1 1 -1 -1 1 -1 -1 2 2 1 -1 -1 -1 -1 1 1 2 1 1 -1 -1 maximum 2 2 2 1 1 -1 of columns V = MAX (-1, -1, -1, -1) = -1.
V = MIN (2, 2, 2, 1, 1, -1_ = -1 V = V So value is -1 and optimal strategy is (r , c ) 4 6 Example 14.3 Find the solutions of this matrix game - 200 -100 - 40 400 0 300 300 -20 400 Solution We check if max (min a ) min (max aij) in order to know whether it has a saddle ij point i j i solution.
We first find the minimum of rows and miximum of columns as follows.
244  - 200 -100 - 40 - 200 400 0 300 0 300 -20 400 -20 Max 400 0 400 So max (mina ) = max (-200, 0, -20) = 0 i j ij min(max a ) = mm (400, 0, 400).
So a saddle point solution exists at (row2, ij column2) i.e (r c ) The value of the game is 0.
2 2 Example 14.4 A modified version of a problem on game theory by Williams (1966) in Adedayo (2006) is hereby presented.
A man planning for the coming winter during summer time, has a home heating tank which has capacity for 200 gallons.
Over the years, he observed that the heating oil consumption depends on the severity of the winter as follows Mild winter: 100 gallons Average winter: 150 gallons Severe winter: 200 gallons The price of oil also seems to fluctuate with severity of the winters as follows: Mild winter: $1 per gallon Average winter: $1.50 per gallon Severe winter: $2 per gallon He has to decide whether to stockpile 100 gallons, 150 gallons or 200 gallons at the present price of$ 1.
If he stockpiles more than he needs, the unused will be wasted since he will be moving next summer.
What is the best decision to take?
Solution: You must recognise who the two players are.
They are Nature and Man.
Nature’s strategies are three, based on severity: namely mild severity, average seventy and severe winter.
Man’s strategies are also those based on sizes of stockpile i.e.
100 gallons, 150 gallons, 200 gallons.
The matrix of pay offs are obtained, using the value given and we get 245  Nature Mild winter Average winter Severe winter 100 gal.
-100 - 175 - 300 Max 150 gal.
- 150 - 150 - 250 200 gal - 200 - 200 - 200 The payoffs are negative since man is playing the row.
Note that for the 100 gallons stockpile in average winter, since 150 gallons are consumed.
50 extra gallons are needed at 1.50 per gallon 75.
So total is 175.
No extra is needed for 150 gallons and 200 gallons (ii) For severe winter, 200 gallons are needed.
So for 100 gallons stockpile, one needs I00 extra gallons at $2 per gallon = 200.
So total = 300.
Same argument goes for 150 stockpi1es: no extra is needed for 200 gallons stockpile.
[-100 -175 -300] -300 [-150 -150 -250] -250 [1-200 -200 -200] -200 Maximum of columns -100 -150 -200 v = max [-300, -250 -200] -200 v=min [-100, -150 -200] = -200 So the saddle point is at [a3, b3J This implies that stockpiling 200 gallons is the optimal strategy.
3.5.3 DOMINATING STRATEGIES In a pay-off matrix row dominance of i oven occurs if a>a, while column i j dominance of I over occurs if b b .
If dominance occurs, column j is not 1 1 considered and we reduce the matrix by dominance until we are left with 1 x I matrix whose saddle point, solution can be easily found.
We consider the matrix 3 4 5 3 3 1 2 3 1 3 4 4 246  Observation shows that every element in column 1 is less than or equal to that of column 4 and we may remove column 4 the dominating column.
Similarly b 3 dominates b and we remove the dominating column b .
The game is reduced to 2 3 3 4 3 1 1 3 In row dominance, we eliminate the dominated rows a, (where a.> a,) while in column dominance we eliminate the dominating column b (where≤b) since player j i j 2 desired to concede the least payoff to the row player and thus minimise his losses.
This procedure is iterated using row dominance.
Since a1 dominates a2 and also dominates a3 we remove the dominated rows a2 and a3.
This is due to the fact that player 1, the row player, wishes to maximise his payoffs.
We then have a 1 x 1 reduced game [3 4] which has a saddle point solution.
Generally if a dominated strategy is reduced for a game, the solution of the reduced game is the solution of the original game.
3.5.4 MIXED STRATEGIES Suppose the matrix of a game is given by 2 -1 3 A = -1 3 -2 Inspection shows that i column dominance cannot be used to obtain a saddle point solution.
If no saddle point solution exists we randomise the strategies.
Random choice of strategies is the main idea behind a mixed strategy.
Generally a mixed strategy for player is defined as a pro6a6iffty distribution on the set of pure strategies.
The minimax theorem put forward by von Neumann enables one to find the optimal strategies and value of a game that has no saddle point solution and he was able to show that every two-person zero-sum game has a solution in mixed if not in pure strategy.
3.5.5 OPTIMAL STRATEGIES IN 2 X 2 MATRIX GAME 247 Linear optimisation in linear programming enables one to calculate the value and optimal actions especially when the elements of A are more than 2.
We now demonstrate how to solve the matching pennies matrix with a simple method applicable when A has two elements and B is finite.
Here the value is given as maximin ( [a ,b ] + (1-)  (a b ),  ,(a ,b ) + (1-)  (a , b ) ) 1 1 2 2 1 2 2 2 The matric is odd  1 1 1 1 -1 1--1 1 We note here that the maximin criterion cannot hold since max (mm of row) max (-1, -1)-1 while min (max of columns) = min (1,1) 1 and no saddle point solution exists.
Let “even” choose randomised action (, 1 - ) i.e  = a (a ) and (1-) =  (a ).
1 2 Using formula above, we have max mm ( - 1 + , -  + 1 - )  + -l (1 - ) = -+ 1 (1 —) using principle of equalising expectations.
This gives 2 -1, 1 -2 4 =2.
And  = 1/ 2 Similarly if optimal randomised action by player 2=  , 1 then we get  + (1- )-1, ,+1 - ) 1 1 1 1(1) + -1(1-  ) =  (-1) + (1 -  ).
Simplify both sides of the equation to get 2 - 1 1 1 1 1 = 1 - 2  =1/ and so randomised action by player 1 is ( 1/ , 1/ ) and also ( 1/ , 1/ ) 1 1 2 2 2 2 2 by player 1 The value can be obtained by substituting = 1/ into 2 - 1 or I - 2 or by 2 substituting  = 1/ into 2 - I or 1 -2 .
If we do this we get a value of zero.
So 1 2 1 1 the solution is as follows: Optimal strategies of (1/ ,1/ ) for player 1 and (1/ , 1/ ) for player 2 and the value of 2 2 2 2 the game is 0.
248 It is Obvious that there is no optimal mixed strategy that is independent of the opponent.
Example 14.5 Two competing telecommunication companies MTN and Airtel both have objective of maintaining large share in the telecommunication industry.
They wish to take a decision concerning investment in a new promotional campaign.
Airtelwishes to consider the following options: r : advertise on the Internet 1 r : advertise in all mass media 2 MTN wishes to consider these alternatives c : advertise in newspapers only 1 c :run a big promo 2 If Airtel advertise on the Internet and MTN advertises in newspapers, MTN will increase its market share by 3% at the expense of V-Mobile.
If MTN runs a big promo and Airtel advertises on the Internet, Airtel will lose 2% of the market share.
If Airtel advertises in mass media only and MTh advertises in newspapers, Airtel will lose 4%.
However, if Airtel advertises in mass media only and MTN runs a big promo, Airtel will gain 5% of the market share.
a) Arrange this information on a payoff table b) What is the best policy that each of the two companies should take?
Solution a) The matrix of payoff is as follows MTN c c 1 2 Airtelr 3 -2 1 -4 5 We first cheek if a saddle point solution exists.
We use the minimax criterion to do this.
Now for the rows, Minimax (3,5) = 3 while for the columns Maximin = Max (-4, -2) = -2.
Since minimax is not equal to maximin, no saddle point solution exists.
We then randomise and use the mixed strategy.
249 Let (, 1 - ) be the mixed strategies adopted by Airtel while (8, 1-8 ) be the strategies adopted by MTN Then for Airtel. (3)+-4(1 - )-2+5(1 -) 3 - 4+4 =-2 +5 - 5 7 - 4 -7 +5.
Solving we obtain  = 9/ and 1 - 5/ 14 14 The randomised strategies by V-Mobile will be (9/ ) 4 For MTN, 3 -2(1-)=-4 i+5(1- ) 1 1 3+2 2=-4+5-5 1 - 1 5 -2= -9 +5.
Solving, we obtain  = 1/ and 1- =1/ 1 1 1 2 1 2 The value of the game can be found by substituting 9/14 into 78-4 or – 79+5; or V2 into 5 -2 or -9+5.
When we do this we obtain the value 1/ .
So Airtel should 2 advertise on the Internet 9/ of the time and advertise on the mass media 5/ of the 14 14 time.
On the other hand, MTN should advertise in the newspapers only 50% (1/ ) of 2 the time and run a big promo 1/ of the time.
The expected gain of Airtel is 1/ of 2 2 the market share.
3.5.6 EQUILIBRIUM PAIRS In mixed strategies, a pair of optimal strategies a* and b* is in equilibrium if for any other a and b, E(a,b*) <E(a*,b*) <E(a*, b) A pair of strategies (a*, b*) in atwo person zero sum game is in equilibrium if and only if {(a*, b*), E(a*, b*)} is a solution to the game.
Nash Theory states that any two person game (whether zero-sum or non-zero-sum) with a finite number of pure strategies has at least one equilibrium pair.
No player can do better by changing strategies, given that the other players continue to follow the equilibrium strategy.
3.5.7 OPTIMAL STRATEGIES IN 2 X N MATRIX GAME Suppose we have a matrix game of 5 2 4 3 4 5 Now max(mina )= max(2,3)=3 while = min(max) 4. i j ij The two players now have to look for ways of assuring themselves of the largest possible shares of the difference 250 max(min a ) - min(max a ) ≥ 0 i j ij i j ij They will therefore need to select strategies randomly to confuse each other.
When a player chooses any two or more strategies at random according to specific probabilities this device is known as a mixed strategy.
There are various method employed in solving 2x2, 2xn, mx2 and m x n game matrix and hence finding optimal strategies as we shall discuss in this and the next few sections.
Suppose the matrix of game is m x n. If player one is allowed to select strategy I. with probability pi and player two strategy II with probability q. then we can say player 1 uses strategy P=(P ,P …P ) 1 2 m While player 2 selects strategy q=(q ,q ,...q ).
1 2 n The expected payoffs for player 1 by player two can be explained in m n E*   pi (pi)q i1 j1 In this game the row player has strategy q = (q1, q2.. .q).
The max-mm reasoning is used to find the optimal strategies to be employed by both playeNWe demonstrate with a practical example: Example 14.6 Let the matrix game be 5 2 4 3 4 5 Solution Inspection shows that this does not have a saddle point solution.
The optimal strategy p” for the row player is the one that will give him the maximum pay-off.
Since p = (p p2).
Let the expected value of the row be represented by E player.
If 1 player 2 plays column 1 is = 5p+3(l .p) 2p+3p If player 2 plays column 2 we have E = 2P+ 4 (l-P) = -2P+4 2(p) and if player 2 plays colunm 3 we have E (p) 4 +5(1-p) =p+5.So, E = 2p +3; E 2p+4 and E = p+5 3 (p) 1(p) 2(p) = 3(p) are the payoffs for player 1 against the three part strategies of player 2, we give arbitrary values for p to check which of these strategies by player2 will yield the largest payoff for 251 player 1.
Let p 3/ …….
E =-2x3/ +3=41/ 4 1 4 2 E = 2x¼+421/ E =-3/ +5=41/ .
2(p) 2 2(p) 4 4 So the two largest are E E and we equate them to get 1(p), 3(p) 2p = 3 = p+5 so 3p= 2, p=2/ 3 E = (2 x 2/ ) + 3 41/ j(p) 3 3 E = -2 -2 x 22/ + 4 = 22/ and E = 2/ + 5 = 741/ (p) 3 3 3(p) 3 3 So(2/ , 1/ ) is optimal for player 1.
To get the optimal strategy for player 2, we 3 3 observe that it is advisable for player 2 to play column 2 in other to ensure that the payoff to row player is minimal.
So the game is reduced to 5 4 3 5 Let (q, l-q) be the strategy for player 2 in a required game.
So 5q + 4 (1-q) 3q +5(l-q) 5q+4-4q=3q+5-5q q +45-2q 3q=l q=1/3 So it is optimal for player 2 to play mixed strategy with probability q(1/ ,O,2/ ).If 3 3 we substitute q = 1/ into q+4 or 5-2q, we obtain 41/ as before.
This is the value of 3 3 the game.
3.5.8 OPTIMAL STRATEGIES FOR M X 2 ZERO - SUM GAMES The procedure here is to convert to 2 x m game by finding the transpose of the matrix of the payoffs and then multiplying 2 x m matrix by =1.
The new game matrix is then solved using the procedure for 2 x m matrix described earlier Example 14.7 Find the optimal strategies for the matrix game -1 1 X = 1 -2 -2 2 Solution 252  -1 1 -2 XT = 1 -2 2 Next multiply each element by - ,to obtain the matrix game 1 -1 2 -1 2 -2 We then solve this using the method described earlier to obtain randomised optimal strategies (3/ ,2/ ) for player I and (3/ , 2/ ,0) for player 2 with values of the 5 5 5 5 games being V5.
Graphical methods can also be employed to solve 2xn and mx2 games.
Here the expected payoffs are plotted as the functions and the intersection of the lines gives the value of p(or q).
3.5.9 OPTIMAL STRATEGIES IN M X N TWO PERSONS ZERO- SUM GAME USING THE SIMPLEX METHOD In this type of games the method usually used is the simplex method of linear programming.
It involves converting the two persons zero-sum game into a Standard Maximum Problem (SMP).
If any negative number exists in the payoff matrix we eliminate by adding a suitable constant to every entry to ensure that all the entries are positive.
From the prime the dual of the matrix of payoffs is formed, and both are solved using the Simplex method.
The optimal strategy for both row and column players are obtained by dividing each of the optimal value obtained by their sum.
We now give details on how this method can be used, to solve the next example.
Example 14.8 Find the randomised optimal strategies for the matrix of payoffs 1 0 0 -1 1 -1 0 -1 1 Solution- This matrix does not have a saddle point and it cannot be solved by using the concept of dominating strategies.
As a 3x3 matrix of payoff, we can use the simplex linear programming method to solve it.
Since there are negative entries, we convert it to a matrix of positive entries by adding constant c 2, we then obtain 253  3 2 2 P = 1 3 1 2 2 1 3 4.0 CONCLUSION The theory of games (or game theory or competitive strategies) is a mathematical theory that deals with the general features of competitive situations.
This theory is helpful when two or more individuals or organisations with conflicting objectives try to make decisions.
In such a situation, a decision made by on person affects the decision made by one or more of the remaining decision makers, and the final outcome depend depends upon the decision of all the parties.
The theory of games is based on the minimax principle put forward by J.
Von Neumann which implies that each competitor will act as to minimise his maximum loss (or maximise his minimum gain) or achieve best of the worst.
So far, only simple competitive problems have been analysed by this mathematical theory.
The theory does not describe how a game should be played; it describes only the procedure and principles by which players should be selected 6.0 SUMMARY Making decision is an integral and continuous aspect of human life.
For child or adult, man or woman, government official or business executive, worker or supervisor, participation in the process of decision- making is a common feature of everyday life.
A competitive situation is called a game if it has the following characteristics- there is finite number of competitors called Players.
A list of finite or infinite number of possible courses of action is available to each player; a list of finite or infinite number of possible courses of action is available to each player; a play is played when each player chooses one of his courses of actions; all players act rationally and intelligently.
Each player is interested in maximizing his gains or minimizing his losses; each player makes individual decisions without direct communication between the players; it is assumed that each player knows complete relevant information.
A game in which the gains of one player are the losses of other player or the algebraic sum of gains of both players is equal to zero, the game is known as Zero sum game (ZSG).
Next we defined some important elements in game theory like- player, moves, game, decision maker, objective, 254 behaviour, decision, conflict, strategy, perfect information, payoffs, zero-sum, and game.
Finally, we solved problems involving Two-Person Zero-Sum Game, Pure Strategies, Dominating Strategies, Mixed Strategies, Optimal Strategies in 2 X 2 Matrix Game, Equilibrium Pairs, Optimal Strategies in 2 X N Matrix Game, Optimal Strategies For M X 2 Zero - Sum Games.
6.0 TUTOR MARKED ASSIGNMENT 1.
What do you understand by a game?
2.
Write short notes on the following • Player • Moves • Game • Decision maker • Objective • Behaviour • Decision • Conflict • Strategy • Perfect information • Pay-offs • Zero-sum Game 3.0 Find the optimal strategies for the matrix game -2 2 X = 3 -2 -2 3 7.0 REFERENCES Adebayo, O.A., Ojo, O., and Obamire, J. K. (2006), Operations Research in Decision Analysis, Lagos: Pumark Nigeria Limited.
Murthy, R. P. (2007), Operations Research, 2nd ed., New Delhi: New Age International (P) Limited Publishers 255  UNIT 15: INVENTORY CONTROL 1.0 INTRODUCTION 2.0 OBJECTIVE 3.0 MAIN CONTENT 3.1 DEFINITION OF INVENTORY AND INVENTORY CONTROL 3.2 BASIC CONCEPTS IN INVENTORY PLANNING 3.3 NECESSITY FOR MAINTAINING INVENTORY 3.4 CAUSES OF POOR INVENTORY CONTROL SYSTEMS 3.5 CLASSIFICATION OF INVENTORIES 3.6 COSTS ASSOCIATED WITH INVENTORY 3.7 PURPOSE OF MAINTAINING INVENTORY OR OBJECTIVE OF INVENTORYCOST CONTROL 3.8 OTHER FACTORS TO BE CONSIDERED IN INVENTORY CONTROL 3.9 INVENTORY CONTROL PROBLEM 3.10 THE CLASSICAL EOQ MODEL (Demand Rate Uniform, Replenishment Rate Infinite) 4.0 CONCLUSION 5.0 SUMMARY 6.0 TUTOR MARKED ASSIGNMENT 7.0 REFERENCES 1.0 INTRODUCTION One of the basic functions of management is to employ capital efficiently so as to yield the maximumreturns.
This can be done in either of two ways or by both, i.e.
(a) By maximizing the margin of profit; or (b) By maximizing the production with a given amount of capital, i.e.
to increase the productivity of capital.
This means that the management should try to make its capital work hard as possible.
However, this is all too often neglected and much time and ingenuity are devoted to make only labour work harder.
In the process, the capital turnover and hence the productivity of capital is often totally neglected.
256 Several new techniques have been developed and employed by modern management to remedy this deficiency.
Among these,Materials Managementhas become one of the most effective.
In Materials Management, Inventory Controlplay vital role in increasing the productivity of capital.
Inventory management or Inventory Control is one of the techniques of Materials Management which helps the management to improve the productivity of capital by reducing the material costs, preventing the large amounts of capital being locked up for long periods, and improving the capital - turnover ratio.
The techniques of inventory control were evolved and developed during and after the Second World War and have helped the more industrially developed countries to make spectacular progress in improving their productivity.
The importance of materials management/inventory control arises from the fact that materials account for 60 to 65 percent of the sales value of a product, that is to say, from every naira of the sales revenue, 65 kobo are spent on materials.
Hence, small change in material costs can result in large sums of money saved or lost.
Inventory control should, therefore, be considered as a function of prime importance for our industrial economy.
Inventory control provides tools and techniques, most of which are very simple to reduce/control the materials cost substantially.
A large portion of revenue (65 percent) is exposed to the techniques, correspondingly large savings result when they are applied than when attempts are made to saver on other items of expenditure like wages and salaries which are about 16 percent or overheads which may be 20 percent.
By careful financial analysis, it is shown that a 5 percent reduction in material costs will result in increased profits equivalent to a 36 percent increase in sales (Murthy, 2007).
2.0 OBJECTIVES At the this study unit, you should be able to 1 Define inventory control 2 Explain the basic concepts in inventory control 3 Identify the issues that necessitate maintaining inventory 4 Identifycauses of poor inventory control systems 5 Discuss the various classifications of inventories 6 Highlight the costs associated with inventory 7 Identify objective of inventorycost control 8 Discuss the problems associated with inventory control 257 9 Solve problems associated with the classical EOQ model.
3.0 MAIN CONTENT 3.1 DEFINITION OF INVENTORY AND INVENTORY CONTROL The word inventory means a physical stock of material or goods or commodities or other economicresources that are stored or reserved or kept in stock or in hand for smooth and efficient running of future affairs of an organization at the minimum cost of funds or capital blocked in the form of materials or goods (Inventories).
The function of directing the movement of goods through the entire manufacturing cycle from the requisitioning of raw materials to the inventory of finished goods in an orderly manner to meet the objectives of maximum customer service with minimum investment and efficient (low cost) plant operation is termed as inventory control.
(Murthy, 2007) Gupta and Hira (2012) defined an inventory as consisting of usable but idle resources such as men, machines, materials, or money.
When the resources involved are material, the inventory is called stock.
An inventory problem is said to exist if either the resources are subject to control or if there is at least one such cost that decrease as inventory increases.
The objective is to minimise total (actual or expected) cost.
However, in situations where inventory affects demand, the objective may also be to minimise profit.
3.2 BASIC CONCEPTS IN INVENTORY PLANNING For many organizations, inventories represent a major capital cost, in some cases the dominant cost, so that the management of this capital becomes of the utmost importance.
When considering the inventories, we need to distinguish different classes of items that are kept in stock.
In practice, it turns out that about 10% of the items that are kept in stock usually account for something in the order of 60% of the value of all inventories.
Such items are therefore of prime concern to the company, and the stock of these items will need close attention.
These most important items are usually referred to as “A items” in the ABC classification system developed by the General Electric Company in the 1950s.
The items next in line are the B items, which are of intermediate importance.
They typically 258 represent 30% of the items, corresponding to about 30% of the total inventory value.
Clearly, B items do require some attention, but obviously less than A items.
Finally, the bottom 60% of the items are the C items.
They usually represent maybe 10% of the monetary value of the total inventory.
The control of C items in inventory planning is less crucial than that of the A and B items.
The models in this chapter are mostly aimed at A items.
Due to the economic importance of the management of inventories, a considerable body of knowledge has developed as a specialty of operations research.
Wemay mention just-in-time (JIT) systems that attempt to keep inventory levels in aproduction system at an absolute minimum, and put to work in Toyota’s so-called kanban system.
There are also material requirements planning (MRP) aimed at using the estimated demand for a final product in order to determine the need for materials and components that are part of a final product.
Multi-echelon and supply-chainmanagement systems also consider similar aspects of production- inventory control systems.
Such topics are beyond the scope of this text, in which we can only cover some basic inventory models (Eiselt and Sandblom, 2012).
3.3 NECESSITY FOR MAINTAINING INVENTORY Though inventory of materials is an idle resource (since materials lie idle and are not to be used immediately), almost every organisation.
Without it, no business activity can be performed, whether it is service organisation like a hospital or a bank or it a manufacturing or trading organisation.
Gupta and Hira (2012) present the following reasons for maintain inventories in organisations.
1.
It helps in the smooth and efficient of an enterprise.
2.
It helps in providing service to the customer at short notice.
3.
In the absence of inventory, the enterprise may have to pay high prices due to piecemeal purchasing.
4.
It reduces product cost since there is an added advantage of batching and long, uninterrupted production runs.
5.
It acts as a buffer stock when raw materials are received late and shop rejection is too many.
6.
Process and movement inventories (also called pipeline stock) are quite necessary in big enterprises where significant amount of time is required to tranship items from one location to another.
7.
Bulk purchases will entail fewer orders and, therefore, less clerical cost.
8.
An organisation may have to deal with several customers and vendors who may not be necessarily near it.
Inventories therefore have to be built to meet the demand at least during the transit period.
259 9.
It helps in maintaining economy by absorbing some of the fluctuations when the demand for an item fluctuates or is seasonal.
3.4 CAUSES OF POOR INVENTORY CONTROL SYSTEMS a. Overbuying without regard to the forecast or proper estimate of demand to take advantages of favourable market.
b.
Overproduction or production of goods much before the customer requires them c. Overstocking may also result from the desire to provide better service to the customeN d. Cancellation of orders and minimum quantity stipulations by by the suppliers may also give rise to large inventories.
(Gupta and Hira, 2012) 3.5 CLASSIFICATION OF INVENTORIES Inventories may be classified as those which play direct role during manufacture or which can be identified on the product and the second one are those which are required for manufacturing but not as a part of production or cannot be identified on the product.
The first type is labeled as direct inventoriesand the second are labeled as indirect inventories.
Further classification of direct and indirect inventories is as follows: A.
Direct inventories (i) Raw material inventories or Production Inventories: The inventory of raw materials is the materials used in the manufacture of product and can be identified on the product.
In inventory control manager can concentrate on the (a) Bulk purchase of materials to save the investment, (b) To meet the changes in production rate, (c) To plan for buffer stock or safety stock to serve against the delay in delivery of inventory against orders placed and also against seasonal fluctuations.
Direct inventories include the following:  Production Inventories- items such as raw materials, components and subassemblies used to produce the final products.
 Work-in-progress Inventory- items in semi-finished form or products at different stages of production.
 Finished Goods Inventory  Miscellaneous Inventory- all otheritems such as scrap, obsolete and unsaleable products, stationary and other items used in office, factory and sales department, etc.
260 (ii) Work-in -process inventories or in process inventories: These inventories are of semi-finished type, which are accumulated between operations or facilities.As far as possible, holding of materials between operations to be minimized if not avoided.
This is because; as we process the materials the economic value (added labour cost) and use value are added to the raw material, which is drawn from stores.
Hence if we hold these semi-finished material for a long time the inventory carrying cost goes on increasing, which is not advisable in inventory control.
These inventories serve the following purposes: (a) Provide economical lot production, (b) Cater to the variety of products, (c) Replacement of wastages, (d) To maintain uniform production even if sales varies.
(iii) Finished goods inventories: After finishing the production process and packing, the finished products are stocked in stock room.
These are known as finished goods inventory.
These are maintained to: (a) To ensure the adequate supply to the customers, (b) To allow stabilization of the production level and (c) To help sales promotion programme.
(iv) MRO Inventory or Spare parts inventories: Maintenance, Repair, and Operation items such as spare parts and consumable stores that do not go into final products but are consumed during the production process.
Any product sold to the customer, will be subjected to wear and tear due to usage and the customer has to replace the worn-out part.
Hence the manufacturers always calculate the life of the various components of his product and try to supply the spare components to the market to help after sales service.
The use of such spare parts inventory is: (a) To provide after sales service to the customer, (b) To utilize the product fully and economically by the customer.
356 Operations Research (iv) Scrap or waste inventory or Miscellaneous Inventory: While processing the materials, we may come across certain wastages and certain bad components (scrap), which are of no use.
These may be used by some other industries as raw material.
These are to be collected and kept in a place away from main stores and are disposed periodically by auctioning.
B.
Indirect Inventories Inventories or materials like oils, grease, lubricants, cotton waste and such other materials are required during the production process.
But we cannot identify them 261 on the product.
These are known as indirect inventories.
In our discussion of inventories, in this chapter, we only discuss about the direct inventories.
Inventories may also be classified depending on their nature of use.
They are: (i) Fluctuation Inventories: These inventories are carried out to safeguard the fluctuation in demand, non-delivery of material in time due to extended lead-time.
These are sometimes called as Safety stock or reserves.
In real world inventory situations, the material may not be received in time as expected due to trouble in transport system or some times, the demand for a certain material may increase unexpectedly.
To safeguard such situations, safety stocks are maintained.
The level of this stock will fluctuate depending on the demand and lead-time etc.
(ii) Anticipation inventory: When there is an indication that the demand for company’s product is going to be increased in the coming season, a large stock of material is stored in anticipation.
Some times in anticipation of raising prices, the material is stocked.
Such inventories, whichare stocked in anticipation of raising demand or raising rises, are known as anticipationinventories.
(iii) Lot size inventory or Cycle inventories:This situation happens in batch production system.
In this system products are produced in economic batch quantities.
It sometime happens that the materials are procured in quantities larger than the economic quantities to meet the fluctuation in demand.
In such cases the excess materials are stocked, which are known as lot size or cycle inventories.
(iv) Transportation Inventories: When an item is ordered and purchased they are to be received from the supplier, who is at a far of distance.
The materials are shipped or loaded to a transport vehicle and it will be in the vehicle until it is delivered to the receiver.
Similarly, when a finished product is sent to the customer by a transport vehicle it cannot be used by the purchaser until he receives it.
Such inventories, which are in transit, are known as Transportation inventories.
(v) Decoupling inventories: These inventories are stocked in the manufacturing plant as a precaution, in case the semi-finished from one machine does not come to the next machine, this stock is used to continue a production.
Such items are known as decoupling inventories.
3.6 COSTS ASSOCIATED WITH INVENTORY While maintaining the inventories, we will come across certain costs associated with inventory, which are known as economic parameters.
Most important of them are discussed below: 262  A.
Inventory Carrying Charges, or Inventory Carrying Cost or Holding Cost or StorageCost (C ) or (i%) 1 This cost arises due to holding of stock of material in stock.
This cost includes the cost ofmaintaining the inventory and is proportional to the quantity of material held in stock and the time forwhich the material is maintained in stock.
The components of inventory carrying cost are: (i) Rent for the building in which the stock is maintained if it is a rented building.
In case it is own building, depreciation cost of the building is taken into consideration.
Sometimes for own buildings, the nominal rent is calculated depending on the local rate of rent and is taken into consideration.
(ii) It includes the cost of equipment if any and cost of racks and any special facilities used in the stores.
(iii) Interest on the money locked in the form of inventory or on the money invested in purchasing the inventory.
(iv) The cost of stationery used for maintaining the inventory.
(v) The wages of personnel working in the stores.
(vi) Cost of depreciation, insurance.
(vii) Cost of deterioration due to evaporation, spoilage of material etc.
(viii) Cost of obsolescence due to change in requirement of material or changed in process or change in design and item stored as a result of becomes old stock and become sales.
(ix) Cost of theft and pilferage i.e.
indenting for the material in excess of requirement.
This is generally represented by C naira per unit quantity per unit of time for 1 production model.
That is manufacturing of items model.
For purchase models it is represented by i% of average inventory cost.
If we take practical situation into consideration, many a time we see that the inventory carrying cost (some of the components of the cost) cannot be taken proportional to the quantity of stock on hand.
For example, take rent of the stores building.
As and when the stock is consumed, it is very difficult to calculate proportion of rent in proportion to the 263 stock in the stores as the rent will not vary day to day due to change in inventory level.
Another logic is that the money invested in inventory may be invested in other business or may be deposited in the bank to earn interest.
As the money is in the form of inventory, we cannot earn interest but losing the expected interest on the money.
This cost of money invested, is generally compared to the interest rate i% and is taken as the inventory carrying cost.
Hence the value of ‘i’ will be a fraction of a and will be 0 <i < 1.
In many instances, the bank rate of interest is somewhere between 16 to 20 % and other components like salary, insurance, depreciation etc.
may work out to 3 to 5 %.
Hence, the total of all components will be around 22 to 25 % and this is taken as the cost of inventory carrying cost and is expressed as i % of average inventory cost.
B.
Shortage cost or Stock - out - cost- (C ) 2 Sometimes it so happens that the material may not be available when needed or when the demand arises.
In such cases the production has to be stopped until the procurement of the material, which may lead to miss the delivery dates or delayed production.
When the organization could not meet the delivery promises, it has to pay penalty to the customer.
If the situation of stock out will occur very often, then the customer may not come to the organization to place orders that is the organization is losing the customers In other words, the organization is losing the goodwill of the customers The cost of good will cannot be estimated.
In some cases it will be very heavy to such extent that the organization has to forego its business.
Here to avoid the stock out situation, if the organization stocks more material, inventory carrying cost increases and to take care of inventory cost, if the organization purchases just sufficient or less quantity, then the stock out position may arise.
Hence the inventory manager must have sound knowledge of various factors that are related to inventory carrying cost andstock out cost and estimate the quantity of material to be purchased or else he must have effective strategies to face grave situations.
The cost is generally represented as so many naira and is represented by C .
2 C. Set up cost or Ordering cost or Replenishment Cost (C ) 3 For purchase models, the cost is termed as ordering cost or procurement cost and for manufacturing cost it is termed as set up cost and is represented by C .
3 (i) Set up cost: The term set up cost is used for production or manufacturing models.
Whenever a job is to be produced, the machine is to set to produce the job.
That is the tool is to be set and the material is to be fixed in the jobholder.
This consumes some time.
During this time the machine will be idle and the labour is 264 working.
The cost of idle machine and cost of labour charges are to be added to the cost of production.
If we produce only one job in one set up, the entire set up cost is to be charged to one job only.
In case we produce ‘n’ number of jobs in one set up, the set up cost is shared by ‘n’ jobs.
In case of certain machines like N.C machines, or Jig boarding machine, the set up time may be 15 to 20 hours The idle cost of the machine and labour charges may work out to few thousands of naira.
Once the machine set up is over, the entire production can be completed in few hours if we produce more number of products in one set up the set up cost is allocated to all the jobs equally.
This reduces the production cost of the product.
For example let us assume that the set up cost is N 1000/-.
If we produce 10 jobs in one set up, each job is charged with N 100/- towards the set up cost.
In case, if we produce 100 jobs, the set up cost per job will be N10/-.
If we produce, 1000 jobs in one set up, the set up cost per job will be Re.
1/- only.
This can be shown by means of a graph as shown in figure 15.1.
(ii) Ordering Cost or Replenishment Cost:The term Ordering cost or Replenishment cost is used in purchase models.
Whenever any material is to be procured by an organization, it has to place an order with the supplier.
The cost of stationary used for placing the order, the cost of salary of officials involved in preparing the order and the postal expenses and after placing the order enquiry charges all put together, is known as ordering cost.
In Small Scale Units, this may be around N 25/- to N 30/- per order.
In Larger Scale Industries, it will bearound N 150 to N 200 /- per order.
In Government organizations, it may work out to N 500/- and above per order.
If the organization purchases more items per order, all the items share the ordering cost.
Hence the materials manager must decide how much to purchase per order so as to keep the ordering cost per item at minimum.
One point we have to remember here, to reduce the ordering cost per item, if we purchase more items, the inventory carrying cost increases.
To keep inventory carrying cost under control, if we purchase less quantity, the ordering cost increase.
Hence one must be careful enough to decide how much to purchase?
The nature of ordering cost can also be shown by a graph as shown in figure 8.1.
If the ordering cost is C per order (can be equally applied to set up cost) and the quantity ordered 3 / produced is ‘q’ then the ordering cost or set up cost per unit will be C3/q is inversely proportional to the quantity ordered, i.e.
decreased with the increase in ‘q’ as shown in the graph below.
265  C 0 (q/2)C 1 Ordering cost Order quantity C /q 3 Fig.
15.1: Ordering Cost Source : Murthy, P. R. (2007) Operations Research 2nded.
New Delhi: New Age International Publishers (iii) Procurement Cost :These costs are very much similar to the ordering cost / set up cost.
This cost includes cost of inspection of materials, cost of returning the low quality materials, transportation cost from the source of material to the purchaser‘s site.
This is proportional to the quantity of materials involved.
This cost is generally represented by ‘b’ and is expressed as so many naira per unit of material.
For convenience, it always taken as a part of ordering cost and many a time it is included in the ordering cost / set up cost.
D. Purchase price or direct production cost This is the actual purchase price of the material or the direct production cost of the product.
It is represented by ‘p’.
i.e.
the cost of material is N ‘p’ per unit.
This may be constant or variable.
Say for example the cost of an item is N 10/- item if we purchase 1 to 10 units.
In case we purchase more than 10 units, 10 percent discount is allowed.
i.e.
the cost of item will be N9/- per unit.
The purchase manager can take advantage of discount allowed by purchasing more.
But this will increase the inventory carrying charges.
As we are purchasing more per order, ordering cost is reduced and because of discount, material cost is reduced.
Materials manager has to take into consideration these cost – quantity relationship and decide how much to purchase to keep the inventory cost at low level.
3.7 PURPOSE OF MAINTAINING INVENTORY OR OBJECTIVE OF INVENTORY COST CONTROL 266 The purpose of maintaining the inventory or controlling the cost of inventory is to use the available capital optimally (efficiently) so that inventory cost per item of material will be as small as possible.
For this the materials manager has to strike a balance between the interrelated inventory costs.
In the process of balancing the interrelated costs i.e.
Inventory carrying cost, ordering cost or set up cost, stock out cost and the actual material cost.
Hence we can say that the objective of controlling theinventories is to enable the materials manager to place and order at right time with the rightsource at right price to purchase right quantity.The benefits derived from efficient inventory control are: (i) It ensures adequate supply of goods to the customer or adequate of quantity of raw materials to the manufacturing department so that the situation of stock out may be reduced or avoided.
(ii) By proper inventory cost control, the available capital may be used efficiently or optimally, by avoiding the unnecessary expenditure on inventory.
(iii) In production models, while estimating the cost of the product the material cost is to be added.
The manager has to decide whether he has to take the actual purchase price of the material or the current market price of the material.
The current market price may be less than or greater than the purchase price of the material which has been purchased some period back.
Proper inventory control reduces such risks.
(iv) It ensures smooth and efficient running of an organization and provides safety against late delivery times to the customer due to uncontrollable factors (v) A careful materials manager may take advantage of price discounts and make bulk purchase at the same time he can keep the inventory cost at minimum.
(vi) It enables a manager to select a proper transportation mode to reduce the cost of transportation.
(vii) Avoids the chances of duplicate ordering.
(viii) It avoids losses due to deterioration and obsolescence etc.
267 (ix) Causes of surplus stock may be controlled or totally avoided.
(x) Proper inventory control will ensure the availability of the required material in required quantity at required time with the minimum inventory cost.
Though many managers consider inventory as an enemy as it locks up the available capital, but by proper inventory control they can enjoy the benefits of inventory control and then they can realize that the inventory is a real friend of a manager in utilizing the available capital efficiently.
3.8 OTHER FACTORS TO BE CONSIDERED IN INVENTORY CONTROL There are many factors, which have influence on the inventory, which draws the attention of an inventory manager, they are: (i) Demand The demand for raw material or components for production or demand of goods to satisfy the needs of the customer, can be assessed from the past consumption/supply pattern of material or goods.
We find that the demand may be deterministic in nature i.e., we can specify that the demand for the item is so many units for example say ‘q’ units per unit of time.
Also the demand may be static, i.e.
it means constant for each time period (uniform over equal period of times).
Further, the demand may follow several patterns and so why it is uncontrolled variable, such as it may be uniformly distributed over period or instantaneous at the beginning of the period or it may be large in the beginning and less in the end etc.
These patterns directly affect the total carrying cost of inventory.
(ii) Production of goods or Supply of goods to the inventory The supply of inventory to the stock may deterministic or probabilistic (stochastic) in nature and many a times it is uncontrollable, because, the rate of production depends on the production, which is once again depends on so many factors which are uncontrollable / controllable factors Similarly supply of inventory depends on the type of supplier, mode of supply, mode of transformation etc.
The properties of supply mode have its effect in the level of inventory maintained and inventory costs.
(iii) Lead time or Delivery Lags or Procurement time Lead-time is the time between placing the order and receipt of material to the stock.
In production models, it is the time between the decisions made to take up the order and starting of production.
This time in purchase models depends on 268 many uncontrollable factors like transport mode, transport route, agitations etc.
It may vary from few days to few months depending on the nature of delay.
The materials manager has to refer to the past records and approximately estimate the lead period and estimate the quantity of safety stock to be maintained.
In production models, it may depend on the labour absenteeism, arrival of material to the stores, power supply, etc.
(iv) Type of goods The inventory items may be discrete or continuous.
Sometimes the discrete items are to be considered as continuous items for the sake of convenience.
(v) Time horizon The time period for which the optimal policy is to be formulated or the inventory cost is to be optimized is generally termed as the Inventory planning period of Time horizon.
This time is represented on X - axis while drawing graphs.
This time may be finite or infinite.
(vi) Safety stock or Buffer stock Whatever care taken by the materials manager, one cannot avoid the stock out situation due to many factors.
To avoid the stock out position the manager sometimes maintains some extra stock, which is generally known as Buffer Stock, or Safety Stock.
The level of this stock depends on the demand pattern and the lead-time.
This should be judiciously calculated because, if we stock more the inventory carrying cost increases and there is chance of pilferage or theft.
If we maintain less stock, we may have to face stock out position.
The buffer stock or safety stock is generally the consumption at the maximum rate during the time interval equal to the difference between the maximum lead timesand the normal (average) lead time or say the maximum, demand during lead time minus the average demand during lead time.
Depending on the characteristics above discussed terms, different types of inventory models may be formulated.
These models may be deterministic models or probabilistic model depending on the demand pattern.
In any inventory model, we try to seek answers for the following questions: (a) When should the inventory be purchased for replenishment?
For example, the inventory should be replenished after a period ‘t’ or when the level of the inventory is qo.
(b) How much quantity must be purchased or ordered or produced at the time of replenishment so as to minimize the inventory costs?
For example, the 269 inventory mustbe purchased with the supplier who is supplying at a cost of Np/- per unit.In addition to the above depending on the data available, we can also decide from which sourcewe have to purchase and what price we have to purchase?
But in general time and quantity are the twovariables, we can control separately or in combination.
3.9 INVENTORY CONTROL PROBLEM The inventory control problem consists of the determination of three basic factors: 1.
When to order (produce or purchase)?
2.
How much to order?
3.
How much safety stock to be kept?
When to order: This is related to lead time (also called delivery lag) of an item.
Lead time may interval between the placement of an order for an item and its receipt in stock.
It may be replenishment order on an outside or within the firm.
There should be enough stock for each item so that customers’ orders can be reasonably met from this stock until replenishment.
This stock level known as reorder level, has to be determined for each item.
It is determined by balancing the cost of maintaining these stocks and the disservice to the customer if his orders are not met.
How much to order: Each order has an associated ordering cost or cost of acquisition.
To keep this cost low, the number of orders has to be as reduced as possible.
To achieve limited number of orders, the order size has to be increased.
But large order size would imply high inventory cost.
Thus, the problem of how much to order is solved by compromising between the acquisition cost and the inventory carrying cost.
How much should the safety stock be.This is important to avoidoverstocking while ensuring that no stock out takes place.
The inventory control policy of an organisation depends upon the demand characteristics.
The demand for an item may be dependent or independent.
For instance, the demand for the different models of television sets manufactured by a company does not depend upon the demand for any other item, while the demand for its components will depend upon the demand for the television sets.
270 3.10 THE CLASSICAL EOQ MODEL (Demand Rate Uniform, Replenishment Rate Infinite) According Gupta and Hira 2012, the EOQ model is one of the simplest inventory models we have.
A store keeper has an order to supply goods to customers at a uniform rate R per unit.
Hence, the demand is fixed and known.
Not shortages are allowed, consequently, the cost of shortage C is infinity.
The store keeper places an 2 order with a manufacturer every t time units, where t is fixed; and the ordering cost per order is C .
Replenishment time is negligible, that is, replenishment rate is 3 infinite so that the replacement is instantaneous (lead time is zero).
The holding cost is assumed to be proportional to the amount of inventory as well as the time inventory is held.
Hence the time of holding inventory I for time T is C IT, where 1 C , C and C are assumed to be constants.
The store keeper’s problem is therefore 1 2 3 to the following i.
How frequently should he place the order?
ii.
How many units should he order in each order placed?
This model is represented schematically below.
If orders are placed at intervals t, a quantity q = Rtmust be ordered in each order.
Since the stock in small time dt is Rtdt the stock in time period t will be t t t T Fig.
Inventory situation for EOQ model 271   Cost of holding inventory during time t = 1 C Rt2.
1 2 Order cost to place an order = C .
3  Total cost during time t = 1 C Rt2 + C .
1 3 2 Average total cost per unit, C(t) = 1 C Rt + C …………….
(1) 1 3 2 t C will be minimum if dC(t) = 0 and d C(t) is positive.
2 dt dt2 Differentiatingequation (1) w.r.t ‘t’ d2C(t)=1 C R – C = 0, which gives t = 2C 1 3 3 .
dt 2 t2 C R 1 Differentiating w.r.t.‘t’ d2C(t) = 2C which is positive for value of t given by the above equation.
3 dt2 t3 , Thus C(t) is minimum for optimal time interval, t = 2C o 3 C R ………………………….
(2) 1 Optimum quantity q to be ordered during each order, 0 q = Rt = 2C R …………………… (3) 0 0 3 C 1 This is known as the optimal lot size (or economic order quantity) formula by r. H. Wilson.
It is also called Wilson’s or square root formula or Harris lot size formula.
Any other order quantity will result in a higher cost.
The resulting minimum average cost per unit time, C0(q) = 1 C R.2C + C C R 1 3 3 1 2 C1R 2C 3 272  = 1 C C R + 1 C C R = 2C C R …… (4) 1 3 1 3 1 3 √2 √2 Also, the total minimum cost per unit time, including the cost of the item = √2C1C3R + CR, …………………………………….. (5) Where C is cost/unit of the item Equation (1) can be written in an alternative form by replacing t by q/R as The average inventory is and it is time dependent.
It may be realised that some of the assumptions made are not satisfied in actual practice.
For instance, in real life, customer demand is usually not known exactly and replenishment time is usually not negligible.
Corollary 1.
In the above model, if the order cost is C + bq instead of being fixed, 3 where b is the cost of order per unit of item, we can prove that there no change in the optimum order quantity due to changed order cost.
Proof.
The average cost per unit of time, .
From equation (5), is positive That is, , which is necessarily positive for above value of q. , which is the same as equation (3) Hence, there is no change in the optimum order quantity as a result of the change in the cost of order.
273 Corollary 2.In the model in figure …… discussed above, the lead time has been assumed to be zero.
However, most real life problems have positive lead time L from the order for the item was placed until it is actually delivered.
The ordering policy of the above model therefore, must satisfy the reorder point.
If L is the lead time in days, and R is the inventory consumption rate in units per day, the total inventory requirements during the lead time = LR.
Thus we should place an order q as soon as the stock level becomes LR.
This is called reorder point p = LR.
In practice, this is equivalent to continuously observing the level of inventory until the reorder point is obtained.
That is why economic lot size model is also called continuous review model.
If the buffer stock B is to maintained, reorder level will be P = B + LR ……………………………………….. (6) Furthermore, if D days are required for reviewing the system, ……………….. (7) Assumptions in the EOQ Formula The following assumptions have been made while deriving the EOQ formula: 1.
Demand is known and uniform (constant) 2.
Shortages are not permitted; as soon as the stock level becomes zero, it is instantaneously replenished.
3.
Replenishment stock is instantaneous or replenishment rate is infinite.
4.
Lead time is zero.
The moment the order is placed, the quantity ordered is automatically received.
5.
Inventory carrying cost and ordering cost per order remain constant over time.
The former has a linear relationship with the quantity ordered and the latter with the number of order.
6.
Cost of the item remains constant over time.
There are no price- breaks or quantity discounts.
7.
The item is purchased and replenished in lots or batches.
8.
The inventory system relates to a single item.
274 Limitations of the EOQ Model The EOQ formula has a number of limitations.
It has been highly controversial since a number of objections have been raised regarding its validity.
Some of these objections are: 1.
In practice, the demand neither known with certainty nor it is uniform.
If the fluctuations are mild, the formula can be applicable but for large fluctuations, it loses its validity.
Dynamic EOQ models, instead, may have to be applied.
2.
The ordering cost is difficult to measure.
Also it may not be linearly related to the number of orders as assumed in the derivation of the model.
The inventory carrying rate is still more difficult to measure and even to define precisely.
3.
It is difficult to predict the demand.
Present demand may be quite different from the past history.
Hardly any prediction is possible for a new product to be introduced in the market.
4.
The EOQ model assumes instantaneous replenishment of the entire quantity ordered.
The practice, the total quantity may be supplied in parts.
EOQ model is not applicable in such a situation.
5.
Lead time may not be zero unless the supplier is next-door and has sufficient stock of the item, which is rarely so.
6.
Price variations, quantity discounts and shortages may further invalidate the use of the EOQ formula.
However, the flatness of the total cost curve around the minimum is an answer to the many objections.
Even if we deviate from EOQ within reasonable limits, there is no substantial change in cost.
For example, if because of inaccuracies and errors, we have selected an order quantity 20%more (or less) than q the increase in total 0 cost will be less than 20%.
EXAMPL 15.1 A stock keeper has to supply 12000 units of a product per year to his customer.
The demand is fixed and known and the shortage cost is assumed to be infinite.
The inventory holding cost is N 0.20k per unit per month, and the ordering cost per order is N350.
Determine i.
The optimum lot size q 0 ii.
Optimum scheduling period t 0 iii.
Minimum total variable yearly cost.
Solution Supply rate R = 275 C1 = N 0.20K per unit per month, C3 = N350 per order.
i. q = 0 ii.
iii.
EXAMPL15.2 A particular item has a demand of 9000 unit/year.
The cost of a single procurement is N100 and the holding cost per unit is N 2.40k per year.
The replacement is instantaneous and no shortages are allowed.
Determine i.
The economic lot size, ii.
The number of orders per year, iii.
The time between orders iv.
The total cost per if the cost of one unit is N1 Solution R = 9000 units/year C3 = N100/procurement, C1 = N2.40/unit/year i. ii.
iii.
iv.
= 9000 + 2080 = N11080/year EXAMPL 15.3 A stockist has to supply 400 units of a product every Monday to his customeN He gets the product at N 50 per unit from the manufacturer.
The cost of ordering and 276 transportation from the manufacturer is N75 per order.
The cost of carrying the inventory is 7.5% per year of the cost of the product.
Find i.
The economic lot size ii.
The total optimal cost (including the capital cost) iii.
The total weekly profit if the item is sold for N 55 per unit Solution R = 400 units/week C3 = N75per order C1 = 7.5% per year of the cost of the product i. ii.
iii.
4.0 CONCLUSION Inventory management or Inventory Control is one of the techniques of Materials Management which helps the management to improve the productivity of capital by reducing the material costs, preventing the large amounts of capital being locked up for long periods, and improving the capital - turnover ratio.
The techniques of inventory control were evolved and developed during and after the Second World War and have helped the more industrially developed countries to make spectacular progress in improving their productivity.
Inventory control 277 provides tools and techniques, most of which are very simple to reduce/control the materials cost substantially.
A large portion of revenue (65 percent) is exposed to the techniques, correspondingly large savings result when they are applied than when attempts are made to saver on other items of expenditure like wages and salaries which are about 16 percent or overheads which may be 20 percent.
By careful financial analysis, it is shown that a 5 percent reduction in material costs will result in increased profits equivalent to a 36 percent increase in sales.
5.0 SUMMARY It has been an interesting journey through the subject of inventory control systems.
This unit has provided us with vital information about the inventory control model.
An inventory control model has been defined an inventory as consisting of usable but idle resources such as men, machines, materials, or money.
When the resources involved are material, the inventory is called stock.
Though inventory of materials is an idle resource (since materials lie idle and are not to be used immediately), almost every organisation.
It helps in the smooth and efficient of an enterprise.
It helps in providing service to the customer at short notice.
In the absence of inventory, the enterprise may have to pay high prices due to piecemeal purchasing.
It reduces product cost since there is an added advantage of batching and long, uninterrupted production runs.
It acts as a buffer stock when raw materials are received late and shop rejection is too many.
Overbuying without regard to the forecast or proper estimate of demand to take advantages of favourable market can may result in poor inventory control system.
Inventories can be classified into direct and indirect.
Direct inventories includeraw material inventories or production inventories, work-in -process inventories or in process inventories, finished goods inventories, MRO inventory or spare parts inventories.
While indirect inventory type include, fluctuation inventories, anticipation inventory, lot size inventory or cycle inventories, transportation inventories, and decoupling inventories.The purpose of maintaining the inventory or controlling the cost of inventory is to use the available capital optimally (efficiently) so that inventory cost per item of material will be as small as possible.
The inventory control problem arises from, when to order, how much to order, how much should the safety stock be.
Finally, we discussed the EOQ model whichis one of the simplest inventory models we have.
A store keeper has an order to supply goods to customers at a uniform rate R per unit.
Hence, the demand is fixed and known.
278  6.0 TUTOR MARKED ASSIGNMENT 1.
What do you understand by the term inventory control?
2.
Identify and discuss the different classifications of inventories.
3.
Give six limitations of the EOQ model.
4.
Outline the assumptions of the EOQ formula 5.
List and explain three inventory control problems.
6.
Clearly write out the EOQ formula and explain all its components.
7.0 REFERENCES Eiselt, H.A.
and Sandblom, C. L. (2012) Operations Research: A Model Based Approach, 2nd ed., NewYork:SpringerHeidelberg Gupta, P.K and Hira, D.S., (2012), Operations Research, New – Delhi: S. Chand & Company.
Murthy, Rama P. (2007) Operations Research 2nded.
New Delhi: New Age International Publishers.
279  UNIT 16: CASE ANALYSIS 1.0 INTRODUCTION 2.0 OBJECTIVES 3.0 MAIN CONTENT 3.1 WHAT IS A CASE STUDY 3.2 THE CASE METHOD AS A LEARNING TOOL 3.3 HOW TO DO A CASE STUDY 3.4 PREPARING A CASE STUDY 3.5 ANALYSING CASE DATA 3.6 GENERATING ALTERNATIVES 3.7 KEY DECISION CRITERIA 3.8 EVALUATION OF ALTERNATIVES 3.9 RECOMMENDATION 4.0 CONCLUSION 5.0 SUMMARY 6.0 TUTOR MARKED ASSIGNMENT 7.0 REFERENCES 1.0 INTRODUCTION This introduces us to case analysis.
A case study is a description of an actual administrative situation involving a decision to be made or a problem to be solved.
It can be a real situation that actually happened just as described, or portions have been disguised for reasons of privacy.
It is a learning toolin which students and Instructors participate in direct discussion of case studies, as opposed to the lecture method, where the Instructor speaks and students listen and take notes.
In the case method, students teach themselves, with the Instructor being an active guide, rather than just a talking head delivering content.
2.0 OBJECTIVES After studying this unit, you should be able to 1.
Discuss what case analysis involves 2.
Analyse a case as a learning tool 3.
Highlight the stages in preparing a case.
280 4.
Analyse case data.
5.
Outline key decision criteria in a case.
3.1 WHAT IS A CASE STUDY?
A case study is a description of an actual administrative situation involving a decision to be made or a problem to be solved.
It can be a real situation that actually happened just as described, or portions have been disguised for reasons of privacy.
Most case studies are written in such a way that the reader takes the place of the manager whose responsibility is to make decisions to help solve the problem.
In almost all case studies, a decision must be made, although that decision might be to leave the situation as it is and do nothing.
3.2 THE CASE METHOD AS A LEARNING TOOL The case method of analysis is a learning tool in which students and Instructors participate in direct discussion of case studies, as opposed to the lecture method, where the Instructor speaks and students listen and take notes.
In the case method, students teach themselves, with the Instructor being an active guide, rather than just a talking head delivering content.
The focus is on students learning through their joint, co-operative effort.
Assigned cases are first prepared by students, and this preparation forms the basis for class discussion under the direction of the Instructor.
Students learn, often unconsciously, how to evaluate a problem, how to make decisions, and how to orally argue a point of view.
Using this method, they also learn how to think in terms of the problems faced by an administrator.
In courses that use the case method extensively, a significant part of the student's evaluation may rest with classroom participation in case discussions, with another substantial portion resting on written case analyses.
For these reasons, using the case method tends to be very intensive for both students and Instructor.
Case studies are used extensively throughout most business programs at the university level, and The F.C.
Manning School of Business Administration is no exception.
As you will be using case studies in many of the courses over the next four years, it is important that you get off to a good start by learning the proper way to approach and complete them.
3.3 HOW TO DO A CASE STUDY 281 While there is no one definitive "Case Method" or approach, there are common steps that most approaches recommend be followed in tackling a case study.
It is inevitable that different Instructors will tell you to do things differently; this is part of life and will also be part of working for others.
This variety is beneficial since it will show you different ways of approaching decision making.
What follows is intended to be a rather general approach, portions of which have been taken from an excellent book entitled, Learning with Cases, by Erskine, Leenders, & Mauffette-Leenders, published by the Richard Ivey School of Business, The University of Western Ontario, 1997.
Beforehand (usually a week before), you will get: 1. the case study, 2.
(often) some guiding questions that will need to be answered, and 3.
(sometimes) some reading assignments that have some relevance to the case subject.
Your work in completing the case can be divided up into three components: 1. what you do to prepare before the class discussion, 2. what takes place in the class discussion of the case, and 3. anything required after the class discussion has taken place.
For maximum effectiveness, it is essential that you do all three components.
Here are the subcomponents, in order.
We will discuss them in more detail shortly.
1.
Before the class discussion: 1.
Read the reading assignments (if any) 2.
Use the Short Cycle Process to familiarize yourself with the case.
3.
Use the Long Cycle Process to analyze the case 4.
Usually there will be group meetings to discuss your ideas.
5.
Write up the case (if required) 2.
In the class discussion: 1.
Someone will start the discussion, usually at the prompting of the Instructor.
2.
Listen carefully and take notes.
Pay close attention to assumptions.
Insist that they are clearly stated.
3.
Take part in the discussion.
Your contribution is important, and is likely a part of your evaluation for the course.
3.
After the class discussion: 1. Review ASAP after the class.
Note what the key concept was and how the case fits into the course.
Top of page 3.4 PREPARING A CASE STUDY 282 It helps to have a system when sitting down to prepare a case study as the amount of information and issues to be resolved can initially seem quite overwhelming.
The following is a good way to start.
Step 1: The Short Cycle Process 1.
Quickly read the case.
If it is a long case, at this stage you may want to read only the first few and last paragraphs.
You should then be able to 2.
Answer the following questions: 1. Who is the decision maker in this case, and what is their position and responsibilities?
2.
What appears to be the issue (of concern, problem, challenge, or opportunity) and its significance for the organization?
3.
Why has the issue arisen and why is the decision maker involved now?
4.
When does the decision maker have to decide, resolve, act or dispose of the issue?
What is the urgency to the situation?
3.
Take a look at the Exhibits to see what numbers have been provided.
4. Review the case subtitles to see what areas are covered in more depth.
5. Review the case questions if they have been provided.
This may give you some clues are what the main issues are to be resolved.
You should now be familiar with what the case study is about, and are ready to begin the process of analysing it.
You are not done yet!
Many students mistakenly believe that this is all the preparation needed for a class discussion of a case study.
If this was the extent of your preparation, your ability to contribute to the discussion would likely be limited to the first one quarter of the class time allotted.
You need to go further to prepare the case, using the next step.
One of the primary reasons for doing the short cycle process is to give you an indication of how much work will need to be done to prepare the case study properly.
Step 2: The Long Cycle Process At this point, the task consists of two parts: 1.
A detailed reading of the case, and then 2.
Analysing the case.
When you are doing the detailed reading of the case study, look for the following sections: 1.
Opening paragraph: introduces the situation.
2.
Background information: industry, organization, products, history, competition, financial information, and anything else of significance.
3.
Specific (functional) area of interest: marketing, finance, operations, human resources, or integrated.
4.
The specific problem or decision(s) to be made.
283 5.
Alternatives open to the decision maker, which may or may not be stated in the case.
6.
Conclusion: sets up the task, any constraints or limitations, and the urgency of the situation.
Most, but not all case studies will follow this format.
The purpose here is to thoroughly understand the situation and the decisions that will need to be made.
Take your time, make notes, and keep focussed on your objectives.
Analysing the case should take the following steps: 1.
Defining the issue(s) 2.
Analysing the case data 3.
Generating alternatives 4.
Selecting decision criteria 5.
Analysing and evaluating alternatives 6.
Selecting the preferred alternative 7.
Developing an action/implementation plan Defining the issue(s)/Problem Statement The problem statement should be a clear, concise statement of exactly what needs to be addressed.
This is not easy to write!
The work that you did in the short cycle process answered the basic questions.
Now it is time to decide what the main issues to be addressed are going to be in much more detail.
Asking yourself the following questions may help: 1.
What appears to be the problem(s) here?
2.
How do I know that this is a problem?
Note that by asking this question, you will be helping to differentiate the symptoms of the problem from the problem itself.
Example: while declining sales or unhappy employees are a problem to most companies, they are in fact, symptoms of underlying problems which need to addressed.
3.
What are the immediate issues that need to be addressed?
This helps to differentiate between issues that can be resolved within the context of the case, and those that are bigger issues that needed to addressed at a another time (preferably by someone else!).
4.
Differentiate between importance and urgency for the issues identified.
Some issues may appear to be urgent, but upon closer examination are relatively unimportant, while others may be far more important (relative to solving our problem) than urgent.
You want to deal with important issues in order of urgency to keep focussed on your objective.
Important issues are those that have a significant effect on: 1.
Profitability, 284 2. strategic direction of the company, 3. source of competitive advantage, 4. morale of the company's employees, and/or 5. customer satisfaction.
The problem statement may be framed as a question, e.g.
what should Joe do?
or How can Mr Smith improve market share?
Usually the problem statement has to be re-written several times during the analysis of a case, as you peel back the layers of symptoms or causation.
3.5 ANALYSING CASE DATA In analysing the case data, you are trying to answer the following: 1.
Why or how did these issues arise?
You are trying to determine cause and effect for the problems identified.
You cannot solve a problem that you cannot determine the cause of!
It may be helpful to think of the organization in question as consisting of the following components: 1. resources, such as materials, equipment, or supplies, and 2. people who transform these resources using 3. processes, which creates something of greater value.
Now, where are the problems being caused within this framework, and why?
2. Who is affected most by this issues?
You are trying to identify who are the relevant stakeholders to the situation, and who will be affected by the decisions to be made.
3.
What are the constraints and opportunities implicit to this situation?
It is very rare that resources are not a constraint, and allocations must be made on the assumption that not enough will be available to please everyone.
4.
What do the numbers tell you?
You need to take a look at the numbers given in the case study and make a judgement as to their relevance to the problem identified.
Not all numbers will be immediately useful or relevant, but you need to be careful not to overlook anything.
When deciding to analyse numbers, keep in mind why you are doing it, and what you intend to do with the result.
Use common sense and comparisons to industry standards when making judgements as to the meaning of your answers to avoid jumping to conclusions.
3.6 GENERATING ALTERNATIVES This section deals with different ways in which the problem can be resolved.
Typically, there are many (the joke is at least three), and being creative at this stage helps.
Things to remember at this stage are: 1.
Be realistic!
While you might be able to find a dozen alternatives, keep in mind that they should be realistic and fit within the constraints of the situation.
285 2.
The alternatives should be mutually exclusive, that is, they cannot happen at the same time.
3.
Not making a decision pending further investigation is not an acceptable decision for any case study that you will analyse.
A manager can always delay making a decision to gather more information, which is not managing at all!
The whole point to this exercise is to learn how to make good decisions, and having imperfect information is normal for most business decisions, not the exception.
4.
Doing nothing as in not changing your strategy can be a viable alternative, provided it is being recommended for the correct reasons, as will be discussed below.
5.
Avoid the meat sandwich method of providing only two other clearly undesirable alternatives to make one reasonable alternative look better by comparison.
This will be painfully obvious to the reader, and just shows laziness on your part in not being able to come up with more than one decent alternative.
6.
Keep in mind that any alternative chosen will need to be implemented at some point, and if serious obstacles exist to successfully doing this, then you are the one who will look bad for suggesting it.
Once the alternatives have been identified, a method of evaluating them and selecting the most appropriate one needs to be used to arrive at a decision.
3.7 KEY DECISION CRITERIA A very important concept to understand, they answer the question of how you are going to decide which alternative is the best one to choose.
Other than choosing randomly, we will always employ some criteria in making any decision.
Think about the last time that you make a purchase decision for an article of clothing.
Why did you choose the article that you did?
The criteria that you may have used could have been: 1. fit 2. price 3. fashion 4. colour 5. approval of friend/family 6. availability Note that any one of these criteria could appropriately finish the sentence, the brand/style that I choose to purchase must....
These criteria are also how you will define or determine that a successful purchase decision has been made.
For a business situation, the key decision criteria are those things that are important to the organization making the decision, and they will be used to evaluate the suitability of each alternative recommended.
286 Key decision criteria should be: 1.
Brief, preferably in point form, such as a. improve (or at least maintain) profitability, b. increase sales, market share, or return on investment, c. maintain customer satisfaction, corporate image, d. be consistent with the corporate mission or strategy, e. within our present (or future) resources and capabilities, f. within acceptable risk parameters, g. ease or speed of implementation, h. employee morale, safety, or turnover, i. retain flexibility, and/or j. minimize environmental impact.
2.
Measurable, at least to the point of comparison, such as alternative A will improve profitability more that alternative B.
3.
Be related to your problem statement, and alternatives.
If you find that you are talking about something else, that is a sign of a missing alternative or key decision criteria, or a poorly formed problem statement.
Students tend to find the concept of key decision criteria very confusing, so you will probably find that you re-write them several times as you analyse the case.
They are similar to constraints or limitations, but are used to evaluate alternatives.
3.8 EVALUATION OF ALTERNATIVES If you have done the above properly, this should be straightforward.
You measure the alternatives against each key decision criteria.
Often you can set up a simple table with key decision criteria as columns and alternatives as rows, and write this section based on the table.
Each alternative must be compared to each criteria and its suitability ranked in some way, such as met/not met, or in relation to the other alternatives, such as better than, or highest.
This will be important to selecting an alternative.
Another method that can be used is to list the advantages and disadvantages (pros/cons) of each alternative, and then discussing the short and long term implications of choosing each.
Note that this implies that you have already predicted the most likely outcome of each of the alternatives.
Some students find it helpful to consider three different levels of outcome, such as best, worst, and most likely, as another way of evaluating alternatives.
3.9 RECOMMENDATION You must have one!
Business people are decision-makers; this is your opportunity to practice making decisions.
Give a justification for your decision (use the 287 KDC's).
Check to make sure that it is one (and only one) of your Alternatives and that it does resolve what you defined as the Problem.
4.0 CONCLUSION The case method of analysis is a learning tool in which students and Instructors participate in direct discussion of case studies, as opposed to the lecture method, where the Instructor speaks and students listen and take notes.
In the case method, students teach themselves, with the Instructor being an active guide, rather than just a talking head delivering content.
The focus is on students learning through their joint, co-operative effort.
5.0 SUMMARY This study unit has exposed us to the subject of case analysis in OR.
We opened the unit with a description of what case analysis is all about.
We defined a case asa description of an actual administrative or operational situation involving a decision to be made or a problem to be solved.
It can be a real situation that actually happened just as described, or portions have been disguised for reasons of privacy.
Most case studies are written in such a way that the reader takes the place of the manager whose responsibility is to make decisions to help solve the problem.The stages involved in case analysis include the following the short cycle process, and the long cycle process.
Next, we considered the key decision criteria when doing a case analysis.
These have to be brief, measurable, and be related to your problem statement.
Finally we considered how to analyse alternatives.
6.0 TUTOR MARKED ASSIGNMENT 1.
What do you understand by case analysis?
2 Discuss the key decision criteria used in analysing a case.
3.
Identify and briefly discuss the stages involved in case analysis.
4.
Present a brief analogy on how to do a case study.
7.0 REFERENCES Denardo, Eric V. (2002), The Schience of Decision making: A Problem-Based Approach Using Excel.
New York: John Wiley.
Gupta, P.K and Hira, D.S., (2012), Operations Research, New – Delhi: S. Chand & Company.
288 Lucey, T. (1988), Quantitative Techniques: An Instructional Manual, London: DP Publications.
289
