 NATIONAL OPEN UNIVERSITY OF NIGERIA SCHOOL OF MANAGEMENT SCIENCES COURSE CODE: COP 415 COURSE TITLE: SEMINAR IN COOPERATIVE MANAGEMENT I 1  2 COURSE GUIDE: COP 415 Course Title: SEMINAR IN COOPERATIVE MANAGEMENT I GUIDE ON SEMINAR PREPARATION AND PRESENTATION Course Developer: LAWAL, Kamaldeen A.
A NOUN, Lagos Course Editor: Dr ‘Mure AGBONLAHOR Programme Leader: Prof. Oludimu, .O.L NOUN, Lagos Course Co-ordinator: LAWAL, Kamaldeen.A.A NOUN, Lagos 3 INTRODUCTION Seminar in Cooperative Management is a 3 credit unit course for final year students of B.Sc.
Cooperative Management.
The seminar is an independent presentation.
It is compulsory for all students that intend to write their Bachelor’s degree thesis in the session under consideration.
Each student will present a paper on the topic approved by the supervisor.
.The presentation shall be within the time stipulated by the seminar panel (Programme leader, Coordinator and Facilitators).
Students’ assessment will be based on the demonstrated knowledge of the topic in relation to the relevant branch of cooperative management, comportment and communication skills.
The seminar presentation will normally be conducted in a conducive environment.
OBJECTIVES OF THE SEMINAR 1.
The objectives of the Seminar are to: Familiarize the students to appreciate problems and other the basic issues in Cooperative Management.
2.
Develop the analytical skills of students in cooperative research and field surveys 3.
Develop the confidence of students in public presentations 4.
Develop the written and project reporting skills of students.
5.
Develop competence in statistical analyses of data 6.
Develop skills in writing academic papers.
SEMINAR PAPER OUTLINE Students are expected to cover the following areas: 1.
Introduction a.
General overview b.
Problem definition/research questions and study objectives 2.
Literature review on the topic.
3.
Research Methodology 4.
References.
4 AREAS FROM WHICH STUDENTS CAN CHOOSE A TOPIC These are the areas in which student can generate their presentation topic from: 1.
Identification and choice of cooperative business opportunities.
2. Business feasibility study.
3.
Starting a small business.
4.
Bankable business proposals.
5.
Cooperative business finance identification and use of Micro-Credit Institution.
6.
Pricing principles and competitive business analysis.
7.
Demand analysis.
8.
Cooperative management problems and financing 9.
Cooperative and self employment 10.
Cooperatives Organizing and management problems and prospects 11.
Cooperatives and Development –Rural and Urban 12.
Cooperatives and industrialization 13.
Cooperatives and Trade union- conflictory or complementary 14.
Cooperative and Mass Literacy 15.
Cooperatives Democracy and Efficiency 16.
Cooperatives and Local and State Government 17.
Officialization and De-officialization of cooperatives 18.
Cooperatives Organizational Structure, e.t.c 19.
Indigenous versus Imported cooperatives 20.
Cooperatives and Inflation in Nigeria 21.
Cooperatives for the Rich or the Poor?
22.
Cooperatives and various Programmes –MAMSER, School to land e.t.c PREPARATION AND PRESENTATION OF A SEMINAR PAPER 1.
Determine your seminar's time limit 1.
Allow 1/4 of that time for questions 2.
The remaining time is available for your talk 2.
Determine your audience 1.
Interests 5 2.
Level of understanding 3.
Pick your major topics 1.
Estimate the time needed for each 2.
Make sure these times don't exceed your 3/4 total allotment 3.
Add or remove topics as needed to meet that time constraint 4.
Make sure all the topics are in a logical order 4.
For each major topic, choose the subtopics 1.
Estimate the time needed for each subtopic 2.
Make sure these times don't exceed your 3/4 total allotment 3.
Add or remove subtopics as needed to meet that time constraint 4.
Make sure each subtopic is in the appropriate topic 5.
Make sure all the subtopics within each topic are presented in a logical order 5.
Determine which points you want to make 1.
Each point is a SINGLE idea or example 2.
Make sure each point is relevant to your audience 3.
For each point, pick the best subtopic 4.
Once all your points have been placed in subtopics, rearrange the points within each subtopic into logical order 5.
If you find any gaps as a result of this reordering, add the appropriate points 6.
If you find any orphaned points, eliminate them 6.
Group the points within each subtopic into closely related groups that make a single argument, i.e.
paragraphs 1.
Associate each of these paragraphs with the image or object you'll use to support it 2.
You'll show this image or object while you're presenting the paragraph's argument 7.
Allow just enough time to present each paragraph 8.
Recheck to see that you'll finish within your time limit.
The seminar presentation will normally take place at the end of the first semester examination or any other convenient time as agreed by the Study Centre Coordinator.
Each student will present a report of his/her proposed project work in the presence of facilitators and at least a 6 resident academic staff in the centre.
Each student is allowed a presentation time of 10 minutes and a question and answer time of 10 minutes maximum.
It is assumed that questions posed should test the students’ understanding of the research aim and his/her ability to independently conduct the research.
Each student must be able to relate the research questions to the objectives and analytical methods.
It is recommended that the presentation shall be done in Microsoft Power Point where the facility exits.
The printout of the slides presentation should be submitted at least a day to the defence.
Students are expected to arrange for all materials needed (generators, projectors, screen and laptop).
7
