 NATIONA L OPEN UNIVERSITY OF NIGERIA SCHOOL OF MANAGEMENT SCIENCES COURSE CODE: COP 416 COURSE TITLE: COOPERATIVE ACCOUNTING  COURSE MAIN TEXT Course Developer/ Mr. S. O. Israel-Cookey Unit Writer School of Management Sciences, National Open University of Nigeria, Lagos.
Course Editor: Dr. O. J. Onwe NOUN, Lagos Programme Leader: Dr. C. I. Okeke School of Management Sciences, National Open University of Nigeria, Lagos.
Course CoordinatorP: astor Timothy O. Ishola School of Management Sciences, National Open University of Nigeria, Lagos  NATIONAL OPEN UNIVERSITY OF NIGERIA 14/16 AMADU BELLO WAY, VICTORIA ISLAND, LAGOS SCHOOL OF MANAGEMENT SCIENCES COP415 ASSESSMENT SHEET PROGRAMME: B.Sc.
COOPERATIVE MANAGEMENT COURSE CODE: COP 415 COURSE TITLE: SEMINAR IN COOPERATIVE 1 CREDIT: 02 PART A: SEMINAR PRESENTATION NAME OF CENTER: …………………………………….
NAME OF STUDENT: ………………………………...... MATRIC NO: …………………………………………….
S/N Seminar presentation Max Facilitator Head/Coordinator, Remark Score Score (%) Hq.
Score(%) (%) i.
Content mastery: 10 • Relevance and Comprehensiveness • Correctness ii.
Comportment of the presenter 5 iii.
• Confidence 10 • Demonstration of boldness to address the audience iv.
• Response to questions 10 • Ease attending to audience’s questions and observation v. Communication- Correction of grammer 10 • Fluency and Simplicity vi.
Dressing-Simplicity and neatness 5 Grand total 50% 50% Facilitator name and signature PART B: ASSESSMENT OF TERM PAPER S/N Term Paper Report Feature Max Score /Coordinator, Hq.
Remark (%) Score(%) i.
Literature review 15 • Relevancy of cited works • Comprehensiveness of the review • Extensive of the sources – textual, interact, journals, government report etc.
ii.
Summary, conclusion and recommendation: 10 iii.
Referencing: 10 • Materials – correctly cited using the APA format, Comprehensive cited iv.
Others: 5 • Typing/Neatness/consistency of character • Overall impression v. Applicability: 10 • Relevance of the topic to the course • Applicability of findings Total = maximum Mark = 50% 50% Total = maximum Mark = 100% COP418 ASSESSMENT SHEET PROGRAMME: B.Sc.
COOPERATIVE MANAGEMENT COURSE CODE: COP 418 COURSE TITLE: SEMINAR IN COOPERATIVE II CREDIT: 02 PART A: SEMINAR PRESENTATION NAME OF CENTER: …………………………………….
NAME OF STUDENT: ………………………………...... MATRIC NO: …………………………………………….
S/N Seminar presentation Max Facilitator Head/Coordinator, Remark Score Score (%) Hq.
Score(%) (%) I Content mastery: 10 • Relevance and Comprehensiveness • Correctness II Comportment of the presenter 5 iii • Confidence 10 • Demonstration of boldness to address the audience Iv • Response to questions 10 • Ease attending to audience’s questions and observation V Communication- Correction of grammer 10 • Fluency and Simplicity Vi Dressing-Simplicity and neatness 10 Grand total 50% 50 Facilitator name and signature PART B: ASSESSMENT OF TERM PAPER S/N Term Paper Report Feature Max Score /Coordinator, Hq.
Remark (%) Score(%) I Literature review 15 • Relevancy of cited works • Comprehensiveness of the review • Extensive of the sources – textual, interact, journals, government report etc.
i Summary, conclusion and recommendation: 10 i vi.Referencing: 10 • Materials – correctly cited using the APA format, Comprehensive cited vii.Others: 5 • Typing/Neatness/consistency of character • Overall impression viiiA.
pplicability: • Relevance of the topic to the course 10 • Applicability of findings Total = maximum Mark = 50% 50% Total = maximum Mark = 100% 100% TSM 447 ASSESSMENT SHEET PROGRAMME: B.Sc.
TOURISM STUDIES COURSE CODE: TSM 447 COURSE TITLE: SEMINAR IN TOURISM STUDIES CREDIT: 02 PART A: SEMINAR PRESENTATION NAME OF CENTER: …………………………………….
NAME OF STUDENT: ………………………………...... MATRIC NO: …………………………………………….
S/N Seminar presentation Max Facilitator Head/Coordinator, Remark Score Score (%) Hq.
Score(%) (%) 1 Content mastery: • Relevance and Comprehensiveness • Correctness 2 Comportment of the presenter 3 • Confidence • Demonstration of boldness to address the audience 4 • Response to questions • Ease attending to audience’s questions and observation 5 Communication- Correction of grammer • Fluency and Simplicity 6 Dressing-Simplicity and neatness Grand total 50% Facilitator name and signature PART B: ASSESSMENT OF TERM PAPER S/N Term Paper Report Feature Max Score /Coordinator, Hq.
Remark (%) Score(%) 1 Literature review • Relevancy of cited works 15 • Comprehensiveness of the review • Extensive of the sources – textual, interact, journals, government report etc.
2 Summary, conclusion and recommendation: 10 3 Referencing: 10 • Materials – correctly cited using the APA format, Comprehensive cited 4 Others: 5 • Typing/Neatness/consistency of character • Overall impression 5 Applicability: 10 • Relevance of the topic to the course • Applicability of findings Total = maximum Mark = 50% 50 Total = maximum Mark = 100% 100 NATIONAL OPEN UNIVERSITY OF NIGERIA 14/16 AMADU BELLO WAY, VICTORIA ISLAND, LAGOS SCHOOL OF MANAGEMENT SCIENCES ENT 412 ASSESSMENT SHEET PROGRAMME: B.Sc.
ENTERPRENUERSHIP AND BUSINESS MANAGEMENT COURSE CODE: ENT 412 COURSE TITLE: SEMINAR IN ENTERPRENUERSHIP AND BUSINESS MANAGEMENT CREDIT: 02 PART A: SEMINAR PRESENTATION NAME OF CENTER: …………………………………….
NAME OF STUDENT: ………………………………...... MATRIC NO: …………………………………………….
S/N Seminar presentation Max Facilitator Head/Coordinator, Remark Score Score (%) Hq.
Score(%) (%) 1 Content mastery: 10 • Relevance and Comprehensiveness • Correctness 2 Comportment of the presenter 5 3 • Confidence 10 • Demonstration of boldness to address the audience 4 • Response to questions 10 • Ease attending to audience’s questions and observation 5 Communication- Correction of grammer 5 • Fluency and Simplicity 6 Dressing-Simplicity and neatness 10 Grand total 50% 50% Facilitator name and signature PART B: ASSESSMENT OF TERM PAPER S/N Term Paper Report Feature Max Score /Coordinator, Hq.
Remark (%) Score(%) 1 Literature review • Relevancy of cited works 15 • Comprehensiveness of the review • Extensive of the sources – textual, interact, journals, government report etc.
2 Summary, conclusion and recommendation: 10 3 Referencing: 10 • Materials – correctly cited using the APA format, Comprehensive cited 4 Others: 5 • Typing/Neatness/consistency of character • Overall impression 5 Applicability: • Relevance of the topic to the course 10 • Applicability of findings Total = maximum Mark = 50% 50% Total = maximum Mark = 100% 100%  TABLE OF CONTENTS Module 1 Unit 1: Overview of Cooperative Accounting Unit 2: Overview of Accounting Unit 3: Basic Book-keeping Unit 4: The Cash book, Petty Cash Book, and the Imprest System Unit 5: Financial Statements Module 2 Unit 1: Bank Reconciliation Statements Unit 2: Accounts of Sole Proprietorships Unit 3: Introducing Partnership Accounts Unit 4: Manufacturing Accounts Unit 5: Control Accounts Module 3 Unit 1: Accounts from Incomplete Records Unit 2: Accounts of Non- Profit Organizations Unit 3: Preparation of Accounts for Cooper ative Societies Unit 4: Roles/Functions of the Registrar/Director of Cooperatives in Cooperative Accounting Unit 5: Liquidation of Cooperative Accounts  Module 1 Unit 1: Overview of Cooperative Accounting Unit 2: Overview of Accounting Unit 3: Basic Book-keeping Unit 4: The Cash book, Petty Cash Book, and the Imprest System Unit 5: Financial Statements Unit 1: OVERVIEW OF COOPERATIVE ACCOUNTING CONTENTS 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objectives 3.0 Main Content 3.1 Concept of Cooperatives/Cooperative Society 3.2 Cooperative Accounting 3.3 Various Reports in Cooperative Accounting 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summar y 6.0 Tutor-Marked Assignment 7.0 References/Further Reading 1.0 INTRODUCTION Financial r eports are used to evaluate past operations and ar e the basis for management and oper ating decisions on future projects.
The board of directors use the reports for feedback on the financial status of the cooperative, to evaluate progress and to make informed decisions about future operations.
Manager s need accurate and timely information to run the day-to-day operations.
Creditors examine the financial reports when consider ing loans to the cooperative and accountants need accurate r ecords to prepare tax documents.
Accurate and current records are also important to members of the cooperative.
Records should show the net profit, the level of each member’s patronage account and the amount of equity members hold in the cooperative.
This facilitates distribution of patronage refunds and ensures that the cooperative is operating according to cooperative pr inciples.
In this unit, therefore, we shall look at the concept of cooperatives/the cooperative society as well as make an overview of cooper ative accounting.
2.0 OBJECTIVES At the end of this Unit, you should be able to: (i) Explain the concept of Cooperatives/Cooperative Society; (ii) Explain cooperative accounting; (iii) Enumerate and explain the var ious reports in cooperative accounting; (iv) Discuss the impor tance of accounting in Cooperatives.
3.0 MAIN CONTENT 3.1 CONCEPT OF COOPERATIVES/COOPERATIVE SOCIETY Ther e are certain organizations which undertake business activities with the prime objective of providing service to the members.
Although some amount of profit is essential to survive in the market, their main intention is not to generate profit and grow.
They pool available r esources from the members, utilize the same in the best possible manner, and the benefits are shared by the members.
The ter m “co-operation” is derived from the Latin word “co-operari”, where the wor d “co” means “with” and “operari” means “to work”.
Thus, co-operation means working together.
So, those who want to work together with some common economic objective can form a society which is termed “co-operative society”.
It is a voluntar y association of persons who work together to promote their economic interest.
It works on the principle of self-help as well as mutual help.
The main objective is to provide support to members.
Nobody joins a cooperative society to earn profit.
People come forward as a group, pool their individual resources, utilize them in the best possible manner, and derive some common benefit out of it.
Types of cooperative societies include the following: (i) Consumers’ cooperative society (ii) Producers’ cooperative society (iii) Cooper ative marketing society (iv) Cooperative credit society (v) Cooperative farming society (vi) Housing cooper ative society 3.2 COOPERATIVE ACCOUNTING The cooperative’s accounting system is a method of recording and reporting the financial results of its business transactions.
The bookkeeper records the business transactions of the cooperative in a daily journal.
These records are then used to generate various financial reports that provide an historical record of the cooperative’s business activity.
Three financial reports commonly used in business are the balance sheet, income statement, and the statement of cash flows.
They report the financial position of the cooperative, its performance over a given time per iod, and its ability to meet cash obligations.
They are the basis for planning futur e operations.
Each report contains different, but interrelated information that together give a complete picture of the financial operations of the cooperative.
Managers, bookkeepers and board members should be able to understand and interpret these reports so they can make infor med business decisions about the future of the cooper ative.
The balance sheet is used to r eport the financial position of the cooperative at a given point in time, usually at the end of a month, quarter, or year.
It shows the assets owned by the cooperative balanced against its liabilities and member equity.
Assets are listed on the left-hand side of a balance sheet while liabilities and member equity are listed on the right-hand side.
Total assets, or resources owned by the cooperative, must always equal the total liabilities and equity, or obligations of the cooperative.
Assets = Liabilities + Equity Assets: Resources owned by the cooperative Liabilities: Debts owed by the cooperative Equity: Member’s interest in the cooperative  Assets are shown as current assets and fixed assets.
Current assets include cash and those assets that are expected to be converted into cash within one year, such as saleable inventory and accounts receivable.
Fixed assets are items the cooperative will use during normal operations, such as buildings, machinery, and equipment.
Liabilities are shown in two categories-current or long-term.
Current liabilities are those paid within 1 year such as accounts payable, short-term operating loans, or the current portion of long-term loans.
Those due beyond the next 12 months, such as mortgages, are long-term liabilities.
The equity section of the balance sheet shows the amount of capital the members have invested in the cooperative through stock purchases, allocated reserves, and per -unit retains.
The income statement (or profit and loss account) or reports the results of all business transactions of the cooperative that occurred during a certain time per iod, such as month, quarter or year.
It shows the total dollar revenue of the cooperative, the total expenses, and the resulting net income (or loss) .
Revenue is the dollar amount earned by the cooperative fr om oper ations.
It can come from several sources, such as selling merchandise in a supply cooperative, charging members for services or marketing their products.
In multi- functional cooperatives it is useful to separate the revenue from each function on the income statement.
Gross revenue is the total profit the cooperative received from providing goods and services to members that can be used for business expenses.
Expenses ar e the costs incurred to provide ser vices to members.
They vary according to the industry, services pr ovided, and str ucture of the cooperative.
They should be categorized to determine the costs incurred to operate each phase of the cooper ative.
Administrative costs include the salar ies of sales staff, management, and office personnel.
Others are office supplies, insur ance, accountant fees, and advertising.
These expenses are not directly linked to operations, but ar e the support services it provides.
Some are considered fixed costs of operations because they do not var y with the level of output.
In respect of statement of cash flows, only those accounts that result in cash flowing in or out of the cooperative during the accounting period are included on the statement of cash flows.
This report shows the change that occurred in amount of cash from the opening to the closing of the cooperative’s balance sheets.
Three categories on the statement of cash flows are: operations, investment transactions, and financing transactions.
Cash flow from operations gives the net cash from providing goods and services to members and all other cash flows not from investment or financing transactions.
This includes net income, adjustments to net income, and changes in balance sheet items.
Adjustments to net income offset the non-cash items included on the income statement that do not result in an actual inflow or outflow of cash, such as depreciation, a gain (loss) from the sale of an asset, and deferr ed taxes.
Changes in balance sheet items ar e assets and liabilities where changes result in positive or negative cash flows, such as accounts r eceivable, accounts payable, patronage refunds payable, or other accrued expenses.
Cash flow from investment transactions include the purchase or sale of property and equipment, the purchase or redemption of equity in other organizations, and payments from long-term investments.
Cash flow from financing transactions include the acquisition or redemption of loans, the sale of capital stock, r edemption of member equities or payment of patronage refunds.
In summar y, the financial statements that are prepared in the cooperative accounting are same with f inancial statements that are made in other companies.
SELF-ASSESSMENT EXERCISE Explain the concept of cooperatives.
3.3 VARIOUS REPORTS IN COOPERATIVE ACCOUNTING Here, we wish to highlight the sample reports in cooperative accounting as follows: (i) Operational Reports Daily collection report Summar y of Daily collection report Monthly collection r eport  Summar y of booklets Pre-collection list Collection efficiency report Daily cash disbursement report Over-payment/withdrawal report Monthly loan released report Schedule of delinquents report Schedule of payments report Repayment report (ii) General Ledger Reports Trial balance report Financial condition report Financial condition monthly compar ative Financial condition year ly comparative (iii) Subsidiary Ledger Reports Member s master list Member s statement of account Member s subsidiar y ledger statement Subsidiary ledger status (iv) Computation Reports Savings interest computation report Distribution of dividend and patronage refund r eport 4.0 CONCLUSION The main objective of the cooperative form of business organization is to provide service rather than to earn profit.
The cooperative society is the only alternative to protect the weaker sections of the societ y and to protect the economic interest of the people.
I n certain situations when it is not possible to achieve the target by individual effort, collective effort in the form of cooperative society is preferred.
Cooperative accounting is not different from the accounting for non-business organizations.
5.0 SUMMARY In this Unit, we have been able to consider that: A cooperative society is a voluntary association of individuals having common needs who join hands for the achievement of common economic interest.
Its aim is to serve the inter est of the poorer sections of society through mutual help; The cooperative’s accounting system is a method of recording and reporting the financial results of its business transactions; Cooperative accounting is not different fr om the accounting for non- business organizations and other business organizations.
6.0 TUTOR- MARKED ASSIGNMENT 1.
Mention and explain the various reports in cooper ative accounting.
7.0 REFERENCES/FURTHER READING Chukwu, S. C. (2005).
Economics of Cooperative Business Enterprise.
Germany: Mabing.
Onuoha, E. and Budden, J. J.
(2002).
Principles of Cooper ation.
Enugu: Amazing Grace Printing and Publishing Co. United States Department of Agr iculture (1998).
Rural Business Cooperative Service, Cooperative Infor mation, Report 57.
UNIT 2 AN OVERVIEW OF ACCOUNTING CONTENTS 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objectives 3.0 An Overview of Accounting 3.1 Definition of Accounting 3.2 Accounting: “A Science or An Art” 3.3 The Accounting Cycle 3.4 Accounting Concepts and Conventions 3.5 Purpose / Uses of Accounting 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutor Marked Assignments 7.0 Reference and Further Readings 1.0 INTRODUCTION This unit will cover the meaning of Accounting, and consider, whether Accounting is a science or an art.
Derived from the definition, the accounting cycle will be explained before considering the concepts and conventions which guide in accounts prepar ation.
Lastly, the purpose and uses of accounts will be discussed with emphasis on the categor ies of user groups of accounting or financial information.
2.0 OBJECTIVES At the end of this unit, you will be able to: - Explain the meaning of accounting; - Say whether accounting is a science or an art; -Explain the accounting cycle; -Enumerate and explain accounting concepts and conventions; -Discuss the uses of accounting.
3.0 AN OVERVIEW OF ACCOUNTING 3.1 Definition of Accounting Accounting can be viewed fr om different perspectives by authors, teachers and practitioners, but can best be thought of as a process of handling infor mation of economic or financial in nature.
This infor mation forms the basis for financial reporting.
The process could be seen in the light of the following: - As an activity per formed by Accountants and their supporting staff; - As a system comprising several inter related and interdependent parts; - As a technique of management for planning and control purposes, and - As a discipline of study.
Accounting is basically a service function designed to inform management and other interested parties like analysts, investors, cr editor s, shareholders, about the financial implications and their effects on the organisation.
From the foregoing, therefore, Accounting can be said to be the language of business; it can be seen as a management tool, as their reports provide the basis for planning, and initiating control measures.
A generally accepted definition of Accounting has it that it is “the art of recording, classifying and summarising in a significant manner and in terms of money, transactions and events which are, in part at best, of a financial character, and interpreting the result thereof”.
At this point, let us mention the two major branches of accounting, which are: - Financial accounting - Management accounting.
Self-Assessment Exercise Explain what Accounting means.
3.2 Accounting: A Science or An Art?
Arguments exist as to whether Accounting is a science or an art.
Interestingly, these arguments reveal some features of accounting which may be of benefit, especially, to a new entrant into the discipline, to understand its methodology.
Accounting is not a natural science like chemistry or physics, although by the benevolence of more modern definitions of science, it is scientific to the extent that it applies scientific methods of observation, experiment and measurement in the course of processing financial information for use by management.
On the other hand, art stresses the human attributes of imagination and judgement.
Accounting tends to draw from both science and ar t, but cannot be said to belong to either one.
As a science, it is a body of organised knowledge and uses systematic procedur es to obtain results.
However, it is not an exact science because its results are not conclusive.
For example, given the same set of economic data, two Accountants can reach different conclusions.
On the other hand, it is not an exact art because it employs a great deal of human skill rather than judgement.
From the foregoing, accounting can be referred to as a management science because it is a tool of management for planning and control.
It can be called a social science as well.
I n conclusion, therefore, accounting is neither science nor art in the strictest sense of it.
Self-Assessment Exercise Is accounting a science or an art?
3.3 The Accounting Cycle From the generally accepted definition of accounting in 3.1 above, derives the Accounting Cycle, which refer s to series of stages necessary to produce the financial reports.
The stages are: - identifying of transactions - measuring of economic changes - r ecording of transactions in the r elevant books - communicating of financial information associated with economic events.
Please, note that the objective of the Accounting system is to produce financial reports about the organisation.
Self-Assessment Exercise Explain the Accounting Cycle.
3.4 Accounting Concepts and Conventions There are seven basic concepts or principles in Accounting, modified by three conventions, which have been adopted as a general guide to practice.
3.4.1 The Business Entity Concept This concept suggests that the business is separate from the owner.
Therefore, all accounts are kept in respect of the business entities which are distinct from persons who own or manage them.
It then follows that the personal financial affairs of the owners are never inter mingled with those of the business for which the accounting is being performed.
3.4.2 Money as a common unit of Account This concept speaks to the fact that accounts are expressed in monetary terms which can be added or subtracted.
This gives a meaningful financial description.
The implication of this concept is that any information that cannot be measured in naira terms, such as the quality and exper ience of wor kers, is usually not included in the financial statements.
3.4.3 The Cost Concept The historical cost concept, as this may be called, says that assets (resources acquired by a business) are reflected at cost, which means that for their subsequent treatment in the measurement of the income of the business, the price paid on such acquisitions form the basis instead of their real or market values.
3.4.4 The Going Concern Concept This concept assumes that the business will continue operations for the foreseeable future, that is, it has no plans to either liquidate or cut down significantly any major line of its operations in the nearest future.
3.4.5 The Accrual Concept The concept accommodates all revenues and expenses to be received or charged in a given accounting period irr espective of what is actually received or paid.
3.4.6 The Concept of Duality The duality concept determines that the financial situation of the enterprise be represented in terms of the basic accounting equation.
Thus, it recognises that each transaction involves two entries in the same set of accounts, that is, ever y credit must have a corresponding debit and vice versa.
This will be treated in details under the Double Entry system.
3.4.7 Realization Concept The realization concept assumes that revenue is ear ned on the day which it is realised, and that is, when goods are tr ansfer red to the customer in exchange for a valuable consideration.
3.4.8 Accounting Conventions You will recall that we said that there are three conventions which guide the application of the concepts in practice, and they are as follows: - Conser vatism / Pr udence Here, the profit is understated while all possible losses are anticipated and taken into books, all possible future profits will be ignor ed.
- Consistency There should be consistency in the use of a particular accounting method for a reasonable per iod of time so that comparisons between accounting periods will be meaningful.
- Materiality The size of an amount will inf luence its treatment in the books of account, depending on individual entities.
Therefore, what may be considered material in any circumstance is judgemental.
Self-Assessment Exercise Name and discuss four accounting concepts and two conventions.
3.5 Purpose / Uses of Account ing We can categorise the various uses of accounts and their user groups as follows: - Direct User s The dir ect uses of accounts made by the managers and shareholder s are for planning and control purposes.
While the managers use accounting infor mation to assess the viability of the business and to make future decisions, shareholders require the information to know whether the business is doing well or not, profit-wise.
- Indirect Users Those in this gr oup include financial analysts, cr editors, investor s, tax authorities, employees and customers.
For example, the prospective investor would like to be assured of the security and profitability of his investment; the creditor will determine whether a business will be able to pay its debt as and when due; the employees will even use the information to bargain for a better package; and the tax authorities will be able to calculate the tax liabilities.
Self-Assessment Exercise Discuss the user groups of accounting infor mation.
4.0 CONCLUSION Accounting can be regarded as the language of business.
The infor mation, when generated, serves both as tool for planning and control, and evidence of financial position.
Shareholders, managers, financial analysts, creditors, investors and the tax authorities, use accounting information as of benefit.
5.0 SUMMARY In this unit, we have defined accounting and classified it into two major branches.
We have also explained that Accounting is neither a science nor an art, but can best be r egarded as a management science discipline.
Attempts were made to explain the accounting cycle.
Also, we discussed the seven accounting concepts and three conventions.
Lastly, the uses of accounting information were discussed under the categories of the direct and indirect users.
6.0 TUTOR-MARKED ASSIGNMENTS 1.
Define accounting and explain its major processes.
2.
Identify the major users of accounting infor mation and explain the types of decisions for which each group may require accounting information.
7.0 REFERENCE AND FURTHER READINGS Anao, A.R.
(1989).
An Introduction to Financial Accounting.
Ibadan: Longman Niger ia Limited.
Flynn, David et.
Al.
(2000) .
Fundamental Accounting 4th Edition, Kenwyn: Juta & Co. Limited.
Gabbutt, Douglas (1972).
Carter s Advanced Accounts London: Pitman Publishers.
Igben, R.O.
(2004).
Financial Accounting Made Simple (Volume 1) Lagos: ROI Publishers.
Wood, Frank (1990).
Business Accounting I 5th Edition London: Longman Company Limited.
UNIT 3 BASIC BOOK KEEPING CONTENTS 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objectives 3.0 Basic Book-keeping 3.1 Meaning of Book-Keeping 3.2 Objectives of Book-Keeping 3.3 Books of Account 3.4 Accounting Infor mation Generating Process 3.5 The Double Entry System 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summar y 6.0 Tutor Marked Assignments 7.0 Reference and Fur ther Readings 1.0 INTRODUCTION This unit is packaged to deal with preliminary matters relating to recording procedures in Accounting – Basic Book-keeping and the Double Entry System.
Her e, we shall discuss the meaning and objectives of book-keeping.
What are books of account?
And how do we explain the Accounting Information Generating Process?
These questions would r eceive answers in this unit.
In addition, we would explain and apply the principles of the double entry system in recording business transactions.
2.0 OBJECTIVES At the end of this unit, you will be able to: - Define book-keeping; - Discuss the objectives of book-keeping; - Discuss the books of account; - Explain the Accounting Information Generating process; - Describe and apply the principles of double entry system of book-keeping.
3.0 BASIC BOOK-KEEPING 3.1 Definition of Book-Keeping Book-keeping which resulted from a practical business need, can be said to be a subset of Accounting or a record-making place of the accounting process.
It can be defined as “the act of recording all money  transactions so that the financial position of an undertaking and its relationship to both its proprietors and to outside persons can be readily ascertained”.
It is important to note that book-keeping lays emphasis on regular and systematic method of recording, how the records are maintained in the books, the right classification and summarisation so that the users of accounts can find the information contained in the books meaningful.
The transactions for which record are maintained and the nature and scope of the records themselves dif fer from business to business.
Self-Assessment Exercise What is book-keeping?
3.2 Objectives of Book-Keeping From the meaning of book-keeping given in 3.1 above, the objectives of book-keeping include the following: - To provide infor mation about the conduct and position of the business; - To provide a permanent and systematic record of financial transactions; - To provide record for the value of var ious items of transactions; - To ensure the arithmetical accuracy of financial records; - To ascertain the financial worth of an undertaking at any given time; - To provide records of profit or loss at any given time; - To assist in the detection of fraud and other irregularities; - To provide financial records for comparative purposes; - To provide aid to planning and control; - To provide a basis for taxation.
Self-Assessment Exercise Discuss the objectives of Book- keeping.
3.3 Books of Account The Books of account consist of the subsidiary books and the ledger.
Recording of transactions start from the subsidiar y books to the ledger.
Subsidiary Books The subsidiar y books, the Day books, books of original entry, and the books of prime entry all mean one and the same thing.
These books exist to provide periodic totals for posting into the ledger.
Please, note that transactions are not normally posted from the source documents (invoices, receipts, etc.)
directly to the ledger.
Subsidiary books are books into which transactions are recorded on a daily basis from the source documents and from which postings are made periodically to the relevant accounts in the ledger.
This practice prevents the ledger from containing too many details.
The subsidiar y books normally used in financial accounting are: o Sales Day book (or sales journal) for recording credit sales.
o Purchase Day book (or purchases journal) for recording credit purchases.
o Retur ns Inward Day book (or returns inward journal or sales returns day book) for recording returns from customers.
o Retur ns Outward Day book (or returns outward jour nal or pur chases returns day book) for recording returns to suppliers.
o Cash book for recording receipt and payment of money.
o Jour nal proper for recording other transactions like: - the purchase and sale of fixed assets on credit; - opening entries; - correction of errors; - transfer from one account to another; - taking of goods by the owner from the business for his private use; - end-of- period adjustments; and - any other transaction which cannot be recorded in any of the other subsidiary books.
I llustration: Purchase of fixed asset on credit Ndale Systems Limited purchased a motor vehicle on credit at a cost of N1.8 million from Coscharis Motors on 31st October, 2005.
The journal to record this tr ansaction will appear as follows: DR CR N N Motor Vehicle Account 1,800,000 Coscharis Account 1,800,000 Being cost of motor vehicle purchased on credit from Coscharis Motors on 31st October, 2005.
Ledger The ledger is the main or principal book of account where accounts are maintained for income, assets, expenses as well as individuals (or organisations) who may be debtors or cr editor s to the firm.
Entries made or posted into the ledger (usually in summar ised form) are expected to be preserved over a reasonable period.
As we said earlier , the ledger is written-up periodically, and is the ultimate destination of all entries made in the subsidiary books.
Below is an example of a Ledger Account: Dr. Motor Vehicle Account Cr..
Date Particulars Folio Amount Date Particular Folio Amount Self-Assessment Exercise Discuss the Books of Account with emphasis on the relationship/correlation between the books of original entry and the ledger.
3.4 Accounting Information Generating Process This process involves a sequence of activities from gathering, sorting and extracting data, from the sour ce documents, to the preparation of  financial reports.
This process is cler ical, fairly routine and at times mechanistic.
The figure below says it all about the nature and sequence of the activities involved: SOURCE DOCUMENTS (Invoices, Receip ts , B ank Tellers, etc.)
Recorded in S U BSIDIARY BOOKS Posted to THE LEDGER (Debtors/Creditors/General Ledger) Checked by trial balance FINANCIAL REPORTS The Information Generating Process Self-Assessment Exercise Explain the Accounting Information Generating Process.
3.5 The Double Entry System The Double Entry system of book-keeping hinges on the “Duality Concept” which we explained in Unit 2.
Recognising that every transaction involves the “receiving” and the “giving” of values, the double entry system (or principle) requires that the dual effect of every transaction should be recorded.
For ever y debit entry, there is a corresponding credit entry and vice versa.
Let us note here that credit is given to the giver of the value always while the receiver is debited.
Therefore, every transaction has to be recorded twice between accounts in the same set of books to ensure that a complete record is obtained.
This pr inciple has its or igin from the Italian merchants of the 14th century.
Let us illustrate with the following example:  Olabisi & Company Limited sells a generator to Mrs. A.J.
Thompson for N2,000.00 only.
This is a sales transaction where there is a purchaser and a seller.
The company is parting with a generator and receiving cash in return; Mrs. Thompson is giving away cash and getting a generator in r eturn.
With the double entry r ule in mind – “debit the receiver , credit the giver”, we shall record the sales transaction as follows: In Thompson’s Books: Dr.
Purchases Account Cr.
Olabisi & Co 12,000.00 (Cash) Dr. Cash Account Cr.
Olabisi & Co 12,000.00 (Purchases) In Olabisi’s Books: Dr. Cash Account Cr.
Thompson 12,000.00 (Purchases) Dr.
Purchases Account Cr.
Thompson 12,000.00 (Cash) In double entry system of recording, it is necessary to analyse the effect of each transaction in respect of “who gives and who receives” to determine who to debit and who to credit.
As a guide in posting ledger account, entries on the DEBIT side incr eases in assets, expenses and  losses while entries on the CREDIT side increases in liabilities, income and profits.
Self-Assessment Exercise Describe the double entry system of book-keeping.
4.0 C ONCLUSION Book-keeping can be seen as a record-making phase of the accounting process, the activity of which, amongst others, provide meaningful infor mation about the conduct and position of the business to users of accounts.
The information generating process of accounts involves a sequence of activities from gathering, sorting and extracting data from the source documents to the preparation of financial reports.
Necessary entries, made in both the books of original entry and the ledger s, should obey the double entr y pr inciple of book-keeping which identifies the “giver” and “receiver ” in every transaction and “debits” or “credits” accordingly.
The double entry system has the added advantage of maintaining a complete record of transactions both from the viewpoint of the business and those the business deals with.
5.0 S UMMARY We have seen book-keeping as laying emphasis on the regular and systematic method of recording that provide infor mation to users of accounts.
We also considered the objectives of book-keeping in details.
In addition, we wer e able to explain the accounting information gener ating process as well as answer that the books of account consist of the subsidiary books and the ledger .
Finally, the principle of double entry has told us that for every debit, there must be a corresponding cr edit entry, and this forms the basis of recording economic transactions to show the effect which is either an increase or a decrease in the par ticular account concerned.
6.0 T UTOR-MARKED ASSIGNMENTS 1.
Define book-keeping and discuss its objectives.
2.
(a) Explain the double entry system of recording transactions.
(b) Indicate which account should be debited or credited in the following transactions: (i) Cash paid into business by owner; ( ii) Rent paid by owner of business; ( iii) Purchase of goods for cash;  (iv) Sale of goods on credit to OKC; (v) Purchase of motor vehicle on credit from OMOBA Motors Ltd; (vi) Payment of electricity expenses; (vii) Cash withdrawn from business by owner; (viii) Receipt of loan from Benevolent Bank; (ix) Cash received from OKC (Credit customer); and (x) Remittance to OMOBA Motors Ltd. (Creditor).
7.0 R EFERENCE AND FURTHER READINGS Anao, A.R.
(1989).
An Introduction to Financial Accounting.
Ibadan: Longman Niger ia Limited.
ACCA (2004).
Preparing Financial Statements.
Middlesex: A – T. Foulks Lynch Limited.
Gabbutt, Douglas (1972).
Carter s Advanced Accounts London: Pitman Publishers.
Glautier, M.W.
E. & Underdown, B.
Accounting Theor y and Practice.
London: Pitman Publishers.
Igben, R.O.
(2004).
Financial Accounting Made Simple (Volume 1) Lagos: ROI Publishers.
Oyekanmi, Abiodun ( 2003).
Introductory Financial Accounting for Professionals.
NOOKIA Ventures Ltd. Rowland, S.W.
(1988).
Principles of Accounting.
London: Pitman Publishers.
UNIT 4 THE CASH BOOK, PETTY CASH BOOK AND THE IMPREST SYSTEM CONTENTS 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objectives 3.0 The Cash Book, Petty Cash Book and the Imprest System 3.1 Nature and Uses of the Cash Book 3.2 Treatment of items in the Cash Book 3.3 Columnar Cash Books 3.4 The Petty Cash Book and Voucher 3.5 The Imprest System 3.6 Posting the Petty Cash Book 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summar y 6.0 Tutor Marked Assignments 7.0 Reference and Fur ther Readings 1.0 INTRODUCTION In Unit 3, we listed the cash book as one of the books of prime entr y.
It is also a ledger.
The existence of the cash book in any organisation, be it profit- making or non-profit making, needs not be overstressed because of dealings with money (cash- in- hand or cash-at-bank).
And the recording procedures for cash using the cash book become ver y essential.
This unit will deal with the natur e and uses of the cash book as well as the treatment of items in the cash book.
Columnar cash books will be explained and demonstrated also.
Furthermore, the petty cash book and the imprest system will not be left out.
2.0 OBJECTIVES At the end of this unit, you will be able to: - Discuss the nature and uses of the cash book; - Distinguish between the treatments given to various items in the cash book; - Demonstrate the columnar cash books; - Define a petty cash book and the imprest system; - Effect posting in the petty cash book using the petty cash vouchers.
3.0 THE CASH BOOK, PETTY CASH BOOK AND THE IMPREST SYSTEM 3.1 Nature and Uses of the Cash Book One of the main books of account is the cash book.
Kindly recall that we had said earlier that the cash book is both a subsidiar y book and a ledger.
It is a book of prime entry where cash receipts and payments are recor ded immediately after transactions have taken place and on daily basis, and a ledger where the daily recorded transactions are summar ised periodically and transferred to the final accounts.
From the foregoing, please note that the cash book is not posted into the ledger but balanced and the relevant figures carried to the balance sheet.
Usually, the cashier maintains the cash book.
The operation of a cash book is very important in accounting because it provides a means of controlling the amount held at all times.
The dual use of the cash book in an organisation becomes clear when we consider or take cognisance of the fact that cash constitutes the most fluid form of asset of the organisation which is easily prone to losses or abuses.
Self-Assessed Exercise Explain the dual use of the cash book.
3.2 Treatment of items in the Cash Book Contra Entry: Contra entry is when the double entry for a transaction appears on both sides of the cash book.
Therefore, contra entries do not require recor ding in another account because entry has taken place within the cash book.
These entries are made when surplus cash is transferred to the bank or the withdrawal of cash from the bank for use.
The entries here will be to credit cash and debit bank or debit cash and credit bank in the columnar cash book which we shall consider in 3.3.
Cash Cash receipts are debited in the cash column while payments are credited in the cash column.
Cheques Cheques received from customers are debited in the bank column while cheques issued to suppliers are credited.
Cash Discounts Cash discounts are rebates granted to a buyer or debtor for making cash payments within a shorter time period than the normal cr edit period.
This implies that the seller accepts an amount smaller than the invoice value in full settlement of the account.
If it is a two – column cash book (to be considered shortly), they are posted directly to the ledger but if it is 3 three – column cash book, they will be recorded in the cash book.
Self-Assessed Exercise Explain the treatment of any two items in the cash book.
3.3 Columnar Cash Books Single – Column Cash Book Dr. Cash Account Cr.
Date Particulars Folio Amount Date Particular Folio Amount (N) (N) The above is a format for the single – column cash book, which is like a ledger account with one column each for debit and cr edit; thus, making provision for cash transaction only.
This is used to r ecord the receipts and payments of cash, typical of small businesses whose transactions do not involve cheques/bank.
Two – Column Cash Book This is the commonest for m of cash book.
As the name implies, the two – column cash book makes provision for two columns, one each for cash and bank transactions.
The for mat is shown as follows:  Dr. Cash Account Cr.
Date Particulars Folio Cash Bank Date Particular Folio Cash Bank Here, all cash and cheque receipts are debited in the appropriate column while payments by cash and cheque are credited accordingly.
The cash book is usually balanced at the end of the month.
Example: Bello Trading Company brought forward balances of N2,000.00 and N13,200.00 for cash and bank respectively, from June, 2004 account.
The following tr ansactions took place: N July 2 Cheque received 11,500.00 July 3 Cash sales 8,200.00 July 6 Paid rent by cash 3,500.00 July 7 Banked par t of cash 5,000.00 July 14 Cash sales (paid through the Bank) 4,000.00 July 23 Paid by cheque 17,700.00 July 29 Cash withdrawal for use 12,000.00 July 31 Wages paid in cash 11,800.00 You are required to write-up a two-column cash book for this company and balance off at the end of July, 2004.
Solution: Bello Trading Company Dr. Cash Account Cr.
Date Particulars Folio Cash Bank Date Particular Folio Cash Bank 1/7/04 Balance b/f 2,000.00 13,000.00 6/7/04 Rent 3,500.00 2/7/04 Cheque 11,500.00 7/7/04 Bank 3/7/04 Sales 8,200.00 23/7/04 Cheque 5,000.00 17,700.00 7/7/04 Cash 5,000.00 29/7/04 Cash 12,000.00 14/7/04 Sales 4,000.00 31/7/04 Wages 29/7/04 Bank 12,000.00 31/7/04 Balance c/d 11,800.0 4,000.00 0 22,200.00 33,700.0 33,700.0 0 1,900.00 0 1/8/04 Balance b/d 1,900.00 22,200.0 4,000.00 0  Three – Column Cash Book A thr ee-column cash book, as the name suggests, makes provision for a third column (in addition to the two columns for cash and bank) for recor ding cash discounts allowed to customers and received from suppliers.
Discounts allowed to debtors are listed as debits while those received from credits are credited.
The discount columns save time although they are not part of the double entr y system because they are not expected to balance each and also in posting out.
Total debits, at the end of the period, are debited to the Discount Allowed account while the total credits are transferred to the Discount Received account.
The corresponding entries are usually made in the various personal ledger accounts of debtors and creditors.
We shall illustrate the three-column cash book now.
Example: Mike started a small business with N80,000.00 on January 2, 2005 which he paid into a bank account for the business on the same date.
His transactions for the rest of the month were as follows: 5/1/05 Purchases by cheque N27,300.00 6/1/05 Credit purchases N25,200.00 Electricity paid by cheque N500.00; Rent N700.00 by cheque 7/1/05 Drew cash for office use N1,200.00 Sales by cheque N42,520.00 Sales by cash N480.00 Sales on credit N50,000.00 8/1/05 Paid creditors by cheque N15,100.00 and r eceived discount of N300.00 9/1/05 Cash sales N17,115.00; cash wages paid N500.00 10/1/05 Paid into bank the sales made on 9/1/05; Stationer y bought by cash N50.00 12/1/05 Received from customers cheques for N39,200.00 and allowed discount of N800.00 15/1/05 Drew cash from bank for office use N200.00 16/1/05 Servicing and repairs by cash N120.00 Purchases by cash N20,000.00 Purchases by cheque N5,000.00 Purchases on credit N45,000.00 20/1/05 Sales by cash N37,500.00 Sales by cheques N17,000.00 22/1/05 Paid creditors N27,900.00 by cheque and received discount of N100.00  Cash sales N2,000.00 which was immediately lodged into the bank.
24/1/05 Payments by cheque: Rent N1,200.00 Rates N300.00 Wages N2,000.00 28/1/05 Salar ies by cheque N3,600.00 30/1/05 Cash lodged into bank N10,000.00 31/1/05 Drew cheque for petty cash N200.00 Required: Three – column cash book of Mike for the month of January, 2005.
Solution: Mike Trading Company Dr. Cash Book Cr.
Date Particulars Disc.
Cash Bank Date Particular Disc.
Cash Bank All’d Rec’d 2/1/05 Capital 80,000.00 5/1/05 Purchases 27,300.00 7/1/05 Bank (contra) 1,200.00 6/1/05 Electricity 500.0 0 7/1/05 Sales 480.00 42,520.00 6/1/05 Rent 700.0 0 9/1/05 Sales 17,115.00 7/1/05 Cash (contra) 1,200.00 10/1/05 Cash (contra) 17,115.00 8/1/05 Trade Creditors 32 0.00 15,100.00 12/1/05 Trade Debtors8 0 0 .00 39,200.00 9/1/05 Wages 500.00 15/1/05 Bank (contra) 200.00 10 /1/05 Bank (contra) 17 ,115.00 20/1/05 Sales 37,500.00 17,000.00 10 /1/05 Stationery 50.00 22/1/05 Sales 2,000.00 15 /1/05 Cash (contra) 200.0 0 30/1/05 Cash (contra) 10,000.00 16 /1/05 Rep airs 120.00 31/1/05 Bank (contra) 200.00 16 /1/05 Purchases 20 ,000.00 5,000.00 22 /1/05 Trade Creditors 10 0.00 27,900.00 24 /1/05 Rent 1,200.00 24 /1/05 Rates 300.00 24 /1/05 Wages 2,000.00 28 /1/05 Salaries 10 ,000.00 3,600.00 30 /1/05 Bank (contra) 200.00 31 /1/05 Cash (contra) 8,910.00 12 2,635.00 800 .00 56,695.00 207 ,835.00 31 /1/05 Balance c/d 42 0.00 56 ,695.00 20 7,835.00 1/2/05 Balance b/d 8,910.00 122 ,635.00  Self-Assessment Exercise Discuss the columnar cash books, pointing out their major differences.
3.4 The Petty Cash Book and Voucher It is certain that in almost every organisation, there will be a great deal of small cash payments to be made.
Records of these payments could be kept separate from the main cash book.
The petty cash book is a record, in columnar format, of small cash payments made on a day-to-day basis.
The columnar ruling of the petty cash books is designed to enable small payments to be analysed according to expenditure head and posted in totals to the ledger periodically.
This book is maintained by the petty cashier under the supervision of the main cashier.
The petty cash voucher shows the amount of money required the purpose and nature of expenditure involved, and the account to be char ged.
The petty cash voucher is required before making any payment.
It must be duly author ised before payment is made out of the petty cash float.
The format of the voucher varies from organisation to organisation.
However, it is the instrument from which posting is done to the petty cash book.
Self-Assessment Exercise Explain the petty cash book and the petty cash voucher.
3.5 The Imprest System This is basically a system of funding petty cash which reimburses the petty cashier with the total amount expended.
By this, the total amount which the petty cashier has is restored to the float (fixed amount) with which he started.
Therefore, total payments added to the imprest balance will, at all times, remain equal to the float.
Self-Assessment Exercise What is the Imprest System?
3.6 Posting the Petty Cash Book We shall use the following exercise to illustrate posting into the petty cash book: The following is a summary of petty cash transactions of a business organisation for the month of June, 2004.
The business maintains a petty cash float of N5,000.00.
N June 1 Petty cash float given to petty cashier June 3 Postages 200 June 5 Transport fare 450 June 8 Cleaning materials 350 June 9 Stationery 170 June 14 Petrol for deliver y van 880 June 16 Taxi fare 390 June 20 Postages 180 June 21 Disinfectant for cleaning toilet 280 June 23 Petrol for general manager s car 660 June 24 Service of delivery van 400 June 28 Writing materials 310 June 30 Transport fare 120 You are required to rule up a petty cash book with columns for Postages, Transport, Travelling, Cleaning, Stationer y and Motor Expenses and enter the month s transactions, entering the re-imbursement on 30th June, 2004 necessary to restore the imprest.
Dr.
Petty Cash Book Cr.
Payments Receipts Date Details Total Postages Transport Cleaning Stat ionery Mot or & Travel Expenses 5,000 1/6/04 Cash float 3/6/04 Postages 200 200 5/6/04 Transport far e 450 450 8/6/04 Cleaning mater ials 350 350 9/6/04 Stationery 170 170 14/6/04 Petrol for deliver y van 880 880 16/6/04 Taxi fare 390 390 20/6/04 Postages 180 180 21/6/04 Disinfectant 280 280 23/6/04 Petrol for GM s car 660 660 24/6/04 Service of delivery van 400 400 28/6/04 Writing mater ials 310 310 30/6/04 Transport far e 120 120 30/6/04 Balance c/d 5,000 4,390 380 960 630 480 1,940 610 1/7/04 Balance b/d 610 4,390 1/7/04 Reimbursed 5,000  The double entry for the disbursements during June, 2004 will be completed by posting the total of each of the payments columns to the debit of the appr opriate ledger accounts.
For example, N380.00 will be debited to postages account, N960.00 debited to transport and travelling account and so on.
Self-Assessment Exercise Explain how posting is made in the petty cash book.
4.0 CONCLUSION The cash book is both a book of original entry and a ledger.
Entries into the cash book must obey the double entry principle.
The cash book provides a means of controlling cash.
To take care of sundr y small day- to-day cash payments in an organisation, the petty cash book becomes relevant.
It plays the role of a subsidiar y book.
The funding of petty cash is through the imprest system.
5.0 SUMMARY We have discussed the nature and uses of the cash book as well as distinguished between the treatments given to various items in the cash book.
Also, we explained and demonstrated the use of the columnar cash books.
Furthermore, we considered the usefulness of the petty cash book and voucher, as well as the imprest system.
Amongst other advantages, the imprest system enables control to be kept over the series of frequent small expenditur e of the organisation because all petty cash disbursements must be duly authorised/approved.
6.0 TUTOR-MARKED ASSIGNMENTS 1.
Discuss the advantages of the imprest system.
2.
Adekoye Nigeria Ltd. operates its petty cash account on the imprest system.
It maintains its imprest at a figure of N56,000 on the first day of each month.
At 31 May, 2002, the petty cashier had a balance of N3,100 at hand.
During the month of June, 2002, the following petty cash transactions arose: 1st Paid bus fares 900 2nd Bought stationer y 4,800 7th Bought trade journals 2,400 8th Bus fare 1,280  11th Bought stationery items 2,320 12th Bought printer ribbon 740 14th Postage 1,160 15th Paid for newspapers 1,800 16th Repair of giant stapling machine 700 18th Bought postage stamps 4,000 20th Bought wrapping paper 1,100 22nd Biro pens 3,600 25th Paper clips 1,440 28th Repair of computer printer 1,200 29th Transport fare 2,300 You are required to draw up a petty cash book with analysis columns for transport and travelling, stationery, journals, and newspapers, postage, and general expenses.
7.0 REFERENCE AND FURTHER READINGS Akplu, H.F. (1985).
I ntroduction to Accounting.
London: Macmillan Publishers Limited.
Anao, A.R.
(1989).
An Introduction to Financial Accounting.
I badan: Longman Nigeria Limited.
Flynn, David et.
Al.
(2000).
Fundamental Accounting 4th Edition.
Kenwyn: Juta & Co. Limited.
Igben, R.O.
(2004).
Financial Accounting Made Simple (Volume 1) Lagos: ROI Publishers.
Oyekanmi, Abiodun (2003).
Introductory Financial Accounting for Professionals.
Calabar: NOOKIA Ventures Ltd. Whitehead, Geoffrey (1986).
Success in Principles of Accounting.
London: John Murray Publishers.
Wood, Frank (1990).
Business Accounting I West African Edition.
London: Longman Company Limited.
UNIT 5 FINANCIAL STATEMENTS Table of Contents 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objectives 3.0 Financial Statements 3.1 Objectives and Structure of Financial Reports 3.2 Trading and Profit and Loss Account 3.3 Balance Sheet 3.4 Capital and Revenue items 3.5 Treatment of Account Receivable and Payable 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutor Marked Assignments 7.0 Reference and Further Readings 1.0 INTRODUCTION In Unit 2, we learnt that accounting is a service function which is designed to inform management and other interested parties (like the investors, analysts, creditors, shareholders) about the financial implications and their effects on the organisation.
Therefore, the generated accounting information are presented to various inter ested parties for their respective decisions.
How are the accounting information presented?
This will be the focus of Unit 5.
We shall find out that accounting information ar e presented through the medium of periodic financial statements or financial reports, done in consonance with specified accounting and legal standards relating to the style and content of presentation.
We shall look at the objectives and structure of financial reports, and discuss the Trading and Profit and Loss Account, and the Balance Sheet, under the structure.
Also, capital and revenue components of the structure will be explained.
Finally, we shall consider the treatment of account receivable and payable items of the reports.
2.0 OBJECTIVES At the end of this unit, you will be able to: - Discuss the objectives and structure of financial reports; - Discuss the components, and demonstrate the formats of the Trading and Profit and Loss Account and the Balance Sheet  - Distinguish between the capital and revenue items of the financial statements; and - Discuss the difference between Accounts receivable and accounts payable.
3.0 FINANCIAL STATEMENTS 3.1 Objectives and Structure of Financial Reports The periodic financial reports comprise two major statements – the Trading and Profit and Loss Account, and the Balance Sheet.
While the Trading and Profit and Loss account measures the net income or surplus ar ising from the operations during the period under review, in order to know how actual profits compared with the expected, the balance sheet discloses the financial position of the enterprise (relating to the assets, liabilities and capital) as at a particular date, usually the last day of the accounting period.
The Trading and Profit and Loss account provides the yardstick for measuring the extent to which an enterprise has succeeded in attaining its profit making objective.
It also shows the relationship between costs and revenues which serve as basis for decision aimed at improving future performance.
Self-Assessed Exercise Discuss the objectives and structure of financial r eports.
3.2 Trading and Profit and Loss Account The Trading and Profit and Loss account matches a period s revenues with the costs associated with generating those revenues.
Two components of the trading and profit and loss account are: - Trading account which discloses gross profit; - Profit and Loss account which discloses the net profit.
However, for a manufacturer, it is also useful to prepare “Manufacturing Account” which we shall consider later.
Gross profit is the difference between sales proceeds and the cost of goods sold in a trading account while net profit is the gross profit less the expenses of the business in the profit and loss account.
The trading and profit and loss account of a sole trader (concerned with buying and selling) using the vertical format would appear as follows:  Trading and Profit and Loss account for the period ended 30/6/xx N N Sales X Opening Stock X Add: Pur chases X Available Stock X Less: Closing Stock X Cost of Sales X Gross Profit X Less: Wages X Rent X Sundry expenses X Total Expenses X Net Profit X 3.3 The Balance Sheet The balance sheet, which is often prepared on the historical cost basis, can be seen as a collection of the residual values of assets, liabilities and capital carried over from one accounting per iod into the next, to continue the running of the enter prise as a going concern.
Thus, the balance sheet lists a business s assets, liabilities and capital at a particular point in time.
Assets are stated at book value, which may be historical or market value, but not at realisable value (Book value is the amount of money that was paid to acquire a particular asset while the net realisable value of an asset is the money that might be possible to get by selling the asset).
Fixed Asset is any asset, tangible or intangible, acquired for retention by an entity for the purpose of providing a service to the business, and not held for resale in the normal cour se of trading.
The balance sheet of a sole trader using the vertical format would appear as follows: Balance Sheet as at 30/6/x N N Fixed Assets: Vehicles X Current Assets: Stock X Debtors X Cash at bank X Cash in hand X X Less: Curr ent Liabilities: Creditors X Net current assets (CA less CL) X Total Assets X Capital Account: Balance at beginning of per iod X Add: Net Profit for period X X Less: Drawings for period X Retained profit X Balance at end of period X Let us look at an example: The following trial balance was extr acted from the books of Alaba Enterprises on 31st December, 2004: Dr .
Cr.
N N Purchases 368,400 Sales 517,900 Drawings 14,100 Returns inwar ds 7,300 Returns outwards 6,200 Discount allowed 10,200 Discount received 8,400 Debtors 45,000 Creditors 57,100 Stock 34,300 Freehold Premises at cost 46,000  Motor Vehicles at cost 12,000 Provision for depreciation on motor vehicles 4,500 Provision for depreciation on furniture 1,000 Cash at bank 5,000 Cash in hand 1,900 Salaries 40,600 Carriage inwards 22,200 Carriage outwards 10,300 Printing Stationer y 3,600 Electricity and water 14,900 Insurance 6,800 General Expenses 34,800 Provision for bad debt 200 Bad debt written off 400 Capital 70,000 Rent received 3,800 Commission received ______ 11,200 68,300 68,300 The following information should be taken into account: (i) Stock 31st December, 2004 was valued at N31,800 ( ii) Accrued expenses at 31/12/04 were salaries N1,800, and electricity N80 ( iii) Prepaid expenses at 31/12/04 were insurance N400 and gener al expenses N500 ( iv) Adjust provision for bad debt to 2% of debtors and create provision for discount allowable at 1% of debtors.
(v) Commission due but yet to be received on 31/12/04 amounted to N800 (vi) Charge depreciation on fixed assets as follows: Furniture 20% on cost Motor vehicles 10% on cost (vii) Rent received in advance at 31/12/04 amounted to N200 (viii) Goods costing N1,200 were taken by owner for private use.
This was yet to be recorded in the cash book.
Using the vertical formats, you are requir ed to prepare the Trading and Profit and Loss Account for the year ended 31st December, 2004 and Balance Sheet as at that date.
Using the vertical formats Alaba Enterprises Trading and Profit and Loss Account for the year ended 31st December 2004 N N Sales 517,900 Less: Returns inwards (7,300) Net Sales 510,600 Less: Cost of goods sold Opening stock (Note 1) 34,300 Purchases (368,400 – 1,200) 367,200 Returns outwards (6,200) Carr iage inwards 22,200 Cost of goods available for sale 417,500 Closing stock (31,800) 385,700 Gross Profit 124,900 Add: Other incomes Discount received 8,400 Rent received (3,800 – 200) 3,600 Commission (11,200 + 800) 12,000 24,000 148,900 Less: Expenses Discount allowed 10,200 Salaries (40,600 + 1,800) 42,400 Printing and stationery 3,600 Carr iage outwards 10,300 Electricity and water (14,900 + 80) 14,980 Insurance (6,800 – 400) 6,400 General expenses (34,800 – 500) 34,300 Bad debt 400 Increase in provision for bad debt 700 Provision for discount allowable [1% x (45,000 – 900)] 441 Depreciation: Motor vehicles (10% x 12,000) 1,200 Furniture (20% x 2,500) 500 (125,421) Net Profit 23,489_  Alaba Enterprises Balance Sheet as at 31st December 2004 N N N Cost Acc.
Depn.
NBV Fixed Assets Freehold premises 46,000 - 46,000 Motor vehicles 12,000 5,700 6,300 Furniture 2,500 1,500 1,000 60,500 7,200 53,300 Current Assets Stock 31,800 Debtors 45,000 Provision for bad debt ( 900) Provision for discount all.
441 43,659 Prepayments (400 + 500) 900 Accrued Income 800 Cash at bank 5,000 Cash in hand 1,900 84,059 Current Liabilities Creditors 57,100 Accruals (1,800 + 80) 1,880 Interest received in advance 200 59,180 WORKING CAPITAL 24,879 Net Assets 78,179 Financed By Owner s Equity Capital at 1/1/04 70,000 Add: Net Profit 23,479 93,479 Less: Drawings (14,100 +1,200) 15,300 78,179 The following points should be noted regarding the solution above: 1.
Unless otherwise stated, the stock shown on the trial balance is the opening stock while the closing stock is disclosed as additional infor mation to the trial balance.
2.
The adjustments required per the additional infor mation to the trial balance are as follows:  Additional information No.
Nature of adjustment ( i) Closing stock ( ii) Accrued expenses (or accruals) ( iii) Prepaid expenses (or prepayments) ( iv) Provision for bad debt and provision for discount on debtors ( v) Accrued income ( vi) Depreciation on fixed assets ( vii) Income received in advance ( viii) Drawings Self-Assessment Exercise The following is the tr ial balance of Bamijoko Enterprises as at 31st December 2002: Dr. Cr.
N N Capital 5,000 Loan 1,000 Bank overdraft 1,000 Plant and machiner y 4,000 Furniture and fittings 1,000 Sales 30,000 Purchases 17,500 Carr iage inwards 500 Stock in trade (opening balance) 1,000 Returns inwar ds (sales returns) 400 Returns outwards ( purchases returns) 300 Discounts allowed 800 Discounts received 600 Rent 250 Telephone 120 Wages and salaries 6,000 Lighting and power 100 Insurance premium 360 Sundry expenses 50 Cash at bank 3,000 Cash on hand 380 Provision for bad and doubtful debts 300 Sundry creditors 2,880 Provision for depreciation:  Plant and machinery 800 Furniture and fittings _____ 120 42,000 42,000 Additional information: (i) Stock in trade as at 31 December 2002 was N1,300 (ii) Rent outstanding as at December 2002 was N50 (iii) Insurance premium relating to 2003 was N120 (iv) Write off bad debts amounting to N400 and increase provision for doubtful debts to N500.
(v) Provide 10 percent for depreciation on plant and machinery for the curr ent year.
(vi) Provide 5 percent for depreciation on fur niture and fittings for the current year.
Required: (a) Prepare a Trading and Profit and Loss account for the year 2002 ( b) Extract a Balance Sheet for Bamijoko Enterprises as at 31st December 2002 3.4 Capital and Revenue Items The ability to measure capital and revenue as well as the inter - relationship between them, is ver y important in accounting practice because capital generates revenue and it is this ability to gener ate revenue that gives value to capital.
There ar e capital and revenue items of receipts as well as capital and revenue expenditure items.
It is very important to distinguish between these items as their treatment differ in the books of account.
It is also necessary in the determination of profit made by the enterprises and explain why certain items go to the Trading and Pr ofit and Loss account and others go to the Balance Sheet.
Capital and Revenue Receipts Capital receipts comprise the initial capital paid by the owner(s) of the business as well as loans and proceeds of sale of any of the assets.
On the other hand, revenue receipts are the cash received from sales of goods, discounts received, commission, interest on investment and all such monies arising from rendering services or in the normal course of business transactions in the current period.
Capital and Revenue E xpenditure “Capital expenditure consists of expenditure, the benefit of which is not fully consumed in one period, but spread over several periods”.
These ar e fixed assets like land and buildings and new factory which are acquired for the purpose of earning income or increasing the earning capacity of the business.
Revenue expenditure are those incurred in one period of account and whose full benefit is consumed within the same per iod.
Examples include travelling and fuelling expenses, repairs, postages, interest on loan and salar ies and wages.
Usually, it is the revenue expenditure that is charged against revenue receipts to determine the profit made by a business in a given accounting year.
Self-Assessment Exercise 1.
What do you understand by capital receipts?
Give two examples.
2.
Distinguish between capital and revenue expenditur es and give three examples of each.
3.5 Treatment of Account Receivable and Payable Accounts r eceivable, also known as “Debtors”, is given rise to when allowance is made for payments to be effected sometime later after the sales transactions have been concluded and the goods changed ownership for the reasons that buyers need goods and services that they cannot pay for immediately, and sellers sell more through credit sales.
Credit sales are recorded in the sales jour nal and accounts receivables ar e current assets to the organisation.
Accounts payable, on the other hand, ar e normally current liabilities to the enterprise.
They are also known as “Creditor s” which arise as a result of credit purchase transactions.
Accurate record of accounts payable is important to avoid an omission that will lead to an overstatement of profit.
Credit purchase transactions are recorded in the purchase journal.
Self-Assessed Exercise Discuss the differ ence between accounts receivable and accounts payable.
4.0 CONCLUSION Financial reports – basically, the Trading and Profit and Loss account and the Balance Sheet – ar e necessary to inform management and other interested outside parties about the per for mance as well as the financial position of the enterprise which form the basis for their respective decisions.
Capital and revenue items would need to be distinguished or categorised properly to enable the financial reports give a true reflection of the financial affairs.
Also, due care should be taken in deciding on, and recording matters, relating to accounts payable and accounts receivable in order to have a good relationship between cur rent assets, current liabilities and profit.
5.0 SUMMARY We have seen and discussed how accounting information is presented to all interested parties by focusing on the Tr ading and Profit and Loss account as well as the Balance Sheet.
While the trading and profit and loss account ascertains the gross profit on sales and the net profit or loss for the period, the balance sheet ascertains the financial position of the business at the end of the accounting per iod.
Also, the capital and revenue items of the financial reports have been discussed with emphasis on their proper distinction, recognition and recording.
Lastly, we considered the treatment of account receivable and account payment items.
6.0 TUTOR-MARKED ASSIGNMENTS The following trial balance is drawn from the books of Tukur Mills, a sole proprietorship.
Dr. Cr.
N N Capital 21,000 Drawings 7,100 Sales 86,400 Purchases 55,500 Rent (Office) 2,520 Travelling Expenses 940 Insurance on purchases 240 Carriage inwards 130 Carriage outwards 150 Insurance (Fire, etc.)
120 Salaries 6,260 Wages 920 Bank charges 33 43  General expenses 108 Creditors 5,300 Motor vehicle 9,800 Furniture and fixtures 3,600 Stock in trade (at the beginning of per iod) 5,900 Sundry and trade debtors 7,200 Cash at bank 12,084 Cash on hand 95_ ______ 112,700 112,700 Additional information: (a) The value of closing stock is N6,400 (b) Accrued salaries of N366 have not been paid as at December 31, 1999 and not yet recorded in the books (c) Sales of N1,200 made on account of Yaro Stores on December 20 were omitted in the record keeping process.
You are to ignore depreciation on motor vehicle, and furniture and fixtures.
Required: (a) Prepare a Trading and Profit and Loss account for Tukur Mils (b) Extract a Balance Sheet for Tukur Mills as at December, 1999 7.0 REFERENCE AND FURTHER READINGS ACCA (2003) .
Preparing Financial Statements.
Middlesex: A. T. Foulks Lynch Ltd. Anao, A.R.
(1989).
An Introduction to Financial Accounting.
I badan: Longman Nigeria Limited.
Igben, R.O.
(2004).
Financial Accounting Made Simple (Volume 1) Lagos: ROI Publishers.
Whitehead, Geoffrey (1986).
Success in Principles of Accounting.
London: John Murray Publishers.
Wood, Frank (1990).
Business Accounting I 5th Edition London: Longman Company Limited.
MODULE 2 UNIT 1: BANK RECONCILIATION STATEMENTS Table of Contents 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objectives 3.0 Bank Reconciliation Statements 3.1 Bank Statements and Reconciliation 3.2 The Bank Reconciliation Statement 3.3 Method of Bank Reconciliation 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutor Marked Assignments 7.0 Reference and Further Readings 1.0 INTRODUCTION In Unit 4, we considered the Two-Column Cash Book which provides two columns, one each for cash and bank transactions.
Therefore, this cash book brings together the cash and bank accounts maintained by an organisation.
Usually, the business transacts with the bank while the bank transacts with the business.
The cash book records al the business transactions with the bank, and for al the bank s transactions with the business, a bank statement records the proceedings.
However, the balance on the cash book is rarely if ever the same as the balanc e on the bank statement.
Ther efore, in this unit, we shall examine the need to agree our bank balance obtained fr om the cash book to the bank statement balance issued by the bank.
Also, we shall consider the factors that are responsible for the differences in both balances, how they are tr eated and how r econciliation statements are prepared.
2.0 OBJECTIVES At the end of this unit, you will be able to: - Explain why the bank balance obtained from the cash book differ s from the bank statement; - Discuss the need for bank reconciliation statements; - Prepare the bank reconciliation statements to agree with the two balances.
3.0 BANK RECONCILIATIONSTATEMENTS 3.1 Bank Statement s and Bank Reconciliation Banks send monthly or periodical statements to their customer s – individuals, associations, corporate entities, etc.
A bank statement shows details of bank s transactions ( deposits, withdrawals and charges) with their customers during a given per iod.
At the end of the period to which the statement relates, it would indicate the balance in the account taking note of the credits (deposits) and debits (withdrawals and char ges).
Earlier in the introduction, we noted that it is difficult for the cash book balance to agr ee with the balance on the bank statement, why?
One reason can be attr ibuted to timing differences.
For example, a cheque payment may be recorded in the cash book when it is issued.
The bank only records such a cheque when it is paid by the bank, which may be several days or even weeks later (unpresented cheque).
Other examples are outstanding deposits and uncredited lodgements.
Secondly, some items may appear in the bank statement but yet to be entered in the cash book, and these include bank charges, bank interest paid (on overdrafts) or received (on deposits), standing orders and direct debts, credit transfers (where a receipt has been paid dir ect into the organisation s bank account), cheques returned unpaid, and unauthorised debits due to genuine mistakes or fraud.
Therefore, bank reconciliation is the process of investigating the differ ence in both balances and attempt to agree them.
Self-Assessment Exercise Explain why the cash book is rarely if ever the same as the balance on the bank statement.
3.2 The Bank Reconciliat ion St atement This is a statement prepared to agr ee the balances of both the bank statement and the cash book.
Apart from this function, the bank reconciliation statement helps to ensur e that: All deposits and withdrawals have been entered correctly.
No unauthorised debits have been made in the account.
Frauds and errors are detected early and corrected.
The reconciliation process is to verify the entries by ticking the credit side of the bank statement to the debit side of the cash book and vice versa.
Any unticked entr ies in either the statement or the cash book represents items given as examples in explaining the reasons why balances in the statement and the cash book don t agree.
The items could be treated as follows: Unpresented Cheques have been deducted in the cash book already but not in the bank statement.
Either we add it back to cash book balance or deduct from bank statement balance.
Direct debits are either added to cash book balance or deducted from bank statement balance.
Uncredited lodgements ar e either added to the statement balance or deducted from cash book balance.
Frauds and er rors should be investigated and corrected.
Self-Assessment Exercise 1.
Define the bank reconciliation statement.
2.
Discuss the bank reconciliation process.
3.3 Methods of Bank Reconciliation There are two methods of bank reconciliation: Update the cash book by recording items in the bank statement not in it, and then, reconcile the adjusted cash book balance to the statement balance.
Do straight reconciliation.
We shall demonstr ate both methods in the following illustration: On 31 July, 2004, Adekunle Ajani received a bank statement which showed a balance of N198,000 whereas the bank column of the cash book showed a balance of N140,000.
After comparing the entries in both, the following items were r evealed as accounting for the difference: 29 July 2004 Dividend received fr om ABC Ltd. credited by bank not yet recor ded in the cash book amounts to N16,000.
30 July 2004 Payment of N10,000 by standing order not yet recorded in the cash book.
30 July 2004 Transfer charges (N300) and bank commission (N700) not yet recorded in the cash book.
47  31 July 2004 Interest of N24,000 credited by bank not yet entered into the cash book.
31 July 2004 Cheque Nos.
311, 316 and 317 in favour S. Kasali, John Dans and Dennis Kay for N6,000, N16,000 and N7,000 respectively, have not been pr esented for payment.
You are required to prepare a bank reconciliation statement.
Method I: Adekunle Ajani Dr.
Adjusted Cash Account (Bank Column) Cr.
Date Part iculars Folio Amount Date Part icular Folio Amount Balance as given 140,000.00 Payment by order 10,000.00 29/7/04 Dividend ( ABC 16,000.00 Transfer Charges 300.00 Ltd.) 31/7/04 24,000.00 Bank Commission 700.00 Interest (bank) _________ Balance c/d 169,000.00 180,000.00 180,000.00 169,000.00 Balance b/d Bank Reconciliation Stat ement N N Balance as per Bank Statement 198,000.00 Less: Unpresented cheques: S. Kasali (311) 6,000.00 John Dans (316) 16,000.00 Dennis Kay (317) 7,000.00 29,000.00 Balance as per adjusted Cash Book N169,000.00 Method II: A Straight Reconciliation N N Balance as per Bank Statement 198,000.00 Add: Direct Debits: Transfer charges 300.00  Bank Commission 700.00 Payment by order 10,000.00 11,000.00 209,000.00 Less: Unpr esented cheques 29,000.00 Less: Direct Credits: ABC Ltd. Dividend 16,000.00 Bank Interest 24,000.00 69,000.00 Balance as per Cash Book N140,000.00 Self-Assessment Exercise Prepare a bank reconciliation statement using the following particulars: 30 April 2002 Bank statement balance N780,000 Cash book balance N680,000 Cheques drawn not presented for payment N300,000 Cheques paid into bank not yet credited N200,000 4.0 CONCLUSION We wish to conclude that usually, the balance on the cash book and the bank statement do rarely agree with each other, due to timing differences as well as the fact that some items may appear in the bank statement but yet to be recorded in the cash book.
A process of bank reconciliation which involves investigating the differences in both balances is employed to agree the balances.
This leads to the generation of a bank reconciliation statement.
5.0 SUMMARY In this unit, we have examined the need to agree our cash book balance to the bank statement balance.
We considered, also, reasons for the differences in both balances, and how they could be reconciled.
Two methods were employed to illustrate/demonstrate how bank reconciliation statements are drawn.
6.0 TUTOR- MARKED ASSIGNMENTS 1.
Discuss the need for bank reconciliation.
2.
The following cash book and bank statement relates to the firm of Onyeka Enterprises for the month of June 2002.
Dr. CASH BOOK Cr.
Date Particulars Folio Amount Date Particular Folio Amount 1/6/02 Balance b/fwd 12,000 .00 2/6/02 Cheq ue – Oweh 800.00 3/6/02 Cash 1,00 0.00 2/6/02 Cheq ue – Peter 300.00 5/6/02 Cheq ue - Ko nb e 170.006 /6 /02 Cheq ue – Bello 210.00 7/6/02 Cheq ue – Ladi 440.00 8 /6/02 Cheq ue – Smart 730.00 9/6/02 Cheq ue – Michael 310.001 0 / 6/02 Cheq ue – Thomas 2,240.00 11/6/02 Cheq ue - Nwafa 720.001 2 /6/02 Balance c/d 13,360.00 14,640 .00 14,640.00 Balance b/d 169,000 .00 ONYEKA ENTERPRISES Bank Statement as at 12th June 2002 Dr. Cr.
Balance 1/6 Balance 12,000.00 Cr.
2/6 Cheque No.
5554 800.00 11,200.00 Cr 3/6 Cash 1,000.00 12,200.00 Cr.
4/6 COT 40.00 12,160.00 Cr.
5/6 Cheque deposits 170.00 12,330.00 Cr.
6/6 Cheque No.
5555 300.00 12,030.00 Cr.
7/6 Cheque deposit 440.00 12,470.00 Cr.
8/6 Cheque deposit (by Yinka) 1,200.00 13,670.00 Cr.
9/6 Cheque dishonoured 170.00 13,500.00 Cr.
11/6 Standing Order (Insurance Prem) 1,120.00 12,380.00 Cr.
12/6 Cheque No.
5556 210.00 12,170.00 Cr.
You are required to: (a) Adjust the Cash Book (b) Prepare a Bank Reconciliation Statement.
7.0 REFERENCE AND FURTHER READINGS ACCA (2004) .
Preparing Financial Statements.
Middlesex: A. T. Foulks Lynch Limited.
Akplu, H.F. (1985).
I ntroduction to Accounting.
London: Macmillan Publishers Limited.
Wood, Frank (1990).
Business Accounting I 5th Edition London: Longman Company Limited.
UNIT 2: ACCOUNTS OF SOLE PROPRIETORSHIPS CONTENTS 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objectives 3.0 Accounts of Sole Proprietorships 3.1 Char acteristics of one – man business 3.2 Equity of a sole proprietorship 3.3 Drawings 3.4 Nature of Tax 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutor Marked Assignments 7.0 Reference and Further Readings 1.0 INTRODUCTION The content as well as the form of presentation of financial statements vary according to the nature of the organisation – sole proprietorships, partnerships, limited liability companies, government departments, clubs, associations, non-governmental organisations – because the different organisations are subject to different laws and norms which, amongst other things, prescr ibe the minimum infor mation required to be disclosed in the respective financial statements.
Kindly refer to unit 5 and recall that the formats for the presentation of the Trading and Profit and Loss account, and the Balance Sheet, were those for a sole trader (sole proprietorship).
Like other profit-or iented organisations, it is ver y necessary to keep and maintain accounts for sole proprietorships which enable the operators to ascertain the profits earned or losses incurred.
Various reasons could be adduced as to why the operators would want to have an idea of profits ear ned such as: (i) To ascertain or assess the capacity to obtain loans from banks or private individuals; ( ii) To assist them to make future plans; ( iii) To know how attractive their ventures are to prospective investors or would- be buyers; ( iv) To know the profit for income tax purposes; (v) To know whether the concerns are doing well or not.
This unit will give attention to the characteristics, equity and drawings of/in sole proprietorships as well as their nature of tax.
2.0 OBJECTIVES At the end of this unit, you will be able to: - Discuss the characteristics of one-man business; - Explain the equity composition of sole propr ietorship; - Explain “drawings” in relation to sole proprietorship; - Discuss the nature of tax in one-man business.
3.0 ACCOUNTS OF SOLE PROPRIETORSHIPS 3.1 Characteristics of One – man business One – man business (or sole proprietorship business), as the name implies, is a business concern owned by one person who often is also engaged actively in the running of the business.
The sole owner subscribes to all of the equity capital of the business which in most cases ar e raised from personal savings or soft loans obtained fr om relations and friends.
All incomes also accrue to the owner.
Other characteristics of one – man business include the following: (i) A sole proprietorship has no distinct legal entity.
Even when it is registered by the Corporate Affairs Commission under the Companies and Allied Matters Act, the owner and the business cannot be separated; (ii) The owner has freedom to deal with the organisation s assets without any restrictions imposed by law; (iii) Because of the limited amount of assets which a sole proprietorship business controls, it is often small and can be recognised easily; (iv) Its capacity to bor row (especially from banks) is limited by the asset base; (v) It has ver y high risk because of the inseparability of the owner with the business; (vi) The business outfit often goes by the name of the owner, and operates within a confined location, usually, not more than two branches; (vii) The structure is fair ly simplistic in nature.
From the foregoing, it would appear that the compact nature of the sole proprietorship business should not present much difficulty in its accounting.
However and often times, smallness may impede the ability of the business to engage capable/competent hands to carry out the accounting function and ensure good financial control.
Consequently, the accounting records kept may be incomplete and lack the essential  ingredients.
These may impinge on the preparation of acceptable financial statements.
Self Assessment Exercise Discuss the character istics of a sole pr oprietorship business.
3.2 Equity of a sole proprietorship As mentioned above, the sole owner subscr ibes to all of the equity of the business.
The equity is made up of capital contributions in cash or kind at commencement or at a later date by self through personal savings, relations and friends, and all profits ear ned in the business since its inception but which have not been withdrawn.
This can be shown in the annual balance sheet as follows: N Capital b/f XX Add: Amount introduced during the year X Profit earned during the year X XX Less: Drawings dur ing the year X Capital c/f XX It is very clear, therefor e, that the capital of a sole proprietor is not fixed but varies from year to year depending on the: (i) Amount of capital introduced; ( ii) Amount of profit earned; ( iii) Extent of drawings; ( iv) Degree of disinvestment (where fixed asset of reasonable value is taken out of the business for personal use).
Let us quickly say that there is no legal restrictions on drawings; prudence is the watchword.
Also, the proprietor is free to increase the capital position at anytime.
However, this flexible position of the sole proprietor in his unrestricted rights in dealings that affect the equity of the fir m and the absence of legal ties could be disadvantageous in terms of the ability of the business to enter into certain types of transactions – especially, borrowing-where it would appear that the rights of the other party may suf fer.
With this situation, the sole proprietor would be constrained in his ability to obtain capital or to grow.
Self Assessment Exercise The capital of a sole proprietor is not fixed but var ies fr om year to year.
Explain this statement.
3.3 Drawings The sole proprietor s drawings dur ing the year affect the equity.
Drawings speak to the per iodic withdrawals made by a sole proprietor (who is actively engaged in the management of the business) in anticipation of profits.
As we stated earlier, drawings are not regulated and tend to fluctuate from month to month depending on the personal commitments of the proprietor.
Drawings can also be taken in kind when the owner takes out some of the goods which the business trades in.
Self-Assessed Exercise Explain the features of drawings.
3.4 Nature of Tax A business which has a legal entity normally pays tax on its income just as any natural person does.
In the case of sole proprietorship, however, since it is not a legal entity, it is not bound to pay tax.
Recall that here is a situation where the business cannot be separated from the owner, and that being the case, the income of the business is considered to be that of the owner for tax pur poses.
The sole proprietor is required to declare such income, amongst others, in the annual tax returns for personal income tax assessment and payment.
Self-Assessment Exercise What ar e the tax implications for a sole proprietor?
4.0 CONCLUSION The sole proprietorship business has no legal entity; both the business and the owner are inseparable.
The owner subscr ibes to all of the equity of the business and the capital var ies from year to year.
The proprietor makes periodic withdrawals known as “drawings” in anticipation of profits to attend to his personal commitments.
The business is not liable to tax because of its legal status.
Instead, the owner is taxed as a person based on the income of the business.
5.0 SUMMARY In this unit, we have looked at some guides necessary to keep the accounts of sole proprietor ships.
Apart from discussing the char acteristics of one – man business, we considered the equity composition.
Furthermore, we explained drawings in relation to sole 54  proprietorship, and discussed the nature of tax.
The proprietor and not the business is liable to tax.
6.0 TUTOR-MARKED ASSIGNMENTS 1.
What do you understand by sole proprietorship?
2.
The following trial balance is extracted from the books of Cornerstone Enterprises, a sole proprietor ship, specialised in manufactured goods.
Dr. Cr.
Capital account 15,000 Drawings account 7,600 Purchases 40,000 Sales 65,000 Discounts ( allowed and r eceived) 3,200 2,000 Rent of office 1,440 Rent of warehouse 1,200 Travelling expenses 600 Insurance (against fire, etc.)
150 Transit insurance on goods purchased 180 Office (salaries) 3,200 Wages 600 Carriage inwards 108 Carriage outwards 120 Furniture and Fixtur es 4,500 Stock at beginning of per iod 3,800 Sundry debtors 500 Trade debtors 8,000 Sundry and trade creditors 4,200 Cash at bank 10,810 Cash in hand 50 Bank charges 22 General expenses 120 ______ 86,200 86,200 Additional information: (a) All furniture and fixtures were acquired in the month of Januar y, 2004.
It was decided that depreciation should be char ged for 2004 at the rate of 10% on cost.
(b) The value of closing stock was N3,000.00  (c) A further examination of the records revealed that the following had not been recorded in the books before extracting the above trial balance: ( i) Wages amounting to N120.00 had accrued by December 31,2004 but were not paid.
( ii) Accrued office salaries of N400.00 had not been paid as at the end of 2004.
( iii) Purchases of N2,000.00 made on account in 2004 were omitted in the records.
( iv) General expenses of N60.00 accruing as at December 31, 2004, were not recorded.
( v) Goods amounting to N1,400.00 were taken out of the business dur ing the year by the pr oprietor.
(d) Prepaid rent on warehouse amounted to N300.00.
(e) Provision for doubtful debt is to be 5% of trade debt.
You are required to: (a) Make relevant adjusting entr ies to the ledger balances.
(b) Extract an adjusted trial balance.
(c) Prepare a trading and profit and loss account for the year 2004 (skip closing journal entries).
(d) Prepare a balance sheet for Cornerstone Enterprises as at December 31, 2004, and show the up-to- date capital position.
7.0 REFERENCE AND FURTHER READINGS Anao, A.R.
(1993).
An Introduction to Financial Accounting.
I badan: Longman Nigeria Limited.
Flynn, David et.
Al.
(2000).
Fundamental Accounting 4th Edition, Kenwyn: Juta & Co. Limited.
Oyekanmi, Abiodun (2003).
Introductory Financial Accounting for Professionals.
Calabar: NOOKIA Ventures Ltd.  UNIT 3: INTRODUCING PARTNERSHIPS ACCOUNTS CONTENTS 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objectives 3.0 Main Content 3.1 Companies and Par tnership Contrasted 3.2 Admission of a new partner 3.3 Profit ratio after admission of a new par tner 3.4 Goodwill in partnerships 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutor Marked Assignments 7.0 Reference and Further Readings 1.0 INTRODUCTION A partnership is generally defined as a legal relationship between two or more per sons where each person contributes something in order to carry on a lawful business with a view of profit which is to be shared between the partners in a proportion agreed upon by them.
Therefore, for a partnership to exist: the association must be engaged in a business which may be a trade or a profession; the trade or the profession must be carried on together, jointly, for the benefit of all the partners; and there must be an intention to earn a profit.
The above description, therefore, distinguishes a partnership from a political, religious, social, or philanthropic club or association.
A partnership agreement, which need not necessarily be in written for m (although it is advisable or wiser that any agreements between the partners be reduced to writing as this will tend to lead to fewer possibilities of misunderstandings and disagreements between partners), will gover n the relationships between the partners, including: name of organisation, the type of business, and duration; capital to be introduced by par tners; division of profits between parties, including salaries since not all the partners may be employed by the partnership on a full- time basis.
Such salaries will be normal operating expenses; drawings by par tners;  arrangements for dissolution, or on the death or retirement of partners; settling of disputes; preparation and audit of accounts.
At this juncture, it is necessary to note that, although the partner ship agr eement creates a legal relationship between the partners, the par tnership itself is not a legal entity.
With the above backgrounder, the unit (being the first part of the three to consider Accounts of Partner ships) will attempt to distinguish companies from partnerships.
The unit will also consider accounting treatments relative to admission of a new partner, profit ratio after admission of a new partner as well as goodwill in partnerships.
2.0 OBJECTIVES At the end of this unit, you will be able to: - Distinguish between companies and partnerships; - Explain the accounting treatments relative to admission of a new partner ; - Work out the profit ratio after admission of a new partner; - Discuss goodwill in partnerships.
3.0 ACCOUNTS OF PARTNERSHIP 3.1 Companies and Partnerships Contrasted Let us attempt to outline the distinguishing features/characteristics of limited liability companies and partnerships as follows: S/N COMPANIES S/N PARTNERSHIPS 1.
Separate legal entity 1.
No separate legal entity – not which is not affected by a juristic person.
changes in its membership.
2.
Shareholders have limited 2.
The liability of each member liability for debts – limited for debts of the fir m is to the amount he agreed to unlimited.
Partners are pay for shares allotted.
jointly and severally liable for debts.
3.
Rights of management are 3.
Every member can partake in delegated to the directors.
the management of the business.
4.
Powers and duties of 4.
The rights of partners directors are spelt out in themselves are governed by  the Articles of Association the partnership agreement and can be var ied by which can be var ied.
passing a special resolution of the company in a general meeting.
5.
The authorised capital is 5.
Capital is contributed by the fixed by the Memor andum par tners by agreement.
The of Association.
amount, which is not fixed, can be increased by undrawn profits or reduced by losses and withdrawals.
6.
Shar es are freely 6.
The share in a partnership transfer able in public cannot be transferred except companies; in private by the consent of all partners.
companies, shares are transfer able subject to restrictions imposed by the Articles of Association.
7.
Audit is compulsor y, and 7.
Audit is not compulsor y; copies of accounts are copies of accounts are not filed with the Corporate filed with the Corporate Affairs Commission Affairs Commission.
(CAC) annually.
8.
Profits are distr ibuted in 8.
Profits ar e distributed as per the form of dividend.
agr eed ratios; drawings may be made by mutual agr eement for accruing profits.
9.
Profits are subject to 9.
Profits are subject to Personal Company Income Tax.
Income Tax; partnership is not taxed.
10.
Unlimited life.
10.
Partnerships have limited life.
Self-Assessment Exercise Distinguish between limited liability companies and partnerships.
3.2 Admission of a new Partner Before we look at the different dimensions of admitting a new member relative to the accounting procedure, let us start from the ver y beginning when establishing the partner ship.
Each partner contributes an amount of capital.
A fundamental principle for the accounting treatment is that all aspects of an individual partner s contributions, charges to and charges by the partnership must be accounted for separately.
Recall that  in the books of the sole proprietor, two accounts are opened for the owner: Capital account; Drawings account.
However, in the books of the partnership, three accounts will be opened for each of the partners, namely: a capital account; a drawings account; a current account.
Partners capital accounts are referred to as “fixed capital accounts” because they are not used to record drawings or shar es of profits but rather: capital introduced or withdrawn by new or retiring partners; revaluation adjustments.
Current accounts are used to deal with the r egular transactions between the partners and the fir m. Most commonly, these transactions are share of profits, inter est on capital and partners salaries.
Drawings are made against the partners share of anticipated profits.
Drawings account is debited and cash credited to record drawings.
At year end, drawings account is closed off to the individual partner s current account and cr editing drawings account.
Let us note that drawings do not mean appr opr iation of pr ofit.
Now let us look at the accounting procedures involved in the different dimensions of introducing or admitting a new par tner.
(i) A new partner is admitted into the business when the capital base of the partnership is not affected: An existing interest in a partnership ( that is, each partner s share of the total capital and of the profits) can be acquired by a new partner through direct purchase from the existing partners.
This means that the assets and liabilities (capital base) of the partnership remain unchanged even though a new partner is admitted.
An Example: Peter, James and John, being partners agree to sell N60,000 interests to Andrew on equal basis (N20,000 each).
The capital accounts of the partners prior to the purchase reflected the  following balances: Peter – N50,000; James – N100,000 and John – N150,000.
The journal entries for the above will be: N N Dr. Cr.
Peter 20,000 James 20,000 John 20,000 Andrew 60,000 (Being the transfer of partnership capital to a new partner) By the above journal, the capital account of the three old partners is reduced by N20,000 each and a new capital account is set up for Andrew (the new partner ).
Note that the admission of Andrew does not bring new cash into the partnership; the cash paid by Andrew to acquire the interests goes to the individual old partners.
Total partnership capital and assets remain the same; what has changed is the structure of the partnership capital – Peter: N30,000; James – N80,000; John – N130,000; Andrew – N60,000.
(ii) A new part ner can be admitted through an additional investment in the partnership: This dimension increases total partnership capital and assets.
The under listed steps should be followed to determine the appr opriate entries in the partnership accounts when a new partner invests in the partnership: o Determine the total amount of the agreed capital after the new investment.
o Ascertain the new partners share of the capital to arrive at the proper cr edit to the new partner s capital account.
o Adjust the capital accounts of the partners if the asset values are changed or if bonuses are given to old or new par tners.
o Adjust the book values of the partnership assets, especially, if the total capital of existing partners plus the capital invested by the new partner does not equal the agr eed capital arr ived at in bullet 1 above.
(The acquisition of a new partnership interest by investment can be effected at book value.
Alternatively, the inter est can be purchased at more or less than the book value).
An Example: Osagie and Haruna are partners with N55,000 and N35,000 balances in the capital accounts respectively (after adjustment of assets to mar ket value).
Profits and losses are divided 60% to Osagie and 40% to Haruna.
A new partner, Jumbo acquires ¼ interest in profits and in the capital by investing additional assets.
The profit ratios specified in the new partnership agreement are 45%, 30% and 25% for Osagie, Haruna and Jumbo respectively.
Effect the appropriate entries.
With investment at book value, Jumbo pays in N30,000 for ¼ interest.
The new total capital and assets is N120,000.
Jumbo s share in the book value is N30,000 and this is equal to the cash br ought in.
No further adjustments are required since the total assets are equal to the new agreed capital.
The journal entries will be: N N Dr. Cr.
Cash 30,000 Jumbo 30,000 (Being Jumbo s admission to a 25% interest in a total capital of N120,000) (iii) A new partner is admitted with a bonus credited to the old partners: The partners (Osagie and Haruna) agreed that the total capital and total assets are to be N125,000, and the new partner, Jumbo, pays in N35,000 an amount, greater than the recorded value of his capital (N31,250).
Jumbo is paying a bonus of N3,750 to the partnership (in expectation of superior profit per for mance), which is divided between Osagie and Haruna in the pr ofit sharing ratio that existed between them.
The relevant entries are: N N Dr. Cr.
Cash 35,000 Osagie: Capital 2,250 Haruna: Capital 1,500 Jumbo: Capital 31,250  (Being Jumbo s admission by investment in a total capital of N125,000) (iv) A new partner is admit ted wit h Goodwill credited to the old partners: As in (iii) above, Jumbo pays in N35,000 for ¼ interest, which payment exceeds the book value of his proportionate shar e of tangible assets.
The partners agreed that Goodwill is to be recorded, with its value determined from Jumbo s contribution.
Let us make the following deductions: o Jumbo contributed N35,000 for ¼ interest in total capital.
Therefore total capital after his contribution is N140,000 (N35,000 x 4).
o The assets of the old partnership were valued at N90,000.
So the total tangible assets are now: N Assets 90,000 Cash (New investment) 35,000 125,000 o The difference between the total capital and the total tangible assets of the partnership is the value of goodwill, that is, N15,000 (140,000 – N125,000) which belongs to the old partnership and is to be shared between Osagie and Haruna in the profit ratio.
(Goodwill will be treated in details in 3.4).
The following entries are relevant: Dr. Cr.
N N Goodwill 15,000 Osagie: Capital 9,000 Haruna: Capital 6,000 (Being Goodwill determined by Jumbo s admission) Jumbo s investment will be recorded in the journal as follows: Dr. Cr.
N N Cash 35,000 Jumbo: Capital 35,000  (Being Jumbo s admission to a 25% interest in the total capital of N140,000) Note: The partner s profit ratio remains as specified in the new agr eement.
Self-Assessment Exercise 1.
Explain the different scenarios of admitting a new partner.
2.
What are the steps to be taken in determining the appropriate entr ies in the partnership accounts when a new partner invests in the partnership?
3.3 Profit Ratio after admission of a new Partner Here, we shall consider the method for calculating the profit and loss sharing ratio for partners after the admission of a new partner since the old shar ing ratio would have been overtaken by events.
The old par tners, in some cases, may wish to retain their for mer relative positions.
Sometimes too, they may prefer changes.
However, whatever is the case, the new profit ratio has to be determined/established and included in the revised agreement.
An Example: Jerome and Shedrack, being partners in business, share profits and losses in the ratio of 60% and 40% respectively.
The partners agreed to admit Lamber t to a 25% interest.
You are required to determine the new profit shar ing ratio for the partner s. The calculation will be as follows: Total net profits 100% Less: Lambert s share 25% Balance for Jerome and Shedr ack 75% Ratio for Jerome (60% of 75%) 45% Ratio for Shedrack (40% of 75%) 30% Therefore, the new profits ratio is 45%, 30% and 25% for Jerome, Shedrack and Lambert.
Self-Assessment Exercise If Kay and Ker s profits ratio in the partnership business befor e admitting Kan to a 15% interest was 70% and 30% respectively, what will be the partners new sharing ratio after Kan was admitted?
3.4 Goodwill in Partnerships We shall consider the meaning, valuation and treatment of goodwill relative to the partnerships.
Goodwill refers to the benefit and advantage of the good name, reputation and connection of a business which can be valued and expressed in monetar y terms.
It is a force that attracts customer s; it makes a new partner to contr ibute capital over and above the saleable values of the tangible assets.
The goodwill possessed by a firm may be due to, among others, the: Monopoly enjoyed by the business; Reputation of the company in terms of quality of goods and services; Management skill and reputation of the partners, and the value of the labour for ce; Location of the business premises; Possession of the trade marks, patents, or well- known businesses name over the years.
In the valuation of goodwill, custom plays a great role in many sorts of business.
Let us discuss a few of the methods: (i) The average profits of a given number of past years multiplied by an agreed number: Thus, it is common to learn of three years purchase of the net profits as the basis for valuing goodwill.
For example, if the average net profit made by XYZ Company for the past five (5) years is N2,000 per annum, on the basis of three years purchase of the net profits, goodwill will be valued at N6,000 (N2,000 x 3).
Please, note that this method is purely ar bitrary.
(ii) The average gross income of the business for a number of past years multiplied by an agreed number: Professional firms usually adopt this method.
(iii) The value of the business: The value of the business is estimated by reference to the expected earnings and the yield required, and from the figure arrived at, the value of the net tangible assets is deducted, the difference being taken to represent the value of goodwill.
For example, the estimated future accrued profits of the partnership (less par tners remuner ation of N2,500) is N7,500.
If yield at 10% per annum is expected and the value of the tangible assets is N50,000, what is the value of the goodwill?
Capital value of business (7,500 x 10) N75,000 Less: Value of tangible assets N50,000 Value of goodwill N25,000 Kindly refer to 3.2 for the treatment of goodwill in partnership accounts.
Self-Assessment Exercise Define goodwill and discuss the methods of its valuation.
4.0 CONCLUSION Although the partnership agreement or deed creates a legal relationship between the partners, the partnership itself is not a juristic person.
Each par tner, in the partnership books, has a capital account, drawings account and a curr ent account.
When a new partner is admitted, the profit shar ing ratio of the old partners changes; a new ratio to include the new partner has to be established and included in the revised agreement.
Goodwill is an important factor is deter mining a new partner s contribution to the partnership.
5.0 SUMMARY We have been able to define partnership, and distinguished between it and company.
In the partnership, we have discussed the admission of a new partner under different approaches as well as the accounting procedures.
We also looked at the profit ratio after admission of a new par tner which has to change and form part of the r evised agreement document.
Goodwill – an intangible asset, which makes a new partner contribute to the partnership over and above the saleable values of the tangible assets – was discussed as well.
6.0 TUTOR-MARKED ASSIGNMENTS 1.
(a) Define Goodwill.
(b) What are the contributing factors to the goodwill possessed by a firm?
2.
Alabo and Rotimi have N100,000 and N90,000 respectively.
Their profit sharing ratio are 55% and 45% respectively.
The profit sharing ratio in the new par tnership agreement if Alfa is to be admitted on the payment of N120,000, which is to be 1/6 of the total new capital, as his interest, will be 48%, 35% and 17% for Alabo, Rotimi and Alfa r espectively.
You are required to show the asset of the old and new partnership and the goodwill.
Also, show the old partners shares of goodwill since it was agreed that it should be shared in their profit and loss shar ing ratio.
7.0 REFERENCE AND FURTHER READINGS ACCA (2004).
Preparing Financial Statements.
Middlesex: A.T. Foulks Lynch Ltd. Anao, A.R.
(1989).
An Introduction to Financial Accounting.
Ibadan: Longman Niger ia Limited.
Beckett, D.W. (1980).
Spicer and Pegler s Book-Keeping and Accounts.
London, Gr eat Br itain: HFL Publisher s Ltd. Flynn, David et.
Al.
(2000) .
Fundamental Accounting, 4th Edition, Kenwyn: Juta & Co. Limited.
Larson, K.D.
(1989).
Financial Accounting.
Boston: Von Hoffman Press Inc. Samuels, J.; Richwor d, C.; Piper, A.
(1981).
Advanced Financial Accounting.
London: McGraw Hill Book Company Ltd. Soyode, A.
( 1983).
Financial Accounting (Pr inciples and Practice) .
London: Graham Bur n F & A Publishers Ltd. Wood, Frank (1990).
Business Accounting I 5th Edition.
London: Longman Company Limited.
UNIT 4: MANUFACTURING ACCOUNTS Table of Contents 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objectives 3.0 Manufacturing Accounts 3.1 Objectives of a manufacturing account 3.2 Classification of manufacturing costs 3.3 Valuation of Closing stock 3.4 Ascertainment of profit/loss on manufacture 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summar y 6.0 Tutor Marked Assignments 7.0 Reference and Fur ther Readings 1.0 INTRODUCTION The final accounts prepar ed in the previous units have been those for firms that engage in trading activities (buying and selling) or those for the non-profit or ganisations and profit-oriented firms as well, whose functions are limited to render ing ser vices.
The goods (merchandise) ar e valued at the actual cost to the firm, usually obtained from the supplier s invoice.
However, there are firms whose main activity is in the manufactur e of goods for sale.
For these concerns, in addition to the trading and profit and loss account, a manufacturing account is prepared.
The manufactur ing firm transfor ms basic raw mater ials into marketable goods, and during the manufacturing process, costs are incurred in order to complete the products.
These end products are valued at cost to the firm, usually the aggregate of the manufacturing costs.
Obviously, at the end of the accounting period, stock or inventory in this kind of concern will be at various stages of completion since manufacturing is a continuous process.
Three stages of completion can be identified: Raw materials (unpr ocessed and uncompleted stock) Work-in-pr ogress (partly – completed stock) Finished goods (completed stock) The main difference between the trading and profit and loss account of a manufacturing business and a trading fir m is the ascertainment of cost of goods manufactured as against the cost of goods purchased for reselling.
In this unit therefore, we shall highlight the objectives of a manufacturing account.
We shall also classify the manufacturing costs and draw a line of division between them and the non- manufacturing  costs.
In addition, we shall discuss the valuation of closing stock/ work- in-progress in accordance with the basic pr inciples.
Lastly, we shall look into the matter of ascertaining profit or loss on manufactur e to determine the relative advantage of manufacturing instead of buying the goods for resale.
2.0 OBJECTIVES At the end of this unit, you will be able to: - Explain the objectives of a manufacturing account; - Discuss the classification of manufacturing costs; - Distinguish between manufacturing costs and non- manufacturing costs; - Explain the valuation of closing stock relative to manufacturing concerns; - Ascertain the profit or loss on manufacture; - Prepare a manufacturing account.
3.0 MANUFACTURING ACCOUNTS 3.1 Objectives of a Manufacturing Account When a firm engages in manufacture, there ar ises the need to ascertain the cost of manufacture as a basis for fixing the eventual selling pr ice.
This need is met by the manufacturing account, which is prepared in such situation in addition to the nor mal trading and profit and loss accounts.
Therefore the aims of the manufactur ing account are: - to disclose the total cost of manufacture; - to enable the firm to determine the relative efficiency of its manufacturing activity separate from its trading activities.
This is achieved by computing the profit or loss ar ising fr om manufacture on one hand as distinct from its selling operations.
Self-Assessment Exercise Explain the objectives of a manufacturing account.
3.2 Classification of Manufacturing Costs There is an obvious link with the costing records because the costs in the manufactur ing account are involved with production, and the concepts of the manufacturing account are in fact really costing concepts.
Therefore, we shall examine the main elements and divisions of cost as used in costing.
Manufacturing (or production) costs are the costs incurred by a manufacturer in the process of transforming raw materials into finished products, which should be distinguished from non- manufacturing costs such as administrative and selling/distribution expenses.
The classification can be done as follows: Direct or Prime Cost o Direct materials o Direct labour o Direct expenses Indirect or Factory/Works Overhead Expenses By “dir ect” is meant that the materials, labour and expenses involved can be traced to the particular unit of goods produced.
Factory overhead expenses consist of all those expenses which are not easily traceable to the units being manufactur ed.
Examples include wages of cleaners and cr ane drivers, r ent and rates of the factory, depreciation of plant and machiner y used in the factory and factory power.
To summar ise, therefore, direct costs and factory overhead make up the manufacturing or production cost.
However, to ascertain the total costs, which guide in fixing the r elevant selling price, the non-manufacturing costs of administrative and selling/distribution expenses, are added to the manufacturing costs.
Administrative expenses include such items as manager s salaries, legal and accounting charges, the depreciation of accountancy machinery and secretar ial salaries.
Selling and distribution expenses are items such as salesmen s salar ies and commission, carriage outwards, depreciation of delivery vans, adver tising and display expenses.
In the manufacturing account, the manufacturing cost of goods completed during the accounting period is ascertained.
This means that all the elements of the production cost – direct materials, direct labour, direct expenses and factory overhead expenses – are charged to the manufacturing account.
All administrative and selling and distribution expenses are charged to the profit and loss account.
You are to note that the manufactur ing account is concerned with the production cost of goods completed in the year irrespective of when work started on them.
Therefore, semi- finished goods (work-in-progress) must be taken into account.
Self-Assessment Exercise 1.
Attempt a classification of the production costs with examples.
2.
Distinguish between manufacturing and non-manufacturing costs.
3.3 Valuation of Closing Stock The inventory of a manufacturing concern may compr ise raw mater ials, work-in-progress and finished goods at any one time.
It is often necessary to ascertain accurately the cost at which work-in-progress is carr ied over from one period to another.
The basic principle followed in valuing stock is to relate to each type of stock a proportion of the total cost incurr ed up to the level where the stock accrues.
Thus, raw materials are valued at the cost of purchase (if lower than cur rent mar ket price); finished goods are valued as a proportion of the total cost of production; semi-finished goods (work-in-progr ess) are valued at prime cost only ( although debate had it that it might have been more accurate to attribute to them a proportion of factory overhead once they have received some benefits fr om these indirect costs).
At this juncture, let us illustrate the preparation of a manufacturing, trading and profit and loss account.
Example: The following are extracted from the trial balance of TEKI LTD, a manufactur ing outfit, in respect of the year ended 30th September, 1993: N Opening stock: Raw material 12,500 Work-in-progress 8,600 Finished goods 14,800 Purchase of raw materials 68,200 Carriage inwards 3,410 Factor y wages 18,390 Rent of factor y 4,800 Factor y general expenses 8,360 Salaries of factory supervisors 8,740 Salaries of salesmen and office staff 22,570  Rent of office 5,400 Insurance of factory equipment 2,840 Bad debts 960 Office general expenses 12,930 Depreciation: Factory equipment 16,280 Office and distr ibution equipment 14,880 Sales less returns 215,000 Power and lighting (factor y) 5,610 Power and lighting (general) 3,200 Closing stocks wer e valued at the following amounts at year end: Raw mater ials 14,480 Work-in- progress 10,250 Finished goods 18,390 Work-in- progress is normally valued in this fir m at prime cost plus a portion of factory overheads.
You are required to prepare the manufacturing, trading, and profit and loss accounts as at end of year.
Solution: TEKI LTD. MANUFACTURING, TRADING AND PROFIT AND LOSS ACCOUNT FOR THE YEAR ENDED 30TH SEPTEMBER, 1993 N N Raw mater ials: Opening stock 12,500 Purchases 68,200 Carriage inwards 3,410 84,110 Less: Closing stock 14,480 Cost of mater ials consumed 69,630 Direct Wages 18,390 PRIME COST 88,020 Add: Factory overheads Rent on factory 4,800 Supervisors salar ies 8,740 Insurance of equipment 2,840 Power and lighting 5,610 Factory general expenses 8,360 Depreciation of equipment 16,280 46,630 102  COST OF PRODUCTION 134,650 Add: Opening work-in-progress 8,600 Less: Closing work-in-progr ess 10,250 COST OF GOODS COMPLETED 133,000 Sales 215,000 Finished goods: Opening stock 14,800 Cost of goods completed 133,000 Less closing stock 18,390 Cost of Goods Sold 129,410 GROSS PROFIT 85,590 Less: Administrative, Selling and Distribution Expenses Office and salesmen s salar ies 22,570 Rent on office space 5,400 Power and lighting 3,200 Office general expenses 12,930 Bad debts 960 Depreciation 14,880 59,940 NET PROFIT N25,650 Self-Assessment Exercise Explain the basic principle in valuing closing stock, and how each type of closing stock in a manufacturing concern should be valued.
3.4 Ascertainment of Profit or Loss on Manufact ure In the last example, we disclosed a composite gross profit of N85,590, which represents what was realised from both manufacturing and selling operations.
When we desire to ascertain the relative advantage of manufactur ing instead of buying the goods for resale, the manufacturing account will have to be restructured so as to disclose separately the gross profit or loss accruing from manufacturing as well as tr ading operations.
The profit or loss on manufacture is ascertained on the basis of the opportunity cost principle, that is, by referring to what the fir m would have spent in purchasing instead of manufacturing the goods.
Thus, if the total purchase value is more than the cost of manufacture, a gross profit on manufacture has resulted.
On the other hand, a loss will arise if the manufactur ing cost exceeds purchase cost.
Therefore, it requires that finished goods are taken out of the factory at the estimated market value (purchase cost) instead of the actual cost of production.
Thus, the estimated market value is cr edited to the manufacturing account and debited to the trading account.
A credit balance represents a gross profit on manufacturing while a debit  balance represents a loss.
The difference is then tr ansfer red to the profit and loss account as appropriate.
Example: Let us assume the same data as in the pr evious example.
Let us also assume that the firm likes to ascertain the relative efficiency of its manufacturing operations, and estimates that had it not manufactured the goods, it would have purchased the total volume which it finished during the per iod at a cost of N150,000.00.
We are required to prepare the manufacturing, tr ading and profit and loss accounts of TEKI LTD, showing separately, the profit or loss on manufacturing as against selling oper ations.
Solution: TEKI LTD. MANUFACTURING, TRADING AND PROFIT AND LOSS ACCOUNT FOR THE YEAR ENDED 30TH SEPTEMBER, 1993 N N N Estimated market value of finished goods 150,000 Raw mater ials: Opening stock 12,500 Purchases 68,200 Carriage inwards 3,410 84,110 Less: Closing stock 14,480 Cost of mater ials consumed 69,630 Direct Wages 18,390 PRIME COST 88,020 Add: Factory overheads Rent on factory 4,800 Supervisors salar ies 8,740 Insurance of equipment 2,840 Power and lighting 5,610 Factory general expenses 8,360 Depreciation of equipment 16,280 46,630 COST OF PRODUCTION 134,650 Add: Opening work-in-progress 8,600 Less: Closing wor k-in-progress 10,250 COST OF GOODS COMPLETED 133,000 Profit on Manufacturing 17,000 Sales 215,000  Finished goods: Opening stock 14,800 Market value of finished goods 150,000 Less closing stock 18,390 146,410 GROSS PROFIT 68,590 Less: Administrative, Selling and Distribution Expenses Office and salesmen s salar ies 22,570 Rent on office space 5,400 Power and lighting 3,200 Office general expenses 12,930 Bad debts 960 Depreciation 14,880 59,940 Net Profit 8,650 Add Profit on Manufactur e 17,000 NET PROFIT N25,650 Self-Assessment Exercise How do you ascertain the profit or loss on manufacture?
On what basis is the profit or loss on manufacture ascertained?
Explain the basis.
4.0 CONCLUSION Apart from the trading and profit and loss account, a manufacturing account is prepared for concerns whose main activity is in the manufacture of goods for sale.
The goods, because costs are incurred during the manufacturing process, are valued at costs to the firm.
The major distinguishing factor between the trading, profit and loss accounts of a manufacturing business and those of a trading fir m lies in the ascertainment of cost of goods manufactured as against the cost of goods purchased for r esale.
The manufacturing account, thus, aims at disclosing the total cost of manufacture as well as enabling the firm to determine the relative efficiency of manufacturing in place of buying of goods for resale.
5.0 SUMMARY The manufacturing firm transforms raw materials into finished goods for sale.
Costs are incurred, dur ing the manufacturing process, in order to complete the products.
A manufacturing account is prepared for a manufactur ing company.
In this unit, we have been able to highlight the objectives of a manufacturing account.
We have also classified the manufacturing costs, and distinguished between them (manufacturing costs) and the non-manufacturing costs such as administrative, selling and distribution costs.
We discussed, in addition, the valuation of the closing stock of a manufacturing concern, emphasising the principle that relates to each type of inventory, a proportion of the total cost incurred up to the level where the stock accrues.
Finally, we discussed the ascertainment of profit or loss on manufacture relative to pur chase of finished goods for resale, using the principle of opportunity cost by considering what the firm would have spent in purchasing in place of manufacturing the goods.
6.0 TUTOR-MARKED ASSIGNMENTS The following is the tr ial balance of DEDE Manufacturing Ltd. for the year ended 30th September, 2005: Dr. Cr.
N N Bank 31,000 Debtors 79,000 Prepaid expenses 1,000 Inventory at 1/10/2004: Raw mater ials 20,000 Work-in- progress 42,000 Finished goods 28,000 Fixed assets 350,000 Creditors 35,000 Long term loan 100,000 Share capital 300,000 Accumulated profits, 1/10/2004 55,000 Sales 900,000 Materials purchases: Direct 240,000 Indirect 5,000 Labour: Direct 190,000 Indirect 33,000 Other manufacturing overheads 120,000 Selling expenses 100,000 Administrative expenses 90,000 Interest paid 10,000 Income tax expense 50,000 Bad debts 1,000 ________ 1,390,000 1,390,000  The closing inventory balances are: Raw materials 19,000 Work-in-progress 40,000 Finished goods 30,000 You are required to prepare for DEDE Manufacturing Ltd for the year ended 30th September, 2005: (i) the manufacturing account; (ii) the trading and profit and loss account; and (iii) the balance sheet.
7.0 REFERENCE AND FURTHER READINGS Anao, A.R.
(1993).
An Introduction to Financial Accounting.
Ibadan: Longman Niger ia Limited.
Flynn, David et.
Al.
(2000) .
Fundamental Accounting 4th Edition, Kenwyn: Juta & Co. Limited.
Igben, R.O.
(2004).
Financial Accounting Made Simple (Volume 1) Lagos: ROI Publishers.
Wood, Frank (1990).
Business Accounting I 5th Edition.
London: Pitman Publishing.
UNIT 5: CONTROL ACCOUNTS Table of Contents 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objectives 3.0 Control Accounts 3.1 Meaning of Control Accounts 3.2 Writing Control Accounts 3.3 Advantages of Control Accounts 3.4 Accounting treatment of certain items in Control Accounts 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summar y 6.0 Tutor Marked Assignments 7.0 Reference and Fur ther Readings 1.0 INTRODUCTION The whole process of book-keeping revolves around the idea that the records “balance”, that is, every transaction has a cr edit and a debit, and the total of the debits equals the total of the credits.
I n other words, if there are no errors in the r ecords, the trial balance will balance.
When a trial balance does not balance, it shows that errors have been made in the accounting entries which may be difficult and time- consuming to trace, especially in a large business organisation.
The problem of errors can be solved by having a control account for each ledger that shall act as a check on the accuracy of the entr ies in that ledger.
Most notably of control accounts are the debtor s and creditors control accounts.
These are ledger accounts which summarise a large number of transactions, and should be free from err ors if the trial balance must agr ee.
Sometimes, a ledger that has a control account is referred to as a self-balancing ledger .
In this unit, therefore, apart from looking at the meaning of control account, we shall consider how control accounts are written-up.
Also, we shall explain what advantages control accounts have.
And lastly, we shall go into the treatment of certain items in the control account.
2.0 OBJECTIVES At the end of this unit, you will be able to: - Explain the meaning of control accounts; - Discuss how control accounts are written-up; - Explain the advantages of control accounts;  - Give accounting treatment to certain items in the control accounts.
3.0 CONTROL ACCOUNTS 3.1 Meaning of Control Accounts A control account is an account which contains the summar y of entries in the individual accounts in each ledger.
Put in another way, a control or total account is a replica, in summarised form, of the accounts in the ledger to which it relates.
By logic of extension, therefore, the balance on this account, all things being equal, will be equal to the total of all individual balances in the ledger.
The principle of control accounts can be applied to all ledger s but it is usually restricted to sales ledger and purchases ledger.
Self Assessed Exercise What do you understand by a control account?
3.2 Writ ing Control Accounts From the explanation above, we understand that a control account contains the summary of entries in individual accounts.
However, the figures posted to the control account are not obtained from the individual accounts themselves.
For example, the figures posted to the debtor s control account are not obtained from the individual debtor s accounts while the figures posted to the creditors control account are not obtained from the individual creditors accounts.
Instead, the total cr edit sales, total returns from customers, and total discounts allowed figures posted to the debtors control account are obtained from the sales day book, returns inwards day book and discount allowed column of the 3 – column cash book respectively.
Similarly, the total credit pur chases, total returns to suppliers and total discount received figures posted to the creditors control account are obtained from the purchases day book, returns outwards day book and the discounts received day book of the 3 – column cash book respectively.
It has to be mentioned that the control accounts are memoranda records which implies that the entries in them are not made on the basis of double entry.
The double-entries ar e the ones made in the individual accounts.
At this point, let us summarise the sources of the entries posted to the control accounts: DEBTORS CONTROL ACCOUNT Debit Entr ies Sour ce Total credit sales Sales day book Dishonoured cheques fr om customers Cash book Interest charged to customers Journal book Bill receivable dishonoured Journal book Credit Entries Source Cheques and cash received from customers Cash book Discount allowed Discount allowed column of 3 – column cash book Bad debt Journal book Bills receivable accepted by customers Journal book Returns inwar ds Returns inwards day book Purchases ledger contras (set-off) Journal book CREDITORS CONTROL ACCOUNT Debit Entr ies Sour ce Cheques and cash paid to suppliers Cash book Discount received Discount received column of cash book Bills payable accepted in favour of suppliers Journal book Returns outwards Returns outwards day book Sales ledger contras (set-off) Journal book Credit Entries Source Total credit purchases Purchases day book Dishonoured cheques Cash book Interest charged by suppliers Journal book Bills payable dishonoured Journal book Self-Assessed Exercise Discuss how control accounts are written-up.
Give specif ic examples of entries and sources.
3.3 Advantages of Control Accounts From our discussions so far, let us highlight the merits of control accounts as follows: A control account serves as a check on the accuracy of the entries in the ledger to which it r elates.
Thus, control accounts make it possible to localise errors to specific ledgers so that precious time is not wasted checking ledgers which have no errors.
Because control accounts are usually put under the charge of a senior official, they ser ve as a check against error and fraud by the juniors who keep the ledgers.
For management purposes, the balance on the sales ledger control account can be taken to be the total amount owed to cr editor s. This saves the time and efforts of drawing up the debtors and creditors schedules, thereby, aid the timely preparation of draft periodic accounts.
Self-Assessment Exercise Discuss the advantages of control accounts.
3.4 Accounting treatment of certain items in Control Accounts Debtors Control Account o Bills receivable – where bills receivable and bills receivable accepted are both given, the later should be used because the obligation of the debtor on a bill arises only when he accepts the bill.
However, when only bills receivable is given, it should be interpreted to mean bills receivable accepted.
o Bills receivable discounted should be disregarded.
When a bill is discounted, no entry goes to the debtors account, and invariably, no entry in respect of that would go to the debtors control account.
o Bills receivable honoured should be disregarded.
When a debtor honours a bill r eceivable, no entry is made to the debtors account, and therefore, no entry need be made to the debtors control account.
o Bad debt recovered should be ignored unless it had earlier been credited to the debtors control account along with the other sums collected from debtors.
In that case, it should be debited to the debtor s control account.
o Provision for bad/doubtful debt and discount allowable should be disr egarded because they do not affect the debtors account at all.
Therefore, no entr y need be made to the debtors control account in respect of these pr ovisions.
o Cash sales should be disregarded.
The entr y for cash sale is to debit the cash book and credit the sales account.
Since no entry is made to the customer s account, it would not be necessar y to make any entry to the debtors control account in respect of cash sales.
Creditors Control Account o Where “bills payable” and “bills payable accepted” are both given, the latter should be used because the right of the creditor on a bill arises only when the debtor accepts the bill.
However, where only “bills payable” is given, it should be interpreted to mean “bills payable accepted”.
o Bills payable honoured should be ignored because when a bill payable is honoured, no entry is made to the creditors account and, of course, no entry need be made to the creditors control account.
o Provision for discount receivable should be disregarded because it does not affect the creditors control account.
o Cash purchases should be disregar ded because the related entries have nothing to do with either the creditors account or the creditors control account.
Example: Maduako, a sole trader, keeps his books so that a sales ledger control account and a purchases ledger control account are shown in his general ledger and balanced at the end of the month.
From the following details, show how these two control accounts will appear in the gener al ledger for the month of December, 1997.
At December, 1997: N Dr. balances in the sales ledger 13,500 Dr. balances in the purchases ledger 415 Cr.
Balances in the sales ledger 300 Cr.
Balances in the purchases ledger 12,000 For the month of December, 1997: - Total credit purchases 17,500 - Total credit sales 20,000 - Sales returns and allowances 360 - Purchase returns and allowances 200  - Cash received from trade debtors 7,500 - Cheques received from trade debtors 15,000 - Discounts received from creditors 120 - Payments made to trade creditors 16,400 - Discounts allowed to trade debtors 360 - Bad debts written-off 50 - Provision for doubtful debts 200 - Bills of exchange accepted by trade debtors of Maduako 4,300 - Sales ledger credit balances transferred to purchases ledger 80 - Cash purchases 3,000 - Dishonoured bills payable 130 - Dishonoured bills receivable 150 - Cr.
balances in the sales ledger 195 - Dr. balances in the purchases ledger 180 Solution: Dr.
Sales Ledger Control Account Cr.
N N Balance b/d 13,500 Balance b/d 300 Sales 20,000 Sales returns and Allowances 360 Purchases ledger control 80 Cash 7,500 Bills receivable dishonour ed 150 Bank 15,000 Balance c/d 195 Discounts allowed 360 Bad debts 50 Bills receivable 4,300 _____ Balance c/d 6,055 33,925 33,925 Balance b/d 6,055 Balance b/d 195  Dr.
Purchases Ledger Control Account Cr.
N N Balance b/d 415 Balance b/d 12,000 Purchases returns and alls.
200 Purchases 17,500 Discount received 120 Sales ledger control 80 Bank 16,400 Bills payable dishonoured 130 Bills payable 6,600 Balance c/d 180 Balance c/d 6,155 ______ 29,890 29,890 Balance b/d 180 Balance b/d 6.155 Self Assessment Exercise Explain the accounting treatment of the following items in the control accounts: Bills receivable discounted Bills receivable honour ed Cash sales Bills payable accepted Provision for discount receivable Cash pur chases Total credit sales Provision for doubtful debts Discounts received from creditors 4.0 CONCLUSION Having a control account for each ledger that act as a check on the accuracy of the entries in that ledger is a sure way to solve problems which arise from wrong entries.
The notable control accounts are the debtors and creditors control accounts.
A control account has the advantage of serving as a check on the accuracy of the entries in the ledger to which it relates.
5.0 SUMMARY We have seen the control (or total) account as one which contains the summar y of entr ies in the individual accounts in each ledger.
We have also observed that the figur es posted to the control accounts are not obtained from the individual accounts themselves.
Mention was made that the control accounts are memoranda r ecords which means that the entries in them are not made on the double-entr y principle.
We have also considered the various advantages which control accounts can offer as well as the accounting treatment given to certain items in the control accounts.
6.0 TUTOR-MARKED ASSIGNMENTS 1.
(a) Explain the concept of control account.
(b) What advantages do control accounts offer?
2.
Enter the following amounts in the purchases ledger control and sales ledger control accounts in the general ledger, and obtain balances at the end of the period: N 1st Jan.
Purchases ledger control balances 8,650 Sales ledger control balances 12,390 Summary of transactions dur ing the period: Purchases journal total 43,270 Sales journal total 72,680 Sales returns jour nal total 1,460 Purchases r eturns journal total 1,320 Cash rebate given 240 Cash and cheques received from debtors 69,350 Cash and cheques paid to creditors 45,190 Discounts allowed 150 Discounts received 170 Bad debts written-off 490 Dishonoured cheque received 2,300 7.0 REFERENCE AND FURTHER READINGS ACCA (2003).
Preparing Financial Statements.
Middlesex: A.T. Foulks Lynch Ltd. Anao, A.R.
(1993).
An Introduction to Financial Accounting.
Ibadan: Longman Niger ia Limited.
Igben, R.O.
(2004).
Financial Accounting Made Simple (Volume 1) Lagos: ROI Publishers.
MODULE 3 UNIT 1: ACCOUNTS FROM INCOMPLETE RECORDS Table of Contents 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objectives 3.0 Accounts from Incomplete Records 3.1 Meaning of Incomplete Records 3.2 Situation of No Records 3.3 Situation of Partial Records 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summar y 6.0 Tutor Marked Assignments 7.0 Reference and Fur ther Readings 1.0 INTRODUCTION “I ncomplete accounting records” refers to a situation wher e the accounting system do not apply the principles of double entry, thus, making it difficult or impossible to draw up the normal trading and profit and loss account as well as produce a trial balance.
Two distinguishable situations of this are where no records are kept at all and where partial records are maintained usually in the form of real accounts (cash or fixed assets) but personal and expense accounts are omitted.
This unit will concentrate on the above situations.
The essence, if not the quintessence, is to explore the possibility or feasibility of creating something out of nothing – having some idea of the trading results with scanty accounting information.
2.0 OBJECTIVES At the end of this unit, you will be able to: - Give meaning to the term „incomplete records ; - Compute the trading r esults where no records are kept; - Compute the trading results and net investments in the business where partial records are kept.
3.0 ACCOUNTS FROM INCOMPLETE RECORDS 3.1 Meaning of Incomplete Records From our introduction above, we can say that “incomplete records” denotes varying degrees of deviation from the standard accounting records which are kept on the „complete principle of double entry.
In  other words, it descr ibes records which the trader has not fully completed or wher e no records at all have been kept of transactions.
However , it may still be possible to prepare periodic financial statements if the relevant basic documents are made available from which the required additional information can be obtained.
The matter of incomplete accounting records is more often associated with the sole proprietorships.
Self-Assessment Exercise Explain what you understand by the term „incomplete records under two distinct situations.
3.2 Situation of No Records Where no records have been kept, the accountant will fall back to a great extent on basic source documents such as receipts, invoices, and bank tellers/statements as well as the entity s tr ansaction files.
Some information relating to opening/closing stocks, cash balances, fixed assets, debtors, creditors and the opening capital position can be gotten from the proprietor through interviews.
Also, where there are no reliable records to lay hands on, further inter views with the proprietor may reveal the extent and frequency of cash withdrawals from the business to meet personal obligations as well as cash or assets introduced into the business during the year , to enable the accountant make appropriate estimates.
A „statement of affairs may be prepar ed as at the start of the period and another as at the close of period if the aim is just to let the proprietor have some approximate idea of the period s trading results and the closing net worth.
A „statement of affairs , which is the name given to what would have been called a „balance sheet if it had been dr awn from a set of records, is a summar y of an entity s assets, liabilities and capital at a particular date.
It contains approximate values rather than values disclosed by books of account which have been kept systematically.
A comparison of the net asset position on the two dates (start and close of periods) will show the amount by which the proprietor s capital had increased/decreased during the intervening per iod.
If there were no withdrawals and no new capital introduced during the period, this difference must be of the nature of profit or loss.
To calculate the amount of profit (or loss) realised between the inter vening periods from the relevant statements of affairs would  require, firstly, that we find the net increase in the net asset and then add back drawings (if any)and deduct new capital introduced (if any).
Example: The statement of affairs of Ryzma, a sole proprietor, disc losed capital as at 31st December, 2001 and 2002 as N450,000 and N600,000 respectively.
During the year, Ryzma introduced an old delivery van valued at N100,000 but total drawings in cash and goods amounted to N200,000.
Compute the net profit for the year.
Solution: Net change in net worth (capital): N Closing balance 600,000 Opening balance 450,000 Difference 150,000 Add: Drawings 200,000 Less: Capital introduced 100,000 Net profit for the year 250,000 Let us look at another example: The following information is disclosed in respect of Rodro & Co., who did not maintain a set of accounting records during the year 1st July, 1992 to 30th June, 1993.
You are required to pr epare a set of accounts, highlighting the company s profit for the year as well as the closing networth.
Estimated Values As at 1/7/92 As at 30/6/93 N N Land and Buildings 25,000 24,000 Plant and machiner y 34,000 30,000 Office furniture 6,000 7,000 Motor vehicles - 4,000 Stocks 12,000 15,000 Sundry Debtors 8,000 12,000 Sundry Cr editors 13,000 15,000 Cash 2,000 3,000 During the year, Rodro withdrew cash and goods amounting to N4,500 for his per sonal use.
He, however, brought in sundry assets valued at N3,000.
Prepare statement of affairs for Rodro & Co. highlighting the trading results and the financial position of the fir m.  Solution: Dr.
Statement of Affairs as at 1st July, 1992 Cr.
Date Particulars Folio Amount Date Particular Folio Amount (N) ( N) Networth 74,000.00 Land and (capital) 13,000.00 Buildings 245000.00 Creditors Plant and 34,000.00 Machiner y 6,000.00 Office 12,000.00 Furnitur e 8,000.00 ________ Stocks 2,000.00 87,000.00 Debtors 87,000.00 Cash Dr.
Statement of Affairs as at 30th June, 1993 Cr.
Date Particulars Folio Amount Date Particular Folio Amount (N) (N) Networth 80,000.00 Land and Buildings 24,000.00 (capital) Plant and Machinery 30,000.00 Creditors 15,000.00 Motor Vehicles 4,000.00 Office Furniture 7,000.00 Stocks 15,000.00 Debtors 12,000.00 Cash 3,000.00 ________ 95,000.00 95,000.00 Computation of Net Profit N Net worth at 30/6/93 80,000 Less: Networth at 1/7/92 74,000 Net increase 6,000 Add: Dr awings 4,500 Less: New capital introduced 3,000 Net profit for the year 7,500 Self-Assessment Exercise Explain the difference between „statement of affairs and „balance sheet relative to accounts from incomplete records.
Explain the computation of trading results in a situation of „No records .
3.3 Situation of Partial Records Wher e partial r ecords are kept (which may be r eferred to as single entry accounts), some concerns are able to keep a cash book for much of their transactions that are carried out in cash or through the bank.
However, cash book entries are usually not posted as few or no ledger accounts ar e kept.
In this circumstance, the accountant will have to fall back on basic documents relating to sales, pur chases, cash transactions, etc.
which may be filed, as well as the management for additional information.
It is important to obtain information relating to fixed assets inventory, inventory values, accruals and prepayments.
Also, the accountant may have to convert the entire system into a double entry system first before embarking on the preparation of the final accounts.
When the books are kept on the single entry principle, a common problem which ar ises is the determination of purchases and sales figures in the absence of accounts maintained for these items.
However, the total amounts of sales and purchases for a period can be derived once infor mation is given in respect of the outstanding debtors and creditors at the beginning and close of the per iod, and also, on the total cash movement during the period between the firm and its customers and supplier s. Example: Derive the total sales figure from the following infor mation extracted from a firm s cash book and other relevant records: N Total debtors b/f 5,600 Total cash receipts from debtors and cash sales 153,000 Total debtors c/f 6,800 Dr. Total Debtor s Account Cr.
Date Particulars Fol.
Amount Date Particular Fol.
Amount (N) (N) Balance b/f 5,600.00 Cash Sales (balancing receipts 153,000.00 figure 154,200.00 Balance c/f 6,800.00 159,800.00 159,800.00 Balance b/f 6,800.00 Dr.
Sales Account Cr.
Date Part iculars Folio Amount Date Particular Folio Amount (N) (N) Total Debtors account 154,200  Self Assessment Exercise From the following information relating to a company, you are required to determine the year s purchases: N Total creditors b/f 7,200 Total cash paid to suppliers 98,800 Total creditors c/f 8,400 4.0 CONCLUSION The concept of “Incomplete accounting records” describes two distinct situations where either no records have been kept at all or where partial recor ds are being maintained.
I n either case, there is a deviation from the double entry pr inciple.
The situations make it diff icult or impossible to produce a trial balance or draw up the final accounts at the end of a period.
The task of the accountant, given the situations, is to explore all possible avenues to obtain information in order to create something out of nothing.
5.0 SUMMARY In this unit, we have discussed “Accounts from incomplete r ecords” that denotes deviation from the accounting records which are kept on the complete principle of double entr y.
We have considered situations where no records are kept and where partial records are maintained with emphasis on the job of the account to attempt to make good the situations.
6.0 TUTOR MARKED ASSIGNMENTS Ms Clark, a shop owner, keeps a cash book and a ledger containing personal accounts for debtors and creditors.
At 31st December , 1999 and 31st December, 2000, her assets and liabilities were as follows: 1999 2000 Petty cash balance 100 125 Bank balance 2,000 5,000 Debtors 10,000 12,000 Creditors 15,000 13,000 Inventory 5,000 6,000 Equipment at carrying value 5,000 7,500 The following additional information are ascertained: (i) Drawings during the year amounted to N2,500.
(ii) During the year, a legacy of N3,000 had been paid into the bank as additional capital.
(iii) N50,000 had been paid to creditors for purchases.
(iv) Receipts from debtors amounted to N75,000.
All sales were on credit.
(v) An amount of N1,000 must be written-off as bad debts.
(vi) Depreciation is to be provided for at 10% on carrying value.
(vii) Additional equipment was purchased on 1st July, 1999.
You are REQUIRED to prepare in r espect of Ms Clark s shop: (a) The Trading and Profit and Loss account for the year ended 31st December, 2000 to show the gross profit as well as the net profit.
(b) The balance sheet as at 31st December, 2000.
7.0 REFERENCE AND FURTHER READINGS ACCA (2003) .
Preparing Financial Accounts.
Middlesex: A. T. Foulks Lynch Ltd. Anao, A.R.
(1993).
An Introduction to Financial Accounting.
I badan: Longman Nigeria Limited.
Igben, R.O.
(2004).
Financial Accounting Made Simple (Volume 1) Lagos: ROI Publishers.
Wood, Frank (1990).
Business Accounting I 5th Edition.
London: Pitman Publishing.
UNIT 2: ACCOUNTS OF NON-PROFIT ORGANISATIONS CONTENTS 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objectives 3.0 Accounts of Non-profit Organisations 3.1 Char acteristics of Non-profit Organisations 3.2 Clubs and Associations – Accounting Requirements 3.3 Receipts and Payments Accounts 3.4 I ncome and Expenditure Accounts 4.0 Conclu s i o n 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutor Marked Assignments 7.0 Reference and Further Readings  1.0 INTRODUCTION Accounting, as a tool for measurement and communication, is relevant to both business and non-business situations, to all forms of organisations, whether they exist to make profit or not.
So far in this course, we have assumed accounting situations where the pr imary goal is profit-making.
A non-profit organisation such as a church association, school, social club, sports club or charitable institution is one which is funded by members subscriptions or donations and such funds are used to achieve the objectives of the organisations.
I n its book-keeping, although the basic pr inciples appear the same, the kind of final accounts prepared by a non-profit organisation tend to differ from those prepared by a profit- making outfit.
Therefore, this unit will attempt to explore into the nature of non-profit organisations, their accounting requirements as well as the nature of final accounts prepared by them.
2.0 OBJECTIVES At the end of this unit, you will be able to: - Explain the characteristics of non-profit organisations; - Explain the accounting requirements of clubs and associations; - Prepare receipts and payments accounts; - Prepare income and expenditure accounts.
3.0 ACCOUNTS OF NON-PROFIT ORGANISATIONS 3.1 Characteristics of Non-profit Organisations It is the nature of non-profit organisations, as their name implies, to carry on their activities without the profit motive.
They may trade or carry on any other type of business but with the aim of rendering service at the minimum cost.
This suggests that they may charge for the services just to r ecover costs with little or no surplus.
The surplus (not profit) they may make could be regar ded as a by-product.
Usually, by way of capital, there is little per manent investment by members.
Any permanent fund is usually the outcome of periodic surpluses of receipts over payments or income over expenditure accumulated over a number of years.
Non-profit organisations usually have “Accumulated Fund” (as we shall see later) in place of “Capital”, and as a result, member s have no proprietary right which they may withdraw or transfer upon cessation of membership.
The usual sources of revenue for non-profit concerns are fees, periodic subscriptions and donations.
At times, some trading activities may be carried out and a little margin made therefrom, for example, sale of magazines or journals, sale of food and drinks in a club house, etc.
Also, fund-raising activities like exhibitions and var iety nights, may be organised, from time to time, to get money.
The kind of final accounts prepared by non-profit organisations are either „Receipts and Payments accounts or „Income and Expenditure accounts.
Self-Assessment Exercise Discuss the features of non-profit organisations.
3.2 Clubs and Associations – Accounting Requirements The final accounts which are presented to members of non-profit organisations usually r eports to what extent incomes fr om all sources were enough to meet the expenses incurred during a particular period.
Here, “income” can be viewed or adopted either on cash basis or accrual basis.
When the cash basis is adopted, a receipts and payments account is prepared but if situation warrants adopting the accrual basis, an income and expenditure account is prepared.
We shall explain these statements shortly.
A balance sheet, as in the case of profit-making concerns, is also usually prepared which shows the summarised values of assets, liabilities and the accumulated fund being carried forward to the next period.
Self-Assessment Exercise What are the accounting requirements of non-profit organisations?
3.3 Receipts and Payments Accounts Receipts and payments accounts ar e merely a summary of the cash book for the period.
In other words, it is a summary of all the cash transactions car ried out during a per iod.
This may be adopted when a very small non-profit concer n carries out transactions on cash basis and does not feel the need for more sophisticated infor mation other than merely being interested in assessing the entity s liquidity position.
As a measure of success or otherwise of the activities of the period, the receipts and payments accounts suffer some drawbacks arising mainly from the exclusive reliance on receipts and payments (cash movements) as the evidence that the transaction has taken place.
Thus, they do not adequately disclose the results of the organisation s activities during a period because: they do not take account of credit transactions – debtors and cr editor s are not disclosed; they fail to make a distinction between capital and revenue items; they take no account of accruals and prepayments.
Example: Fitness Sports Club was formally established on 1st January, 2004 and was granted the free use of a clubhouse at Kokoma.
The following are its financial transactions for the year ended 31st December, 2004 as recor ded in the treasurer s only financial record, the cash book: Dr. Receipts and Payments Account Cr.
Date Particulars Folio Amount Date Particulars Folio Amount (N) (N) Balance b/d 16,500.00 Wages 1,300.00 Subscriptions 800.00 Equipment 4,000.00 Admission fees 1,500.00 Wages 1,300.00 Proceeds from Wages 1,200.00 jour nal sales 2,000.00 Subscriptions 4,000.00 Donations 2,300.00 Balance c/d 19,300.00 27,100.00 27,100.00 Balance b/d 19,300.00  You are required to prepare a statement of receipts and payments for the year ended 31st December , 2004.
FITNESS SPORTS CLUB STATEMENT OF RECEIPTS AND PAYMENTS FOR THE YEAR ENDED 31ST DECEMBER, 2004 N N Balance b/d (opening balance) 16,500.00 Add: Receipts: Subscriptions 4,800.00 Admission fees 1,500.00 Sales of journals 2,000.00 Donations 2,300.00 10,600.00 27,100.00 Less: Payments: Wages 3,800.00 Equipment 4,000.00 7,800.00 Balance c/d (closing balance) 19,300.00 Explanation: The statement is prepared on a cash flow basis and reflects only the receipts and payments of cash.
No cognisance is taken of the fact that income and expenditure of a capital nature, such as the purchase of equipment, has taken place.
No cognisance is taken of items such as subscr iptions which may be in arrears or prepaid.
Self-Assessed Exercise Discuss the disadvantages inherent in adopting the receipts and payments accounts as a measure of the performance of non- profit organisations activities dur ing a per iod.
3.4 Income and Expenditure Accounts The limitations of the receipts and payments accounts make it necessar y for many non- profit organisations to present reports which are prepared on the accrual basis and in accordance with the principles of double entry.
Income is recognised once it is realised whether or not proceeds have actually been received.
In like manner, all costs would be taken into account once they have been incurred whether or not they have actually been paid.
In effect, income and expenditure accounts have to  be prepared on the basis of systematic standard procedur es of book- keeping.
The income concept, as disclosed by the income and expenditure account, is much mor e accurate than that disclosed by the receipts and payments account.
Note that income and expenditur e account, and the profit and loss account are the same in form and structur e, but differ conceptually, for example: In the income and expenditure account, revenue r efers to fees, subscriptions, donations received as against “Sales” in the profit and loss account.
The difference between revenue and expenditure is known as “surplus” or “deficit” as against “profit” or “loss”.
Example: Assume that in addition to the transactions recorded in the receipts and payments of Fitness Sports Club in 3.3 above, the following information is made available by the Treasurer: (i) On 1st January, 2004, the club had the following assets: Bank Balance N16,500.00 Equipment at carrying value 6,000.00 (ii) The register of club member s shows: Membership at 1st January, 2004 20 Joined during the year 5 Membership at 31st December, 2004 25 Club members each pay an annual subscription of N300.00 and new members pay an additional admission fee of N300.00.
At 31st December, 2004, one member had already paid his subscription for the year to 31st December, 2005.
It is not the club s practice to treat admission fees as income but as a contribution towards accumulated funds.
(iii) At the end of each year, 20% of the carrying value of equipment is to be treated as depreciation.
(iv) The Editor/Marketer of the journal provided documentation indicating that N6,100.00 had been raised and that expenses had totalled N4,100.00.
Required: Prepare a statement of income and expenditure for the year ended 31st December, 2004, and a balance sheet as at that date.
Solution: FITNESS SPORTS CLUB STATEMENT OF INCOME AND EXPENDITURE FOR THE YEAR ENDED 31ST DECEMBER, 2004 N N Income: Subscr iptions (25 x N300) 7,500.00 Sales of journals 6,100.00 Donations 2,300.00 15,900.00 Less: Expenses: Journal expenses 4,100.00 Wages 3,800.00 Depreciation (20% of N10,000) 2,000.00 9,900.00 Surplus of income over expenditur e 6,000.00 FITNESS SPORTS CLUB BALANCE SHEET AS AT 31ST DECEMBER, 2004 N N ASSET: Fixed Assets: Equipment at cost less depreciation (10,000 – 2,000) 8,000.00 Current Assets: Subscr iptions in arrear s 3,000.00 Cash at bank 19,300.00 22,300.00 Total Assets 30,300.00 EQUITY AND LIABI LITIES: Accumulated Funds: Balance beginning of year (16,500 + 6,000) 22,500.00 Add: Surplus 6,000.00 Admission fees (5 x 300) 1,500.00 30,000.00 Current Liabilities:  Subscriptions in advance 300.00 Total Equity and Liabilities 30,300.00 Explanation: The opening accumulated fund of N22,500.00 is the bank balance (16,500) plus the equipment (N6,000) as these were the only assets on hand on 1st January.
The adjustments for subscriptions ( nominal account) and depr eciation were made.
Self-Assessment Exercise Distinguish between Receipts and Payments account and Income and Expenditure account relative to non-profit organisations.
4.0 CONCLUSION We wish to conclude that non-profit organisations, as the name suggests, exist not for profit-making but to achieve the objectives for which they are established.
They could be churches, sports clubs, charitable organisations, etc.
What appear s to be „profit at the end of their accounting per iod is regarded as „surplus which results from receipts in excess of payments.
Between the profit-making and non-profit organisations, although they adopt similar basic principles of book- keeping, they prepare different final accounts.
Non-profit organisations prepare receipts and payments account or income and expenditure account instead of profit and loss account.
Also, they have “accumulated fund” in place of “capital” in the balance sheet.
Receipts and payments accounts are not actually accounts but summary statements – summarises all cash transactions carried out during the period.
Their major limitation lies on their being prepared on cash basis hence they do not adequately disclose the organisation s r esults at the end of the period.
On the other hand, the income and expenditure accounts are prepared on accr ual basis and according to the principles of double entry.
Therefore, cognisance is taken of credit transactions (debtors and creditor s), accr uals and prepayments as well as the distinction between capital and revenue items.
5.0 SUMMARY In this unit, you have been exposed to the nature of non-profit organisations and their accounting requirements.
We have also considered the prepar ation of their final accounts – receipts and payments accounts, income and expenditure accounts, and the balance sheet.
However, because of the limitations of the receipts and payments accounts, income and expenditure accounts are better preferred.
6.0 TUTOR-MARKED ASSIGNMENTS The treasurer of the I nland Football Club gives you the following summar y of his cash book for the year ended 30 June, 1997: N N Balance at commencement of Salaries and wages 19,600 Year: Rent and rates 3,800 At bank 6,300 Printing and stationery 1,800 In hand 1,000 Affiliation fees 1,200 Subscr iptions: Captain s and treasurer s exps.
3,700 Supporters 15,000 Refreshments for visiting teams 6,100 Supporters – 1998 season 2,000 Annual social fund 10,200 Share of gate takings 32,000 Equipment purchased 2,600 Annual social 13,400 Balances at close of year: At bank 19,900 _____ In hand 800 69,700 69,700 The Secretary also gives you the following information: 30 June 1996 30 June 1997 Amounts due to the club: Supporters subscriptions 1,400 1,200 Share of gate takings 7,800 5,300 Re: Annual social fund (deficit) 600 - Amounts owing by the club: Rent and rates 1,200 1,400 Printing - 300 Treasurer s expenses 400 800 Refreshments 1,300 1,200 On 30 June, 1996, the club s equipment appeared in the books at N15,000.
It is desired that 20 percent be written off the book value of the equipment as it appears on 30 June, 1997.
Yo u are required to: Prepare the inco me and expenditure account showing the result for the year ended 30 June, 1997, and the balance sheet as at that date.
7.0 REFERENCE AND FURTHER READINGS Anao , A.R.
( 1989).
An Introduction to Financial Acco unting.
Ibadan: Longman Niger ia Limited.
Flynn, David et.
Al.
( 2000) .
Fundamental Accounting 4th Edition, Kenwyn: Juta & Co. Limited.
Wood, Frank (1990).
Business Acco unting I 5th Edition Lo ndo n: Pitman Publishing.
