 NATIONAL OPEN UNIVERSITY OF NIGERIA SCHOOL OF MANAGEMENT SCIENCES COURSE CODE: HCM 439 COURSE TITLE: HOTEL PLANNING ND INTERIOR DECORATION Course Code: HCM 439 Course Title: Hotel Planning and Interior Decoration Course Developer: Dr. (Mrs.) Adebimpe Okhiria Course Editor: Programme Leader: Dr. (Mrs.) A.O.
Fagbemi School of Management Sciences National Open University of Nigeria Course Coordinator: Miss F. E. Nnanna School of Management Sciences National Open University of Nigeria 1  CONTENTS PAGE Introduction……………………………………………………………….1 Planning in the Hotel Industry…………………………………………… 1 Course objectives……………………………………………………….... 1 Hotel planning concepts………………………………………………….. 4 Hotel concept and gaming Entertainment………………………………... 7 Interior design decoration ……………………………………………….. 10 Interior decoration/design ……………………………………………….
18 Psychology of colors…………………………………………………….. 23 Interior decoration with relationship to beauty ………………………….
34 Housing development and building design……………………………… 39 Project design…………………………………………………………….
45 Planning and design of food and beverage service area ………………… 49 Hotel facility design and architectural construction …………………….. 53 Hotel facility design……………………………………………………… 54 The space allocation programs in hotel plan …………………………….. 59 Hospitality marketing …………………………………………………….
63 Hospitality sales and marketing ………………………………………….
69 2 Forecasting ……………………………………………………………….
74 Planning concept in the sales of hospitality services …………………….
78 Hotel planning, marketing criteria and the business of selling ………….. 85 Business of selling hotel facilities ……………………………………….
89 The need for management information system ………………………….
93 MODULE 1 Unit 1 – Planning in the Hotel Industry Unit 2 – Hotel Planning Concept Unit 3 –Hotel Concept and Gaming Entertainment Unit 4 – Interior Design/Art Decor UNIT 1 – PLANNINGIN THE HOTEL INDUSTRY CONTENTS 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objective 3.0 Main Contents 3 3.1 Proper Planning in the Hotel Industry 3.2 Sound Decision Making 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutor – Marked Assignment 7.0 References PLANNINGIN THE HOTEL INDUSTRY 1.0 INTRODUCTION: Planning is the management process of looking into the future in order to establish goals for an organization.Planning provides the framework so that the work of the enterprise promotes a desired purpose and everyone in the organization works towards the objectives.
It is a process by which managers analyze the organization and its environment and design courses of action to achieve the set objectives.
Success of every hotel is a function of effectiveness and efficiency of planning and control measures applied in the entire operation.
2.0 OBJECTIVE: At the end of this unit you should be able to (a) evaluate the effectiveness and efficiency of planning and control measures applied in the management of hotel (b) Good decision making in Hotel business.
3.0 MAIN CONTENT 3.1 Effective Planningproper planning is essential for the effective control of cost in the hotel.
The failure to plan and set standards, objectives and practicable lines of action and control measures have been identified as one of the most common reasons for business failure.Control is management processes by which managers are allowed to direct, regulate restrain the actions of people and consequence effect of people’s action in order to achievegoals.
In any hospitality organization, daily events raises need for action by the management.
Thus, effective management must be prepared to see that proper decisions are made so that the operation functions effectively, poorlydevice action or in action by management can ultimately cause an operation and records must be maintained.
Employees must be selected with care and given adequate training.
Personnel records must be established 4 and maintained, complete with job descriptions.
Supervisors must be properly Instructed as to plans and actions and must be given adequate authority and backing to ensure that work professes satisfactorily, planning, production and service must be flowsmoothly so that customers are satisfied and functions occur when they should.
Making the operation run clockwise requires considerable planning skill.
3.2 Sound decision making:Is a product of good judgment, practical knowledge and positive thinking.
The hotel catering business is a dynamic, fast changing one and management must be equal to the demands.
The industry relies on the productivity of human beings for consumers or guest satisfaction.
For whatever reasons, today’s worker does not share the same attitudes and reactions held by workers in the past, workers who lived and worked through depression period regard job security as their principal motivation for working.
But today’s “baby boomars” who make up a large proportion of the work force are more motivated by job satisfaction and opportunity rather than job security.
Therefore, a hospitality manager today must learn not only about personnel management and also human resources development.
4.0 CONCLUSION: Both planning and control are two fundamental elements in the process of managing business and are considered with future expectations.Planning and control measure is relevant because it ensures optimization of organization’s inputs.
It ensure greater out put it also enhance proper allocation of resources hence, budgeted cost and time could be adequately utilized.
So as to ensure profit maximization and efficient services delivery to clients.
For the management, it will assist them to develop a culture of under standing planning and control measures so as to positively enhance job and customer satisfaction.
Both the economy and performance of organization improve through effective and efficient application of planning and control measures.
5.0 SUMMARY:The success of every business enterprises depends on how carefully its activities are planned and controlled.
Planning and control are not independent activities.
Control depends upon and affects plans.
However, despite the relevance of planning and control in the success of every organization, many hotels have failed while some hotels are still in operations with their physical facilities deteriorating, others have gone out of business completely due to 5 wrong approach in performing these important management functions of planning and control.
6.0 TUTOR MARKED ASSIGNMENT 1.
Discuss in detail, the effectiveness of planning the hotel enterprise.
7.0 Reference: 1.
Stokes, D (1997); Hotel planning and marketing.
A case study Apprech London.
Press pg 20 – 34 2.
Tom Powers, (2001) Introduction to Management in the Hospitality Industry Fourth edition Britain shop ton Publishers.
Pg 301 – 311.
UNIT 2: HOTEL PLANNING CONCEPTS CONTENTS 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objective 3.0 Main Content 3.1.1 Policies in Planning 3.1.2 Rules, methods and procedures 3.1.3 Standard 3.1.4 Budget 3.1.5 Strategy and tactics 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutor – Market Assignment 1.0 INTRODUCTION In the last unit, we discussed planning as the management process of looking into the future in order to establish goals for an organization.
Also planning can determine the success of any hotel this depends on proper planning, setting of standards, objectives, practicable lines of actions and effective control measure.
6 This unit will discuss management policies, riles standards, budget and strategy and tactics.
2.0 OBJECTIVE At the end of this unit, you should be able to; (cid:1) Know the roles of plan policies, budget and strategy in hotel business management.
(cid:1) Differentiate between policies, plans and standards (cid:1) Know how to apply the right strategies and tactics in running hotel business.
3.0 MAIN CONTENT 3.1 An absence of conscious planning leads to two related kinds of problems, employee confusion at work and lack of direction and control by the management.
Thus, effective planning coupled with relevant policies, good standard, budget and effective strategy will carry the hotel to high levels of productivity and profitability.
3.1.1 Policies in Planning Policies are general guides for dealing with the future.
They don’t tell what to do, they indicate how to reach a decision.
Policies leave much to the discretion of the decision maker, but they provide a predetermined agreed upon begin for decision.
3.1.2 Rules, Methods and Procedures Rules states what must be done, or must not be done in a giving situation.
Rules leave no discretion in their execution.
Methods and procedures resemble rules.
Method indicates how a standard job is to be done.
Procedures are a sequential set of rules stating how a specific duty should be carried out.
The procedures could be how to mix and harmonise the ingredients of fruit cake or that of fish pies.
Following the laid down procedures will lead to tested and accepted standard.
3.1.3 STANDARDS Do not specify procedures but the outcomes.
Some standard pertain to cost control and many relate to quality control.
Quality standard determine for instance, how food should taste or what quantity of nutrients should be present, as in the approved plan school meals.
3.1.4 BUDGET 7 A budget is a numerical generally 3.1.5 STRATEGY AND TACTICS Are terms to denote level of importance and time dimension of plans strategy impieties large scale, high level and long term commitment.
Strategies are concerned with the overall goals and the general means of achieving them.
Tactics: Are specific, relating methods to individual circumstances.
Hotels have different tactics they used to increase sales; this depends on location, environment and goals.
A hotel chain may develop a marketing strategy that relates the hotels services to the guest it seeks to serve and that prescribes, in general, how their patronage will be sought.
4.0 CONCLUSION Planning and the usage of other management tools i.e.
policies, rules methods and procedures and standard can not be effectively managed without effective plan; good policies and standard with the right strategy and tactics in running the business.
5.0 SUMMARY This unit has been able to highlight the essential roles of planning good policies, setting standard and budgets in running hotel business.
6.0 TUTOR – MARKED ASSIGNMENT 1.
Describe the meaning and the use of policy, rules, standard and budget in running a hotel business 2.
Discuss the outcome when a hotel management do not operate a laid down policy nor operate on standard.
7.0 REFERENCES Stokes, D (1997): Hotel planning and marketing; a case study Approach London.
Press Ltd Pg 39 – 51.
8 UNIT 3 HOTEL CONCEPT AND GAMING ENTERTAINMENT CONTENTS 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objectives 3.0 Main Contents 3.1 Food and Beverage Operations 3.2 Casino Operation 3.3 Entertainment Operation 3.4 Trends in the Gaming Entertainment Industry 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutor Marked Assignment 7.0 References 1.0 INTRODUCTION Hotel business can be viewed from various perspectives but it remains a unique industry that plays a fundamentalroles in the social and economic lives of travelers tourists and the host community where it is located.
It has many units that performs various functions and services towards guests satisfaction, safety and care.
They include the following.
The rooms and guest services departments offer the most opportunities for students of hospitality management.
However, hotel with gaming entertainment are more in number than non gaming hotels and departments.They also have a large number of supervision reporting to them and more responsibilities.
2.0 OBJECTIVE At the end of this module, students should be able to know; i.
That high quality food and beverage service are offered to customers by gaming entertainment industry.
ii.
Classifying casino operation jobs into five functional areas iii.
Have a comprehensive idea on the gaming industry.
3.0 MAIN CONTENTS 3.1 Food and Beverage operation 9 Gaming entertainment has a foundation of high-quality food and beverage service in a wide varity of styles and concepts.
Some of the best food services operation in the hospitality industry are found in gaming entertainment operation units.
There are many career opportunities in cookingand the culinary arts.
As with hotel operations, gaming entertainment properties are typically very large and contain numeric foral and beverage outlets, including a number of entertainment, hotel room services, banquette and conventions.
3.2 Casino operation Casino operation jobs fall into five functional area, gaming generations staff slot machine,lection claims, table game dealers and table game supervisor, casino service staff include, security, purchasing and maintenance and facilities engineers, marketing staff includes public relations market research and advertising professionals.
Human resource staff includes employee relation, compensation, staffing and training specialists.
Finance and administration staff includes lawyers, accounts payable, audit, payroll and income control specialists.
All these personells have various specific duties they perform individually towards the gaming entertainment.
3.3 Entertainment operation Because of the increased competition, gaming entertainment companies are creating bigger and better production shows to turn their properties into destination attraction.
As a result of this,management does not concentrate solely on entertainment.
There exist career opportunities for thepersonnel working on stage,and other staff in charge ofmanagement, artist, and others for various administrative works.
3.4 Trends in the Gaming Entertainment industry (cid:2) Gaming entertainment is depending less on casino revenue and more on room, food and beverage, and entertainment revenue for its profitability and growth.
(cid:2) The gaming entertainment industry and holding industry are converging as hotel room inventory is rapidly expending in gaming entertainment properties.
10 (cid:2) As gaming entertainment industry become more competitive, exceptional service quality will become an increasing important competitive advantage for success among the practitioners.
(cid:2) The gaming entertainment industry will continue to provide management opportunities for careers in the hospitality business.
4.0 CONCLUSION Now, you should be able to know what gaming entertainment industry is all about and also be able to classify casino services and trades in gaming industry.
5.0 SUMMARY In this unit, the area we have dealt with are essentially operations of game entertainment industry and casino operation jobs classification.
6.0 Tutor-Marked Assignment 1.
Briefly describe the industry of legalized gaming and its modes of operation.
2.
How are hotel operations in a gaming business different from hotel operation in a non gaming environment.
7.0 REFERENCES a) Caseram and Kinton (1990).
The theory of catering.6th edition Hodder and Stoughton Educational, a Drusion of Hodder Headline pic, 338 Euston Road, London NWI 3bh.
Pg 73 – 429. b) Anita Tull (1995).
Food and Nutrition.Oxford University press.
Pg 20 – 45.
UNIT 4 INTERIOR DESIGN/ART DÉCOR CONTENTS 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objective 3.0 Main Contents 3.1 History of the interior Design profession in the U.S 3.2 Interior Design 3.3 Interior Design Education 3.4 Art Décor Style in Interior Design 11  3.5 On Television and Radio 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutor – MarkedAssignment 7.0 References 1.0 Introduction– Interior design describes a group of various yet related projects that involves turning an interior space into an effective setting for the range of human activities that are to take place.
An interior designer is someone who conducts such projects.
Interior design is a multifaceted profession that includes conceptual development, Liasing with the state holders of a project and the management and execution of the design.
2.0 Objective – At this module, we should be able to know: (1) The history of the interior design profession in the United States.
(2) Who is an interior design?
(3) Explain interior design education (4) Explain Art deco style in interior design.
3.0 MAIN CONTENT 3.1 History of the interior design profession in the US.
In the past, interiorswere put together instinctively as a part of the process of building.
(1) The profession of interior design has been a consequence of the development of society and the complex architecture that has resulted from the contributed to the development of the contemporary interior design profession.
In ancient India, architects used to work as interior designers.
This can be seen from the references of Vishwakarma the architect- one of the Gods in Indian mythology.
Additionally, the sculptures depicture depecting ancient texts, events are seen in palaces built in 17th century India.
12 Throughout the 18th century and into the early 19th Century, interior decoration was the concern of the homemaker or, in well off families an upholsterer or craftsman may in influence the style of the interior space.
Architects would also employ craftsman or artisans to complete interior design for their buildings.
Towards the end of the 19th century interior decoration emerged as a profession in the western world.
This was due to various actions, particularly by women, to professionalize the homemaking process.
Elsie De Wolfe has been credited with the creation of the interior decorating profession.
(2) Having successfully re-designed her own home.
De Wolfe began offering her services to other people within her social circle.
As people began offering interior decoration as a service, the professionalization of this service gained momentum.
This movement towards professionalization was reinforced by the publication of books on the subject.
Publications include the book Suggestions for House Decoration in Painting, Woodwork and Furniture (1876) by Anges and Rhoda Garrett, Elsie De Wolfe’s The House in Good Taste (1913) and articles by Candice Wheeler such as Principles of Home Decoration with Practical Examples (1903).
Most of the books were published by women and clearly suggested the profession was within the women’s domain, E.g.
The two-part article Interior Decoration as a Profession for Women (1985), written by Cadice Wheeler.
As previously mentioned, before formal interior decorators evolved the job was the concern of craftsmen or upholsterers.
This means that many ‘decorator’ at this time were dealers in the elements needed for interiors.
This called into question the qualifications of the decorator and their standard as an independent advisor.
This gave term interior decorator negative connotations for some, as a painter or curtain sales person can be a self-appointed decorator.
Hence, the decorators favoured term Interior Designer.
Interior design has now developed past the point of decoration and the terms, although overlapping, are distinct.
The most prominent development of the interior design profession was after World War II.
From the 1950s onwards spending on the home increased.
Interior design courses were established, requiring the publication of textbooks and reference sources.
Historical accounts of interior designers and firms distinct from the decorative arts specialists were made available.
While organizations do regulate education, qualifications, standard and practices, etc.
were established for the profession.
13 Interior design was previously seen as playing a secondary role to architecture.
It also has many connections to other design disciplines, involving the work of architects, industrial designers, builders, craftsmen, etc.
For these reasons the government of interior design standards and qualifications was often incorporated into other professional organizations that involved design.
Organizations such as the Chartered Society of Designers, established in the UK in 1986, and the American Designers Institute, founded in 1938, were established as organizations that governed various areas of design.
It was not until later that specific representation for the interior profession was developed.
The US national Society of Interior Designers was established in 1957, while in the UK the interior Decorators and Designers Association was established in 1966.
Across Europe, other organizations as the Finnish Association of Interior Architects (1949) were being established and in 1994 the International interior Design Association was founded.
Ellen mazur Thomson, author of Origins of Graphic Design in America (1997), determined that professional status is achieved through education, self-imposed standards and professional gate-keeping organizations.
Having achieved this; interior design became an accepted profession.
3.2 Interior Designer Interior Designer implies that there is more of an emphasis on Planning, Functional design and effective use of space involved in this profession, as compared to interior decorating.
An interior designer can undertaken projects that include arranging the basic layout of spaces within a building as well as projects that require an understanding of technical issues such as acoustics, lighting, temperature etc.
Although an interior designer may create the layout of a space, they may not build the space without having their designs stamped for approval by an architect, which is why many interior designers also complete school to become architects as well.
An interior designer may wish to specialize in a particular type of interior design in order to develop technical knowledge specific to that area.
Types of interior design include residential design, commercial design, hospitality design, healthcare design, universal design, exhibition design, spatial branding, etc.
3.3 Interior Design Education 14 There are various paths that one can take to become a professional interior designer.
All of these paths involve some form of training.
Working with a successful professional designer is an informal method of training and has previously been the most common method of education.
Real-life experience can gradually build skills that professional design work demands.
Training through an institution such as a college, art or design school or university is a more formal route to professional practice.
A formal education program, particularly one accredited by or developed with a professional organization of interior designers, can provide training that is associated meets a minimum standard of excellence and therefore gives a student an education of a high standard.
Supervised practical experience in a design firm after formal training produces develops skills further and results in one being a highly skilled designer.
While one can become an interior designer without formal training, the knowledge and skills attained through structured education allows a designer to be better prepared in a competitive job market.
3.4 Art Deco Style in Interior Design The Art style began in Europe in the early years of the 20th century, with the waning of Art Nouveau.
The team “Art Deco” was taken from the Exposition Internationale des Arts DecoratifsetIndustrielsModernes, a world’s fair held in Paris in 1925.
Art Deco rejected many traditional classical influences in favor of more streamlined geometric forms and metallic color.
The Art Deco style influenced all areas of design, especially interior design, because it was the first style of interior decoration to spotlight new technologies and materials.
Art Deco style is mainly based on geometric shapes, “streamlining” and clean lines.
The well-maintained Muswell Hill Odeon was an Art Deco style interior.
Its striking lighting fixtures include an illuminated ribbon running down the middle of the ceiling to the top of the screen, which creates a streamlined effect, with a circular light be placed in the recessed ceiling area as a focal point.
The geometrical shapes, angular edges and clean lines offer a sharp, cool look of mechanized living utterly at odds with anything that came before.
The spacious lounge of Chicago’s 1929 Powhatan apartments which designed by Robert S. Degolyer and Charles L. Morgan is also a key Art Deco icon.
These apartments note the geometric patterns on the ceiling’s light panels, as well as on the mouldings, grilles and pelmet.
All of these geometric patterns provide by sharp angels and well-define lines that give the whole space a clean and elegant looking.
15 As the influence of industrial power, the Art Deco has to be seemed as one of the most exciting decorative styles of the century.
The Art Deco reject the traditional materials of decoration and interior design, instead option to use more unusual materials such as chrome, glass, stainless steel, shiny fabrics, mirrors, aluminum, lacquer, inlaid wood, sharkskin, and zebra skin.
Stemming from this use of harder, matellic is the celebration of the machine age.
Some of the materials used in art deco styleinteriors are direct reflection of the time period.
Materials like stainless steel, aluminum, lacquer, and inlaid woods all reflect the modern age that was ushered in after the end of the World Warl and the steel and aluminum reflect the growing aviation movement of the time.
The innovative combinations of these materials create theatrical contrasts which very popular at the end of the 1during the 1930s, for example, the mixing highly polished wood and black lacquer with satin and furs.
The barber shop in the Austin Reed store in London was designed by P.J.
Westwood.
It was the trendiest barber shop in Britain by using metallic materials.
The whole barber shop was a gleaming ovoid space of mirrors; marble, chrome and frosted glass.
The most exciting design was the undulating waves lighting fixture that forming by the continous arcs of neon tubing, and support by chrome structure.
The used of new technologies and materials emphasis the feature of Art Deco style.
The popular color themes in Art Deco consist of metallic color, neutral color, bright color and, black and white.
The primary color use of Art Deco interior design is predominant by cool metallic colors including silver, gold, metallic blue, charcoal grey and platinum.
These metallic colors not only create a shiny and glitz look to express the wealth and prosperity of the times, but also emphasis the look of Art Deco interior design by giving life to the numerous geometrical shapes that defines this styles.
Serge Chermayeff is a Russian designer who made extensive use of cool metallic colors and luxurious surface in his room schemes.
The 1930 showroom for a British dressmaking firm has silver-grey background and black mirrored-glass wall panels which created a typical Art Deco of metallic look.
Art Deco style color schemes started out with neutral colors such as beige, taupe, cream and medium brown.
These neutral colors can easily achieve the feeling about streamlined and modern look.
The black and white was also a very popular color scheme during the 1920s and 1930s, like the black and white checkerboard tiles, floors and wallpapers were very trendy in that time.
As the style developed, bright vibrant color 16 became popular as well.
For interior design, Art Deco incorporates a verity of creative color combinations into its décor.
The walls were often painted with a glossy finish to highlight the brightness of the Art Deco style.
The colours were usually use plain and neutral colors with the bold, stylized and metallic patterns.
The practice of painting each wall in a different color is very common in the Art Deco style of interior design.
Since the furniture and lighting fixture are the very significant parts of interior design, the features of art deco style also work the same in furniture and lighting design as well.
Art Deco furnishings and lighting fixtures have a glossy, luxurious appearance.
Art Deco is a streamlined, geometric style which often includes furniture use glossy and curved edges, geometric shapes and clean lines.
Art deco furniture use glossy and shiny with inlaid wood and reflective finishes.
The materials of chrome, aluminum, glass, mirrors and lacquered wood can create glossy and brilliant surfaces that define this style.
Art Deco lighting fixtures often make use of the stacked geometric patterns.
Most fixtures were made from polished bronze chrome or steel in order to shiny, sleek look that was most associated with Art Deco.
3.5 On Television and Radio Interior design has become the subject of television shows.
In the United Kingdom (UK), popular interior design and decorating programs include 60 Minute Makeover (ITV), Changing Rooms (BBC) and selling houses (Channel 4).
Famous interior designers whose work is featured in these programs include Linda Barker and Laurence Llewelyn- Bowen.
In the UnitedState, the TLC Network aired a popular program called Trading Spaces, a show based on the UK program Changing Rooms.
In Canada, popular shows include Divine Design with Candice Olsen and Design Inc., featuring Sarah Richardson.
In addition, both Home & Garden Television (HGTV) AND THE Discovery Home networks also televise many programs about interior design and decorating, featuring the works of a variety of interior designers, decorators and home improvement experts in a myriad of projects.
4.0 CONCLUSION Having studied this unit, you should be able to understand what interior design profession is all about, who is a designer and interior design education.
17 5.0 SUMMARY This unit has given us enlightmenton what interior design cost of, the socio economic roles in the society.
The interior designer and interior design education.
6.0 TUTOR – MARKED ASSIGNMENT 1.
Compare Interior design and Interior decoration 2.
Explain the history of the interior design profession in the United States.
3.
Interior design has become the subject of television shows.
Briefly comment on this statement.
7.0 REFERENCES 1.
Flanner, J.
(2009) Archive hand springs Acriss the SQ.
Ward Lock Ltd London Sydney Pp 37-67.
2.
Less-Maffei, G. 2008.
Introduction professional as a focus in Interior Design History.Journal of design history, Vol 21, No 1, Pg 21-32.
3.
Tinnis Wood, Adrian.
The art Deco House; Avant-Garde House of the 1920s and 1930s.Watsonguptill Publishing Company, new York, 2002.
Pg 121-130 4.
Duncan, alas fair, “Art Deco Lighting”.
The Journal of Decovalue and Propaganda Arts.Vol.
1 (Spring 1986).
Pg 25-36.
5.
Stanly Meister, Art Deco: The Last Hunah.
The metropolisan museum of Art Bulletin.
New series, Vol.
30:21.
Pg 28-33.
MODULE 2 Unit 1 – InteriorDecoration/Design Unit 2 – Psychology of Colours Unit 3 – Management of Living Space Unit 4 – Design of Living Space Unit 5 – Interior Decoration with Relationship to Beauty 18 UNIT 1 – INTERIOR DECORATION/DESIGN CONTENT 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objective 3.0 Main Content 3.1 Application of Design Principal to Interior Decoration 3.2 The Interior Decoration Design 3.3 Interior Decoration Design and Renovation requirements 3.4 Colour design 3.4.1 Classification of colour 3.4.2 Colour Chart or Wheel 3.4.3 Some Important Terms of know About Colours 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutor Market Assignment 7.0 References 1.0 INTRODUCTION – Interior decoration/design is the act of decorating a room so that, it is attractive, easy, to use and functions well with the existing architecture.
The role of interior decorator probably came into existence in the 1720s in Western Europe, mostly being performed by men of diverse backgrounds William Kent, was trained as a first person to take change of an entire interior, including internal architecture, furniture selection, and the handling of paintings in his own time and among the elites, in this industry role was frequently filled by the upholsterer (sometimes called the upholder), while in Paris the marchand – marcier (a merchant of goods who acts as general contractor) offen filled this role.
2.0 Objective – At the end of the module, student should know the; (1) Role of Interior decoration in architecture design.
(2) Its application principle to management of living space.
3.0 MAIN CONTENT 3.1 Application of Design Principles to Interior Decoration 19 Interior Decoration is an act of beatifying rooms and other indoor areas of a house so that they become attractive, comfortable and useful.
Floors, walls and ceiling are often decorated using furniture and fixtures, carpets and rugs, draperies or curtains, lightings, paints, wall coverings, as well as many other items that may constitute to the creation of an interior that is beautiful.
The interior of a house offen tells the story of what type of people live there, when we look at the colours, crafts and fine arts, arrangement for beauty and efficiency it is at ones reveals the individuals personalities of the members as the collective character of the family as a whole.
There is no denying facts that our grand parents lived in dull and drab houses for wants of suitable colour in those days.
Our houses should be a place for comfort, peace and relaxing the mind.
So we must have the plan of colour in room to produce a positive effect on our minds.
3.2 The Interior Decoration Design This is the intended arrangement of materials to produce a desired result and effect.
The principle of design can be seen most cleanly in visual arts of draining, painting, and architecture.
Painting wall with lines, shapes and colours.
They are also concerned with division of lines, the use of shapes and the shading of the colour they try to arrange all these elements into a pattern that will seem emotionally satisfying to the speculator.
If this effort is obtained, the design will have unity harmony.
3.3 Interior Decoration Design and Renovation Requirement Some of those elements of designs include; colour, line, texture, balance and shape/form.
3.4 Colour:Colour does not really exist, but it supply the decomposition of white light, which is composed of the seven colour in the spetrum.
This can easily be demonstrated by passing a ray of light through glass prison.
To an artist it is regarded as a pigment.
3.4.1 Classification of Colour Colour may be divided into three classes; primary, secondary and tertiary colours.
(a).
Primary Colours – these are red, yellow and blue.
They are so called because they are the only colour that can not be obtained by mixing other colours.
20 (b).
Secondary colour – where 2 primary colours are mixed to equal proportions, a different line/colour will result.
This new hue is called a secondary colour.
Examples are: Red + Yellow – Orange Red + Blue – purple Yellow + Blue – Green Thosecolour, namely: Orange, green and purple are called the secondary colours.
(c).
Tertiary Colours – when a primary and a secondary colour are mixed, a tertiary hue results.
In appearance, the tertiary colour is located halway between the two colours.
The six tertiary colours are: Yellow – Green, Blue – Green, Blue – purple, Red – purple, Red – Orange and Yellow – Orange.
3.4.2 COLOUR CHART OR WHEEL Red Purple Blue Purple RedOrange Blue Purple YellowOrange NEUTRAL COLOURS: - These are black and white.
YellowGreen NOTE: - Colour can also be grouped as warm or cool colours.
The warm colours are the reds, and yellows while the cool colours are the greens and the blues.
3.4.3 Some Important Terms to Know About Colour i. Complementary Colours:These are colours that are directly opposite each other on the colour wheel.
ii.
Harmonious Colours:These are colours that go well together or agree & unite together.
iii.
Hue:Huecolourare, violet, Yellow, orange etc.
iv.
Value:Mean colour’s lightness or darkness.
v. Intensity or Cromaof a colour is its relative purity or brilliance.
vi.
Analogous Colour:This mean colour that lie very close to each other on the colour wheel are used usually within 15Oon a state of harmony.
21 vii.
TraidicColours:The choice of colours in this state is based on choosing colours that occurs on three equi-distant radius on the colour wheel.
This will result in a high contrast due to the fact that the colours are chosen from three unrelated parts of the wheel.
viii.
Monochromatic Colours:This is the use of only one colour by varying its value by addition of black and white.
The common nature of the hues will guarantee harmony and should be quite.
Assignment on monocrome (by using the primary and Secondarycolours).
4.0 CONCLUSION This unit has highlighted interior decoration and types of colour available, the classification of colours, the colours, the colour wheel and some terms about colours.
5.0 SUMMARY This unit has exposed you to what interior decoration is all about and the types of colour you can use to decorate your rooms, offices and any environment.
You have also been though how you can combine different colours to achieve harmonious shade design.
6.0 TUTOR – MARKET ASSIGMENT 1.
Briefly discuss what interior decoration is all about 2.
Identify with explanations, classes of colours 3.
State at least five terms often used in reference to colours.
7.0 REFERENCES Okhiria A.O.
and Karim N.R (2005) A manual of home & Hotel Management, Ejide Printing Press.AyetoroYewa, Ogun State.
Pg 25-37 22  UNIT 2 PSYCHOLOGY OF COLOURS CONTENT 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objective 3.0 Main of Content 3.1 Symbolism of Colours 3.1.1 Line 3.1.2 Texture 3.1.3 Balance 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutor-Market Assignment 7.0 Reference 1.0 INTRODUCTION: In the last unit, we discussed interior decoration as act of beautifying rooms and the environment of a house.
This unit is taking us to how to utilize different classes of colours to achieve our desired goals for harmonious shade.
2.0 OBJECTIVE: 23 This unit will discuss what some colour indicate and mixtures and products.
We shall also discuss lines, texture and balance and their utilization in interior decoration materials.
3.0 MAIN CONTENT 3.1 Symbolism of Colours - WHITE: - Gives a sensation of lightness, purity, and Holiness - BLACK: - It can be a symbol of mourning, death, grief and sorrow.
- Blue: - Cool and soothing.
This symbolizes love, truth, piety, and sincerity.
- RED: - Is a warm colour.
A bright red symbolizes gaiety, friendliness, Red also represents exciting, fire, blood, and aggressiveness.
Hence red is generally used as a signal of danger.
- YELLOW: - This is the warmest & brightest of all the colours.
It is a symbol of hope, joy, light-heartedness.
- GREEN: - It is cool & restful.
Green can be a symbol of growth, life, and nature.
- ORANGE: -Suggests sunlight & anger, or strength and endurance.
- VIOLET: - Symbolises excitement or anger, which is slightly unhealthy.
- PURPLE: Is brighter than violet and is a “royal” and high rank colour.
- SILVER: - Symbolises faith.
- PINK: - Feminine colour OTHER COLOUR MIXTURE TO BE NOTED i.
Blue + White = Powder blue ii.
Red + White = Pink iii.
Black + White = Ash or gray iv.
Purple + White = Lavender v. Orange + Purple = Brown vi.
Brown + White = Tan vii.
Orange + Red = Tangerine viii.
Yellow + Orange = Golden Yellow ix.
Red + Purple = Turkey Red 24 x.
Black + Blue = Nevy Blue xi.
Green + Yellow = Lemon Green xii.
Green + Small amount of Black = Forest Green xiii.
Green + Black = Navy or Army Green xiv.
Brown + Yellow + White = Yellow orchre 3.1.1 Line Line is an other important element of design we shall considered.
Line can be defined as an idea which is correspond to direction of movement, that is, is the shortest distance between two points or the boundar of an area.
It can also be referred to as a chain of dots joined together, or a moving dot; and in geometry it is known as infinite number of points.
TYPE OF LINES i. Zigzag Lines e.g.
ii.
Straight Line e.g.
iii.
Spiral Line e.g iv.
Radiating Line e.g.
v. Diagonal Lines e.g.
vi.
Curve Lines e.g.
vii.
Vertical Line e.g.
viii.
Horizontal Lines e.g.
ix.
Implied Lines x. Oblique Line e.g.
Lines can be organized rhythmically to show design.
It can be used to show space, to give harmony and beauty of shapes.
Lines can as well be used for texture and texture design.
There are of course endless ways of arranging lines in diverse forms.
3.1.2 Texture 25 Texture is appreciated through the sense of touch and vision.
It is regarded as the minute structure of the surface of a material.
It can be rough or smooth, soft or hard, pebbly, pricky or velvelty.
TYPES OF TEXTURES In a broad sense textures are of two types namely tactile texture and visual texture.
i. Tactile Texture:This is the type of texture that is actually felt when touched.
Architecture and sculpture are the main employers of this type of texture.
The two dimensional composition based on collage also uses this texture, in that most of the materials used in collage are tactile in themselves.
ii.
Visual Texture:As the name implies, the feeling of this kind of texture is purely visual because, it cannot be felt when touched.
This kind of texture is usually used in paintings, graphics and in textiles design.
E.g.
(a) (b) (c) (d) FORM/SHAPE This of course means the form or out line of anything which in order to be lively must have a rhythm of its own.
Line exist as an element or design.
But if the line touches itself then it encloses an area or form.
So, by speaking of form/shape we are referring to contour, especially when it describes a surface area.
It is a portion of any given surface.
E.g.
3.1.3 Balance Balance is refers to as the state of perfect equilibrium resulting from equal opposition to equal attraction.
TYPES OF BALANCE There are two major types of balance namely: - 26  1.
SYMMETRICAL BALANCE (FORMAL BALANCE): This is the simplest and the most basic type of balance, and it is not difficult to recognize.
It simply means as two bodies that are equal in size, and balance on either end of a uniform level.
The right side is a mirror image of the left side and both sides are balance around the centre of vision.
E.g.
ii.
ASSYMETRICAL BALANCE (INFORMAL BALANCE) This is achieved by the use of different elements.
These elements must however, exert equal visual energy.
This equality in visual weight or attraction is influenced by any of the following: - Position, Colour, Value, Texture, Shape and direction.
E.g.
Fig.
In the figures above balance is achieved because in each situation, right side is equal to the left side and that is why it is known as Assymetrical balance.
4.0 CONCLUSION At this stage, you should be able to identify types of colours and the harmomonious usage to achieve desired colours in our office or when decorating homes.
Also the usage of lines,texture and balance is now clearer and their uses as important elements of designs.
5.0 SUMMARY You have studies in detail all forms of colour available, the harmonous uses and the end products and the industrial the uses of elements of design.
Now you should be able to mix primary, secondary and tertiary colour to obtain desired.
Colours.
6.0 Tutor – Marked Assignment 27 1.
Define the term interior decoration 2.
Enumerate some of the elements of design you have learnt 3.
Briefly state the following psychology of colours: - (a).White (b) Red (c) Black (d) Orange (e) Violet (f) Silver 7.0 REFERENCES 1.
John Bensteren, (2002) Hotel Design and Home Furnishing/Decoration.
M.C Graw Hill Book copy.
Pg 27 – 38 2.
Ross David, (1996), Principle of Home Furnishing and Management.
LondonTrous Printers Pg 20 – 31 3.
Joan C, Branson, (2001) Hotel and Hospitality House Keeping.
Fifth Edition.Holder and Sloughton Education 338 Eustan Rd, London.
NWI 3BH Pg 54 – 244 UNIT 3: MANAGEMENT OF LIVING SPACE UNIT 4: DESIGN OF LIVING SPACE UNIT 1: MANAGEMENT OF LIVING SPACE 28 CONTENTS 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objective 3.0 Main Content 3.1 Meeting Psychological Needs 3.2 A Sense of Belonging 3.3 Privacy 3.4 Individuality 3.5 Values and Goals 3.6 Meeting Physical Needs 3.7 Safety 3.8 Housing Choices 3.9 Location of the House 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutor – Market Assignment 7.0 References 1.0 INTRODUCTION A living space is the place where you belong or a place you created as a home base.
Your home is the place where you always feel that you belong.
It is the place where you can meet your loved ones for warmth, companionship, privacy, safety and self – expression.
It is also the place where you keep your possessions and the things you want to do.
Most important, your home is where your family is, where you live with the people, you love and the people who loves you.
Arrangement of living space depends on individual or family, Home or commercial craft, soft furnishing can be used to beautify a living space.
Articles that can be used to beautify living space are: flowers, pillows, picture frames (collage), curtains, blinds, bed sheet etc.
2.0 OBJECTIVE – At the end of this module, we shall know: (a) Interior decoration in relation to management of living space.
29  (b) Importance of home to mankind.
(c) Differentiate between the management of home and a condominium.
3.0 MAIN CONTENT 3.1 Meeting Psychological Needs Most of us think of home as warm, comforting place where we can relax and please ourselves.
Our homes fill several emotional needs in us that can not fulfilled by school or work or other places.
3.2 A Sense of Belonging Your home should provide you with a sense of belonging.
You should feel that your home is a place where you can unwind, where you can do things with your family and funds or just be by yourselves.
A sense of belonging makes you feel that you are a member of the household.
You may have to follow certain rules as a member of the family, but you also feel comfortable, participating in family decisions.
This is what is meant by a sense of belonging.
3.3 Privacy – The need for a place of one’s own personal space is basic to all people.
Even if you share your personal space, its still a place that you feel is your own.
You have the priviledge of asking people in when you want to and of keeping them out, when that is what you want.
People, needs private, personal space where they can read, listen to music, study, talk with friends or just be alone to think and dream.
This priviledge allows you to have privacy – the ability to be alone.
Everyone needs to get away from others at times, even if its only for a couple of hours.
People use that time away from other people in any way they want to, whether its to thinks to dream or to make decisions.
3.4 Individuality – Just as the way you dress expresses your personality, the way you arrange and use your living space enhances your self-concept.
You can put up posters of your favorite book.starts or classical musicians.
You can display your collection ofarts or sourvenirs.
You can keeps your favorite books, tapes and other possessions around you.
All of these thing, says “this is who I am”.
30  Later, when you set up your own home, some of these personal possessions will help you feel comfortable in a new place.
An empty room quickly becomes yours when you put up your favorite pictures, etc.
3.5 Values and Goals– How you live also reflects your values, if you value neatness, you will have a well – organized space.
If you appreciate family hair looms, you may have antique furniture that belonged to another generation of your family.
How, you live also reflects your goals.
If getting a good education is an important goal of yours you will probably have a comfortable place to study and lots of book shelves.
If being popular is important to you, you may want space in your home to have parties and entertain friends.
Your home also reflects the goals of other members of your family.
For example, your mother may need room to write.
3.6 Meeting Physical Needs In addition to meeting your psychological needs, a home also meets the following physical needs for you and your family.
SHELTER – One important job of home is to provide shelter from whether out side, rain, snow or extreme heart.
3.7 Safety– A home also protects your family and your possessions from dangers such as accidents injuries and crimes.
SPACE FOR POSSESSIONS – A home provides you with spaces for your possessions, such as your books, clothes and furniture.
SPACE FOR ACTIVITIES – A home provides a place for activities such as cooking, bathing, entertaining, working on hobbies, exercising and talking.
Many of these activity areas can be used by more than one person.
3.8 Housing Choices – Where your parents choose the home where you now live, they had to ask several important questions about how the home would fulfil their needs and wants.
1.
How many people there are in your household.
A large family needs more bedrooms and baths than a small family.
31 2.
How old is each member of your family.
If there are small children in your family, your parents may have wanted a house with a fenced-in-yard.
If one or more grand parents live with you they might want rooms on the first floor to avoid the needs to climb stairs.
3.
What are the special needs of family members?
For example does any with disabilities need wheel chair ramps or extra wide doors?
Are there other children in the neighbourhood?
Can youwalk stopping areas when making housing choices, people also have to consider four important factors, where the house is located, what type of housing to choose, whether to buy or rent and how much to spend on housing.
3.9 Location of the House The first decision to make when choosing a home to decide where it will be located, location refers to the region of the country where you will live.
The availability of work may be a major factor in determining in what part of the country you will live.
For example if you go to work for an airplane manufacturer in the pacific North east or an oil company in Louisiana, you would have to live where the company is located.
Location also refers to the kind of community you choose to live in urban, suburban, rural or small town.
People are attracted to a 4.0 CONCLUSION At the conclusion of this unit, we have dealt with what a living space is and what our homes provide in meeting various psychological needs in our daily living.
5.0 SUMMARY A living place create a home base meeting our psychological needs, giving us a sense of belonging and affording us unique privacy hereby making it possible for us to express our individuality.
6.0 TUTOR – MARKET ASSIGNMENT 1.
Identify the importance of home to you as an individual.
2.
In the choice of house to live in, identify what principles you would apply 3.
In what ways would a home meet your physical and safety needs.
32 7.0 REFERENCES Tom powers, (1992) Introduction to Management in Hospitality Industry.
Library of cahress catalogue-in publishing data.
John Wiley &SomsInc Okhiria A.O.
and Karim R.O.
(2005) A manuel of Home & Hotel Management.
Ejide Press Ayetoro, YewaOgun State, Nigeria.Pg 79 -102.
33 UNIT 5: INTERIOR DECORATION WITH RELATIONSHIP TO BEAUTY CONTENTS 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objective 3.0 Main Content 3.1 Interior Decoration and Beauty 3.2 A Continuum 3.3 How much to spend?
3.4 Decisions about Housing 3.5 Adapting Space for Independent Living 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutor – Market Assignment 7.0 Reference 1.0 INTRODUCTION: In the last unit, the discussion was centered on interior decoration and the management of living space.
In this unit we are focusing on designing of living space as part of interior decoration.
2.0 OBJECTIVE: At the end of this unit, we shall know: 1).
How to complement interior decoration with appropriate house design 2).
Comparing single family to townhouse 3) When to take an “appreciating decisions” about the kinds of housing one desire.
3.0 MAIN CONTENT 3.1 Designing a Living Place Designing a living place is part of interior decoration.
The interior decoration of the house depends largely on the individual’s appreciation of beauty.
People see beauty in different ways and its appeal can go a long way in creating happiness or sadness in the home.
The idea of interior decoration is just to try to appreciate the good worth of nature which could be translated into all kinds of ideas.
34 The interior decoration or designer in layman terms can be seen as one who decorates the inside of buildings with painting, wall papers, beautiful colour etc.
to create admiration.
The interior decoration can also be technically defined as one who plans designs and executes building interiors and furnishing to create attractive surroundings in good taste and suited to occupants of the house.
And in a place that offers the lifestyle and the facilities or goods and serviced available in a community that they desire.
For instance, if they like museums, shopping and host of activities, they will choose to like on a city or large suburban area, if they like quiet and the outdoors, they will choose a rural setting for their house.
The facilities and services offered by communities include schools, hospitals/clinics, police protection, parks, libraries and trash picking.
You might choose a home because it is in a nice neighbourhood and has a good school system.
Someone else may choosing home that is close to public transportation systems or recreational areas others may want to be able to walk to a church or to stores.
3.2 Types of Living Spaces/Homes A home can be any size, shape and style.
Here are few example; 1.
Single – family house – this home provide living space for one family.
It is not attracted to any other building.
It stands on its own usually an a separate lot with a lawn and outdoor living space.
2.
Town house – this is one of many single – family units attached to units on its sides.
In the city, these may be called row house.
Each family lives in a different unit.
Duplex or triplex.
This is a building divided into living space for two or three families.
The space can be side by side or one on top of the other.
Apartment building – this building, contain a number of separate living units.
The living spaces may range in size from one room studio apartments to three-bedroom units if the people who live in each unit have a bit of lawn, the units are called garden apartments.
If the building is very tall, it is called a high rise.
Mobile home – this is a factory built house that is moved to the home site by truck.
It is then usually permanenetly parked in a mobile home park or on the individual owner’s property.
Many mobile homes come with furniture and built-in appliances.
These homes are very compact but some owners build porches or decks to add more space.
35  3.3 Rent or Buy You can either rent or buy your home.
When you rent a house or apartment, you may pay monthly.
The rent to the owner – is an exchange for the right to use that space when you buy a home, you usually have to lake out a long-term loan called mortgage then you have 15- 50years pay back the loan.
3.3.1 A Condominiumis one of a group of apartments or townhouses that you buy rather than rent.
When you purchase a condominium, you also agree to pay a monthly service fee to pay for thinks that all of the owners use in common such as lawns, swimming pools tennis’ courts and hallways.
Owning a home has some advantages is that owning your our home gives you a sense of permanence or belonging.
Also your home may increase in value and as you pay off your mortgage, you own more and more of your home.
Another advantage of home ownership is that you can decorate or remodel it any way you like.
Some of the disadvantage of owing a home include being responsible for all of the maintenance and upkeep or having to sell the home if you move.
Renting also has advantages and disadvantages.
If something breaks in a rented apartment or house such as the plumbing or heating system, the building’s owner is responsible for making the repairs.
Renters can also move more easily than homeowner often, they need to give only month’s notice so that owners can find new occupants.
There are however some disadvantages to renting.
You probably could not able to decorate or remodel and the money you pay every month couldbe part of a larger investment.
Also, the building owner can raise the rent.
3.3.2 How Much to Spend?
Another decision you need to make about housing is determined by how much you can afford to pay.
Housing prices vary in different areas such as in a city or a suburban or rural setting as well as in different parts of the country.
When you have a limited amount of money to spend on housing, location is a very important factor in deciding what kind of home you will be able to afford.
Housing costs are also determined by the size of the house or apartment.
Usually the larger the space the higher are the costs.
36 When choosing housing, many people face-trade-offs.
They are willing to spend a little more money for a better location or walk a few blocks more to the bus stop.
How you make these decisions will depend on what is most important to you.
3.3.3 Decisions about Housing Even now you make many decisions about your living space even if you share a room with a brother or sister where will you put your tapes or disks?
How can you store your clothes?
If you want to redecorate, can you use materials you have on hand or do you need to buy new supplies?
- You’ll find out how plan and organize your space for activities and belongings.
- You’ll learn how to use some basic principles and elements of design to give your space the look you want.
- You’ll discover ways to care for space to make it more comfortable.
- You’ll learn how to use your knowledge to help keep your home safe and control the energy you use.
The more you learn about housing choices now, the better prepared you’ll be to make decisions in the future.
3.3.4 Adapting Space for Independent Living If a family member is disabled, living space can be modified so that the person can to make independently.
Necessary adaptations that can make a home accessible for every one who lives there.
4.0 CONCLUSION Studying different types of living spaces have afforded us with the knowledge of types available.
They include single family house, town house, rent or buy, condominium etc.
Besides, if a family member is disable, the living space can be modified so that the individual can move freely.
5.0 SUMMARY This unit has highlighted designing a living space as part of interior decoration.
It also treated types of living spaces, making decisions about housing and adaptation in case a family member is disable.
37  6.0 TUTOR – MARKED ASSIGNMENT 1).
Explain the term “Housing” 2).
Differentiate between single – family house and Town house.
3).
Brieflyexplain interior decoration/beauty.
5.0 References 1.
Ross, David, (1996), Principle of Home furnishing and management.
Thomas Wadsworth Publishers Pp 20-29.
2.
John Benstainren, (2002).
Hotel Design and Home Furnishing/Dear.
Adrec Publishers, llionlsPp 35-42.
MODULE 3 UNIT 1: Housing Development and Building Designs UNIT 2: Project Design UNIT 3: Planning and Design of Food and Beverage Service Area UNIT 4: Hotel Facility Design and Architectural Construction UNIT 5: The Space Allocation program in Hotel Plan CONTENTS 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objective 3.0 Main Content 3.1 Project Development and Building Systems 3.2 Detached House 3.3 Semi-Detached 3.4 Row Houses 3.5 Tenement House 38  3.6 Apartment House 3.7 Apartment House 3.8 Garden Apartments 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutor – Market Assignment 7.0 References 1.0 INTRODUCTION: In this module, we shall discuss various modern building systems which are quite different from olden days when cartles were built with many apartments and structures meant for luxury and unending parties.
The modern homes are usually moderate and functional.
They may be designed for a small family or large number of people for example a block of flats or blocks of rooms often built by government as economic house for the community.
2.0 OBJECTIVE: At the end of this module, we shall know: 1) Details on building systems and its different models of construction.
2) Differentiate Detached House and Semi-Detached 3.0 MAIN CONTENT 3.1 Project Development and Building Systems DETACHED AND SEMI-ATTACHED HOUSES 3.2 Detached House - One or two family.
probably the most popular type of housing in the USandmany country in Africa are thosecompletely independent of any other structure.
Garage is located within main 39 building or in separate structure.
Many state governments in Nigeria also built similar economic blocks of flats for the middle class civil servants.
Generally owner-occupied.
This type of construction includes a wide range, most common are frame and brick veneer.
Older houses generally are 2 stories while newer houses are one story.
3.3 SEMI-ATTACHED (Semi-Detached) One or Two Family.
Utilizes a common wall between houses for economy.
Has similar characteristics of detached house except it is usually located on a smaller— separate and independent entrances are maintained.
this type of dwelling is usually 2 stories high.
3.4 Row Houses (Town Houses) This type of housing can also be either one-family or two family.
common walls are used on both sides of the structure for economy.
The shape tends to be narrow and deep to maximize the number of units in a row.
Recently in urban areas, the town house has emerged as a popular type of dwelling.
This town is usually one-family and owner occupied.
The height is most frequently 2 story and construction is brick or owner 40  3.5 Tenement House Mostly built during the latter part of the 19th century and early part of the 20th century.Common in most cities.Characterized by high percentage of lot coverage.
Inadequate light and air, bathroom facilities, and obsolete room layout.
Generally of frame and masonry construction.
Maximum height 5 to 6 stories often located in olden parts of the community.
3.6 Apartment House (LOW RISE) Common type of multiple dwelling.
It is provided with adequate light and air.
Construction is usually non-fireproof with brick exterior.
Height is often 5-8 stories; building is provided with an elevator.
Lot coverage is moderate.
(50%-70%).
41  3.7 Apartment House (High Rise) Type of construction necessitated by high land costs in built-up areas.
Range in height from 6 to 40 stories.
Construction is fireproof with steel frame or poured concrete.
Lot coverage generally less than low-rise apartment house.
Most of these structures are relatively new and are provided with room layouts, light and air, and several elevators.
3.8 Garden Apartments Most common type of rental housing in suburban or moderately built-up most; built on a large plot of land under one ownership and provided with same community facilities.
Type of construction is usually frame or brick veneer.
Height of buildings are 1 or 2 stories.
Lot coverage is generally less than apartment houses.
Landscaping and open space is moderate.
42 Garden apartments are usually rental occupied.
In recent years there has been an increase in cooperative and condominium ownership.
4.0 CONCLUSION This segment has discussed modern building systems in the modern time.
Those include detached, semi detached houses row houses, tenement and apartment houses.
The facilities available in each types also very depending on the purposes of its design and fund available.
5.0 SUMMARY This unit has enlightened us about systems and its different models of construction different detached houses and semi detached.
6.0 TUTOR- MARKED ASSIGNMENT 1).
Compare detached House with a semi detached House.
2).
Highlight the characteristics of Tenement House in the latter part of the 19th Century and early part of the 20th century.
3).
How would you compare Apartment House (a) (Low Rise) to Apartment House (High Rise).
(b) What features do they have in common?
5.0 REFERENCES 1.
Ross Davids, (1996) Principle of Home Furnishing and Management LondonTrouse Publisher Pg 51-60.
43 2.
Joan, C. Branson, (2001) Hostel and Hospital House Keeping.
Fifth Edition Hodder and Sloushton Educational 338 Eustan RdLond NWI Pg 62-79.
UNIT 2: PROJECT DESIGN CONTENTS 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objective 3.0 Main Content 3.1 Design Features of Grow House Project 3.2 PrivateGarden 3.3 Public Access 3.4 The 20-foot Raw House 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutor – Market Assignment 7.0 References 1.0 INTRODUCTION: A project design involves more than one building on a large site.
It is usually a superblock.
The type of housing can be either low or high-rise.
The site is characterized by low land coverage (20-40%) and provision of basic community facilities, such as play areas and sitting areas.
Construction is dependent upon height of building.
Because of low lot coverage, the project often has extensive landscaping and open areas.
44  2.0 OBJECTIVE: At the end of this module, we shall be able to know: - Deferring project design - Know some of the features row house projects can be designed for - Effect of privacy in row house design - Discuss details on the 20FT.
Row House.
3.0 MAIN CONTENT 3.1 Design Features of Grow House Project The project usually is under one ownership and the dwelling units are rented.
In recent years there has been an increase in cooperative and condominium ownership.
The row house has long been advocated for rental housing for urban families with children as a good compromise between the desirability of a detached single-family house and the economic necessity of multifamily units.
It is decidedly preferable from the viewpoint of the tenants because of greater livability.
The results of surveys in both public and private housing indicate that families want to have direct access to the house, an individual yard or garden, and a place for small children to play close to the house where they can easily supervised.
These are features which the row house can provide.
From the management point of view, row house projects can be designed for maximum tenant maintenance of land area.
They can also be designed for their individual heating installations or a central heating plant.
Individual heating installations, though of higher operating cost to the tenant, result in lower maintenance cost to the management.
3.2 PrivateGarden Privacy is an important factor in row house design.
All house types show, therefore, a 2- foot extension of the party walls beyond the face of the building on either side.
There are sitting-out terraces on the garden side separated by wing-walls, 6 feet long and 6 45 feethigh.
These wing-walls do not have to be of masonry material, although preferably they should be of a permanent rather than of a temporary nature.
3.3 Public Access Another arrangement which insures more privacy is the concentration of services from the front.
The problem of refuse collection is solved by means of a masonry enclosure, 3 feet wide, 4 feet high, and 10 feet long for two living units.
Access doors to the enclosure are from the side facing the building, away from street view.
A flower box built into the top of the enclosure makes the appearance pleasing and attractive to the passer-by.
A hose-bib connection facilitates cleaning and reduces odors to a minimum.
An entry-space for each living unit presents another privacy feature and is absolutely necessary for service-from-the-front planning.
The conventional direct entrance from the street into the living room reduces privacy and is the cause of annoyance to many housewives.
3.4 The 20-Foot Row House Plan Type A has a gross floor area of 1,000 square feet.
Living-dining areas are combined into one room, 12-by 19-feet.
This room should face south.
THE 20FT.
ROW HOUSE The dinning area has direct communication with the kitchen by mean of a pass, and can be screened off from the living area with a curtain bookshelves, a permanent plywood 46 screen, or other media.
A large costs closet, 2 feet by 6 feet 6 inches, separates the stairhall from the living room.
Its height can be held to feet if an effect of greater spaciousness for the whole living area is desired.
The space under the stairs is used for storage.
In addition to accommodating standard equipment, the kitchen provide space for a heater, water heater, and washing machine.
If individual heat planned, duct work is reduced to a minimum.
If central heat is provided, the kitchen will gain 3 more feet of counter and cabinet space.
On the second floor are two bedrooms, the bathroom (tub on opposite side from window), and a small dressing alcove with a storage closet.
Bedroom wind sills are high so that furniture can be placed under them.
All plumbing concentrated in one wall.
One flue services the heater and hot water heater.
Hot water lines are short.
The outdoor terrace, linking garden to living room can be used in complete privacy.
4.0 CONCLUSION Under this unit we have dealt in detail on housing project design, features of row houses and effect of privacy in row house designs.
5.0 SUMMARY This unit has highlighted project design structures and features.
The use of row house project which include maximum tenant maintenance of land area, individual heating installations and central heating plant.
6.0 TUTOR – MARKED ASSIGNMENT 1) Define project design 2) Highlight some of the importance of privacy in row House Design 3) Discuss in details “the 20Ft.Row House design” 5.0 References 1.
John, Bensterien, (2002) – Hotel Design and space allocation.
Heineman Educational Books London Pg 23-45.
47 Unit 3: PLANNING AND DESIGN OF FOOD & BEVERAGE SERVICE AREA Unit 4: HOTEL FACILITY DESIGN AND ARCHITECTURAL CONSTRUCTION UNIT 1: Planning and Design of Food & Beverage Service Area CONTENTS UNIT 1: PROJECT DESIGN CONTENTS 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objective 3.0 Main Content 3.1 Type of Establishment 3.2 Potential Customers 3.3 Styles of Service 3.4 Menu Preparation 3.5 Facility layout and Design 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutor – Market Assignment 7.0 References 1.0 INTRODUCTION: The last module, we discussed a general project design of houses.
Then, we studies different project design, the features of row houses projects and details on 20ft row houses.
On this module, we are going to narrow our study down to planning and designing a typical food and beverage service area.
2.0 OBJECTIVE: At the end of this unit, you should be able to: 1.
List and discuss the necessary perequisite to planning a food & beverage facility.
2.
The concept of focus 3.
The elements within the concept 4.
Sub areas of consideration in facility 5.
Design and planning.
The relevance that potential customers type of establishment, has with planning and designing a food and beverage facility.
48  3.0 MAIN CONTENT Pre – requisite in Planning a food & Beverage Area: The first step in the planning process is to establish a concept.
This is an imaginative and unifying idea of the operation that will serve to focus the resources required for its creation.
This concept are (a) type of establishment the operation is to be (b) class of potential cuptomers the hotel which to attract (c) styles of services (d) menu preparation and (e) facilities layout and design.
3.1 Type of Establishment One of the concept of importance before planning is what type of establishment the owner(s) what it to be in the area of operations.
Some possible operations include fast food service, operations, fine dinning restaurant, family restaurants, cafeterias, ethic restaurant, specialty restaurants, bars, taven cocktail lounges, bukaterias etc.
Each of those will attract specific customers.
Ethnic restorant for instance will attract those who seek a particular type of ethnic design like Nigerian indigenous foods, Chinese, Italians etc.
3.2 Potential Customers For successful operation, there must be adequate number of potential customers within reasonable distance who will be willing to patronize it.
For a company to meet its goals, location is a key element in determining whether or not the establishment will succeed.
Some locations will not attract sufficient numbers of potential customers.
For example fine dining establishments are normally unsuccessful in a working-class communities, principally because the residents in the community cannot afford to pay the prices such establishment must charge to be profitable.
To assess the potential for successful operation, such as establishment must do a feasibly study for relevant information on: number of potential customers for the types of food and beverages to be sold, service planned, competitive establishment around, the cost of constructing the facility to be used, availability of suitable labour pool, money the potential customers would likely be able to spend and potential for profitability.
In addition to this study, any laws and regulations –federal/state or local must be taken into 49 account.
Health codes, fire, building codes, zoning regulations licencing requirement are among those things that should be considered along with feasibility study.
3.4 Styles of Service The range of service is associated with the specific food and beverage produces to be offered.
The more commonly practiced services include; cafeteria service, French, American services, gueriden, family of buffet service etc.
other service include food preparation in the kitchen friendly staff, dishwashing, valet, parking, music, birthday celebration complimentary photographs of customers etc.
3.5 Menu Preparation Menu planning requires the consideration of type of potential customers type of establishment, type of service and equipment and facilities available.
Menu can be table d’horte or a la carte depending on the above stated factors.
The type of menu selected are often dictated by potential customers, the occasion and time available to eat the meals.
3.6 Facility layout and Design The design should be such that include sub-areas where different activities taken place.
They include; Purchasing Area: A space for meeting with sales representatives to vendor receiving – An area that contains equipment used to verify that the goods received conform to the order placed.
Quantity and price must be checked.
Storing and using: An area where goods are stored and also issued out to staff when required.
Serving: This is the location where finished products are transferred from preparation staff to servers.
The layout and design of an efficient food area, one that contributes to smooth day to day operation, should take the following into account; (1) Space (2) Equipment (3) Lighting (4) Ventilation (5) Flow of material (6) Traffic flow 4.0 CONCLUSION 50 This unit has covered the necessary pre-requisites to planning a food and beverage area in terms of facilities and concept to be beared in mind at the planning stage.
We also learnt about the element that make up a concept.
5.0 SUMMARY We have discussed in detail the various elements that will guide an efficient plan and design of a food and beverage facility.
The necessary facilities that should be in the sub- areas of the entire structure was also discussed.
6.0 TUTOR MARKET ASSIGNMENT a.
List and discuss the necessary pre-requisites to planning a food and beverage facility b.
Identify with explanations 5 types of foods services methods.
c. List the considerations of an efficient food cooking/serving area.
d. Discuss what relevance that potential customers has with planning and design of a food and beverage facility.
7.0 REFERENCES Paul R. Dutter and Gerald G. Grifin (1993).The Dimension of the Hospitality Industry.
Van NostrandReinhard, N.Y.Pg 173-199.
UNIT 5: HOTEL FACILITY DESIGN AND ARCHITECTURAL CONSTRUCTION CONTENTS 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objective 3.0 Main Content 3.1 Hotel facility Design 3.2 The Feasibility Report 3.3 Financial Analysis 51  3.3.1 Rooms Division 3.3.2 Public Facilities 3.3.3 Support facilities and Services 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutor – Market Assignment 7.0 References 1.0 INTRODUCTION: In this module we shall examine different kind of people/professionals who are involved in designing and constructing a hotel.
Also, the purpose at which the facility design must be established.
In unit 1, we discussed the various elements in a concept that need to be considered in planning and designing a food and beverage facility.
2.0 OBJECTIVES At the end of this module, you should be able to 1.
Know different kinds of people involved in designing and constructing a hotel.
2.
Understand the feasibility report, and the designs.
3.
Know the financial Analysis of Hotel facility 4.
Know the amount of space allocated to public facilities 5.
Support facilities and services.
3.0 MAIN CONTENT 3.1 Hotel Facility Design People involved in designing and constructing a hotel are (a) Owner – i.e.
investor.
The primary aim is to earn profit owner sees the hotel as a real estate investment and opportunity.
(b) Consultant – they, otherwise known as facility planners.
They expect a hotel to meet the strategic goals for the management as well as revenue earner for the investor.
(c) Architect along with the team of Engineers: they work together for the development and design of the project.
Design must be such That: - it suits the investment available.
52 - Easy to maintain - must have sufficient circulation area i.e.
vacant space around the building.
- It provides proper flow of wall.
Feature a project may be initiated in 2 ways.
1.
A site exists in a particular location and the study is conducted to explore the feasibility for developments as a hotel 2.
It is considered that a particular town/area offers opportunities and it is studied in order to confirm the project.
3.2 The Feasibility Report The feasibility report must cover: 1.
Local Area Evaluation (L.A.E) Analysis of economic vitality of the city.
Also, discuses the suitability of a project site for the hotel.
2.
Local market Analysis (LMA) – Assess the present demand and future growth of several market segment.
Also, identify the existing properties and their probable growth.
3.
Proposed facilities (PF) – propose a balance of guest rooms and revenue generating public facilities.
For example, Room revenue generation is generally higher than restaurant so, it helps in planning facilities in order to sell a complete room package.
3.3 Financial Analysis The financial analysis estimate income and expenses for a hotel over 5 year’s period to show its potential cost flow after fixed changes.
This analysis make sure that the profit Progresses Development process starts with: 1.
Pre-design phase 2.
Establish project objectives 3.
Assemble development team: - facility planner, architect, Engineer etc.
4.
Commission feasibility study 5.
Establish project budget and schedule 6.
Investigate potential finances and negotiate joint ventures: - 7.
Conduct market study and prepare financial analysis 8.
Recommend architect, establish design and operating criderithese two actions are taken by facility planner/consultant.
53  3.3.1 Rooms Division The total square fact area for the guest room block varies between 65-75% of the total floor area of the hotel.
The net guest room area included living space, both room and water closer as follows:- 1.
Budget category hotel 200-275 sq.
ft 2.
Standard hotel 275-325 sq.
ft 3.
First class hotel: - 325-375 sq.
ft 4.
Luxury hotel: 375-450 sq.
ft Note that, to determine the total area of the guest room block including corridor, elevators, stairways, storage generally add 50% of the net guest room area.
3.3.2 PUBLIC FACILITIES Restaurant, Lobby, wash rooms, Barguest Conference Halls Lounge etc.
The amount of space allocated to the various public facilities will fluctuate.
It varies between 10 to 20% of the total floor area of the entire hotel (a) Lobby It varies between 2-6% of the total floor area of the hotel main Lobby (for the circulation and movement of guest) is 7 to 10 sq.
ft/guest room.
(cid:2) Seating area – 0.7 to 1 sq.
ft/guest room (cid:2) Front Desk – 3 to 4 sq.
ft/guest room (cid:2) Left Luggage Room – 0.5 to 1 sq.
ft/guest room (cid:2) Public wash rooms 0.5 to 1 sq.
ft/guests and ladies b.
Retail Shop The size of the outlet can range from 100 to 1200 sq.
ft depending on whether they are desk operations or regular shop.
Desk operations – table space to carry out faster like airline ticketing, car rentals, tourist guides etc.
The Scope is dependent on market requirement.
c. Dinning room and Lawn Varies between 4 to 6% of the total floor area of the hotel (cid:2) Coffee shop, 15 -18 sq.
ft/seat 54 (cid:2) Specialist Restaurant – 18 – 20 sq.
ft/seat (cid:2) Formal dinning – 20 to 22 sq.
ft/seat (cid:2) Cock tail Lawn – 15 to 18 sq.
ft/seat d. Function space - Can range from none to substantial, depending on market requirement, when meeting space included, it varies between 1 to 2 meeting seat/guest room.
Function space could be of various nature.
(cid:2) Ball room – 10 to 12 sq.
ft/seat (cid:2) Conference/meeting room – 10 to 12 sq.
ft/seat (cid:2) Board room 12 to 16 sq.
ft/seat (cid:2) Public wash room – 0.4 to 0.6 sq.
ft 1 seat e. Recreational Facility This can range from 10 sq ft to extensive depending on market requirement.
(cid:2) Swimming pool, 10 -20 sq.
ft/guest room (cid:2) Locker/shower/Toilet Area – 0.2 sq, ft/guest room (cid:2) Health club – 02 sq.
ft/guest room (cid:2) Greenery required 1500 sq.
ft Lump sum 3.3.3 SUPPORT FACILITIES AND SERVICES There are required to run the public facilities a) Restaurant – kitchen is support The amount of space allocated here varies between 10 to 15% of the total floor area of the hotel which depends upon the public facilities provided by the hotel.
Food preparation Area (cid:2) Coffee shop kitchen 20 to 25% of the shop area (cid:2) Main dinning room kitchen, 30 to 45% of the specialist restaurant (cid:2) Banquet kitchen: 20 to 30% of the meeting room area (cid:2) Room service, 01 sq.
ft/guest room (cid:2) F & B storage area (dry fruits, Liquor etc: 35 to 40% kitchen space) House keeping (cid:2) Laundry: 07 sq.
ft/guest room 55 (cid:2) Linen storage – 03 sq.
ft/guest room (cid:2) Guest Laundry (receive & dispatch area): 08 to 15 sq/ft guest room (cid:2) Uniform issuing sq.
ft/guest room Other Storage Areas, Maintenance and Miscellaneous (cid:2) Hotel general storage – 03 to 07 sq.
ft/guest room (cid:2) Miscellaneous Storage: Garbage, empty bottles, cans etc.
02 – 1.8 sq.
ft (cid:2) Telephone switch board and equipment: 1.3 to 2 sq.
ft/guest room (cid:2) Computer room (main serve along with battery back-up) 01-1.5sq.
ft (cid:2) Mechanical, Electrical and Air handling rooms and systems, 13-18 sq.
ft (cid:2) Maintenance workshop – 05 sq.
ft guest room (cid:2) Security – 03 – 0.6 sq.
ft/guest room (cid:2) Circulation – 10% of the total area for support facilities and services.
4.0 CONCLUSION This unit has enlightered us on hotel facility design, the feasibility report and the financial implication.
We also learnt about the public facilities provided.
5.0 SUMMARY In this unit, you have been exposed to hotel facility design and learnt about the support facilities and services, the food preparation, house keeping, storage and maintenance areas.
6.0 Tutor – Marked Assignment 1).
List various kinds of professionals involved In designing and construction of Hotel Facility 2).
State specifications, the amount of space allocation for the following public facilities.
(a).
Restaurant (b) Lobby (c) Front Desk (d) Dinning Room and Lawn 3).
State specifically, the amounts of space allocation to food preparation area.
(a).
Coffee shop kitchen(b) Banquet kitchen (c) F & B story Area 5.0 References 56 1.
Lees – Malfei, G, (2008).
Becoming an Interior Design John Wiley, Heineman Education Books, London.
Pg 120-130.
2.
John Wiley, Industrial Design Industry Report.
http/www.com 3.
Joan C, Branson, (2001).
Hotel, Hotel and hospital House keeping.Fifth edition Hodder and Sloushton 338 Eustan Rd London NWI Pg 37-61.
UNIT 5: THE SPACE ALLOCATION PROGRAM IN HOTEL PLAN CONTENTS 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objective 3.0 Main Content 3.1 The Task of the Development Team 3.2 Site Design 3.3 Design Phase 3.3.1 Site Benefit 3.3.2 Traffic Analysis 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutor-Market Assignment 7.0 References THE SPACE ALLOCATION PROGRAM IN HOTEL PLAN 1.0 INTRODUCTION – Among the many tasks of the development team is to establish allocation program.
The allocation and utilization of space in Hotel management in a hotel varies from property to property.
In this module, we shall discuss on the space Allocation program and its Architectural consideration which include the site Design and the Design phase.
57 2.0.
OBJECTIVE: At the end of this module, you should be able to know: (1) An architect is responsible for site planning and rule working on design; it is important to consider site benefit as well as traffic Analysis 3.0 MAIN CONTENT 3.1 The Task of the development team The development of most commercial lodging properties requires the commitment of major resources i.e.
people, funds, energy and time.
Before selecting and acquiring land and starting to build a property a developer will typically require a feasibility study.
A feasibility study is a professional analysis of a proposed project to determine whether or not it is a likely to succeed.
The feasibility study will address the geographic region competition, product demand, type and size of property site, project finance and anticipated operating results.
Apart from those stated, the architect responsible for the final implementation of feasibility study should include certain key features in general considerations in the design and the planning of the property.
The allocation of space among the principal functions in a hotel varies from property.
The most obvious difference among properties is the ratio of guest room space to public area space and support area space.
This varies from 90% in budget hotels and many motels to 50 – 65% in large commercial hotels.
3.2 Site Design – The Architect is responsible for site planning, analysis of site, its constraints and opportunities.
Before firming up design, the Architect must consider - 1.
Visibility and Accessibility – consider road access and surrounding street patterns.
2.
Surface Conditions – Analyse terrain, vegetation, existing buildings and roads and environmental constrains.
3.
Sub surface condition – confirm location and under ground utilities, height of the water table, bearing capacity of the soil, existence of environmental hazards etc.
4.
Regulatory restriction – Height restrictions, parking require neuts, high way restrictions etc.
58 5.
Site character – Describe qualities of the site such as surrounding uses and views.
6.
Orientation – for sunlight 7.
Adaptability – potential for future development 3.3 Design Phase This commences with the preparation of schematic design (set of alternate plans) and establish design directions considering the space allocation program.
Provide design teams with approvals.
Establish design schedule.
Freeze structural drawings and specifications of finishes etc.
While working on design, it is important to consider: - 3.3.1 Site Benefit – Potential site needs to be considered in relation to the main tourist and service attraction.
View, influences the plan from compensatory attraction (garden view, recreational focuses) should be provided for disadvantaged rooms.
The orientation of sun, shade and prevailing winds will affect building design.
3.3.2 Traffic Analysis – An analysis of traffic flows is necessary to identify 1.
Counter flow of traffic 2.
Restrictions on new entries to the high way and, 3.
Condition relating to signage on high way 4.
Density and Height: - The density and massing of building is dictated by location, land costs and local regulation.
5.
Circulations – The movement of guests, non resident visitors staff and suppliers in a hotel tend to flow distinct circulatory patterns where practical guest, supply and staff circulation be kept separate.
6.
Guest Room Plans – Guest room may be arranged in rows one on both sides, of the corridor forming a slab plan or stacked around the circulation core of a tower structure, which are explained as stated: - 59 a. Slab Plan – Can be double loaded slab or a single loaded slab.
Ina double loaded slab the rooms are land out on both the sides of the corridor where as in single located slab the rooms are only on one side of the side of the corridor.
Double loaded corridors are only on one side of the corridor.
Double loaded corridors are most efficient as far as space utilization is concerned and work to be more cost efficient and economical.
b. Atrium Design –These are internal corridors overlooking the central space which may be open or sub-divided Dymezzanine extensions to increase utilization.
Elevators extending through the atrium are in variably transparent.
The guest rooms are arranged in a single loaded corridor.
c. Tower Structure – the rooms are spread over around a central core which enables the guest rooms to be cantilevered, propped or suspended around the sides.
The proportion of space taken up in circulation including corridors one each floor is high and tower structures generally used for high rise buildings where the advantage of view justify the higher costs.
4.0 CONCLUSION This unit has taught us space utilization in the planning process of a hotel property feasibility study before the planning and allocation process.
5.0 SUMMARY The development of hotel property requires the commitment of major important resources.
Traffic analysis, slab plan, atrium design and tower structures have special places in the overall design and plan.
6.0 TUTOR – MARKED ASSIGNMENTS 1.
Compare site design with Design phase 2.
Enumerate at least 5 factors an Architect must consior before firming up design.
3.
Explain what a feasibility study is?
7.0 References 1.
Tinnis wood, Adiran, “The arts Deco House: space allocation and facility Design.
New York, 2002 Watson gup till publishing company.
Pg 30-40.
60 2.
Morin Rhonda, (2010).
My interior decoration.Com http/www.com.
MODULE 4 Unit 1: Hospitality Marketing Unit 2: Hospitality Sales and Marketing Unit 3: Forcasting Unit 4: Planning Concept in the Sales of Hospitality Service Unit 5: Hotel Planning and Marketing Service Unit 6: Business of Selling Hotel Facility Unit 7: The Need for Management Information System UNIT 1: HOSPITALITY MARKETING CONTENTS 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objectives 3.0 Main Contents 3.1 History of Hospitality Sales Promotion 3.2 Hospitality Marketing 3.3 Consumer Orientation 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutor-marked Assignment 7.0 References 1.0 INTRODUCTION: In the last module we discussed hotel space allocation design and the architectural construction of a hotel.
This module is looking at the market aspect of Hospitality business and its unique roles for business survival.
Every hospitality operation, large or small, profit or non-profit, should develop and use a marketing strategy.
Marketing begins with the earliest planning of a hospitality enterprise and continue through its life.
A hospitality manager should, therefore, understand the principle of marketing and know how to apply this principle.
The paramount principle in the marketing strategy is to realize that marking begins with the customer and not with the production or service a manager happens to have for sale on the same token.
A 61 marketing oriented manager asks first what he customer needs and not what he, the manager can sell.
2.0 OBJECTIVES: At the end of this module on hospitality marketing, students should be able to: (1) Trace the development of the marketing in hospitality (2) Explain in some detail how marking principles can be applied in hospitality operations.
3.0 MAIN CONTENTS 3.1 History of Hospitality Sales promotion: Hospitality establishments have been around for a long time, but, hospitality promotion is a rather recent phenomenon.
For past years, promotion consisted largely of an advantageous location and perhaps an identifying sign or symbol.
The important thing was that when the traveler needed food and rest, a hotel was available.
The neighborhood inn and tavern usually attracted local business.
Several might complete in one area, but business remain brisk as long as the customer’s pool was consistent and confirmed to the local choices.
These completing inns usually offered the same quality of service, no one has much of a competitive edge over the others.
However, the host of one might be more amiable than the host of the others, and a pleasant personality was always most helpful to a hospitality.
A new concept of hospitality service and promotion appeared in 1829 with the opening of the Tremont Hotel in Boston, before the Tremont, customers usually have to accept what was available.
A local hospitality person has no real incentive to cater to the individual traveler.
They offered only the necessities and still enjoyed a lively captive trade.
The Tremont however, offered for more than basic necessities.
Its dining room employed skillful French chefs.
The Tremont provide rooms and even a lock and a key to ensure safety and privacy.
Instead of depending on captive customers, the Tremont studied what its customers wanted and provided it.
Today this, approach is called marketing.
The instant success of the Tremont encourage other hotels to copy its model.
Many new establishments began to engage in promotion.
The major contribution of the Tremont, however, was its idea of offering the attractive extra service that would lure new customers.
62 Other important development in hospitality promotion came with the era of the 1930s.
hotel began to analyze how their guests were and why they came.
Basic clerk were deployed around town to drum up business patrons received thank you letters.
Fancy touches lure imprinted stationery appeared in the rooms.
Progressive hotel.Kept history file that listed the pertinent facts about guests and their information on their visits.
Thus, when guest arrived the desk clerk provide the same rooms and services they lured before.
Catering to the guest to attract business became, in sort a more organized process.
Also in the 1950s, hospitality operations formed claims which had far greater promotional resources.
With multiple units and a claims operation, national advertising became more feasible number of hotels could support this kind of promotion, where as even the longest hotel would have difficult doing it alone.
Keeping, the patron “in the chain” became extremely important many claims started expanding partly because they then could, in effect, pass patrons from one units in location to another location as the patron traveled around the country.
In 1960s, chain business reservation referrals became even more important.
The idea of area promotions gained prominence.
Instead of individual establishments in a specifit area promotion themselves independently, the establishments in and would cooperate to stage attracting that might bring guests to the area.
More business arrived then its guests as attracted by themselves.
In 1990s, it emergence of tourism as one of the world’s major industries produced many marketing and promotion application in the hospitality field.
With more people traveling and eating out, hospitality business grew.
With this, increased business came increased competition.
Developments in tourism stimulated interesting managers.
Hospitality marketing even more important and intense in the 1980s.
Many new facilities were built, some more fro tax purposes them increased competition.
Most of the major holes were affiliated with national chains leading to more chain competition.
Than individual competition.
This had ramifications such as stress on national rather than local advertising and more effort at brand name recognition.
Another development of the 1980s was appreciation of the relationship between marking and strategic planning.
Strategic involves trying to anticipate and satisfy future markets 63 which are also part of marketing.
Every strategic plan should consider marketing necessary to fulfill the goals of the plan.
3.2 Hospitality Marketing Marketing is defined as those activities involved in the flow of goods and services from producer to consumer marketing involves tailoring services to satisfy a specific market.
It includes analyzes of people, social trends, labour supplies, resources, costs, common market, and financial consideration.
An important aspect of marketing involves the origin feasibility study and site selection.
In a hotel, marketing people might consider evenly they that could be lone to enhance the enjoyment and comfort of the guest or potential guests, including special qualities, services, arrangements and personnel.
In a hospital marketing would require an object wole at what could be done to make a patient more comfortable and at ease.
Thus, health care marketing can consider such factors as what is the best way to provide complete service.
It is traditional that a hospital serve three meals a day at scheduled times.
Is this best for all patients?
Should a more selective menu be offered in, should the meals be rigorously scheduled?
Should the hospital meal resemble more of a commercial restaurant meal than standard hospital fare?
From the marketing standpoint, the hospital operation should also consider the visitors and staff.
Few hospitals cater to the relatives of a patient from out of town, where they will stay and how they will manage.
Service establishments can also do far more in a marketing sense than they have in the past.
In fact, one of the reasons for the phenomenonal growth of fast food a chain is that they are marketing oriented.
They carefully consider what their targets want and how to meet these wants.
3.3 Consumer Orientation Marketing is consumer Oriented rather than product or service oriented.
A hotel built just to sell rooms product oriented.
A marketing orientation involves more than just supplying a bed for the might.
The main reason for the early success of motel was that they provided services to fill the new needs of customers beyond rooms, convenient parking less formality in the lobby, no tips, sheaper rates, and swimming polls and other recreation, in fact , modern inn are constantly changing their services in response to their 64 customer’s changing wants.
Thus we see formal dinning room becoming the information coffee shop or oven cafeteria.
Marketing implies a total market place orientation rather than just a sales orientation.
The marketing approach encourages sakes by examing the whole “product”, more than just tempting people to enter an establishment.
4.0 CONCLUSION In this, module, we have studied the history of hospitality sales promotion, hospitality marketing techniquesic consumer orientation.
All combined will give a strong package for effective marketing strategy.
5.0 SUMMARY Marketing is necessary for any hospitality establishment its usefulness begins with earliest feasibility study and continues throughout the life of the enterprise.
Customers do not automatically come to an establishment and do not automatically return.
An operation must constantly attract new customer the next step was to add various aspects of sales promotion.
Sales promotions gradually evolved into marketing a mush garden concept that involves all those business activities related to the flow of goods and services from the producers to the consumers.
6.0 TUTOR-MARKED ASSIGNMENT 1) How does marketing differ from promotion 2) Select a hospitality operation with which you are familiar describe its present marketing efforts.
3) Restaurants are often more restaurant oriented than customer oriented.
Discuss this statement.
7.0 REFERENCES James R. Keiser, (1989) principle and practices of management hospitality industry.
2nd Edition.
Britain Slouphtonpublishers pg 51-62.
65 UNIT 2: HOSPITALITY SALES & MARKETING UNIT 3: FORCASTING UNIT 1: HOSPITALITY SALES & MARKETING CONTENTS 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objectives 3.0 Main Contents 3.1 Purpose of Marketing plan 3.2 Marketing Planning Objective 3.3 Nature of Planning 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutor-Market Assignment 7.0 References/Further Reading 1.0 Introduction: This module deals with hospitality sales and marketing.
In the previous module, we had discussed hospitality marketing, its history in the socio economic life of man, marketing strategies and consumer orientation.
2.0 Objectives: At the end of this module, we should be able to explain: - Purpose of marketing plan - Marketing planning objectives - Implementing marketing plan 3.0 MAIN CONTENT 3.1 Purpose of Marketing Plan All hospitality organizations are founded with some purposes.
The importance of planning is to improve on the negatives of the successful achievement.
Operators in the service industry, particularly in large organizations, sometimes fail to identify the factors which cause under-achievement.
Issues like interest rates, exchange rates or other government policies can undermine the achievement.
Due to poor marketing plan or no plan at all, the hospitality industry is notorious for misinterpreting market potential 66 estimates thus leading to overbuilding, overcapacity, price-cutting, frantic advertising and promotion in an attempt to fill rooms or fill restaurant seats.
Large organizations have responsibilities towards shareholders, employees and customers and the smaller organizations with ambition for growth.
The discussion process of marketing plan has been found useful in team building.
It is an excellent training device for staff members particularly those who wish to be managers.
Marketing planning procedures have several purposes within the hospitality organizations.
Some of them can be summarized as: (cid:2) Helping management to sort out day to day problems.
(cid:2) Illustrating the interrelationships between key decisions in different functional departments.
(cid:2) Demonstrating that short-term actions must be tied to specific long term objectives.
(cid:2) Improving forecasting techniques and procedures for evaluating alternative course of action.
It has assisted in sharpening the decision-making processes on a broad front.
(cid:2) Providing a road map for all marketing activities for the next year.
(cid:2) Ensuring that marketing activities are in agreement with corporate strategic plan.
(cid:2) Assisting management to review and think objectively and match resources with marketing objectives.
The activities of marketing and many other departments within a company are closely intertwined.
Operations and finance are two areas that affect and in turn are affected by marketing.
If guests’ experiences are diminished because of problem areas in operations, marketing will be adversely affected.
Similarly, if financial projections are unrealistic for certain months or for various product lines, marketing will be called to task.
When the organizational design of a company fails to place major marketing activities under the marketing umbrella, the task of writing and implementing a marketing plan is made more complex.
Under these conditions, it behoves the marketing manager to invite the managers of other marketing-related areas to participate in the marketing plan development process.
3.2 Marketing Planning Objectives 67 (cid:2) Customer wanting uninterrupted supply of products (cid:2) The local community wanting employment prospect and a healthy and clean environment.
(cid:2) Creditors wanting assured debt settlement.
Top management balances the interest of these stakeholders against their own personal values.
Typically the top management decides to what extent the plan will reflect their preference for (cid:2) Employee participation or management control (cid:2) Growth or stability (cid:2) Risk taking or security (cid:2) Short term profit taking or long term profit making (cid:2) Market innovation Reduction of capital employed is not usually in the domain of the marketing manager, although is able to influence profit level.
Profit is calculated thus: Z = TR – TC Where Z = Profit TR = Total Revenue TC = Total Cost Increase in profit come about by raising total revenues, decreasing total cost or favourably adjusting the balance between the two so that productivity improves.
3.3 Nature of Planning There are different forms of planning: (cid:2) Corporate plans specify the major objectives and strategies for an entire organization or a major division.
(cid:2) Functional plans such as financial, manpower or marketing plans, detailed objectives and strategies within each function or department.
Functional plans are interdependent with corporate plans, deriving objectives and strategies form the corporate plan whilst also helping to create them.
68 (cid:2) Special ad hoe plans are for activities beyond the normal scope of the organization.
Venture plans, new product plans or market development plans may be created, funded and executed quite separately from other business activities.
Plans also vary by their time skill: (cid:2) Long term plan has a five to ten years horizon.
(cid:2) Medium term plan deals with objective and strategies from one to five years.
(cid:2) Short term plan can be considered for the coming twelve months.
Medium and long term plans tend to be more detailed and marketing consideration increases, it influences the short term and the long range policies in a company.
It is then that total company.
It is then that company planning and marketing planning tend to merge.
Certainly, the major parameters used by many companies to define their future plans are products and market.
These are also the building blocks for marketing plans.
4.0 CONCLUSION This unit has highlighted what is hospitality sales and marketing.
The purpose of marketing plan, the objectives of marketing and nature of planning.
5.0 SUMMARY Having studied unit, you should be ably to understand the different major contents discussed in hotel sale marketing uses.
Including the goals a hotel has in mind for marketing planning.
6.0 TUTOR – MARKED ASSIGNMENT 1.
Briefly discuss the purpose of marketing plan.
2.
Identify marketing plan objectives 3.
Identify with explanation the various forms of hospitality planning.
7.0 REFERENCE/FURTHER READING Stokes, D. (1997).
Marketing: A Case Study Approach.
London: Lefts.
Pg 31-52 Quester, P.G., McGuiggan, R. and P. William (2001).
Basic marketing: and Managerial Perspective.
Htti/www:estra.com.
69  UNIT 2: FORCASTING CONTENTS 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objectives 3.0 Main Contents 3.1 Implementing Marketing Plan 3.2 Marketing process 3.3 Problem of Marketing Plan 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutor-Market Assignment 7.0 References/Further Reading 70 1.0 INTRODUCTION: Unit one deals with hospitality sales marketing.
This took us to study purpose of marketing plan, marketing plan objective, nature of planning and their variability.
In this unit, we shall be studying forcasting in hotel marketing plan and what role it performs in the overall marketing plan of a hotel.
2.0 OBJECTIVE: At the end of this unit, you should be able to explain; 1.
What forcasting is and what use in hotel productivity and sale.
2.
What are marketing plans and marketing process.
3.
The peculiar problems with marketing plan.
3.0 MAIN CONTENT 3.1 Implementing Marketing Plan Sales, profit and profitability forecasts are made so that the company will know whether it will achieve its objectives giving no change in trading conditions.
The starting point is the sales forecast which can be made for the product the company as a whole.
Profit and profitability forecast can then be derived.
Forecasting methods are both quantitative and qualitative.
3.2 Communicating the Plan A sophisticated and brilliantly developed plan is of no use if it is not understood, believed or used.
A marketing plan should not be just a call to action or a benchmark by which to judge the efficiency and effectiveness of decisions.
The plan should also serve as a method for communicating marketing strategy to those people whose duty is to implement or authorize the company’s marketing strategies.
Several groups may serve as an audience for a marketing plan.
Top Management must be convinced that plan will accomplish the stated goals and objective.
Top management demonstrates acceptance or denial by their level of monetary support.
To be effective, a new marketing plan must be written each year.
Marketing plans written for periods longer than a year are generally not effective.
3.3 Marketing process The process of marketing planning is a continuum.
The task is never ending.
Marketing/sales managers must always be planning.
For instances, the development of 71 next year’s marketing plan begins the day this year’s plan is approved.
The process involves many stages viz; (cid:2) Find a need or want.
(cid:2) Develop a product or service to satisfy the need or want.
(cid:2) Conduct research.
(cid:2) Design a product to meet the need based on research.
(cid:2) Do product testing (among potential users).
(cid:2) Determine a brand name (design package & set a prices).
(cid:2) Select distribution system.
(cid:2) Design a promotional system.
(cid:2) Build relationship with customers.
3.4 Problem of Marketing Plan Estimates of market potential often seem to be ignored by those who write hospitality marketing plans.
Marketing managers in hotels sometimes feel that the concept has no application to them.
All travelers are viewed as potential guests and some feel that concept is theoretical for the hospitality industry and applies primarily to consumer- packaged goods.
Human beings are incapable of devising a perfect marketing plan.
Market conditions changes, disasters occur, and many other reasons create a need to refine marketing plans.
Generally, refinements should be made in the area of tactics, budgets and timing of events rather than in major objectives or strategies.
Changes in major objectives such as annual sales volume always require approval by top management.
Marketing/Sales managers are advised to refrain from considering changes in major objectives and strategies unless absolutely necessary.
Top management will almost certainly view the necessity for changes as a reflection of poor management by marketing/sales managers unless the cause was a disaster, such as a major fire in a hotel.
72 A marketing plan is a rigorous process and takes time to complete.
To be effective, a marketing plan should be written every year.
At the same time, the annual marketing plan must be written against a longer-term strategic plan that states what the company hopes to achieve, say three to five years down the road.
It is unrealistic to expect perfect harmony between marketing and other departments.
It is by no means unrealistic to suggest that relations can be greatly improved and that a critical place to begin is by inter-changing data, suggestions and other assistance when department plans are being developed.
The hospitality industry is erroneously ignoring or misinterpreting market potential estimates, thus leading to overbuilding, overcapacity, price-cutting, and frantic advertising and promotion in an attempt to fill rooms or fill seats.
Market potential should be viewed as the total available demand for a hospitality product within a particular geographic market at a given price.
It is important not to mix different hospitality products into an estimate of market potential.
(Product shall be discussed extensively in a later unit) 4.0 CONCLUSION In this module we have discussed Marketing plan; what it takes to achieve successful plan and the problem of marketing plan as it effect the hospitality organizations.
5.0 SUMMARY This module has treated marketing plan, forcasting, marketing processes, and the problems often associated with marketing plan.
6.0 TUTOR-MARKED ASSIGNMENT 1.
What factors should a marketing manager take into consideration when developing a marketing plan for problem-free implementation?
2.
Identify with explanations the usual problems with marketing plan.
3.
What is forcasting?
Discus 7.0 REFERENCE/FURTHER READING Stokes, D. (1997).
Marketing: A Case Study Approach.
London: Lefts.
Pg 31-52 73 Quester, P.G., McGuiggan, R. and P. William (2001).
Basic Marketing: and Managerial Perspective.Htti/www.estra.com.
UNIT 4: PLANNING CONCEPT IN THE SALES OF HOSPITALITY SERVICES CONTENTS 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objective 3.0 Main Content 3.1.0 Planning for Customer Needs 3.1.1 Location 3.1.2 Customer Demographics 3.1.3 Analysis the Competition 3.1.4 Financial Analysis 3.2 Situation Analysis 3.2.1 The Product 3.2.2 The Market 3.2.3 The Competition 3.2.4 Market Segmentation 3.2.5 Evaluation 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutor-Market Assignment 7.0 References 74  1.0 INTRODUCTION: In the last module, we discussed hospitality sales and marketing, forecasting and marketing planning objectives for effective productivity and sales.
The need to sell hospitality is an important element especially in a hotel operation’s marketing program.
There are significant differences in the marketing of services such as a hotel provides and products that are tangible.
A product can be demonstrated for its quantities and attributes and is valued in the absolute against those properties that is processes to have.
A hotel however, must present an image of what it is and whom it exists to serve.
All of the individuals involved in presenting a property to its public must show that they are totally committed to the appropriate level of service for the public.
Every service provided must meet the expectations of the guest that the property wishes to attract and satisfy.
Otherwise, the guests will be either disappointed or over whelmed.
2.0 OBJECTIVES: At the end of this module, you should be able to: 1.
Determine an effective planning for customer needs 2.
Determine a situation analysis necessary to conduct a feasibility study to research a proposed property‘s potential for success.
3.0 MAIN CONTENT 3.1 Planning for Customer Needs Hospitality, then, is not a physical thing which can be presented to a guest on plate or in a glass.
It is the total of all the experiences which have touched the guest during his or her stay.
It is a concept which must be personalized by the guest and incorporated in the way things are done at a properly.
The question is; How can it most effectively sell hospitality to potential guests?
The answer to this question begins wish proper planning and consumers through the delivery of products and services and continues through the delivery of products and service to guests.
Determine what goods and services consumers want and need is usually accomplished by specialized marketing research which is first performed prior to the construction or purchase of the operation.
This research, called a feasibility study, analyzes a proposed site to determine what type of property has the greatest potential for success.
If the proposed facility has a reasonable chance of success at a particular location, investors 75 may then proceed to build or publicize the facility.
The feasibility study concentrates on four areas.
3.1.1 Location: This is considered the most important element in the success of any property.
A hotel, for example, that has great food and service, beautiful décor, a wonderful atmosphere, the harvest guest rooms, and low prices will typically fail, if it is in a poor location conversely, a poor quality property can succeed in the short run if it is in a great location.
Some of the factors that are used to determine whether or not a proposed site is in a good location include the population of the surrounding metropolitan area, number of people within easy driving distance, the availability and convenience of parking, traffic flow patterns, the distance from exists off main high ways and location of air transportation.
3.1.2.
Customer Demographics – Once a proposed site is considered to be in a good location, then the potential customers should be analyzed in terms of demographic and customer preferences customer demographics include factor, such as average age, sex, marital status, average no of children, average family income occupation, and urban customers versus rural customers.
You can deserve customer preference by surveying a representative sample of potential customer.
Surveying can the accomplished through personal interviews, telephone interview, or direct mail questionnaires potential customer can be asked about their dinning preferences what they desire in guest room accommodation, their pricing concerns, whether they will make use of meeting and barguest/ catering facilities and so forth.
After demographic information and preference are istaned from potential customers, you should make decisions about the level of personal service, price range, type of food and beverages service, décor etc, that would best match the needs and wants of the operation is potential customers.
With a food location and a through knowledge of what type of operation would best that the needs and wants of potential customers, you must next analyze your competition and the financial feasibility of a proposed operation before making the final decision of whether or not to go ahead with the project.
76 3.1.3.
Analyzing the competition: in analyzing the competition, determine how well existing properties are meeting the needs and wants of the customers, and financially successful they are, when conducting this analysis, it is important to ascertain the strengths and weakness of each competitor, how long each competitor has operated at the current location, how busy each competitor is on various days of the week, and how current customers feel about each competitor.
After analyzing, the competitor, the investor will be in a same position to estimate the no of guests that the new property should expect to eltrait at a proposed location.
This reasonable estimate would come from a combination of potential customers in the areas that are not currently being satisfied by existing facility or potential customers that would patronize the new operation instead of existing facilities.
3.1.4.
Financial analysis – The final step in the feasibility study is the financial analysis.
Unless a proposed property is financially feasibility, it should not be constructed, no matter how much one desires the facility to be built.
A food feasibility study should give reliable dasa from which to make reasonable decisions concerning various aspects of the proposed operation and accurate estimates of the no of expected guests.
Once these decisions and estimates have been made, the planners can then conservatively estimate projected revenue and expenses to ascertain whether the proposed facility will provide sufficient return on investment to make the project feasible.
3.2 Situation Analysis Another type of marketing research called situation analysis is needed to determine what guest like and dislike.
Situation analysis is the foundation of any good marketing effort it is the determination of a property’s current market position and projected opportunities for promotion.
In order to plan properly.
You first need to know as much as possible about the business, the market place, and the environment in which the business operates.
Situation analysis is not based on intuition or lucky guesses.
Instead, it is accomplished by thorough, careful research and analysis of five basic components.
3.2.1.
The product: This is what the property has to offer in terms of accommodations, facilities and services.
Product involves both tangible and intangible aspects.
Not only 77 must one consider features such as the number of guest rooms in a hotel property but it is also necessary to study psychological factors such as the image of the property and the atmosphere created by the furnishing in the lobby.
Current marketing efforts, including marketing objectives and how well the property is accomplishing desired goals, should be evaluated.
Analysis of the products takes into account both the strengths and the weaknesses of the property as a whole.
3.2.2.
The market – What types of business does the property currently attract and why?
Identification and analysis of past and current guests for group and individual transient markets should be conducted.
Market analysis involves a demographic/sociographic profile of the guests in terms of what they look like and a psychographic/sociographic profile of “what they think and do.
This process of guest identification should be completed for the property as a whole and for each separate facility in the property.
3.2.3.
The competition – the same kind of product and market analysis should be conducted for all the relevant competitors, both in the local market area an in other cities and locations.
What are the competitor’s strengths and weakness?
How is the competition different from or similar to the property under study?
Which of the difference will be significant to what markets.
3.2.4 Market segmentation – This portion of the situation analysis is based upon matching the property’s needs to the guests needs.
First, determine the property’s needs by identifying specific profit areas.
(rooms, food, beverage, other income areas), that require additional sales activity.
In hotels, evaluating guests needs takes into account their preferences for physical facilities (Luce meeting rooms) and also their personal held, such as their desire for luxury, convenience, or security.
Once property and guest needs are determined market segments can be categorized and the appropriate target markets can be chosen to fulfil property needs.
3.2.5.
Evaluation – situation analysis is not a one-time activity.
It is an ongoing process for monitoring the property’s progress and opportunities in the market place.
The marketing plan which is developed from the situation analysis must be companied with 78 actual results, and new strategies for achieving objectives should be developed as necessary.
Research should constantly monitor changes in the market and the environment and frequently evaluate the property’s fit with the current situation in order to maintain a competitive edge.
Customer surveys and comment cards provide helpful information for a situation analysis.
Customer surveys are questionnaires given to individuals and groups at the time of room check-out, after they have eaten meals or after they have attended barguest or other functions to find out how they liked the food, service, cleanliness, price and atmosphere customer comment cards are very similar to customer surveys.
These tent-shaped cards are usually located in each table in the restaurant and/or in the guest rooms.
They ask the customer specific questions in rating various aspects of the facility.
4.0 CONCLUSION This unit has taught us how to determine effective planning for customer needs.
This made us to focus on the important key areas discussed.
5.0 SUMMARY Planning concept in the sales of hospitality took cognizance of effective planning for customer’s needs and important key area of focus in the planning process.
6.0 Tutor – Marked Assignment 1.
The feasibility study concentrates on four areas.
Enumerate with explanation, four areas that are involved in the feasibility study of an effective planning for customer needs.
7.0 REFERENCES 1.
John R. Wallear, introduction to Hospitality, 12th Edition (1944).
Rose Education academic press, London pg 73-81 2.
Anita, Tull (1998)- Food and Nutrition.
OxfordUniversity Press Pp 22-31 79 3.
James R. Keisen (1998) – principles and practices of Management of Hospitality industry (second edition) MCgraw hill book coy Ltd Pp.
30-35.
4.
Tom powers, (2002) Introduction K Management in the Hospitality Industry.
Fourth Edition Kent all hint publication Dubuquestiowa.
Pp 25-33 UNIT 5 HOTEL PLANNING, MARKET CRITERIA AND THE BUSINESS OF SELLING CONTENTS 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objective 3.0 Main Content 3.1 Basic Elements of a Marketing Process 3.2 The Business of Selling Hotel Facility 3.2.1 Room Business 80 3.2.2 Conventions 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutor-Market Assignment 7.0 References 1.0 INTRODUCTION: In the last module, we discussed the planning concept in the sales of hospitality services.
This module is a continuing part of marketing strategy of last segment.
After the marketing and sales division has completed its situation analysis effort.
It knows what it has to sell, what business is currently attracted and who its competitors are.
There is a tendency in the hospitality industry to think that marketing planning is only for larger hotels and that writing a plan for a property with a very limited staff is a waste of time.
Facility, it is even more vital for a small properly to commit its marketing plan to writing because jobs are not as well-defined.
2.0 Objectives:At the end of this module, we should be able 1 Know five basic element s of a marketing planning process.
2 Understanding the business of selling hotel facility.
3.0 MAIN CONTENTS 3.1 Basic Elements of a Marketing Process.
A marketing planning process includes five basic elements: a A statement about the position the property wishes to assume in the market place.
Sometimes called a mission statement, this document must clearly state what the property is and what markets it intends to serve.
b A situation analysis.
This process includes analysis of the property, the competition and the markets.
c Comparative Statistics: One must compare actual business volume during the current year with projection for the twelve months of the up coming year.
In hotels, for example statistic are needed on occupation rate, rooms volume, food and beverage volume, marketing overhead expenses, and if possible, gross operation 81 profit (which is departmental profit minus over heads).
The current status of booking can be judged by recording the amount of future business already in hand as of a given date and comparing it to the amount of business already in hand as of a given date and comparing it to the amount of business booked as of this same date a year earlier.
d Action Plans: The hotels needs to produce a monthly plan for each market segment group, social transient, business transient, etc.
Each plan should include assignment of accountability, sales activities, target dates and standards of measurement.
Media for advertising can be considered and a marketing budget to guide expenses can be planned.
e Finally, management should list by calendar date its schedule of promotional events to be held at the hotel.
For each entry, the objectives of the promotion, the advertising media to be used, and any creative recommendations should be stated.
An effective development marketing plan can guide staff in the marketing and sales division in efforts to sell the right products and services to the right markets at the right time.
3.2 The business of selling hotel facility 3.2.1 Room Business Of all the product available for sales in a hotel, the most profitable is a guest room.
Competition for this business continues to intensify and the vast majority of all properties experience night of the week and/seasonal drops in business demand.
To secure the best overall occupancy for its hotels, a sales division must go after business from specific segments which are most likely to use its property.
3.2.2 Conventions: Annual sessions of approximately 25,000 presentational, trade, and fraternal organizations have become a big business for hotels and cities which are equipped with convention halls and centers.
Hotels and cities realized an economics influx of dollars to their local communities.
When major conventions book, so the competition for this market segment is intense.
Association look for hotels and centers with the particular mix and size of meetings and meal facilities to fit their needs over appropriate dates.
Sales divisions of hotels and convention centers strive hard to book 82 these major group over dates which are most difficult to fill with other sources of business.
Association holding convention and meeting range in scope from international to local and in size from less than 1000 to over 100,000 persons with such a made range, many hotels and cities can find their niche in the market.
In recent years, report properties have begin searching for convention business.
This has been done to fill shoulder and off season period.
Even major destruction repeat which in years past could spend on repeat individual business to fill up have now begin to complete for convention.
They offer food meeting facilities with many recreational amenities which appeal to convention delegates with varied interests.
Barking convention into hotels which do not depend primarily on this business can be riley.
Some convention may force out repeat individual customer and worse yet, may create an atmosphere of the noise and delivery much different from the hotels under normal condition a development which could lose sleepy repeat clientele.
These interest risks are even more severe for result where the individual guest stays to “get away from it all”.
The booking of convention is a major tasks requiring considerable planning and skillful execution.
This job is normally assigned to senior sales staff in smaller properties and to specialized department in large hotels.
4.0 CONCLUSION In concluding this module, you should by now understand the basic elements of a marketing process, the business of selling Hotel facility and the mode of selling convention and centres as hotel products.
5.0 SUMMARY This module has highlighted hotel planning market criteria and the business of selling facilities.
It was further broker down to basic elements of marketing process and other area utilized as marketing products.
6.0 Tutor- Marked Assignment 1 Highlight five basic elements of a marketing process you have studied 2 Fully explain the three basic element of a marketing process, you know 83 3 Discuss the mode of selling convention and centers as the product available for sales in a hotel.
7.0 REFERENCES 1.
General W. Laltun – The Lodging and Food Services Industry, (2002) 10th Edition.AvanGlopbal publishers Pp 22-30.
2.
John R. Walker, Introduction to Hospitality 10th Edition (1944).
Mc.
Graw hill book company Pp 34-38.
UNIT 6 BUSINESS OF SELLING HOTEL FACILITIES (2) CONTENTS 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objective 3.0 Main Content 3.1 Salesmanship of Reception Staff 3.2 Some Useful Techniques in Selling Hotel Facilities 3.2.1 Offering Alternatives 3.2.2 Suggestive Selling’s 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutor-Market Assignment 7.0 References 1.0 INTRODUCTION– The last module highlighted hotel planning, marketing criteria and the business of selling.
This module continues the business of selling hotel facilities using staff techniques.
Unless a guest has guest in the hotel before, that guest usually 84 does not have any knowledge about the accommodation product.
It is likely that many of the guests are not aware of the various services and facilities available when they arrive at the hotel.
These, reception staff is to explain to guest the various types of accommodation and the other hotel facilities and to encourage them to purchase them during their stay.
This up-selling significantly increase the revenue of the hotels.
2.0 OBJECTIVE: At the end of the module, we should be able to: 1 Salesmanship of reception staff in the sale of hotel facilities.
2 Some special techniques in selling hotel facilities.
3.0 MAIN CONTENT 3.1 Salesmanship of Reception Staff Good salesmanship is exhibited by reception staff when selling hotel facilities.
a Product Knowledge: Receptionist clerks must be able to describe and suggest the services and facilities of the hotel.
You therefore, need to have a thorough knowledge of your hotel and its products, includes room rates, and all of the facilities and services available.
b Wiling---- to sell: be willing to five guest your full attention and to offer assistance and knowledge advice whenever it is needed.
c Communication Skills: be able to communicate well.
You must be able to listen, observe, and establish the needs of a guest.
Additionally, you must be able to ask appropriate question and discus with guest type of services that best suit their needs.
d Selling Techniques: process food selling techniques, so that quickly are perfected to purchase the hotels products without feeding that are being premised.
3.2 Some useful techniques in felling hotel facilities Reception staff may promote each of hotel service by employing the use of certain useful techniques.
Which may include the following : 3.2.1 Offering Alternatives Guest are not always aware of the range of service available in a hotel.
Reception staff can promote the sales of the services by suffering the must appropriate service to the 85 guests or offering alternative for the guest to choose them.Two strategies that can be used when offering alternative of accommodation to customers are the top-down and bottom-up approaches.
Top-down techniques requires the receptionist to start from most expensive option, and then after progressed to cheaper ones.
This method is most appreciated when guest’s whole prime concern in comfort and services.
The bottom-up techniques on the other hand, requires the receptionist to start with the cheapest option, and then persuade the guest to take probably the less expensive package.
This method is most appropriate with guests whole prime consideration is the cost of the service.
If the most expensive option is offered first, the guest would be post off right away.
By starting with the cheapest option and then suggesting that for a small amount --- the gust could have much better accommodation, the receptionist may be able to persuade the guest to accept the service of the medium or higher price ranges.
3.2.2 Suggestive Sells This is an important sales techniques for front office staff.
It involves a member of staff deciding the services and offering to them for a guest.
The technique can be illustrated more clearly by the example below.
It is important to remember that when employees suggestive sells, care must be taken to avoid over pricing, that would not help the technique.
It can be explained more clearly by the examples below; Situation 1 A couple traveling with their baby Action: The receptionist may recommend the full range of the hotel services by offering to line a baby-sitter for a family with baby, resaving a table in the hotel with a la carte instrument, or drawing the hotel facilities and baby needs available from room service.
Action: The receptionist may explain the benefits of the special service package (which may for instance, include breakfast, charge, use of the business centre facilities, and use of the hotel.
4.0 CONCLUSION In concluding this module, we have learnt how reception staff can influence the guests to patronize the hotel products through her/his sales salesmanship skill also some helpful and useful selling techniques.
86 5.0 SUMMARY Business of selling hotel facilities part 2 were treated, looking at staff input through his/her salesmanship techniques.
For effective sales, she should have product knowledge, willingness to sell, communication skill and the knowledge of selling techniques.
6.0 Tutor – marked Assignment 1.
Imagine that you are an inexperienced person in hotel; Explain why good salesmanship is important when carrying out duties.
2.
What selling techniques would you employ when offering accommodation for the walk-in guest?
And explain why?
(a) A middle – equal couple who are on holiday.
(b) A mature man on all-expenses paid business trip 3.
What level of services would you suggest to the following guests, in order to increase sales.
(a) An independent traveler coming to your country on business purpose (b) A newly-wed couple on their honey moon.
7.0 REFERENCES 1.
Fosket, David German, viester and lemten Ronald (2003) the keory of catering.
(10th Edition).
Book paint Ltd Ltd, 130 Nulton Part Abusolon Oxon, Bos 1445B Pg 51-72.
87  UNIT 7: THE NEED FOR MANAGEMENT INFORMATION SYSTEM CONTENTS 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objective 3.0 Main Content 3.1 Information Processors 3.2 Characteristics of Management Information System 3.3 Need for MIS Discussed 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutor-Market Assignment 7.0 References 1.0 INTRODUCTION: We have completed work on series of modules that discussed the techniques of Selling hotel facilities and services.
This module is on information system and its uses in management.
Management information system can be defined as a system that transforms data input into information output that decision markers can use productively.
Thus definition calls attention mainly to be data to be used.
What data should be collected?
How will data be collected, stored and distributed?
However, editing and reducing this incoming information, making it manageable, is the process called abstracting.
2.0 OBJECTIVES:-At the end of this module, student should be able to (1) Explain how management needs and resources for information have changed (2) Discuss characteristic of management information system (3) Define needs for information at different levels.
(4) appreciate the role and advantages of computers in management information system (MIS).
3.0 MAIN CONTENTS 88 3.1 Information Processors: Today; managers have been seen as sources and processors of information.
Some believe that the function of management revolves around receiving, handling, appraising, and dispensing information.
It can no longer be assumed that the appropriate information automatically is more abundant now then at any other time in history.
Considerations must now be given to what information is necessary at various management levels and to how that information should travel through an organization.
Once information is obtained and processed, it is used in the decision making and planning for management consumption.
Almost all bad decisions result from bad information, and all bad plans can be resulted to bad decisions.
Hence, it is important that accusable information is vital for all management functions; more managers are studying their information systems.
3.2 Characteristics of Management Information System The characteristics of management information system are discussed below: (i) Accuracy: May be a matter of degree; the more accurate the data the better, financial forecasts may come in increments of thousands or ten thousands of dollars and it may or may not be necessary to counter smaller amount.
(ii) Timelines: Is particularly important because information has to be available when appropriate should be taken.
An information system that fails to indicate that a certain hotel room is available cause’s loss of the revenue that room could have generated that might.
(iii) Completeness: This means sufficient information to support a decision, information about an employee may be needed to process the employee’s separation.
Gathering about all employee separation is much more helpful in diagnosing personnel problem than a harshly look at one such situation.
(iv) Consciousness: Managers can absorbs only so much information available to them, information overhead can be a meal problem for managers, therefore, don’t generally reacts and mis on the quantity of information it can generate.
(v) Relevance:This dues in directly with completeness and consciousness.
One who asks whether the information generated is really necessary for the individual who must use it raises relevance as a criterion.
89  3.3 Need for Mis Discussed Few years ago, many hospitality operatives were models of stability.
Their products and services changed little; customers renewed personal attention and often refund intense loyalty for that attention.
An employee’s working arrangements remained comfortably predictable.
Government regulations inter fund vary little with the business.
However, the life cycle of hospitality products and services now shrunk continually.
Restaurants may change their concepts frequently.
Hotel offer such new services as secretament assistance and health clubs.
Customers have become fickle, and management must learn what their new desires are and to what segments of the market is should direct its attention.
Employee relations are unpredictable and stricter government regulations may now for instance, who a hotel can have and when it can dismiss someone.
To cope with this volatile business climates managers must be well informed.
To accommodate their need, a new area of management information system or management information science (NIS).
Management, it is often said has three primary roles: (1) Interpersonal (2) information and (3) decisional.
The interpersonal role focuses on an involvement with the people within and outside the organization.
It includes representative, moderation and negotiating disputable bin personnel.
3.4 Advantages of Computers There are so many benefits that a computer can provide a hospitality manager that we can specifically begin to list them all.
These include: 1.
Standardization, reliability and accuracy 2.
Better file management 3.
Reduced float 4.
Release of personnel for more people oriented tasks STANDARDIZATION, RELIABILITY AND ACCURACY: A computerized system encourages standardization because I must capable of processing all the data.
This standardization help reduce the need to invent and how producers and encourages 90 better communication because everyone must use the same data formats.
The computer itself is accurate and reliable, tending to eliminate human error.
• BETTER FILE MANAGEMENT: A file is any organized collection of related records.
Files can be kept manually, with folders in a file cabinet.
The computer data base follows the same principle except that the computer can file, start, and retrieve information mush faster and more accurately.
• REDUCED FLOAT: Float is time between the movement goods or services are sold and when payment for them is received.
In a business with many accurate receivable, a computerized system can reduce the time between sending bills and processing payment, increasing the amount of available money • RELEASE OF PERSONNEL FOR MORE PEOPLE ORIENTED TASKS: By taken over paper shuffling.
“the computer frees the personnel from time consuming drudgery to spend more time with customers and also allows managers to more personal work.
• OTHER FEATURES: Computation has also allowed organization to provide new services.
For example, hospitality claims now take advantage of computerized reservation system to simply the reservations and keep track of available rooms nationwide.
Automatic tellers in the banking industry expended banking hours while improving record keeping.
4.0 CONCLUSION This module has discussed the important roles of information system in the management of hotels.
Characteristics of management information system and the advantages of using computers.
5.0 SUMMARY The word management in MIS is something of a mis normal, because other employees beside the managers used information and contribute to it.
It has been suggested that an organization is information system must serve various levels of responsibilities.
The level that various requires information include the rank and file 91 employees, the optional controllers the management controllers and the strategic planners.
6.0 TUTOR – MARKED ASSIGNMENT (1) Why is MIS more important in management now than previously (2) Explain the three primary roles of management in an MIS context as suggested in the text.
(3) List five characteristics of MIS (4) What are examples of computers in hospitality operations?
7.0 REFERENCES James R. Keiser, (1989) Principle and Practices of management in the Hospitality industry 2nd Edition Britain Sloghton publishers Pg 50-89.
92
