 NATIONAL OPEN UNIVERSITY OF NIGERIA SCHOOL OF SCIENCE AND TECHNOLOGY COURSE CODE: HCM 437 COURSE TITLE: ADVANCED FOOD AND BEVERAGE SERVICE.
1 COURSE DEVELOPMENT HCM 437 ADVANCED FOOD AND BEVERAGE SERVICES COURSE MAIN TEXT Course Developer/ Akeredolu, I.A., PhD Unit Writer: Yaba College of Technology, Lagos.
Course Editor: Programme Leader: Dr (Mrs.) A. O. Fagbemi School of Management Sciences, National Open University of Nigeria, Lagos.
Course Coordinator: Mr. S. O. Israel-Cookey School of Management Sciences, National Open University of Nigeria, Lagos.
2  MODULE 1 Unit 1 Meal experience and customer satisfaction ...................................................1 Unit 2 Food and beverage personnel .......................................................................18 Unit 3 Types of dining room service .......................................................................27 MODULE 2 Unit 1 Food serving areas and equipment ................................................................39 Unit 2 Equipment for operating restaurant - service equipment ..............................48 Unit 3 Equipment for operating restaurant – furniture, fixtures, linen .................... 64 Unit 4 Preparation for service ...................................................................................76 Unit 5 Styles and techniques of service ....................................................................82 MODULE 3 Unit 1 Order taking procedures in a restaurant ......................................................... 92 Unit 2 Order of serving meals ..................................................................................103 Unit 3 Designing and decorating a restaurant ......................................................... 115 Unit 4 Health, safety and security ............................................................................126 3 MODULE 1 Unit 1 Meal experience and customer satisfaction Unit 2 Food and beverage personnel Unit 3 Types of dining room service UNIT I MEAL EXPERIENCE AND CUSTOMER SATISFACTION CONTENT 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objectives 3.0 Main content 3.1Customer’s needs 3.2 Customer service 3.2.1 What is customer service?
3.2.2 The keys to good customer service 3.2.3Levelof customer service 3.2.4 Levels of service and standards of service 3.2.5 What customers want 3.2.6 How to achieve success in service 3.2.7 Guest encounters/Moments of truth 3.2.8 Providing good service 3.2.9 Basics of great customer service 3.2.10 Customer service tips 3.2.11 Examples of good customer service 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutor-marked assignments 7.0 References/further reading 4 1.0 INTRODUCTION The main aim of food and beverage operations is to achieve customer satisfaction.
The food and beverage (or food service) operation is designed to meet a wide range of demand.
The different types of operations are designed for the needs people have at a particular time, rather than for the type of people they are.
In this unit, you shall learn what constitutes the meal experience and how customer satisfaction can be achieved through good customer services.
2.0 OBJECTIVES At the end of this unit, you should be able to: 1.
Identify at least five needs that customers have 2.
Define customer service 3.
State five keys to good customer service 4.
Outline at least 10 “moments of truth” in a food service operation 5.
Describe at least five factors that affect a customer’s meal experience 3.0 MAIN CONTENT 3.1 Customers’ needs The needs that customers might be seeking to satisfy include: Physiological: for example, the need to satiate one's appetite or quench one's thirst, or the need for special foods such as diabetic or vegetarian.
(cid:1) Economic: for example, the need for good value; rapid, fast service; a convenient location.
5 (cid:1) Social: for example, going out with friends or business colleagues; attending a function in order to meet others.
(cid:1) Psychological: for example, the need for enhancement of self-esteem: fulfilling life- style needs; the need for variety; as a result of advertising and promotion.
(cid:1) Convenience: for example, as a result of being unable to get home (shoppers, workers) or attending some other event (cinema, theatre); the desire for someone else to do the work; the physical impossibility of catering at home (weddings and other special events).
Customers may want to satisfy some or all of these needs.
As the reasons for eating out vary, then so do the types of operation that may be appropriate at the time.
Different establishments offer differing services, both in the extent of the menu and the price, as well as varying service levels.
The choice offered may be restricted or wide.
It is important to recognize that the specific reasons behind a customer's choice will often determine the customer's satisfaction (or dissatisfaction), rather than the food and beverage service by itself.
One example is the social need to go out with friends: if one person fails to turn up or behaves in a disagreeable way, then the customer may be dissatisfied with the meal.
The customer who is not able to satisfy his or her needs will be a dissatisfied customer.
The customer may, for instance, be dissatisfied with unhelpful staff, cramped conditions or the lack of choice available.
These aspects are the responsibility of the food and beverage operation.
However, sometimes the reasons for the customer being dissatisfied might be beyond the operation's control, for example, location, the weather, other customers or transport problems.
In non-captive markets the customer has a choice of eating out opportunities both in terms of the food and drink to be consumed and the type of operation they may wish to patronize.
While it is true that certain types of catering operations might attract certain types of customer, this is by no means true all the time.
The same customers may patronize a variety of different operations depending on the needs they have at a given time, for example, a romantic night out, a quick office lunch or a wedding function.
6 In semi-captive markets the availability of choice is also important.
Customers may choose, for example, a certain airline or ship or hotel based upon the identification of certain needs they wish to satisfy.
In captive markets where the customer does not have a choice of operation, there is still a need for satisfaction.
For instance, it is generally recognized that better fed workers work better and that better fed patients recover quicker.
'Better fed' here, though, does not just refer to the food and drink provided but the whole experience of the meal.
From the food and beverage operator's point of view it is important to recognize that the customer's needs may vary and that food and beverage operators should be aware of factors that might affect the customer's meal experience.
Much research has been carried out in recent years identifying these factors.
They range from location to the acceptance of credit cards, and from attitudes of staff to the behaviour of other customers.
These factors are summarized in Table 1 below.
7 Table 1 Factors that affect customers’ meal experience FACTOR DESCRIPTION The food and Includes the range of foods and beverages, choice, availability, beverages on offer flexibility for special orders and the quality of the food and beverages Level of service The level of service sought will depend on the needs people have at a particular time.
For example, a romantic night out may call for a quiet table in a top-class restaurant whereas a group of young friends might be seeking more informal service.
This factor also takes into account the importance to the customer of other services such as booking and account facilities, acceptance of credit cards and the reliability of the operation's product Level of- cleanliness This factor relates to the premises, equipment and staff.
Over the last few years this factor has increased in importance in customers' minds.
The and hygiene recent media focus on food production and the risks involved in buying food have heightened awareness of health and hygiene aspects Perceived value for Customers have perceptions of the amount they are prepared to spend and money and price relate this to differing types of establishments and operations.
Value is the personal estimate of a product's capacity to satisfy a set of goals and also perception of the balance between worth and cost.
Good value for a food and beverage operation is where the worth (the perception of the desirability of a particular product over another in order to satisfy a set of established goals) is perceived as greater than the total cost (As well as cash price, total cost includes, for instance, the cost of not going somewhere else, the cost of transport and time, the cost of potential embarrassment, the cost of having to look and behave in a required manner and the cost in terms of effort at work to earn the money to pay the required price.)
Poor value is where the costs involved are perceived as greater than the worth Atmosphere of the This factor takes account of Issues such as design, decor, lighting, heating, establishment furnishings, acoustics and noise levels, other customers, the smartness of the staff and the attitude of the staff 8 3.2 Customer Service 3.2.1 What is Customer Service?
Customer service is sometimes defined as the after sale activities that a company provides to its customers.
Today however customer service means more than just the action that a company takes when a customer encounters any problems with the product or service that you have just sold.
All activities which increase and enhance customer satisfaction are now part of what we call customer service.
To fully comprehend the scope of activities which should be undertaken the phrase customer service should encompass whatever is necessary to exceed the expectation of the customer all the time and every time.
This means that if the purpose of customer services is to exceed the expectations of your customers then the scope of activities must then be widened to include all the features of your business because every aspect potentially can have an effect on customer relationship.
Customer service in foodservice operations can be defined as being a combination of five characteristics.
These are: 1.
Service level: the intensity of or limitations in, the individual personal attention given to customers.
2.
Service Availability: for example, the opening times and variations in the menu and beverage list on offer.
3.
Level of Standards: for example, the food and beverage quality, decor, standard of equipment being used and level of staffing professionalism.
4.
Service Reliability: the extent to which the product is intended to be consistent and its consistency in practice.
5.
Service Flexibility: the extent to which alternatives are available, and to which there can be variations in the standard products that are offered.
A foodservice operation will determine the customer service specification of the operation by taking account of these five customer service factors.
9  3.2.2 The keys to good customer service?
Exceed Expectations.
To meet and consistently exceed the expectations of your customer should be the objective that you set for your customer service.
Most customers will not be back if they feel even the slightest bit that they were mistreated.
The following are some keys to good customer service.
Know Your Customer.
Develop and cultivate a relationship with your customers.
When you and your staff develop rapport and cultivate a relationship with your customer this will result in a more personalized service and a more satisfying experience for the patron.
Treat Your Customer With Respect.
Deal with your customers honestly.
If you lie to a customer and he finds out about it, you can be sure that you will not be seeing him again in your establishment.
If a customer seeks your assistance about a product choice, do not try to sell him something which makes the best profit for you instead offer a product that will best suit his needs.
Train Your Staff Well.
Train your personnel to care for your customers as you do.
If a customer needs something to which you do not have easy access go the extra mile to get him what he needs.
This positive attitude will be conveyed to and be appreciated by the customer.
This is an attitude which has already decided to do what it can for the customer.
Do Not Promise What You Can't Deliver.
A promise to a customer should be kept.
Don’t promise something unless you can keep that promise.
Broken promises will make customers feel betrayed.
When trust is lost it is extremely difficult to regain and sometimes even impossible.
Keep track of your promises and confirm whatever progress you have made towards keeping your promises.
10 3.2.3 Level of customer service In order to meet the customers' expectations and to enhance their meal experience, a foodservice operation will determine the level of customer service that the customer should expect within that operation.
Within foodservice operations the level of service in a specific operation may be defined as follows: 1.
Technical Specification: refers to the food and beverage items on offer, the portion size or measure, the cooking method, the degree of cooking, the method of presentation, the cover, accompaniments and the cleanliness of items, etc.
2.
Service Specification: refers to two aspects: first, the procedures for service and second, the way in which the procedures are carried out.
Procedures include meeting and greeting, order taking, seeking customer comment, dealing with complaints, payment and the special needs of customers.
The method in which the service is carried out includes paying attention to the level of staff attentiveness, their tone of voice and body language.
etc.
Operations will usually have written statements of both technical and service specification (often called a customer service specification).
These may also be detailed in staff manuals that outline expected standards of performance.
3.2.4 Level of service and standards of service There can be confusion when referring to the levels of service and the standards of service: (cid:2) The level of service in foodservice operations can range from being very limited to complex, with high levels of personal attention.
(cid:2) The standards of service are a measure of the ability of the operation to deliver the service level it is offering.
Thus an operation might be offering low levels of service, such as a fast food operation, but may be doing this at a very high standard.
Equally, an operation may be offering a high level of service, such as a full service restaurant, but may be doing so with low standards.
11 3.2.5 What customers want It is easy to believe all that the customers are interested in is a bargain, but your customers want much more.
When you focus solely on cost, you will be missing the chance to address other concerns of your customers.
Customers want genuine greetings.
Your customers want to hear, "How are you today?"
or "Welcome to..." Note the word "genuine."
Mumbled, sing-song welcomes don't count.
Don't forget the importance of eye contact.
If you or your hostess is studying the seating chart to determine where to seat the guests who have just arrived, you will make your guests feel more like a commodity to be handled than guests in your restaurant.
It is not difficult to make every person who enters your restaurant feel welcome -- to feel as if you are glad they are there, that they have been missed if some time has passed since their last visit and that their visit is going to be an enjoyable one.
Providing your guests with a sincere greeting is the best way to set the tone for the dining experience to follow.
Customers want a smiling face.
Personnel experts say that you have only eight seconds to make a good first impression.
The person who greets customers as they enter the restaurant sets the pace for the entire experience.
Select your hosts and hostesses as if they are representing the attitude of every person on your team -- in fact, they are.
Customers want available staff members.
Few guests want servers who hover at the table, but a server should be available within a minute or two of a customer needing something.
Experienced servers continually make the rounds of each table in their station to make sure that all is well.
When you listen to complaints of people about restaurants, one that is often voiced is that the staff congregated in a clump, chatting away, while the customer did everything but stand on his chair to get their attention.
Being available doesn't have to mean instantaneous service -- in fact, 12 all but the most demanding customer will be reasonable and voice their request in "When you have time, could you...?"
or "We just need one more fork..." Customers want choices.
Show the customer that you are flexible and you can work around their diets and tastes.
Don't get so tied into "efficiency" that you can't provide substitutions or other choices.
Whether it's including a no- or low-fat salad dressing in your selection or allowing a customer to have the sauce on the side, it is good business sense to let your customers customize their order, if possible.
While meal customization and flexibility can add to the expense of your service, if you need a stronger business rationalization to encourage your servers and kitchen staff to cater for specific tastes and dietary needs, take a longer view.
Your efforts will be rewarded in repeated business and word-of-mouth advertising.
Customers want a smooth relationship.
Cultivating a good relationship with your customers can be a process that develops over years.
When a customer has a pleasant experience at your restaurant the first time, your relationship is not over.
It has just begun.
You've set the customer's expectations at a certain point, and that customer will expect as good -- or better -- experience the next time they come to your place.
You accomplish this by providing high-quality service and food product while continuing to communicate and listen to your customers.
Customers want knowledgeable staff members.
How big is the chef salad?
How much is the lobster special?
Are the pork chops fried or baked?
Are the green beans fresh?
If I order "medium rare," what will my steak look like?
What vodkas do you carry?
Your servers can be bombarded with questions -- all of which seem reasonable to your customers.
To them your server is an "expert" who is expected to have all the answers to their questions at their fingertips.
Make sure your servers understand the components of your various dishes and how they are prepared.
Post and review "frequently asked questions" at your lineups, so that customers' questions can be easily answered.
Make sure your servers know it is okay to say, "I do not know."
When a customer asks, "Is there cilantro in the sauce?"
rather than guessing, train them to admit they do not know and go find the answer.
Customers want a clean restaurant.
When it comes to a restaurant, good housekeeping may not be good enough.
You need superior housekeeping to build and maintain your restaurant's image.
Customers want to eat in a place that is well-kept and where linens are fresh and surfaces 13 are dust-free.
Just one mistake, such as water spots on a glass or food crumbs on the floor, can throw into question the cleanliness of your entire operation.
The easiest way to keep your standards high is to establish routines and procedures for how every maintenance task within your restaurant is performed.
Staff must be trained in how each task is to be completed.
Customers want useful suggestions.
When a customer asks one of your servers, "What is good here?"
the customer does not want to hear, "Oh, everything is good here."
That might be a great endorsement of the chef's skills, but it does not help the customer decide what to order.
How much more credible for the server to say, "Our chef is known for his spinach ravioli," or "If you like fish, you have got to try the sea bass."
Your customers depend on you to help them make decisions about what is on the menu.
This does not mean that your server hovers over the table as the customers discuss the menu, but a server should be nearby to help customers understand and confirm their needs and choices.
Customers want a visible restaurant manager.
Customers like to know that somebody in authority is nearby to answer questions or settle a dispute.
People feel better when they know that there is a next level of help available to them.
Even if the customer does not call on you, he wants to see that a manager is available and on site.
The presence of a manager making the rounds is reassuring to the customers that someone is "on call" if they need it.
One well-known restaurant chain feels so strongly about the importance of a visible manager that the manager's office has no chairs.
That is right because there should be no sitting in the back room when there is a dining room full of guests.
Customers want a pleasant experience.
Customers want to come to an attractive setting and enjoy a good meal.
They arrive at your restaurant wanting to have a good time.
When you bear in mind the expectations that customers have, you will be able to do a better job at meeting or exceeding them.
3.2.6 How to Achieve Success in Service For success in service to be achieved, we need to do the following: 1.
Focus on the guest.
2.
Understand the role of the guest – contact employee.
3.
Weave a service culture into education and training systems.
14 4.
Emphasize high touch instead of just high tech.
5.
Thrive on change.
It is also very important to encourage great loyalty.
We do not only need to keep guests happy during their stay but also to keep them returning with their friends and relatives as well.
Two basic kinds of service exist: “Help me” and “Fix it”.
“Help me” refers to guests’ regular and special needs such as “help me find the function room”, or “help me get a reservation at a restaurant”.
“Fix it” refers to guests services such as “please fix my TV or please fix my toilet, it does not flush”.
3.2.7 Guest Encounters/Moments of Truth Guest Encounters was coined from “moments of truth” by Jan Carlson when he became president of Scandinavian Airline Systems (SAS).
Every hospitality organization has thousands of moments of truth every day.
This results in critical challenges in maintaining the expected levels of service.
The underlisted are moments of truth in a restaurant dining experience: 1.
Guest calls the restaurant for a table reservation.
2.
Guest tries to find the restaurant.
3.
Guest panics.
4.
Guest is welcomed.
5.
Guest is told that the table is not ready.
6.
Guest either waits or goes to the lounge for a cocktail.
7.
Guest tries to attract the bartender’s attention for a cocktail because there are no seats available.
8.
Guest is called over a loud speaker or paged.
9.
Guest is seated at the table.
10.
Server takes order.
11.
Server brings beverages or food.
12.
Server clears food or beverages.
13.
Server brings check.
14.
Guest pays for meal.
15 15.
Guest departs restaurant 3.2.8 Providing Good Service Giving good service is a very difficult task.
Due to over-reliance on technology, service providers are not often motivated to give good service.
According to Albrecht (1992), there are seven deadly sins of service: 1.
Apathy 2.
Brush off 3.
Coldness 4.
Condescension 5.
Robotics 6.
Rule book 7.
Run around 3.2.9 Basics of Great Customer Service The restaurant business is about serving people.
It is not just about the food.
You are inviting people to eat at your restaurant, so creating a great dining experience for customers is just as important as providing great food.
There are several ways to offer great customer service at your restaurant.
Hire Friendly Restaurant Staff Servers and cashiers are the most important people in your restaurant when it comes to providing great customer service.
Servers need to work quickly and efficiently while providing undivided attention to all your customers’ needs.
It is sometimes difficult to find wait staff that can juggle multiple tasks.
The best servers are some of the most talented people in the industry.
Restaurant owners need to take time to hire the right staff; they need to provide training to ensure the highest level of customer service.
A great way to motivate your staff is to provide incentives or prizes to those who go above and beyond for the customers.
16 Acknowledge Customer Complaints All restaurants will have to deal with customer complaints.
No matter how hard you try to please your customers, complaints do occur occasionally.
The best way for restaurant owners to deal with this is to anticipate it and to be ready to deal with it when it arises.
The most effective way to deal with complaints is to acknowledge that there was a problem and that you will do whatever you can to alleviate the problem.
Showing that you recognize your customers’ concerns and making an effort to help them is the best way to deal with problems.
It is best to try and fix the problem right away, because this prevents the problem from escalating.
Unhappy or angry customers can be detrimental to your business.
They will spread the news to all their friends and family.
Negative word-of-mouth travel quickly and can damage your restaurant’s reputation.
Try to prevent this from happening by acknowledging the problem and fixing it before the customer leaves your restaurant.
Show Customer Appreciation Customers like to be acknowledged and appreciated.
There are many ways to show your customers that you appreciate their business.
You don’t have to spend a lot of money to please your customers.
The best way for restaurant owners to show appreciation is to walk around to each table, introduce yourself as the owner, and thank them for eating at your restaurant.
This simple gesture can go a long way in impressing your customers.
3.2.10 Customer Service Tips Why customer service tips?
A food service operation’s reputation relies heavily on the satisfaction of its customers.
Almost everyone knows that.
The food has to taste wonderful to the customers, the ambiance has to be just right, and of course, the service has to be impeccable.
That is why most restaurant owners have adopted "the customer is always right” mantra and probably every customer takes this as a fact.
Many restaurant professionals/consultants have written customer service tips that should be read and practiced by restaurant owners and staff to help attract more people.
17 That way, more are bound to know what they need to give and what they ought to receive.
It is all for improving the dining experience, and we know that everyone loves to have a wonderful experience whenever they are dining out in a restaurant.
3.2.11 Examples of good customer service 1.
Courtesy.
Nothing can spoil a perfect evening as much as restaurant staff, who have no sense of courtesy.
Although this applies to customers as well, it is very important for the restaurant owner and staff to make sure that they deliver their services with the utmost courtesy to ALL of their customers, regardless of race, time, attitude, etc.
An example of good customer service with regard to courtesy is simply to engage the customer.
First establish eye contact, then offer a warm genuine smile - simple but effective.
2.
Timing and Anticipation.
There’s nothing more impressive than the waiter, who appears at just the right time.
Some customers get uncomfortable with waiters who linger, and some get impatient with waiters who take too long to get there.
So, the trick is to have great timing for everything and to anticipate the needs of your customers.
The staff should know when to offer the wine and when to ask when the plates can be cleared for the next course.
An example of customer service in timing is not to approach the table to discuss the yummy dessert selection when an intense conversation is going on between the guest.
Common sense rules.
3.
Attitude.
Mike Johnson in his book "101 Ways to Provide Exceptional Customer Service Today" said that to raise your reputation, you have to treat everyone (even staff!)
as customers.
This attitude is bound to help you give better service to your customers and creates an excellent working atmosphere with your staff or colleagues.
No customer likes to see and hear a seemingly charming and polite supervisor suddenly bark orders or scold his staff around.
A great attitude towards everyone is addictive and can easily be seen by everyone.
It won’t be long before most of your colleagues follow in your footsteps!
18 4.
Special Treatment.
Everyone likes to be feel pampered and special, especially customers who have decided to dine out for the evening.
Their evening meal in your restaurant is most likely their way of doing something different or special!
Therefore, it is the job of the restaurant staff to make all customers feel special their own way.
Know your regular customers, and if they seem to be like people who like to be conversational, then spark up a greeting or two.
Give the customer, who seems to love trying out new wines, a chance to taste one of your new arrivals, or an old special.
Treat each customer individually but in their own special way.
This technique makes your customers feel valued and they would always get the feeling that going to your restaurant certainly makes them feel special for the night.
Be as detailed as possible - remember the guest's name, whether they have children or not, whether they prefer Merlot over Cabernet, and why they do not like wine made in Napa Valley.
4.0 CONCLUSION Excellence in service is critical in each hospitality organisation.
As hospitality professionals, there is the need to recognize a variety of guest-related situations and act to relieve them or avoid them.
5.0 SUMMARY The main aim of food service operation is to meet the customers’ need which may range from physiological to psychological.
The customer who is not able to satisfy his or her needs will be a dissatisfied one.
In order to achieve success in customer service therefore, you need to create great dining experience for customers and this can be achieved by hiring friendly restaurant staff, acknowledging customer complaint, showing customer appreciation not promising what you cannot deliver among other things.
19 6.0 TUTOR-MARKED ASSIGNMENTS 1.
Compare service in the following: i a casual restaurant ii a five star restaurant 2.
Identify seven deadly sins of service as observed by Albrecht (1992) 7.0.REFERENCES/FURTHER READING 1.
Lillicrap,D,& Cousins,J.
(2010).Food and Beverage Service.
(8th eds) Bookpower with Hodder Educ.UK 2.
Fosket, D. Ceserani, V., & Kinton, R. (2003) Theory of Catering.
(10theds).
Book power pub.London.
20  UNIT 2 FOOD AND BEVERAGE SERVICE PERSONNEL CONTENT 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objectives 3.0 Main content 3.1Organisational charts 3.2 Duties and responsibilities of food and beverage service personnel 3.2.1 Food and beverage manager 3.2.2 Restaurant manager/ supervisor 3.2.3 Reception head waiter 3.2.4 Head waiter/Maitre d’hotel/supervisor 3.2.5 Station head waiter/section supervisor 3.2.6 Station waiter/ chef de rang 3.2.7 Assistant station/demi chef de rang 3.2.8 Waiter/server/commis rang 3.2.9 Trainee commis/debarrasseur 3.2.10 Carver/trancheur 3.2.11 Floor or room service staff/chef d’etage/floor oroom waiter 3.2.12 lounge staff/ chef de sile 3.2.13 Wine butler/wine waiter/sommelier 3.2.14 Bar staff/bar tender/ mixologist 3.2.15 Barista 3.2.16 Buffet assistant/buffet chef/ chef de buffet 3.2.17 Cashier 3.2.18 Counter assistants 3.2.19 Table clearers 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutor-marked assignments 7.0 References/further reading 21 1.0 INTRODUCTION The food and beverage personnel staffs are the corner stone of any successful restaurant operation.
It is therefore important to employ the services of well-trained personnel.
In this lesson, we shall examine the duties and responsibilities of the various food and beverage service personnel.
2.0 OBJECTIVES At the end of this unit, you should be able to: 1.
Analyse the organisational chart of both small and large hotels.
2.
Identify at least 15 personnel involved in food and beverage service 3.
Describe the roles and responsibilities of the various food and beverage service personnel.
3.0 MAIN CONTENT 3.1 Organisational charts Typical organisation charts for small and larger hotels are given in Figures 1 and 2.
In both of these charts various food and beverage job roles are identified.
For food and beverage operations not set within hotels, the organisation often resembles the food and beverage section of the hotel organisation charts.
However, different terminology can be used for the various job roles in differing types of establishment.
The various types of job roles in food and beverage service are identified below.
In some smaller operations a number of these job roles maybe combined.
22  General Manager Food and Front of beverage house Manager Manager Head chef Restaurant Head Housekeep manager receptionist er Figure 1 Small hotel organisational chart General Manager Food and Personnel Control Control Front of beverage Manager office office house Manager Assistant front of Head chef Restaurant Floor Banqueting Storekeepe house manager service head Manager Head Reception Head housekeep manager cashier er Figure 2: Large Hotel Organisational Chart 23 3.2 Duties and responsibilities of food and beverage service personnel 3.2.1 Food and Beverage Manager Depending on the size of the establishment, the food and beverage manager is either responsible for the implementation of agreed policies or for contributing to the setting of the food and beverage policies.
The larger the organisation the less likely the manager is to be involved in policy setting.
In general, food and beverage managers are responsible for: • ensuring that the required profit margins are achieved for each food and beverage service area, in each financial period updating and compiling new wine lists according to availability of stock, current trends and customer needs • compiling.
in liaison with the kitchen, menus for the various food service areas and for special occasions • purchasing of all materials, both food and drink • ensuring that quality in relation to the price paid is maintained • determining portion size in relation to selling price • ensuring staff training, sales promotions and the maintenance of the highest professional standards • employing and dismissing staffs • holding regular meetings with section heads to ensure all areas are working effectively, efficiently and are well coordinated.
3.2.2 Restaurant Manager/Supervisor The restaurant manager or supervisor has overall responsibility for the organisation and administration of particular food and beverage service areas.
These may include the lounges, room, service (in hotels), restaurants and possibly some of the private function suites.
It is the restaurant manager who sets the standards for service and is responsible for any staff training that may be required, either on or off the job.
They may make out duty rosters, holiday lists and hours on and off duty, and contribute to operational duties Depending on the size of the establishment so that all the service areas run efficiently and smoothly.
24  3.2.3 Reception head waiter The reception headwaiter is responsible for accepting any bookings and for keeping the booking diary up to date.
They will reserve tables and allocate these reservations to particular stations.
The reception headwaiter greets guests on arrival and takes them to the table and seats them.
3.2.4 Head Waiter/Maitre d’hotel/Supervisor The headwaiter has overall charge of the staff team and is responsible for seeing that all the pre- preparation duties necessary for service are efficiently carried out and that nothing is forgotten.
The headwaiter will aid the reception headwaiter during the service and will possibly take some orders if the station waiter is busy.
The headwaiter also helps with the compilation of duty rosters and holiday lists, and may relieve the restaurant manager or reception headwaiter on their days off.
3.2.5 Station head waiter/ section supervisor For larger establishments the restaurant area is broken down into sections.
The station headwaiter has the overall responsibility for team of staff serving a number of stations within a section of the restaurant area.
Each of the sets of tables (which may be anything from four to eight in number) within the section of the restaurant area is called a station.
The station headwaiter must have a good knowledge of food and wine and its correct service, and be able to instruct other members of the staff.
They take the food and beverage orders (usually from the host) and carry out service at the table with the help of the chef de rang, who is in command of one of the stations within the section.
3.2.6 Station waiter/chef de rang The chef de rang or station waiter provides service to one set of tables (between about four and eight) known as a station within the restaurant area.
The chef de rang will normally have had less experience than a station headwaiter.
25  3.2.7 Assistant station waiter/demi-chef de rang The assistant station waiter or demi-chef de rang is the person next in seniority to the station waiter and assists as directed by the station waiter.
3.2.8 Waiter/server/commis de rang The waiter or commis de rang acts by instruction from the chef de rang.
This person mainly fetches and carries, may do some of the service of either vegetables or sauces, offers rolls, places plates upon the table and so on, and also helps to clear the tables after each course.
During the pre-preparation period much of the cleaning and preparatory tasks will be carried our by the commis de rang.
3.2.9 Trainee commis/debarrasseur/apprentice The trainee commis or debarrasseur is the apprentice or learner, having just joined the food and beverage service staff, and who wishes to take up food service as a career.
During the service this person will keep the sideboard well stocked with equipment and may help to fetch and carry items as required.
The debarrasseur will carry out some of the cleaning tasks during the pre- preparation periods.
They may also be given the responsibility of looking after and serving hors- d'oeuvre, cold sweets or assorted cheeses from the appropriate trolleys.
3.2.10 Carver/trancheur The carver or trancheur is responsible for the carving trolley and the carving of joints at the table as required.
The carver will plate up each portion and service with accompaniment as appropriate.
3.2.11 Floor or room service staff/chef d’etage/floor or room waiter The floor or room service staffs are often responsible for a complete floor in an establishment or, depending on the size of the establishment, a number of rooms or suites.
Room service of all meals and beverages throughout the day is normally only offered by a first- class establishment.
In smaller establishments, room service may be limited to early morning teas and breakfasts with the provision of in-room mini bars and tea and coffee facilities.
26  If full floor service is in operation, the staff will consist of a head floor waiter with the appropriate number of floor waiters working for them.
This team of staff are then responsible for the service of all meals and beverages (alcoholic and non-alcoholic) in guest rooms.
A thorough knowledge of food and drink, and their correct service, is therefore essential.
The importance of good liaison and cooperation with the housekeeping staff cannot be over-emphasized here.
The floor service staff will normally work from a floor pantry or central kitchen with all food and drink reaching the appropriate floor and the required room by lift and in a heated trolley.
3.2.12 Lounge Staff/Chef De Sole Lounge service staff may be employed only for lounge service within larger establishments.
In a smaller establishment it is usual for members of the food service staff to take over these duties on a roster basis.
The lounge staff are responsible for the service of morning coffee, afternoon teas, aperitifs and liqueurs before and after both lunch and dinner, and any coffee required after meals.
They are responsible for setting up the lounge in the morning and maintaining its cleanliness and presentation throughout the day.
3.2.13 Wine butler/wine waiter/sommelier The sommelier is responsible for the service of all alcoholic drinks and non-alcoholic bar drinks during the service of meals.
The sommelier must also be a sales person.
This employee should have a thorough knowledge of all drinks to be served, of the best wines and drinks to go with certain foods, and of the liquor licensing laws in respect of the particular establishment and area.
3.2.14 Bar staff/bartender/mixologist The people working within bar areas must be responsible and competent in preparing and serving a variety of wine, drinks and cocktails.
They should have a thorough knowledge of all alcoholic and non-alcoholic drinks being offered within the establishment, the ingredients necessary for the making of cocktails, and have knowledge of the requirements of the liquor licensing laws to ensure legal compliance.
27 A mixologist is a person who mixes and serves alcoholic beverages at a bar.
The term is also used for people who are creators of new mixed drinks.
They may also be called a cocktail maker, a cocktail bartender or simply a bartender.
Mixology is the art of making mixed drinks.
3.2.15 Barista The word barista is of Italian origin.
In Italy, a barista is a male or female bartender who typically works behind a counter, serving both hot and cold beverages as well as alcoholic beverages.
Although it does not mean specifically a person who makes various types of espresso- based coffee, it is now often used with this meaning.
The plural in English is baristas.
3.2.16 Buffet assistant/buffet chef/chef de buffet The chef de buffet is in charge of the buffet in the room, its presentation, the carving and portioning of food and its service.
This staff member will normally be a member of the kitchen team.
3.2.17 Cashier The cashier is responsible for billing and taking payments, or making ledger account entries for a food and beverage operation.
This may include making up bills from food and drink checks or in a cafeteria for example, charging customers for their selection of items on a tray.
3.2.18 Counter assistants Counter assistants are found in cafeterias where they will stock the counter and sometimes serve or portion food for customer;.
Duties may also include some cooking of call order items.
3.2.19 Table clearers Table clearers can be found in seating areas where the service is not waiter service.
These people are responsible for clearing tables using trolleys specially designed for the stacking of crockery, glassware, cutlery, etc.
SELF ASSESSMENT EXERCISES What roles would you play as: a.
A reception head waiter 28 b.
Section Supervisor c. Chef de rang d. Floor/room waiter 4.0 CONCLUSION You have learnt about the duties of the food service personnel, you have to endeavor to get quality training in order to function well as a food and beverage service person.
5.0 SUMMARY The food and beverage personnel staffs are the cornerstone of any successful restaurant operation.
However, different terminology can be used for the various job roles in differing types of establishment.
There are so many personnel involved in the food and beverage service.
This include; The food and beverage manager, restaurant manager, reception head waiter, reception head waiter, station waiterhead, waiter, etc, 6.0 TUTOR-MARKED ASSIGNMENTS 1.
Visit both a theme restaurant and five star restaurant and take note of the number of food and beverage personnel present.
2.
Compare the duties of the personnel in both restaurant 7.0 REFERENCES/FURTHER READING 1.
Lillicrap, D,& Cousins, J.
(2010).Food and Beverage Service.
(8th eds) Bookpower with Hodder Educ.UK 29  UNIT 3 TYPES OF DINING ROOM SERVICE CONTENT 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objectives 3.0 Main content 3.1 Food and beverage service as a process 3.2 The service sequence 3.2.1 The customer process 3.3 Categorising the different service methods 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutor-marked assignments 7.0 References/ further reading 30  1.0 INTRODUCTION There are so many ways in which food and beverage service can be carried out depending on several factors like: (cid:2) Type of establishment (cid:2) Time available for the meal (cid:2) Type of menu presented (cid:2) Type of customer to be served (cid:2) Turnover of customers expected (cid:2) Cost of the meal served (cid:2) Site of the establishment In this unit, you are going to learn about the different types of dining room service and how the customer process is accomplished.
2.0 OBJECTIVES At the end of this unit you should be able to: 1.
Outline the sequence of food and beverage service 2.
Categorise the customer process in food and beverage service 3.
Analyse the 3 main modern food and beverage service methods 4.
Describe the relationship between the different operating systems within a food and beverage operation.
3.0 MAIN CONTENT 3.1 Food and beverage as a process A foodservice operation was traditionally only seen as comprising the three operating systems of: (cid:2) Food production (cid:2) Beverage provision (cid:2) Food and beverage service 31 Within this view, food and beverage service was primarily designed and managed as a delivery process, with the customer being considered a passive recipient of the service.
Only the requirements of the operation itself would determine how the service was designed, planned and controlled.
This view has now changed, with the customer being seen as being central to the process and also as an active participant within it.
Consequently, understanding the customers' involvement in the process, and identifying the experience they are likely to have and should expect, has become critical to the business success of foodservice operations.
It is also now recognized that food and beverage service itself actually consists of two separate sub-systems, operating at the same time.
These are: (cid:2) The service sequence - which is primarily concerned with the delivery of the food and beverages to the customer.
(cid:2) The customer process - which is concerned with the experience the customer, undertakes to be able to order, be served, consume and have the area cleared.
This modern view of a foodservice operation can be summarized in a simple model as shown in Figure 1 below: Food and beverage service Food production Customer Customer Service process sequence Beverage provision Simple model of foodservice operation SOURCE: Lillicrap,D,& Cousins,J.(2010).
32  3.2 The service sequence The service sequence is essentially the bridge between the production system, beverage provision and the customer process (or customer experience).
The service sequence may consist of eleven or more stages as summarized in table 1 below: Table 1: Food and beverage service sequence 1.
Preparation for service 7.
Clearing during service 2.
Taking bookings 8. billing 3.
Greeting and seating/directing 9. dealing with payments 4.
Taking food and beverage orders 10. dishwashing 5.
Serving of food 11. clearing following service 6.
Serving beverages Each of these stages of the service sequence may be carried out by a variety of methods.
3.3 The customer process The customer receiving the food and beverage product is required to undertake or observe certain requirements: this is the customer process.
Essentially, a customer enters a food service area, orders or selects his or her choice and then is served (the customer may pay either at this point or later).
Food and beverages are then consumed, following which of the area is cleared.
Bringing these approaches together, it is possible to summaries the relationship between the various systems with a foodservice operation, as shown in Figure 1.
This model identifies the key stages of a foodservice operation: for the customer, for the food and beverage service staff and for those involved in food production and beverage provision.
It also reinforces the existence of the two sub-systems within food and beverage service that have to be managed at the same time.
33 3.4 Relationship between the different operating systems within a food service operation Food production and Food production and Beverage service Beverage provision Booking if Purchasing and required storing of foods Taking bookings and beverages Preparing for Preparing for service service Arriving Welcoming/ directing Ordering/selecting Taking/receiving Preparing foods order and/or beverages Receiving Service of food Preparing foods and beverages and/or beverages Consuming Clearing during Clearing during service service Paying Billing and dealing with payments Leaving Dishwashing Dishwashing Clearing after Clearing after service service 34  3.5 Categorising the different service methods When considering food and beverage service from a customer process perspective, rather than considering it purely as a set of delivery methods, five basic types of customer process can be identified.
Table 2: Simple categorization of the customer processes in food and beverage service Service Service Ordering/ Service Dining/consumption clearing method area Selection Table service Customer From menu By staff to A laid cover By staff enters and customer is seated Assisted Customer From menu, Combination Usually at laid cover By staff service enters and buffet or of both staff is usually passed trays and customer seated Self-service Customer Customer Customer Dining area or take Various enters selects items carries away onto a tray Single point Customer Orders at Customer Dining area or take Various service enters single point carries away Specialized or Where the From menu or Brought to Served where the By staff or in situ service customer predetermined the customer customer is located customer is located clearing All modern food and beverage service methods are grouped or categorised under the five customer processes summarized in table 1 as follows.
35 A.
Table service: the customer is served at a laid table.
This type of service, which includes plated service or silver service, is found in many types of restaurant, cafes and in banqueting.
B. Self- service: the customer is required to help him or herself from a buffet or counter.
This type of service can be found in cafeterias and canteens.
C. Assisted service: the customer is served part of the meal at a table and is required to obtain part through self-service from some form of display or buffet.
This type of service is found in carvery type operations and is often used for meals such as breakfast in hotels.
It may also be used for functions.
D. Single point service: The customer orders, pays and receives the food and beverages, for instance at a counter, at a bar in licensed premises, in a fast food operation or at a vending machine.
E. Specialized service (or in situ): the food and drink is taken to where the customer is.
This includes tray service in hospitals or aircraft, trolley service, home delivery, lounge and room service.
In groups A-D of the customer processes, the customer comes to where the food and beverage service is offered and the service is provided in areas primarily designed for that purpose, such as a restaurant or takeaway.
In customer process E, the service is provided in another location, where the area is not primarily designed for the purpose, for example, in a guest room, lounge or hospital ward.
Table 3 Food Beverage Service Methods Group A: Table service Service to customers at a laid cover 1.
Waiter a) Silver/English Presentation and service of food by waiting staff, using a spoon and fork, onto o customer’s plate, from food flats or dishes.
b) Family Main courses plated (but may be silver served) with vegetables placed in multi-portion dishes on tables tor customers to see themselves: sauces offered separately 36  c) Plate/ Service of pre-plated foods to customers, Now also widely used for American banqueting d) Butler/French Presentation of toed service dishes Individually to customer: by food service staff for customers to serve themselves e) Russian Table laid with food for customers to help themselves (this is a modern interpretation and may also sometimes be used to indicate Guerdon or Butter service) f) Gueridon Food served onto customer’s plate at a side table or trolley: may also Include carving, jointing and fish filleting, the preparation of foods such as salads and dressings and flambage 2.
Bar counter Service to customers sealed at bar counter (often U-shaped) on stools.
Group B: Assisted Combination of table service and self – service 3.
Assisted a) Carvery Some pans of the meal are served to seated customers: other parts are collected by the customers from a buffet, Also used for Breakfast service and for banqueting b) Buffets Customers select food and drink from displays or passed trays; consumption is either at tables, standing or in lounge area Group C: Self service Self – service of customers 4.
Cafeteria a) Counter Customers queue in line formation past a service counter and choose their menu requirements in stages before loading them onto a tray (may include a ‘carousel’ - a revolving stocked counter, saving space) b) Free-flow Selection as in counter (above) out in food service area where customers move at will to random service points: customers usually exit area via a till point 37  c) Echelon Series of counters at angles to the customer flow within a free-flow area, thus saving space d) Supermarket Island service points within a free-flow area Note: some ‘call order’ production may be included in cafeterias.
Group D: Single point service Service of customers at single point-consumed on premises or taken away 5 Takeaway a) Takeaway Customer orders and is served from a single point, at a counter, hatch or snack stand; customer consumes off the premises: some takeaway establishments provide dining areas.
b) Drive-thru Form of takeaway where customer drives vehicle past order, payment and collection points c) Fast food Term originally used to describe service at a counter or hotel where customers receive a complete meal or dish in exchange for cash or ticket; commonly used nowadays to describe type of establishment offering limited range menu, fast service with dining area, and takeaway facility.
6 Vending Provision of food service and beverage service by means of automatic retailing 7 Kiosks Outstation used to provide service for peak demand or in specific location; may be open for customers to order and be served, or used for dispensing to staff only.
8 Food court Series of autonomous counters where customer may either order or eat (as in 2 Bar counter, above) or buy from a number at counters and eat in separate eating area, or takeaway.
9 Bar Term used to describe order, service and payment point and consumption area in licensed premises.
38 Group E: Specialized (or in situ) Service to customers in areas not primarily designed for service 10 Tray Method of service of whole or port of meal on tray to customer in situ, e.g.
at hospital beds; at aircraft seats, at train seats, also used in ODC.
11 Trolley Service of food and beverages from a trolley, away from dining areas, e g. for office worker at their desks; for customers at aircraft seats: at train seats.
12 Home delivery Food delivered to customer’s home or place of work e.g.
meals on wheels, pizza home delivery, or sandwiches to offices.
13 Lounge Service of variety of foods and beverages in lounge area e.g.
hotel lounge.
14 Room Service of variety of foods and beverages in guest bedrooms or in meeting rooms.
15 Drive-in Customer’s park their motor vehicle and are served at their vehicles.
Note: Banquet/function is a term used to describe foodservice for specific numbers of people at specific times in a variety of dining layouts.
Service methods also vary.
In these cases banquet/function catering refers to the organisation of service rather a specific service method A detailed listing of all the modern food and beverage service methods is given in Table 3 and listed under each of the groups A to D. For a particular service method, such as waiter service, a number of tasks and duties are undertaken during the actual service of food and beverages.
However, there are other tasks and duties that contribute to the service.
These may be identified using the service sequence Additionally, the level of complexity of food and beverage service in terms of staff skills, tasks and duties reduces from Group A (the most complex) to Group D. Group B contains specialized forms of service.
SELF ASSESSMENT EXERCISES 39 Critique the 5 different types of dining room service 4.0 CONCLUSION Whatever the type of service being offered, the utmost is to do it with customer satisfaction in mind.
5.0 SUMMARY There are so many ways in which food and beverage service can be carried out depending on several factors like: (cid:2) Type of establishment (cid:2) Time available for the meal (cid:2) Type of menu presented (cid:2) Type of customer to be served (cid:2) Turnover of customers expected (cid:2) Cost of the meal served (cid:2) Site of the establishment In the past, food and beverage service was primarily designed and managed as a delivery process, with the customer being considered a passive recipient of the service.
This view has now changed, with the customer being seen as being central to the process and also as an active participant within it.
It is also now recognized that food and beverage service itself actually consists of two separate sub-systems, operating at the same time.
These are: The service sequence and the customer process.
The food and beverage service sequence consists of Preparation for service, taking bookings, greeting and seating/directing, taking food and beverage orders, serving of food, serving beverages, clearing during service, billing, dealing with payments, dishwashing, and clearing following service.
When considering food and beverage service from a customer process perspective, rather than considering it purely as a set of delivery methods, five basic types of customer process can be identified, namely: table, assisted, self, single point and in situ service.
40 6.0 TUTOR-MARKED ASSIGNMENTS 1.
Sketch a simple model of food service operation 2.
In a logical manner, outline the service sequence of a food and beverage service operation in your locality.
3.
Compare and contrast the following customer process: i. Self service ii.
Assisted service iii.
In situ service 7.0 REFERENCES/FURTHER READING 1.
Lillicrap,D,& Cousins,J.
(2010).Food and Beverage Service.
(8th eds) Bookpower with Hodder Educ.UK 41  MODULE 2 Unit 1 Food serving areas and equipment Unit 2 Equipment for operating restaurant - service equipment Unit 3 Equipment for operating restaurant – furniture, fixtures, linen Unit 4 Preparation for service Unit 5 Styles and techniques of service UNIT 1 FOOD SERVING AREAS AND EQUIPMENT CONTENT 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objectives 3.0 Main content 3.1 Factors that determine the choice of furniture and equipment of service areas.
3.2 Front-of-House service areas 3.3 Back-of-House service areas 3.4 The still room 3.4.1 Staffing 3.4.2 Equipment 3.4.3 Provisions 3.4.4 Control 3.5 Hotplate 3.5.1 Aboyeur or backer 3.5.2 Hotplate language and terminology 3.6 Wash up 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutor-marked assignments 7.0 References/ further reading 42  1.0 INTRODUCTION A customer’s first impression on entering service areas is of great importance; a customer may be gained or lost on this impression alone.
The creation of atmosphere, by the right choice of décor, furnishings and equipment, is therefore a major factor that contributes to the success of the foodservice operation.
A careful selection of items in terms of shape, design and colour enhance the overall décor or theme and contributes towards a feeling of total harmony.
2.0 OBJECTIVES At the end of this unit, you should be able to: 1.
State at least 10 points to consider when purchasing equipment for a food and beverage service area 2.
Identify and describe 3 back-of- house service areas 3.
Explain the different hotplate language and terminology 3.0 MAIN CONTENT 3.1 Factors that determine the choice of furniture and equipment for a service area • The type of clientele expected • The site of location of the establishment • The layout of the food and beverage service area • The type of service offered • The funds available The general points to be considered when purchasing equipment for a food and beverage service areas are: • Flexibility of use *availability in the future • Type of service being offered * replacements • Type of customer * storage • Design • colour * rate of breakage, i.e.
crockery • Durability * shape 43 • Ease of maintenance * psychological effect on customers • Stackability * delivery time • Cost and funds available 3.2 Front –of – house service areas Front–of–house service areas are some of the busiest of a foodservice establishment, especially during the service periods.
It is therefore important that these areas are well designed for operational purposes and that department heads ensure that all members of staff know exactly what their duties are, and how to carry them out efficiently and effectively.
3.3 Back –of –house service areas There are service areas behind the scenes, known as back-of-house areas.
These areas include the stillroom, hotplate (or pass) area and the wash-up.
The back-of-house service areas are usually between the kitchen and food and beverage service, or front-of-house areas.
They are important parts of the design of a foodservice operation, acting as the link between kitchen or food preparation areas and the restaurant or food and beverage service areas.
They are also meeting points for staff of various departments as they carry out their duties, and therefore there must be close liaison between these various members of staff and the departments.
Well designed layout of these areas is essential to ensure an even flow or work by the various members of staff.
These areas also need to be well organized, efficient, stocked with well designed equipment and supervised.
3.4 The still room The stillroom provides items of food and beverages required for the service of a meal that are not catered for by the other major departments in a food service operation, such as the kitchen, larder and pastry.
The duties performed in this service area will vary according to the type of meals offered and the size of establishment concerned.
3.4.1 Staffing In a large establishment a stillroom supervisor is in charge of the stillroom.
Depending on its size and the duties to be performed, they may have a number of staff under their control.
The person in charge is responsible for the compilation of work rosters for all stillroom staff so that all duties 44 are covered and the area is staffed throughout the whole of the service periods.
The stillroom supervisor is also responsible for the ordering of supplies from the main dry goods store and the effective control of these Items when issued to the various departments.
Because of the number of hours that the stillroom has to remain open, and to ensure it is run efficiently, staff may work on a shift basis.
3.4.2 Equipment The equipment in all stillrooms is of a similar nature.
A wide range of food items is offered and so to ensure their proper storage, preparation and presentation, a considerable amount of equipment is used.
The following are examples of items that might be needed: • Refrigerator for storage of milk, cream, butter, fruit juices,etc • Hot and cold beverage – making facilities • Large double sink and draining board for washing-up purposes • Dishwasher of a size suitable for the stillroom but large enough to ensure efficient turnover of equipment • Salamander or toasters • Bread slicing machine • Worktop and cutting board.
• Storage space for small equipment such as crockery, glassware and cutlery and tableware.
• Storage cupboard for all dry goods held in stock and for such paper items as doilies, kitchen papers, napkins, etc.
• Coffee grinding machine to ensure the correct grind of coffee for the brewing method to be used • Ice maker 3.4.3 Provisions As a basic guide, the following food items would normally be dispensed from the stillroom: • All beverages such as coffee, tea, chocolate, tisanes, Bovril, Horlicks, Ovaltine and other drinks.
45 • Assorted fruit juices: orange, tomato, pineapple and grapefruit.
• Milk, cream and alternatives.
• Sugars: loose, pre-wrapped portions, brown coffee crystals, Demerara, etc., and alternatives.
• Preserves: marmalade, cherry, plum, raspberry, strawberry, apricot and honey.
For the purpose of control and to reduce wastage, many establishments now offer pre-portioned jars or pots of jams or preserves at breakfast and for afternoon tea rather than a preserve dish.
• Butter: either passed through a butter pat machine, curled or pre-wrapped portions and also butter alternatives.
• Sliced and buttered brown, white and malt bread.
• Rolls, brioche and croissants.
• Bread substitute items: gluten free, rye, rice crackers, etc.
• Dry cracker, digestive and water biscuits for service with cheese: sweet biscuit- for service with early morning and afternoon teas and coffees.
• Assorted breakfast cereals: cornflakes, Weetabix, muesli, etc.
In many establishments, cereals of all types are offered in pre-wrapped, portion-controlled packets.
• Toasted scones and teacakes.
• Pastries, gateaux and sandwiches.
3.4.4 Control There are two main ways of controlling goods to be issued from the stillroom: * If a foodservice area requires items such as butter, sugar, preserves, etc., in bulk, a requisition signed by a supervisor is required before the stillroom will issue the items.
* Upon receipt of a waiter's check, tea, coffee or any other beverage required in the necessary portion tins will be dispensed 3.5 Hotplate The hotplate or pass is the meeting point between the service staff and the food preparation staff.
Active cooperation and a food relationship between the members of staff of these two areas help to ensure that the customer receives an efficient and quick service of the meal.
46 The hotplate itself should be stocked with all the crockery necessary for the service of a meal.
This may include some or all of the following items: • soup plates • fishplates • joint plates • sweet plates • consommé cups • platters • soup cups.
The food, flats and serving dishes required for service are often placed on the top of the hotplate and used as required.
The hotplate is usually gas or electrically operated and should be lit/switched on well in advance of the service to ensure all the necessary crockery and silver is sufficiently heated before the service commences.
3.5.1 Aboyeur or barker The aboyeur, or barker, is in charge, and controls the hotplate (or pass) during the service period.
As an aid to the food service staff the aboyeur would control the ‘off board’, which tells the waiter immediately of any menu item that is not available (off).
It should be sited in a prominent position for all to see.
The aboyeur will initially receive the food check from the waiter.
Written food orders must be legible to the aboyeur so that there is no delay in calling up a particular dish.
The aboyeur checks that none of the dishes ordered are off the menu.
Then the order from the various ‘comers’ (or ‘parties’ or ‘sections’) of the kitchen is called up, as each particular dish is required.
If a dish required has to be prepared and cooked to order, then it is important that the aboyeur orders this to be done before the waiter comes to the hotplate to collect it.
This ensures that there will be no major delay for the waiter who is going to serve the dish, or for the customer who is waiting for the next course to be served.
When a food check is finished, it is placed in a control box.
This box is often kept locked and can only be opened by a member of staff from the control 47 department who, for control purposes, marries the copy of the food check from the kitchen with the copy the cashier has and the duplicate copy of the bill.
With the modern use of an EPOS (electronic point of sale) system the electronic order can be sent directly from the restaurant to each section of the kitchen and the aboyeur would be the coordinator for the dishes to arrive on the pass at the same time, checking for quality before releasing the plate to the waiting staff.
The control department would then use the EPOS information to control sales and revenue.
3.5.2 Hotplate language and terminology To ensure there is no delay in any food dish reaching the hotplate, the aboyeur should call it up, allowing time for preparation, cooking and presentation.
Various special kitchen terms are used to warn the food preparation staff working in various corners to get ready certain dishes.
Because of a multi-national work force many establishments now use one single specified language within a kitchen.
This is often the language of the country, such as English in the UK.
All members of staff need to know the system for their own establishment.
• Le service va commencer, general warning to kitchen that the service is about to commence.
• Ca marche trois converts: indication to the kitchen of the number of covers on the table, in this case three covers.
• Poissonnier, faites matcher trois soles Veronique: example of fish section informed of the order required, in this case three sole Veronique.
• Poissonnier, envoyez les trios soles Veronique: when the order is required at the hotplate by the waiter, the aboyeur calls it up.
In this example it is the fish section being told to bring the order for three sole Veronique.
• Oui: the reply given by the chef de partue (section chef) to the order called out by the aboyeur.
• Bien soigné: the term called out by the aboyeur before the actual order when an extra special order is required.
• Depechez – vous: the words used to hurry up an order.
• Arretez: the term used to cancel an order.
• Foods requiring special degrees of cooking are given the following terms: - Omelette baveuse: soft inside.
48 - Steak grille.
(a) Bleu: (rare) surfaces well-browned, inside raw (b) Saignant: underdone (c) a point: medium (d) Bien cuit cooked right through, well done.
Whatever system is used all food service staff should be familiar with the specific terms being used in the production area in order to appreciate exactly what is going on at the hotplate and in the food production area, to ensure quick and efficient service.
3.6 Wash–Up The wash-up must be sited so that staff can work speedily and efficiently when passing from the food service areas to the kitchens.
Server; should stack trays of dishes correctly within the service area, with all the correct sized plates together, and tableware stacked on one of the plates with die blades of the knives running under the arches of the forks.
All glassware that has not had grease or fat in it should be taken to a separate glass wash-up point, often in the bar.
The wash-up service area should be the first section in the stillroom when the waiter enters from the service area.
Here all the dirty plates are deposited, stacking them correctly and placing all the tableware in a special wire basket or container in readiness for washing.
The Server must place any debris into the bin or bowl provided.
All used paper, such as napkins, doilies or kitchen paper should be placed in separate waste bins to ensure proper recycling.
SELF ASSESSMENT EXERCISE Visit 2 food and beverage service establishments and compare the activities at their back –of- house service areas 4.0 CONCLUSION A customer might be gained or lost by the first impressions he/she gets of the food service areas, it is therefore imperative that care is taken to attend to details that contribute to making the areas conducive.
49 5.0 SUMMARY The creation of atmosphere, by the right choice of décor, furnishings and equipment, is a major factor that contributes to the success of the foodservice operation.
A careful selection of items in terms of shape, design and colour enhance the overall décor or theme and contributes towards a feeling of total harmony.The type of clientele expected, the site of location of the establishment, the layout of the food and beverage service area, the type of service offered, and the funds available are some of the factors that determine the choice of furniture and equipment for a service area.
The general points to be considered when purchasing equipment for a food and beverage service areas are: • Flexibility of use * availability in the future • Type of service being offered * replacements • Type of customer * storage • Design • colour * rate of breakage, i.e.
crockery • Durability * shape • Ease of maintenance * psychological effect on customers • Stackability * delivery time • Cost and funds available Front–of–house service areas are some of the busiest of a foodservice establishment, especially during the service periods.
The back-of-house service areas include the stillroom; hotplate (or pass) area and the wash-up.
They are usually between the kitchen and food and beverage service, or front-of-house areas.
They are important parts of the design of a foodservice operation, acting as the link between kitchen or food preparation areas and the restaurant or food and beverage service areas.
6.0 TUTOR-MARKED ASIGNMENTS Make a least of at least: 1.
10 hotplate language/terminology in use in Nigeria 2.
15 items that are used in the still room of the most popular hotel in your community 7.0 REFERENCES/FURTHER READING 1.
Lillicrap,D,& Cousins,J.
(2010).Food and Beverage Service.
(8th eds) Bookpower with Hodder Educ.UK 50  UNIT 2 EQUIPMENT FOR OPERATING RESTAURANTS -SERVICE EQUIPMENT CONTENT 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objectives 3.0 Main content 3.1 Service equipment 3.1.1 Factors to be considered in selecting equipment 3.2 Glassware 3.2.1 Types of glassware 3.2.1.1 Collins glassware 3.2.1.2 Highball glass 3.2.1.3 Shot 3.2.1.4 Pint glass 3.2.1.5 Pilsner glass 3.2.1.6 Beer stein 3.2.1.7 Flute glass 3.2.1.8 Goblet or chalice 3.2.1.9 Sniffers 3.2.1.10 Wheat beer glass 3.2.1.11 Tulip glass 3.2.1.12 Cocktail glass 3.2.1.13 Red wine glasses 3.2.1.14 Bordeaux glass 3.2.1.15 Burgundy glass 3.2.1.16 White wine glasses 3.2.1.17 Champagne flutes 3.2.1.18 Sherry glass 3.2.1.19 Coupette glass 3.2.1.20 Pitcher 51 3.2.1.21 Old fashioned glass 3.2.1.22 Yard glass 3.2.1.23 Coffee mug 3.2.1.24 Irish coffee cup 3.2.2 Handling glassware 3.3 Chinaware 3.3.1 Porcelain 3.3.2 Bone china 3.3.3 Earthenware 3.3.4 Stoneware 3.3.5 Chinaware serving items 3.4 Handling of chinaware 3.5 Tableware 3.5.1 Flatware 3.5.2 Cutlery 3.5.3 Hollowware 3.6 Special tableware 3.6.1 Silver tea tong 3.6.2 Asparagus holder 3.6.3 Pastry slicer 3.6.4 Pastry fork 3.6.5 Oyster fork 3.6.6 Lobster fork 3.6.7 Snail tong and snail fork 3.6.8 Snail dish 3.6.9 Skewers 3.6.10 Ice-cream scoop 3.6.11 Nutcracker 3.7 Stainless steel 3.8 Handling of tableware 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 52 6.0 Tutor-marked assignments 7.0 References/ further reading 1.0 INTRODUCTION The operating equipment used in hotels / restaurants play an important role in attracting customers.
The restaurant operating equipment includes service equipment, furniture, fixtures and linen.
All of these reflect the standard and style of the restaurant.
2.0 OBJECTIVES At the end of this unit, you should be able to: 1.
State at least 10 factors to consider when selecting restaurant equipment 2.
Identify and describe at least 15 types of glassware used for different purposes 3.
Describe the different types of chinaware and tableware Analyse how to care for the following: i. Glassware ii.
Chinaware iii.
Tableware 3.0 MAIN CONTENT 3.1 Service equipment Elegant and attractive serviceware, colourful and clean dishes, quality plates and glassware add to the decor of a restaurant.
However, several factors have to be considered while selecting the equipment.
• Standard of the restaurant • Types of service 53 • Décor and theme of the restaurant • Type of clientele • Durability of equipment • Ease of maintenance • Availability when stocks run out for replacement • Storage • Flexibility of use • Price factors • Standardization Food and beverage service equipment may be divided into glassware, chinaware and tableware which are further subdivided into flatware, cutlery and hollowware.
3.2 Glassware Glassware refers to glass and drinkware items besides tableware, such as dishes, cutlery and flatware, used to set a table for eating a meal.
The term usually refers to the drinking vessels, unless the dinnerware is also made of glass.
The choice of the right quality glass is of vital element if the cocktail is to be attractively presented and give satisfaction to the consumer.
Well designed glassware combines elegance, strength and stability, and should be fine and smooth rimmed and of clear glass.
3.2.1 Types of Glassware Many standard patterns and sizes of glassware are available to serve each drink.
Most glass drinking vessels are either tumblers, flat-bottomed glasses with no handle, foot, or stem; footed glasses, which have a bowl above a flat base, but no stem; or stemware, which have a bowl on a stem above a flat base.
Yard (beer) is a very tall, conical beer glass, with a round ball base, usually hung on the wall when empty.
3.2.1.1 Collins Glassware A Collins glass is a glass tumbler, holding 240 to 350 ml, used to serve a mixed drink, named after Tom Collins.
This glass is somewhat narrower, and holds less than the similar highball glass.
54  3.2.1.2 Highball Glass A highball glass is a glass tumbler, holding between 8 and 12 fluid ounces (240 to 350 mL), used to serve a mixed drink, or highball.
This glass is taller than an Old-Fashioned glass, and shorter than a Collins glass.
3.2.1.3 Shot Glass It is a small glass used for measuring or serving up to three ounces of liquor.
Modern shot glass holds a thicker base and sides than the whiskey glass.
3.2.1.4 Pint Glass A pint glass is a drinking vessel holding an imperial pint (568 ml) of liquid and is usually used for beer.
Three common shapes of pint glass are found (conical, jug, and flared top), though others are available.
Pints are considered good for serving stouts, porters and English ales 3.2.1.5 Pilsner Glass A pilsner glass is a glass used to serve many types of light beers, but is intended for its namesake, the pilsner.
Pilsner glasses are generally smaller than a pint glass, usually in 250 ml or 330 ml sizes.
They are tall, slender and tapered.
Wheat beer glasses are often mistakenly referred to as pilsner glasses, but a true pilsner glass has an even taper without curvature.
Pilsner glasses are made to showcase the colour, effervescence, and clarity of the pilsner, as well as to maintain a nice head.
3.2.1.6 Beer Stein A beer stein is a traditionally-German beer tankard or mug, made of pewter, silver, wood, porcelain, earthenware or glass; usually with a hinged lid and levered thumblift.
55 3.2.1.7 Flute Glass A flute glass is the preferred serving vessel for Belgian lambics and fruit beers.
The narrow shape helps maintain carbonation, while providing a strong aromatic front.
Flute glasses display the lively carbonation, sparkling colour, and soft lacing of this distinct style 3.23.1.8 Goblet or Chalice Chalices and goblets are large, stemmed, bowl –shaped glasses adequate for serving heavy Belgian ales, German bocks, and other big sipping beers.
The distinction between goblet and chalice is typically in the glass thickness.
Goblets tend to be more delicate and thin, while the chalice is heavy and thick walled.
3.2.1.9 Snifters Typically used for serving brandy and cognac, a snifter is ideal for capturing the volatiles of aromatic beers, such as Belgian ales, India pale ales, barley wines and wheat wines.
The shape helps trap the volatiles, while allowing swirling to agitate them and produce an intense aroma.
3.2.1.10 Wheat Beer Glass A wheat beer glass is a glass used to serve wheat beer, known also as Weizenbier or Weibbier.
The German glass generally holds 500 millilitres with room for foam or "head".
It is much taller than a pint glass.
It is very narrow at the bottom and slightly wider at the top.
In other countries such as Belgium, the glass may hold 250 ml or 330 ml.
The tall glass provides room for the often thick, fluffy heads produced by the style, which traps aromas and is visually pleasing.
3.2.1.11 Tulip Glass A tulip glass not only helps trap the aroma, but also aids in maintaining large heads, creating a a visual and olfactory sensation.
The body is bulbous, but the top flares out to form a lip which helps head retention.
It is recommended for serving Scottish ales, barley wines, Belgian ales and other aromatic beers.
56 3.2.1.12 Cocktail Glass A cocktail glass, martini glass, or champagne glass, or stem cocktail glass, is a drinking glass with a cone-shaped bowl (the tip of the cone forming approximately a 90 degree angle in the cross section) on a stem above a flat base, used to serve a cocktail or champagne.
As with other stemware, the stem allows the drinker to hold the glass without affecting the temperature of the drink.
One variation is the double martini glass which is taller and wider at the opening than a standard martini glass 3.2.1.13 Red Wine Glasses Glasses for red wine are characterized by their rounder, wider bowl, which gives the wine a chance to breathe.
Since most reds are meant to be consumed at room temperature, the wider bowl also allows the wine to cool more quickly after hand contact has warmed it.
Red wine glasses can have particular styles of their own, such as: 3.2.1.14 Bordeaux glass Tall with a wide bowl, and is designed for full bodied red wines like Cabernet and Merlot as it directs wine to the back of the mouth.
3.2.1.15 Burgundy glass Larger than the Bordeaux glass, it has a larger bowl to accumulate aromas of more delicate red wines such as Pinot Noir.
This style of glass directs wine to the tip of the tongue.
3.2.1.16 White Wine Glass White wine glasses are generally narrower, although not as narrow as champagne flutes, with somewhat straight or tulip-shaped sides.
The narrowness of the white wine glass allows the chilled wine to retain its temperature for two reasons; i.
The reduced surface area of the glass (in comparison to red wine glasses) means less air circulating around the glass and warming the wine.
57 ii.
The smaller bowl of the glass means less contact between the hand and the glass, and so body heat does not transfer as easily or as fast to the wine.
3.2.1.17 Champagne Flutes Champagne flutes are characterised by a long stem with a tall, narrow bowl on top.
The shape is designed to keep sparkling wine attractive and inviting during its consumption.
The glass is designed to be held by the stem to help prevent the heat from the hand warming up the champagne.
The bowl itself is designed in a manner to help retain the signature carbonation in the beverage.
This is achieved by reducing the surface area at the opening of the bowl.
Champagne flutes are often used at formal engagements, such as award ceremonies and weddings.
3.2.1.18 Sherry Glass A sherry glass is a drinkware generally used for serving aromatic alcoholic beverages, such as sherry, port, aperitifs and liqueurs, and layered shooters.
An ISO-standard sized sherry glass is 120 ml.
The copita, with its aroma-enhancing narrow taper, is a type of sherry glass.
3.2.1.19 Coupette Glass This is a modified version of the cocktail glass used for serving drinks where the rim of the glass is required to be coated in either sugar or salt or any other condiments used to make some of the more exotic drinks such as margaritas.
3.23.1.20 Pitcher This larger container usually has a handle and a lip or spout for pouring the contents into several glasses.
Available in glass or plastic.
Generally used for serving beer for a beer keg for draft beer.
3.2.1.21 Old Fashioned Glass The Old-Fashioned glass, rocks glass, or "lowball", is a short tumbler used for serving liquor "on the rocks", meaning over ice, or cocktails having few ingredients.
It is named after the old fashioned cocktail, traditionally served in such a glass.
A White Russian is traditionally served in the Old Fahioned Glass.
58 3.2.1.22 Yard Glass A yard (or yard glass) is a very tall glass used for drinking beer; a yard (or yard of ale) also refers to the (variable) quantity of beer held by such a glass.
The glass is approximately 1 yard long (hence the name), and holds 2 imperial pints (1.14 litres) of liquid.
The glass is shaped with a bulb at the bottom, and a widening shaft which constitutes most of the height.
Because the glass is so long and in any case does not usually have a stable flat base, it is hung on the wall when not in use.
3.2.1.23 Coffee-Mug Almost a smaller version of the beer mug, made of thick heavy glass and used for coffee 3.2.1.24 Irish Coffee Cup A uniquely shaped glass with a handle that is used to serve any hot beverage such as Spanish coffee or cocoa.
3.2.2 Handling of Glassware 1.
Glassware is highly fragile and most delicate and expensive: hence utmost care has to be taken while handling glass equipments.
2.
Glasses are normally stored in a glass pantry and should be placed upside down in single rows on paper-lined shelves, to prevent dust settling in them.
3.
Tumblers should not be stacked inside one another as this may result in heavy breakages and accidents.
4.
The appearance of the drink mainly depends on the glass and therefore, the glass should be sparkling clean and attractive in shape and style.
5.
When glassware is machine or hand washed, each individual item must be polished and dried with a glass cloth made of linen, as water leaves stains on the glasses.
6.
Glasses whether clean or dirty have to be handled by the base or stem, since the finger prints left on the glass necessitates polishing.
59 3.3 Chinaware China is a term used for crockery whether bone china (expensive and fine), earthenware (opaque and cheaper) or vitrified (metallised).
Most catering crockery used nowadays tends to be vitrified earthenware, which is very durable and haven been strengthened.
Crockery is also usually given rolled edges to make it more chip resistant.
Chinaware is made of silica, soda ash, and china clay, glazed to give a fine finish.
Chinaware can be found in different colours and designs which are always coated with glaze.
Chinaware is more resistant to heat than glassware.
There are various classification of catering china.
They are: 3.3.1 Porcelain Porcelain is a ceramic material made by heating selected and refined materials, which often includes clay of kaolinite clay, to high temperatures.
The raw materials for porcelain, when mixed with water, form a plastic body that can be worked to a required shape before firing in a kiln at temperatures between 1200°C and 1400°C.
The toughness, strength, and translucence of porcelain arise mainly from the formation of glass at high temperatures and the mineral mullite within the fired body.
3.3.2 Bone China Bone china is porcelain made of clay mixed with bone ash.
This is very fine, hard china that is very expensive.
The decorations are to be found under the glaze only.
The price of bone china puts it out of reach of the majority of everyday caterers, and only a few of the top class hotels and restaurants would use it.
The range of design, pattern and colour is very wide and there is something to suit all occasions and situations.
3.3.3 Earthenware Earthenware may sometimes be as thin as bone china and other porcelains, though it is not translucent and is more easily chipped.
Earthenware is also less strong, less tough, and more porous than stoneware, but its low cost and easier working compensate for these deficiencies.
Due to its higher porosity, earthenware must usually be glazed in order to be watertight.
60 3.3.4 Stoneware Stoneware is a hard pottery made from siliceous paste, fired at high temperature to vitrify (make glassy) the body.
Stoneware is heavier and more opaque than porcelain.
The usual colour of fired stoneware tends to be grayish, though there may be a wide range of colours, depending on the clay.
It has been produced in China since ancient times and is the forerunner of Chinese porcelain.
3.3.5 Chinaware Serving Items There are wide ranges of chinaware serving items and their sizes vary according to the manufacturer and the design produced.
Recent developments in chinaware include the ovenproof ware (dishes, casserole and cocotte dishes), which allow food to be brought straight from the oven to the table.
3.4 Handling of Chinaware Whatever quality of china or crockery is used, the most important thing to ensure is that it is washed, rinsed and dried correctly to ensure that no dirt, stains or streaks appear.
1) Chinaware has a high breakage rate and, therefore, needs careful handling.
2) They should be stored on shelves in piles or stakes of approximately two dozen each.
Any higher may result in their toppling down.
3) They should be stored at a convenient height for placing on, and removing from the shelves to avoid accidents.
4) Chinaware should be kept covered to prevent dust and germs settling on it.
5) Chipped and cracked items harbor germs and should, therefore, not be used and disposed off carefully.
3.5 Tableware Tableware includes the dishes, glassware, cutlery, and flatware eating utensils (knives, forks, and spoons) used to set a table for eating a meal.
The nature, variety, and number of objects varies from culture to culture, and may vary from meal to meal as well.
61  Tableware may be categorised as follows: 3.5.1 Flatware Flatware denotes all forms of spoon and fork.
Flatware, especially that used by most people when they eat informally, is usually made of stainless steel.
3.5.2 Cutlery Cutlery refers to knives and other cutting instruments.
3.5.3 Hollowware Holloware refers to table service items such as sugarbowls, creamers, coffee pots, teapots, soup tureens, hot food covers, water pitchers, platters, butter plates and other metal items excluding flatware and cutlery.
3.6 Special Tableware There is almost an unlimited range of flatware, cutlery and hollowware in use in the catering industry.
Apart from the familiar knife, fork, spoon, vegetable dishes and lids, entrée dishes and lids, soup tureens, teapot, hotwater jugs, sugar basins there are a number of specialist items of equipment available for use with specific dishes.
Some common specialist equipments are listed below: 3.6.1 Silver Tea Tong The silver tea tongs (called also silver sugar tongs or silver sugar nips) are used for lifting sugar cubes from the sugar bowls and add to tea cups.
The basic forms in which they were made are: (cid:1)(cid:1)fire tongs, of two arms joined at one end by a pivot (cid:1)(cid:1)scissors tongs, of two arms pivoting at the centre, in the form of a pair of scissors (tea tongs or sugar nips) ends of tongs may be serrated.
62 3.6.2 Asparagus Holder The asparagus holder is a utensil for a diner to hold a single stalk of asparagus.
It is made of a single strip of metal, bent in the form of U-shaped tongs, with a small square plate at each end to grip the stalk.
3,6,3 Pastry Slicer Pastry slicer is used for serving pastries (portion of gâteau) 3.6.4 Pastry Fork Pastry fork is a small fork designed for eating pastries and other desserts while holding a plate.
It is typically designed so that it can be used with the right hand, while the left hand holds the plate.
It therefore has the left side widened to be used like a knife to cut the food when pressed down on the plate.
Left-handed pastry forks have the right side widened instead.
This fork may also be used to lift fruit pieces from the plate.
3.6.5 Oyster Fork A fork used for picking up shellfish cocktail or oysters.
This fork is shaped like a regular fork, but it slightly smaller and the tines are curved outward.
3.6.6 Lobster Pick This long, narrow utensil is used to pull every shred of meat from the hard-to-reach cavities (such as the legs) of lobsters and crabs.
The tip of a lobster pick can either be pointed or in the shape of a tiny, two-prong fork.
3.6.7 Snail Tong and Snail Fork Small, spring-operated tongs used to hold hot snail shells while extracting the snail.
Unlike most tongs, these open by squeezing the handles.
When the pressure is released, the tongs snap securely around the snail shell.
3.6.8 Snail Dish It is a round dish with two ears having six indentations to hold portion of six snails.
63 3.6.9 Skewers A long, thin, pointed rod that comes in various sizes.
Skewers are made of metal or wood; the former often has a ring at one end.
They're most often used to hold meat in place during cooking/ serving, as well as to skewer meat and vegetables to be grilled for shish kebab.
The best skewers are square or flat-shaped that hold food securely when moved.
Usually made of stainless steel.
3.6.10 Ice-cream Scoop It is used to remove ice cream from a carton or other container while forming the ice cream into a ball or oval shape.
Ice-cream scoops come in several styles and sizes.
The simplest is a plain metal scoop- o r spade-shaped utensil.
Next comes one shaped like a half-globe or oval with a spring-action lever in the handle.
When squeezed, the lever moves an arc-shaped blade across the scoop's interior and ejects the ice-cream ball.
The nonstick-style scoop has antifreeze sealed inside.
3.6.11 Nutcracker It is a tool for cracking hard nutshells, usually consisting of two hinged metal arms between which the nut is squeezed.
3.7 Stainless Steel Stainless steel flatware and cutlery is available in a variety of grades.
Use of stainless steels and super stainless steels is expanding in a variety of markets.
Stainless steels have higher resistance to oxidation ( rust) and corrosion in many natural and man-made environments; however, it is important to select the correct type and grade of stainless steel.
Stainless steel is finished by different degrees of polishing: high polish finish, dull polish finish and a light grey matt, non reflective finish, etc.
Stainless steel's resistance to corrosion and staining, low maintenance, relative inexpensiveness and familiar lustre makes it an ideal base material for tableware.
Stainless steel neither tarnishes nor stains.
It resists scratching far more than other metals and may, therefore, be said to be more hygienic.
64 3.8 Handling of Tableware i) Storage of cutlery and flatware is very important.
Each item has to be stored in the boxes or drawers lined with baize to prevent the items being scratched ii) They should be stored in cupboard or room which can be locked.
iii) Cutlery and flatware may be stored in cutlery trollies.
SELF ASSESSMENT EXERCISES Visit a medium class restaurant and observe how they take care of the different types of glassware and tableware 4.0.
CONCLUSION A hotel / restaurant should be well stocked with appropriate equipment to provide quality service.
For multipurpose use and to cut down costs, most hotels / restaurants standardise equipment in terms of size and colour.
5.0 SUMMARY The operating equipment used in hotels / restaurants play an important role in attracting customers.
Food and beverage service equipment may be divided into glassware, chinaware and tableware which are further subdivided into flatware, cutlery and hollowware.
Many standard patterns and sizes of glassware are available to serve each drink.
Most glass drinking vessels are either tumblers, flat-bottomed glasses with no handle, foot, or stem; footed glasses, which have a bowl above a flat base, but no stem; or stemware, which have a bowl on a stem above a flat base.
Glassware is highly fragile and most delicate and expensive: hence utmost care has to be taken while handling glass equipments.Chinaware is made of silica, soda ash, and china clay, glazed to give a fine finish.
Chinaware can be found in different colours and designs which are always coated with glaze.
Chinaware is more resistant to heat than glassware.
There are various classification of catering china.
They are:Porcelain,bone china,earthenware and stoneware.
Whatever quality of china or crockery is used, the most important thing to ensure is that it is washed, rinsed and dried correctly to ensure that no dirt, stains or streaks appear.
65 There is almost an unlimited range of flatware, cutlery and hollowware in use in the catering industry.
Apart from the familiar knife, fork, spoon, vegetable dishes and lids, entrée dishes and lids, soup tureens, teapot, hotwater jugs, sugar basins there are a number of specialist items of equipment available for use with specific dishes.
6.0 TUTOR-MARKED ASSIGNMENTS I.
Describe the most common types of tableware and chinaware available in a restaurant in your state 2.
What are glassware?
Give a brief description of 15 types of glassware used in restaurants in Nigeria 7.0 REFERENCES 1.
Baraban,,R.S.& Durocher,J.F.
(2001), Successful Restaurant Design, John Wiley and Sons 2.
Katsigris C.&,Thomas,C.
Design and Equipment for Restaurants and Foodservice: A Management View, 3.
Lillicrap,D,& Cousins,J.
(2010).Food and Beverage Service.
(8th eds) Bookpower with Hodder Educ.UK 66 UNIT 3: EQUIPMENT FOR OPERATING RESTAURANTS - FURNITURE, FIXTURES AND LINEN CONTENT 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objectives 3.0 Main content 3.1 Tables 3.2 Chairs 3.3 Side Station/dummy waiter 3.4 Trolleys 3.5 Linen 3.5.1 Table Cloths 3.5.2 Table and Table Cloths 3.5.3 Slip Cloth or Naperones 3.5.4 Napkins or Serviettes 3.5.5 Buffet Cloths 3.5.6 Trolley Cloths and side board cloths 3.5.7 Waiter’s cloths or service cloths 3.6 Handling equipment 3.6.1 Measures to avoid Breakages 3.6.2 Do’s and Don’ts of handling equipment 3.6.3 Sanitation Standards in handling service equipment 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutor Marked Assignment 7.0 References/Further Reading 67 1.0 INTRODUCTION The atmosphere of a restaurant is largely affected by the kind of furniture used.
The furniture should be utilitarian and elegant to look at.
Very often by using different materials, designs and finishes and by careful arrangement, one can change the atmosphere and appearance of the food service area to suit different occasions.
2.0 OBJECTIVES At the end of this unit, you should be able to: 1.
Identify at least5 furniture that are used in a restaurant 2.
Describe various table linen 3.
Explain the ways of handling different equipment 4.
Describe the sanitation standard in handling equipment 3.0 MAIN CONTENT 3.1 Tables The size and shape of tables depends entirely on the availability of space and the kind of service envisaged.
Normally three types of tables are used.
They are round, rectangular and square.
The height of the table irrespective of the shape should be 75cm from the floor level.
The diameter of a round table to seat four people should be approximately 92 cm.
The size of a square table to seat two people should 76 cm sq and 92 cm square to seat four people.
The size of rectangular table to seat four people should be 137 cm x 76 cm.
Commercial table tops come in a variety of materials: wood, metal, stone, tile and melamine.
Many restaurant table tops are available with edged finishes to prevent scuffs and dents.
In some expensive tables, another table top is placed with revolving facility, on top of which the food is placed where the guests can rosterte revolving top and serve himself, if he chooses to.
68 3.2 Chairs Chairs are available in various shapes, colours and sizes to suit all occasions.
Because of the wide ranges of style, chairs come in varied height and width.
However the dimension of chairs should be relative to table dimensions.
The average height of the chair, should be 92 cm.
The seat should be 46 cm from the floor and 23 cm from the top of the table.
This would enable guests to sit and eat comfortably, without their legs touching the underside of the table.
3,3 Side station / dummy waiter The side station is also called the dummy waiter or service console.
This is a very important piece of furniture in a restaurant.
It is used by the service staff for keeping all the service equipment at one place.
It is also used as a landing table for the dishes picked up from the kitchen enroute to the table and the dirty dishes from the guest's table to the wash-up area.
For the convenience of the service staff, the side station should be strategically located in a restaurant.
The side station should be kept clean and presentable as it can be seen by the guests.
The following service equipment can be stored in a side station: Salvers Creamers Wine chiller and stand Coffee pots Teapots Ice buckets and tongs, finger bowls cruet sets sugar bowl; and tongs Soup ladles, butter dishes, bottle and wine openers cigar cutters, bread baskets bud vases, candle holders, wine cradle, toothpick stand, straw stand, Pot holders, drip bowls.etc The style and design of the side board varies from establishment to establishment.
It depends upon: (cid:1)(cid:1)The style of service and menu offered.
(cid:1)(cid:1)The number of waiters working from one sideboard (cid:1)(cid:1)The number of tables to be served from one sideboard (cid:1)(cid:1)The amount of equipment it is expected to hold.
69 It is essential that the side board is of minimum size and portable so that it may be moved, if necessary.
If the sideboard is too large for its purpose, then it takes up space which could be used to seat more customers.
The top should be of heat resistant material which can be easily washed down.
After service, the sideboard is either completely emptied out or restocked for the next service.
3.4 Trolleys The various trolleys used in the food and beverage service outlets are: 1) Gueridon or Flambe Trolley A gueridon or flambe trolley is a small mobile trolley that can be placed alongside the guest's table.
It consists of one or two burners, a gas cylinder and a work and storage space for plates and cooking equipment.
Using this trolley, the food is flambed at the guest's table.
Only skilled and well trained waiters are allowed to handle this service as there is the risk of spoiling food by overcooking it, and of the flame causing a fire in the premises.
2) Room Service Trolley This trolley is known for its versatility.
It is used for the service to guests in their rooms.
The aiter sets up the meal and covers on the trolley and wheels it into the guest's room.
This trolley may also be used as a dining table in the privacy of the guest's room.
Beneath the trolley top, provision is made for mounting a hot case to keep the food warm.
3) Dessert Trolley This trolley serves as a visual aid to selling desserts.
Guests are more likely to order a dessert if they can see what is available, particularly if it is well presented.
Some dessert trolleys are refrigerated.
Gateaux, pastries, jellies, tarts, pies, flans and souffles can be served from a dessert trolley.
This trolley has several shelves and the bottom shelf is reserved for plates, cutlery, linen and other service equipment.
A glass or transparent trolley top makes it easy for guests to select a 70 dessert of their choice.
4) Hors d'oeuvre Trolley A hors d'oeuvre is the first course of a menu usually consisting of a selection of small items of egg, fish, meat, fruit and vegetables in pungent dressings.
This hors d'oeuvre trolley is used to carry variety of appetizers.
This trolley is probably the least popular in India, as a majority of guests are not too keen on hors d'oeuvre as a starter.
They prefer soups instead.
However, this trolley can be used to popularise the special dishes that are introduced in the restaurant from time to time.
5) Carving Trolley It is used for carving joints of meat at a guest's table.
This trolley is seldom used in Nigeria 3.5 Linen Linens are fabric goods, such as tablecloths, napkins and slip cloths.
Linen is a material made from the fibres of the flax plant.
Originally, many, such as bed sheets and tablecloths, were made of linen.
Today, the term "linen" has come to be applied to all related products even though most are made of cotton, various synthetic materials, or blends.
The main items of linen normally found in a restaurant are: tablecloths; slip cloths; buffet cloths; trolley and sideboard cloths; and waiter’s cloths or service cloths.
3.5.1 Table Cloths Table linens made from cotton or linen are not only more absorbent but also last longer.
The fibres don't pill or pile as easy as with synthetic table linens and they don't become shiny when exposed to an iron's heat.
Egyptian cotton and Irish linen are considered the finest materials for table linens because of their long, durable fibers.
White is the most popular colour for table linens because it's considered formal.
Table linens in off white or ivory are also acceptable.
A damask (woven) or embroidered pattern is a perfectly acceptable table cloth.
71 3.5.2 Sizes of tables and table Cloths Square table 76 cm sq 92 cm sq 137 x 137 cm 183 x 183 cm Rectangular table 136 x 76 cm 183 x 137 cm Round table 92 cm diameter 184 cm diameter Table cloths should be large enough to cover the top as well as a portion of the legs of a table without interfering with the guest's comfort while he is seated at the table.The size of the tablecloth varies according to the size of the table it is required to cover.
3.5.3 Slip Cloths or Naperones These are designed to be laid over the tablecloth to protect it from spillage and give it a longer life.
Using a slip cloth reduces the number of tablecloths used and thus reduces the cost of inventory and laundry.
Slip cloths may measure 1 metre square approximately.
3.5.4 Napkins or Serviettes A napkin or serviette is a rectangle cloth or paper used at the table for wiping the mouth while eating.
It is usually small and folded.
Conventionally, t he napkin is folded and placed to the left of the place setting, outside the outermost fork.
In an ambitious restaurant setting, it may be folded into elaborate shapes and displayed on the empty plate.
A napkin may also be held together in a bundle (with cutlery) by a napkin ring.
Alternatively, paper napkins may be contained with a napkin holder.
Napkins may be of the same colour as tablecloths, or in a colour that blends with the decor of the restaurant.
Napkins should be spotlessly clean and well-pressed.
The ideal size for a napkin is between 46 to 50 cm sq.
3.5.5 Buffet Cloths For a buffet table, the minimum size of the tablecloth required is 2 m x 4 m. 3.5.6 Trolley Cloths and Sideboard Cloths These are usually made from tablecloths well worn and not suitable for use on tables, mended by the ho3usekeeping department and folded to fit a sideboard or trolley.
72 3.5.7 Waiter’s Cloths or Service Cloths A service cloth is a very important part of service equipment as well as being part of the food server’s uniform.
It must be kept clean and ironed at all times and only used as a service cloth for certain activities such as: (cid:1)(cid:1)Carrying hot plates (cid:1)(cid:1)Final polishing of plates (cid:1)(cid:1)Wiping small spills (cid:1)(cid:1)Brushing crumbs onto a service plate (cid:1)(cid:1)Wiping the undersides of the plates before placing plates on the table.
Service cloths are also used by every waiter as protection against heat and to keep uniforms clean.
3.6 Handling equipment Management invests substantial amount in supplies and equipment.
Service staffs are, therefore, expected to handle these equipment gently and carefully.
Staff should be sanitation and safety conscious.
Equipment should be handled in the right way.
Spot stemmed glass by the stem, tumblers by the base, flatware by the handle.
Bowls should never be held by the rim, use appropriate underliners.
The thumb should never show on the plate.
When setting up cutleries, as well as glasswares, avoid leaving finger marks by using trays or by securing them inside a cloth napkin.
To prevent breakage, be conscious of the rules of equipment handling.
Breakages are usually caused by the following factors: 1.
Mechanical Impact -- results from object-to-object collision.
This is induced by stacking of glasswares and chinawares, picking of glasses in bouquet, overloading of buspans and trays, putting cutleries inside glasses.
73 2.
Thermal Shock -- result of sudden change of temperature.
This happens when hot water is placed inside a chilled / cold glass and vice versa, abrupt use of glasswares after coming of the dishwashing machines, heating chilled bowl in a microwave.
3.
Improper Handling and Misuse of Equipment – using the equipment for a purpose it was not intended for such as using a glass to scoop ice, using knives for opening cans, etc.
4.
Inattentiveness or Absent-mindedness – accidents often occur when service personnel are absent-minded or are inattentive in executing services especially when they are carrying breakable equipment.
5.
Environmental Factors – greasy / wet floor, slippery floor, broken tiles, blind doors.
3.6.1 Measures to Avoid Breakages • Use trays when serving and bussing.
• Proper system should be followed in stacking and storing equipment.
• Use appropriate door for entry and exit.
A separate door for entering and exiting should be installed to prevent collision.
• Use appropriate glass racks.
Make sure that the glasses are conveniently, but not tightly inserted in each rack.
• Buss out glasses separately from chinaware.
• Avoid overloading trays and buspans.
3.6.2 Do's and Dont's of Handling Equipment 1.
Dump ice out of the glass; preheat the glass before pouring hot water.
Don't pour hot drinks in chilled or cold glasses.
2.
Stack dishes according to size and kind.
Never stack too high.
3.
Handle stemmed glasses by the stem and tumblers by the base.
Never handle glasses in bouquet.
4.
Remove glass / china from buspan one at a time.
Don't unload china, glasses at random.
74 5.
Use ice scooper for scooping ice.
Never use the glass for scooping ice.
6.
Never put cutlery into glasses, put them in appropriate containers.
7.
Make sure of an adequate back-up supply of glassware for rush periods.
8.
Always be on the lookout for cracked or chipped glassware and remove them.
9.
Never allow glass-to-glass contact on overhead racks, keep distant from each other.
10.
Never overload the tray / buspan.
Load only what it can conveniently accommodate.
11.
Never buss glasses in the sink.
Buss them directly onto divider racks.
12.
Never stack glasses.
Use trays and avoid over crowding them to prevent breakage.
3.6.3 Sanitation Standards in Handling Service Equipment 1.
Use clean and sanitised glasses, flatware, chinaware and other equipment for service.
2.
All service equipment must be wiped dry with clean cloths to avoid watermarks.
The cloths used for this purpose must be segregated from other wiping cloths.
3.
Bowls should be underlined with appropriate underliner and never to be served with the finger touching the rim.
4.
When serving straw serve them with their wrappers or in their respective dispensers.
5.
When serving additional utensils or napkin, place them in a small plate to avoid direct contact with hand.
6.
The thumb should be kept away from the plate to avoid touching the sauce, meat or dish.
7.
When setting up flatware and glasses, avoid leaving finger marks; carry them in trays or with a cloth napkin.
8.
Never serve food using cutleries that have fallen on the floor.
9.
To avoid contamination, food must be covered when it is not served immediately.
75 Never serve utensils, cups, glasses or plates that are oily, wet or with fingermarks, spots or lipstick mark.
SELF ASESSMENT EXERCISES 1.
Familiarise with various types of table linen available in the restaurants in your locality and categorise them 2.
Practice setting up table for service.
4.0 CONCLUSION Much money is spent in the purchase of restaurant equipment, caution should therefore be exercised when purchasing these equipment to ensure durability and serviceability.
Also when these equipment are handled in the correct manner, they enhance the profitability in a restaurant 5.0 SUMMARY In restauarants,many different sizes and shapes of tables are used.
They are generally round, rectangular and square.
Chairs are available in various shapes, colours and sizes to suit all occasions.
The side station is also called the dummy waiter or service console.
This is a very important piece of furniture in a restaurant.
Various trolleys used in the food and beverage service outlets are: gueridon or flambe trolley, room service trolley, dessert trolley, hors d'oeuvre trolley, carving trolley, etc.
Linens are fabric goods, such as tablecloths, napkins and slip cloths.
Linen is a material made from the fibers of the flax plant.
The main items of linen normally found in a restaurant are: tablecloths; slipcloths; buffet cloths; trolley and sideboard cloths; and waiter’s cloths or service cloths.
6.0 TUTOR-MARKED ASSIGNMENTS 1.
Give a detailed description of the types of tables and trolleys found in modern restaurants.
2.
Outline the main linen items found in a typical Nigerian restaurant 76 7.0 REFERENCES 1.
Baraban, R.S,& Durocher,J.F.
(2001), Successful Restaurant Design, John Wiley and Sons 2.
Katsigris,, C.& Thomas.
Design and Equipment for Restaurants and Foodservice: A Management View, 3.
3.
Lillicrap,D,& Cousins,J.
(2010).Food and Beverage Service.
(8th eds) Bookpower with Hodder Educ.UK UNIT 4 PREPARATION FOR SERVICE CONTENT 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objectives 3.0 Main Content 3.1 Mis-en-scene 3.2 Mis-en-plale 3.3 Preparing for servile 3.3.1 Preparation before Servile 3.3.2 Etiquette during servile 3.3.3 Etiquette after servile 3.4 Table setting 3.4.1 Points to remember when laying a table 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutor-Marked Assignments 7.0 References/Further reading 77 1.0 INTRODUCTION Restaurants not only should attract potential customers but also should strive hard to encourage them to become frequent and regular customers.
This can be done in a number of ways, such as through the type of menu, the glamorous and attractive name of the place or atmosphere within the food service area.
The customer’s first impressions of a restaurant are the most important and these are largely determined by the professionalism of the service staff and their preparations prior to service.
These pre -service preparations are known as mise-en-place and are vital in that they create the right and pleasing environment by the setting and controlling of temperature, lighting and equipment.
2.0 OBJECTIVES At the end of the unit, you should be able to : 1.Describe how the following is carried out in a restaurant.
a.Mis-en-scene b.Mis-en-place 2.
Identify at least 5 etiquette to be observed during and after service 3.
Practice table setting 3.0 MAIN CONTENT 3.1 Mise-en-scene Mise-en-scene, the French term means to prepare the environment of the outlet before service in order to make it pleasant, comfortable, safe and hygienic.
Before each service session, the restaurant should be made presentable enough to receive the guests.
The supervisor or team of waiters should ensure the following mise-en-scene: · Carpets are well brushed or swept.
· All tables and chairs are service-ready.
· Table lights or wall lights have functioning bulbs.
· Menu cards are presentable and attractive.
· Tent carts or other sales material are presentable.
· Doors and windows are thrown open for sometime to air the restaurant.
This should be followed by closing the windows and doors and setting the air-conditioning or heating to a comfortable temperature.
· Dirty linen is exchanged for fresh linen.
· Table cloths and mats are laid on the tables.
78 · Wilted flowers are replaced with fresh ones.
3.2 Mise-en-place Mise-en-place, the French term means to “put in place” is attributed to the preparation of a work place for ultimate smooth service.
It is widely used in the food and beverage service department in everyday hotel operations.
Before service commences, the staff should ensure that the station is in total readiness to receive guests.
A station comprises of a given number of tables which are attended by a given team of waiters.
Thus a restaurant may have several stations, each with a team of waiters.
In a large restaurant, each station may be headed by a Chef-de-rang.
Mise-en-place involves: · Stacking side stations with sufficient covers for resetting the restaurant after the first sitting is over.
Keeping extra linen, crockery, cutlery, glassware and ashtrays handy so that they are readily available for use.
·Cleaning and filling Cruet sets on a daily basis.
·Filling Sauce bottles and wiping the necks and tops of the bottles clean.
· Placing butter, condiments and accompaniments for service ready for use when needed.
3.3 Preparing for service Serving food and beverage to the anxiously waiting customer needs professional expertise.
The service should follow a sequence and have a plan of action based on the practices of the professional catering industry.
The service staff should be expert performers of certain tasks before, during and after service.
Diligent and courteous service would likely transform a satisfied customer to a regular one.
3.3.1 Preparation before service The service staff should check the following before service: i) The tables and linen are clean.
ii) Tablecloths are evenly spread on the table.
iii) Chairs are dusted and properly arranged.
iv) The table set up is appropriate and pleasing.
v) The silver is polished and the china and crockery are spotlessly clean and befitting the occasion.
79 vi) Cruet sets, sugar bowls and flower vases are filled and suitably placed on the table.
vii) The floor / carpet is clean and dry.
viii) The restaurant and back area are in a state of readiness before the service session commences.
ix) The side station is fully equipped for service and the following should be checked: · Condiments tray is cleaned and refilled.
· Napkins are folded and kept handy for the particular session.
· Salvers, extra linen, cutlery and service equipment necessary for the session are stacked up.
· Water jugs and ice buckets are filled and kept ready.
· Coffee pots ready with freshly brewed coffee / tea.
· Sugar cubes, butter and butter plates ready.
3.3.2 Etiquette during service i) When the guests arrive greet them warmly, by wishing them the time of the day.
ii) Escort the guests to the table and seat them promptly by pulling the chairs out to ease seating.
If need be, the table should be moved so that very little inconvenience is caused to guests when they seat themselves.
iii) Ensure that children have high chairs and special attention is paid to the elderly.
iv) Remove extra covers, if any.
v) Serve water and present the menu card, if the captain is busy.
vi) If the order has to be taken, offer suggestions to the guests on the choice of food and beverages and repeat the final order to avoid possible errors.
vii) Do not leave the station unattended, as nothing annoys a guest more than not being able to find a waiter, when something is needed.
viii) If the table cloth has to be changed during service, the table top should not be exposed.
Any articles on the table should be cleared to the side station and not placed on chairs or on the next table.
The soiled cloth should be brushed using a service cloth and a crumbing tray or plate.
ix) Do not neglect little things such as lighting a guest's cigarette, responding to a request and showing interest in the guest's needs.
x) Ensure that service is fast, efficient and pleasant.
xi) Before serving dessert, clear and crumb the table.
80 3.3.3 Etiquette after Service i) Pull out the chairs or the table to enable guests to move out comfortably.
ii) Wish them warmly and request them to visit again, saying - Do visit again, sir / madam.
iii) Clear the table immediately and reset for the next guest.
iv) Have the side station cleared and restacked for the next sitting.
3.4 Table setting Table setting refers to the way to set a table with tableware - such as eating utensils and dishware - for serving and eating.
The arrangement for a single diner is called a place setting.
The arrangement varies across various cultures.
The rules for laying a table are not rigid.
They are followed to facilitate dining and making the table neat.
The basic rules for laying the tables are given below: 1) Table Linens: Table linen has to be laid properly.
A white cloth is preferred but not mandatory.
The only rule is to make sure that linen pattern and china patterns do not clash.
2) Chargers: Chargers or dinner plates should be placed on the table first.
Chargers are decorative elements that are placed underneath plates to add colour or texture to the table.
Each plate should be set in the centre of the place setting and each place setting on the table should be set equidistant.
The rest of the components used to set a formal table will be set with the dinner plate in mind.
If a charger is used, soup and melon bowls will be placed on top.
The charger will generally be removed just before the main course.
3) Napkins: Linen napkins should be folded elegantly and placed in the centre of the dinner plate.
4) Silverware: Silverware is to be placed in order of use.
In other words, the diner will start at the end and work his way in.
The first course will use silverware farthest from the dinner plate, while the last course will utilize the silverware closest.
Place all silverware an inch from the table's edge.
5) Knives: Set knives on the table to the right of the dinner plate.
Technically, one should only use a knife if one is cutting meat; however, up to three knives can be placed on the table, in order of use.
Blades should face inside, towards the table setting.
81 6) Forks: Forks are to be set to the left of the dinner plate in order of use.
In most cases, there are three: one each for seafood, the main course and the salad.
When dining formally, salads are generally served at the end of the meal.
7) Spoons: Spoons are set to the right of the knives in order of use.
If there is a melon course, this spoon will be set closest to the plate with the soup spoon on the end.
If there is a dessert spoon, this will be set above the plate.
Coffee spoons are set on the saucer when it's time for dessert.
8) Glasses: Glasses are set above the plate to the right in order of use.
From left to right: Water glass, red wine glass, white wine glass, champagne flute (if ordered).
9) Dessert: Dessert plates and coffee / tea cups will be set out after dinner.
If a fork is to be used with dessert, this will be placed on the dessert plate.
A dessert spoon should have already been set above the dinner plate.
Coffee spoons should be placed on the saucer.
Coffee / tea mugs aren't used for a formal dinner.
3.4.1 Points to Remember When Laying a Table 1) The table on which a tablecloth is to be spread, should be first covered with a baize base cloth, for the following reasons: a.
To protect the diner's wrists and elbows from the table's sharp edges.
b.
To keep the tablecloth firmly in place.
c. To protect the surface of the table and prevent the rattling of crockery and cutlery.
d. To absorb moisture in case liquid spills on the table.
2) Based on the size of the table, appropriate linen should be used.
The central fold of the tablecloth should be in the middle of the table and all the four edges should just brush the seats of the chairs.
Soiled or torn linen should not be used.
Three types of tablecloths namely cotton, linen and damask are used.
Of these, damask is the best.
3) If a bud vase is used as a central decorative piece, it should not be very large or tall as that obstructs the view of guests sitting opposite each other.
Heavily scented flowers should be avoided, as they affect the flavour of the food.
4) Each cover should be well-balanced.
(A cover is the space required on a table for laying cutlery, crockery, glassware and linen for one person to partake of a meal).
82 5) Only the required cutlery, crockery and glassware should be placed on the table.
On a normal dining table, the space required for one cover is 60 cm x 38 cm.
The cover on the opposite side should be exactly similar, so as to give a well balanced look.
6) Cutlery should always be laid from the inside to the outside of the cover, since the order of sequence in which they are to be used is always from outside to inside.
7) Knives and soup spoons should be placed on the right-hand side of a cover, while forks should be placed on the left-hand side.
Dessert spoons and forks should be placed on top of the cover.
The side knife should be placed on a quarter plate and kept on the left side of the cover.
The cutting edge of all knives should face to the left.
8) Water tumbler should be kept to the right of the cover, at the tip of the large knife.
9) Napkins should be placed in the centre of the cover, in between the cutlery.
Normally during a dinner session, napkins are arranged in empty water tumblers.
10) Cruet sets, a butter dish, an ashtray, meal accompaniments and a bud vase should be placed in between the covers at the centre of the table.
11) Crockery and cutlery should be spotlessly clean and the glassware well polished.
12) Chipped or cracked equipment should not be used.
The hotel's monogram should be visible to the guest.
13) All cutlery and crockery should be placed about an inch from the edge of the table so that they are not accidentally tipped over.
SELF ASSESSMENT EXERCISES 1.
Practice setting up a table properly 2.
Practice cleaning and resetting after the customer has left.
3.
Practice clearing and making ready the side station for service.
4.0 CONCLUSION The customer’s first impression of a restaurant is largely determined by the preparations made by staff before, during and after service.
The onus therefore lies on you to cultivate and show professionalism in all you do.
5.0 SUMMARY Restaurants not only should attract potential customers but also should strive hard to encourage them to become frequent and regular customers.
The customer’s first impressions of a restaurant are the most important and these are largely determined by the professionalism of the service 83 staff and their preparations prior to service.
The service should follow a sequence and have a plan of action based on the practices of the professional catering industry.
The service staff should perform many tasks before, during and after service.
Before each service session, the restaurant should be made presentable enough to receive the guests.
The supervisor or team of waiters should ensure that the mise-en-scene such as, carpets are well brushed or cleaned, all tables and chairs are serviceable, table lights or wall lights have functioning bulbs, menu cards are presentable and attractive, tent cards or other sales material are presentable, doors and windows are thrown open for sometime to air the restaurant, exchange dirty linen for fresh linen, table cloths and mats are laid on the tables, wilted flowers are discarded and fresh flowers replaced.
Before service commences, the staff should ensure that the station is in total readiness to receive guests.
Table setting refers to the way to set a table with tableware - such as eating utensils and Dishware - for serving and eating.
The basic rule for laying the table includes table linens, chargers or dinner plates, napkins, silverware, knives, forks, spoons, glasses, dessert, etc.
6.0 TUTOR-MARKED ASSIGNMENTS 1.
Visit a restaurant you are familiar with and take note of how they set up their tables 2.
Describe the mis-en-scene that occurs in an everyday restaurant 7.0 REFERENCES 1.
Bulleid,A.
(1996), Serving Food and Drink: Table & Function: Student Guide, Nelson Thornes.
2 Bruce,A & Litrides,H (1990), Carol Food and Beverage Service, John Wiley & Sons.
3 Mat,C.
A.
(1994), Food and Beverage Service Manual, John Wiley & Sons.
84 UNIT 5 STYLES AND TECHNIQUES OF SERVICE CONTENT 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objectives 3.0 Main content 3.1 Styles of service 3.1.1 French service 3.1.2 American service 3.1.3 English service 3.1.4 Russian service 3.1.5 Buffet service 3.2 Service techniques 3.2.1 Serving of food with one hand 3.2.2 Serving of food with both hands 3.2.3 Arranging food on the plates 3.2.4 Pouring beverages 3.2.4.1 Sequence of clearing 3.3 Handling serving dishes and utensils 3.4 Procedures for carrying plates 3.5 Clearing of plates 3.6 General rules to be observed while serving 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutor-Marked Assignments 7.0 References/Further Reading 85 1.0 INTRODUCTION Service is a term that is used to describe the manner and method in which food is served to guests in foodservice operations.
In former times, this often constituted an elaborate protocol, much of which is no longer in vogue,but some technical terms are still in use today.
When food is placed directly on plates and served to guests at the table, this is referred to as service a lassiette.
When guests serve themselves from the dish on the table with serving spoons, this is referred to a service a la francaise.
When the waiter places the food on the diner’s plate this is referred to as service in the a la anglaise style.
In service a la russe, which is also known as au gueridon, the dish is first offered to guest for viewing or approval, and then food is served onto the diner’s plate at a pedestal table or gueridon, which is located close to or besides the dining table.
2.0 OBJECTIVES At the end of this lesson, you should be able to: 1.
Identify and explain the five styles of service 2.
Describe: i.
At least two service techniques ii.Procedures for carrying plates and trays 3.
Analyse the general rules to be observed while serving 3.0 MAIN CONTENT 3.1 Styles of service Five styles of services are internationally recognized: 1.
French service or gueridon service 2.
American service or plate service 3.
English service 4.
Russian service 5.
Buffet service 3.1.1 French Service French service differs from others in that all food is served from the gueridon.
This is a rolling cart the same height as the guest's table.
The gueridon is covered with a cloth and is placed side- by-side with the table.
It is equipped with a small alcohol stove, or rechaud, that is used to keep the food warm for the preparation of sauces, crepes suzette, jubilee and other special dishes.
This service is very elaborate and elegant.
The food is partially prepared in the kitchen and completed 86 by the Chef or Headwaiter in full view of the customer.
Service of this type requires not only technical expertise on food preparation but also a good showmanship.
The Chef carries out certain activities like carving meats, preparing flambe, etc.
with flair and showmanship.
Advantages: 1.
The guest s given personalized attention making him feel important.
2.
It makes the guest feel that he is receiving a royal treatment.
3.
The service is elegant and entertaining.
4.
It commands higher price than other forms of service (pay for the service).
Disadvantages: 1.
It is a slow service.
2.
It is expensive because it requires large professional staff.
3.
It requires a bigger dining room space to make service and food preparation convenient.
3.1.2 American Service This is usually called "plate service” because the food is already placed in the plate in the kitchen ready to be served to the guests.
This type of service is used in coffee shops where there is a demand for quick and simple service.
It requires minimal training for novice waiters and waitresses.
Advantages: 1.
It is a fast and simple service.
2.It is inexpensive.
One waiter or waitress can serve many guests and no special service equipment is necessary.
3.
It does not require highly trained technical staff that demands for higher pay.
Disadvantages: 1.
Less showmanship 2.
Reduced personalized attention 3.1.3 English Service This type of service is also known as "family style" service.
In this service, the soup tureen is placed before the host alongside with preheated soup plates and hands them to the waiter, indicating the person to be served.
The same procedure is followed with the main entree.
If so desired, the partly filled dinner plate is presented to the hostess who serves the vegetables from large serving dishes placed before her.
Then the waiter places the plate before the guests.
This type of service is usually found in coffee shops, family restaurants, counter service, etc.
87 Advantages: 1.
It is fast.
Plates of food are served immediately at the proper temperature.
2.
It is inexpensive.
3.
It requires no special equipment.
Disadvantages: 1.
Less showmanship.
2.
Reduced personalized attention to the customer.
3.1.4 Russian Service This type of service is the same as that of French service.
However, in Russian service, the food is fully prepared and pre-cut in the kitchen and then neatly arranged on silver platters by the Chef.
The waiter then shows the platter to the guest as a polite gesture and serves the food to the individual plates of the guests using serving cutleries.
Advantages: 1.
Only one waiter is needed to each station.
2.
Elegant and entertaining.
3.
No extra space is needed for the equipment (except for the side stand).
4.
It guarantees equal portions because the food is pre-cut and already served.
5.
Gives the guests personal attention.
Disadvantages: 1.
It requires a big initial investment in silver equipment.
2.
If many guests are served from one platter, the last one to be served may see a rather less attractive display.
3.
If every guest in a party orders a different dish like steak or fish, the waiter must carry very heavily loaded tray / trays to the dining room.
3.1.5 Buffet Service This is also called self service and is normally used in banquet functions and in some restaurants.
Food is attractively arranged on a long table, classified and arranged according to proper sequence, from appetizers to desserts.
Soup is placed on a soup tureen and the hot entrees in chaffing dishes to keep them warm.
Some equipment like dinner plates and saucers are laid down right on the buffet table.
Instead of the waiter serving the guests, the guests go to the buffet table 88 pick up plates, china, cuttkery and knapkin and all other items and serve themselves of their own choice.
Advantages: 1.
It is a fast service.
2.
It requires less staff to render the service needed.
3.
The presentation of the different dishes can be appetizing.
Disadvantages: 1.
It may result in shortage of food especially when the early ones may serve themselves more; thus very little food is left for the latecomers.
3.2 Service techniques 3.2.1 Serving of Food with One Hand This service technique is used only for platter service and involves the so-called long grip.
In the long grip, the utensils are held in the right hand.
Hold the spoon between the index and middle fingers and the fork between the index finger and the thumb.
The curves of the spoon and fork should align.
Gently slide the spoon under the item to be served, so that it is held between the fork and spoon.
Remove your index finger, apply light pressure to the fork, and lift.
3.2.2 Serving of Food with Both Hands This technique is used when working at a side table or a buffet.
When serving with both hands, hold the spoon in your right hand and the fork in your left hand.
If the food is prepared in a sauce, always scrape the bottom of the spoon with the fork, to prevent drips and to keep the plate you are preparing clean and neat.
3.2.3 Arranging Food on the Plates To the uninitiated, it might seem very simple to arrange food nicely on a plate.
Actually, in a refined service, food is arranged according to particular rules that are followed the world over.
Meat is always placed at the lower part of the plate.
Sauces are served separately in a sauce boat, or they are served to the left of the meat or fish.
When a dish is cooked in a sauce, such as a curry or stews, the sauce is served over the meat.
Compound, or flavoured, butters, such as d’hote or d'hotel butter or herb butter, are placed directly on the meat.
Side dishes are arranged to achieve colour harmony.
A piece of cake or pie should be served with the point facing toward the guest.
Plates with a logo or other graphic decoration should be arranged so that the decoration is placed in front of the guest.
Plates should never appear overloaded; the rims must 89 always be free of food and without drip smears.
Hot food is always served on hot plates; cold food, on cold plates.
3.2.4 Pouring Beverages Hold glasses by the foot or stem only, to avoid fingerprints.
Glasses are always placed to the right of the guest with the right hand.
If the glass has a logo, it should face the guest.
Beverages are always poured from the right side of the guest.
When serving heavy red wines that have been decanted or are in a wine basket, hold the glass, slightly slanted, on the table with left hand and slowly pour out the wine with the right hand, so that the wine sediment is not disturbed.
A bottle of wine is first presented to the host.
Then the bottle is opened, and a small amount is poured out for the host.
After the host approves, the guests are served first and the host's glass last.
3.2.4.1 Sequence of Clearing When an aperitif has been served, the empty glasses are cleared only after the wine is served.
If a white wine is served with the appetizer, the empty glasses are removed only after the red wine has been poured.
The red-wine glasses are cleared after the coffee or after-dinner drinks are served.
When guests are smoking, ash trays are always changed before a new course is served.
After the guests have finished the main course, any platters or serving dishes on the table are removed first.
Then the dinner plates are cleared along with the flatware.
Finally, any smaller plates, bread plates, and finger bowls are removed.
Before dessert is served, the table is totally cleared, except for flowers or other decorations.
3.3 Handling serving dishes and utensils During service the right and left hands have distinct functions to perform.
The left hand carries while the right hand works.Flatware, glasses, cups, and the like are always carried on a tray, never in hands.
For safety and to prevent clattering, this tray should always be covered with a paper or cloth napkin.
While bringing platters to the side table or guest table, always carry them in both hands.
The hand towel should be draped lengthwise over the cloth so you can hold the platter on both ends.
If several plates or serving dishes are carried at the same time, place them on the towel so they will not slide.
Serving bowls and sauce boats are always placed on a small plate with a paper doily.
90 3.4 Procedure for Carrying Plates A Stack of Plates A stack of plates is always carried with both hands.
Wrap your hand towel around the plates so that you do not touch the plates with your bare hands.
Do not hold the plates against your body.
One Plate Always hold a plate between the thumb and forefinger (index) finger.
Your thumb should be flat on the rim of the plate, pointing toward the rim, never into the plate.
Two Plates Held from Below: Hold the first plate between the thumb and index finger.
The index finger is placed slightly behind the lower rim.
Slide the second plate against the index finger and support it with the other fingers from beneath.
Held from Above: The first plate is held with the thumb and index finger.
With that hand turned slightly upward, balance the second plate on the lower forearm and the ball of the thumb.
Support the upper plate with the other fingers.
Four Plates The procedure for carrying four plates is as follows: 1.
Seize the first plate between the thumb and the forefinger 2.
Place the second plate between the forefinger (on the top) and the two fingers major and ring finger (under).
3.
Place the third plate over the basis of the thumb and the little finger.
4.
The fourth plate is carried in the right hand, this will be the first plate placed on table.
Figure 8.1 Procedures for Carrying Four Plates Sample Procedure for Carrying Plates Consider a "service" which is composed of a meat dish, a vegetable placed on an under dish, 4 hot plates and a sauce dispenser.
The following procedure is adopted: · Cover plates with a cloth and hold them with the left hand.
· Position the meat dish on the pile of plates · Place the sauce dispenser between the forefinger and little finger (on the top) and middle finger and ring finger (under).
91  Sample Procedure for Carrying a Tray 1) It is important to organize the tray in a way that the weight is concentrated on a precise point that will be maintained by the wrist and the left hand (a pile of under cups) 2) Items less heavy will be placed around heavier items (cups and spoons).
3.5 Clearing of plates The basic technique is the same as carrying two plates from above.
After picking up the first plate, arrange the flatware on it.
The handle of the first fork is under your thumb.
This will secure the remaining flatware.
Then slide the knife in at a right angle under the fork.
Now pick up the second plate with the flatware, and place the flatware on the first plate, fork beneath the thumb and knife below.
The remaining plates are stacked on the second plate, while the flatware is arranged on the first plate.
In an elegant service, no more than four plates are cleared at one time.
Small food remnants on the plates can be pushed to the lower plate; be sure to turn away from the guest when doing this.
When the plates contain a lot of leftovers, they must be scraped away from the table.
Clear only two plates at a time and sort out in the waiter’s pantry.
3.6 General rules to be observed while serving 1.Women are usually served first.
If it is an honorary dinner, of course, the guest of honour is served first.
Otherwise, age and status of the guest determine the sequence, with older or more distinguished guests served first.
The host is always served after his or her guests.
When children are present at the table, serve them as quickly as possible to maintain peace.
2.
Place and remove all food from the left of the guest.
3.
Place and remove all beverages, including water, from the right of the guest.
4.
Use the left hand to place and remove dishes when working at the left side of the guest and the right hand when working at the right side of the guest.
This will provide free arm action for the server and avoids the danger of bumping against the guest's arm.
5.
Place each dish on the table with the four fingers of the hand under the lower edge and the thumb on the upper edge.
6.
Never reach in front of a guest, nor across one person in order to serve another.
7.
Present Serving dishes from the left side, in a position so that the guest can serve himself.
Place serving silver on the right side of the dish, with the handles turned toward the guest so that he may reach and handle them easily.
92 8.
Do not place soiled, chipped, or cracked glassware and china or bent or tarnished silverware before a guest.
9.
Handle tumblers by their bases and goblets by their stems.
10.Do not lift water glasses from the table to fill or refill.
When they cannot be reached conveniently, draw them to a more convenient position.
11.Set fruit juice and cocktail glasses, cereal dishes, soup bowls, and dessert dishes on small plates before placing them in the centre of the cover between the knife and the fork.
12.Place individual serving trays of bread and rolls above and to the left of the forks.
Place a tray or basket of bread for the use of several guests toward the centre of the table.
13.Place the cup and saucer at the right of the spoons, about two inches from the edge of the table.
Turn the handle of the cup to the right, either parallel to the edge of the table or at a slight angle toward the guest.
14.Set tea and coffee pots on small plates and place above and slightly to the right of the beverage cup.
Set iced beverage glasses on coasters or small plates to protect table tops and linen cloth.
15.Place individual creamers, syrup pitchers, and small lemon plates about and a little to the right of the cup and saucer.
16.
Place a milk glass at the right of and below the water glass.
17.
Serve butter, cheese, and cut lemon with a fork, serve relishes, pickles, and olives with a fork or spoon, not with the fingers.
SELF ASSESSMENT EXERCISES 1.
Discuss the salient differences among the various styles of service 4.0 CONCLUSION To achieve success in food and beverage operation, it is advisable to choose the right style and technique of service.
5.0 SUMMARY Service is a term that is used to describe the manner and method in which food is served to guests in foodservice operations.
Five styles of services are internationally recognized which include French service or gueridon service, American service or plate service, English service, Russian service and Buffet service.
93 French service differs from others in that all food is served from the gueridon.
American service is usually called "plate service” because the food is already placed in the plate in the kitchen ready to be served to the guests.
English service is known as "family style" service.
In Russian service, the food is fully prepared and pre-cut in the kitchen and then neatly arranged on silver platters by the Chef.
Buffet service is also called self service and is normally used in banquet functions and in some restaurants.
During service the right and left hands have distinct functions.
The left hand carries while the right hand works.
Serving food with one hand technique is used only for platter service and involves the so-called long grip.
Serving food with both hands technique is used when working at a side table or a buffet.
In a refined service, food is arranged according to particular rules that are followed the world over.
For example, meat is always placed at the lower part of the plate, sauces are served separately in a sauce boat, or they are served to the left of the meat or fish.
Women are usually served first.
If it is an honorary dinner, of course, the guest of honor is served first.
The host is always served after his or her guests.
During service, waiter’s movements should always flow naturally.
SELF ASSESSMENT EXERCISES 1.
What are the various styles of service?
Discuss the salient differences among them 2.
What is the difference between serving food with one hand and serving food with both hands?
6.0 TUTOR-MARKED ASSIGNMENTS 1.
Visit 4 types of restaurant and critically examine the styles and forms of service 2.
Identify the most common forms of service in Nigeria?
Support your answers with documented evidence.
7.0 REFERENCES 1.
Dahmer,,S.J & Kahl,K.W.
(2002), Restaurant Service Basics, John Wiley & Sons, Inc. 2.
Kotschevar,L.H & Luciani,V (2006), Presenting Service: The Ultimate Guide for the Foodservice Professional, John Wiley & Sons Inc. 3.
Strianese,A.J& Strianese,P.P.
(2002), Dining Room and Banquet Management, Thomson Delmar Learning.
4.
Houston, J.& Glenesk ,N (1982), The Professional Service of Food and Beverage, Batsford technical Ltd. 94 MODULE 3 Unit 1 Order taking procedures in a restaurant Unit 2 Order of serving meals Unit 3 Designing and decorating a restaurant Unit 4 Health, safety and security UNIT 1 ORDER TAKING PROCEDURES IN A RESTAURANT CONTENT 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objectives 3.0 Main content 3.1Qualities of a waiter 3.2 Receiving the guest 3.3 Attending an order 3.4 Recording an order 3.4.1 Sample procedure for order taking 3.5 Methods of taking food and beverage order 3.5.1 Triplicate method 3.5.2 Duplicate method 3.5.3 Service with order method 3.5.4 Pre=ordered method 3.6 Room service 3.6.1 Order taking 3.6.1.1 By door hanger 3.6.1.2 By telephone 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutor-marked assignments 7.0 References/further reading 95 1.0 INTRODUCTION Order taking is a skillful art that reflects the efficiency of both the waiter and the establishment.
The order taker (waiter) should be skillful to handle array of customers efficiently.
This unit shall teach you the procedures involved in receiving guests, attending an order and the different forms of taking orders.
2.0 OBJECTIVES At the end of this unit, you should be able to: 1.
Describe the order taking procedures in a restaurant.
2.
State the methods of taking food and beverage orders in a restaurant.
3.
Demonstrate how to take orders in a restaurant 3.0 MAIN CONTENT 3.1 Qualities of a waiter A waiter should have a very good memory.
He should have good oral communication skills.
Knowledge about food and beverage, their garnishes and accompaniments, matching wines and spirits, cooking time and serving time, description of dishes in a lucid manner are other important qualities of a waiter.
He should also possess a rapid writing skill legible enough so that other subordinates can understand and execute the order.
3.2 Receiving the Guest 1.
The welcoming of the guests represents the most important step to his final satisfaction and reflects the level and quality of the service of an establishment 2.
Guests must be welcomed from the entrance of the restaurant; they should not wait by themselves for more than 10 seconds at the entrance.
3.
The first impression received by the guest is most important.
It is not necessary to execute the whole welcoming procedure with each guest however, it is indispensable to show him that he has been taken into consideration, if it is only by eye contact.
4.
If the hostess or the maître d' is occupied, the head waiter or the assistant waiter must show the guests that they have been taken into consideration.
5.
If there is an overbooking problem (more tables have been reserved than the restaurant can welcome), guests should not be left at the entrance but invited to sit down at the bar and take care of the problem away from their presence.
96 6.
The hostess or Maître d' must try to seat the guests if he / she has to modify the planning of reservations at the moment of the guests arrival.
7.
The hostess or the head waiter will accompany the guests to his table and pull out the chair for him / her to sit.
8.
The head waiter or the assistant waiter will immediately present himself to the table to show the guests that he has been taken into consideration 3.3 Attending an Order 1.
The waiter will approach the guest from the left, place the menus, ensuring they are clean, in front of him and enquire: “May I have your order please, sir / madam?” 2.
He should wait patiently, facing the guests, until (after any necessary advice has been asked for and given) the order is completed.
3.
When the menus are long and varied, it is advisable to allow customers a few minutes before asking the order.
4.
When it is apparent that there is a host, take his instructions first, otherwise receive orders as soon as the guests are ready.
5.
If the waiter is busy and cannot attend to a customer at once, he should inform him that he will attend to him shortly or “in a moment”.
6.
When two tables are occupied at approximately the same time, the waiter must take the order of the first party first.
Customers are apt to note with annoyance any failure to a “first come, first served” sequence.
7.
Waiter must be aware not only of the specialty of the day but also reasonable dishes to recommend.
He should know the following things as far as possible: · Knowing which dishes are ready for quick service to guests in a hurry.
· Items suitable for children · Salad, vegetable and potato suggestions for grills, roasts and main courses for a la carte guests.
3.4 Recording an Order 1.
The Head Waiter should write in the corner of the order sheet; the tabe number and the number of persons being served.
He also notes the time at which the order has been taken.
2.
He takes the order for the appetizer; he indicates the number of guests for each appetizer chosen.
97 3.
He takes the order for the main dish.
He writes the special notes at the right (example: choice of spice and hotness).
He repeats the same for all the guests.
4.
He takes the order for all other items.
5.
He affixes his signature and hands it over to his back waiter.
3.4.1 Sample procedure for order taking 1 The front waiter presents himself to the table.
Table No: Covers: 2 He indicates on the voucher the table number and the number of persons.
Table No: FA Covers: 4 3 He writes down the time at which the order has been taken.
Table No: FA Covers: 4 12h30m 4 He takes the order for the first appetizer.
He indicates the number of the guest corresponding to that order.
Table No: FA Covers: 4 12h30m Onion soup (1 5 If the order of the second appetizer is identical, the head waiter will only indicate the chair number corresponding to the second guest.
Table No: FA Covers: 4 12h30m Onion soup (1, 3 98 6 I f a guest does not take an appetizer, the head waiter will write on the voucher "no appetizer" and the chair number corresponding to the guest, so that there is no confusion in the kitchen.
Table No: FA Covers: 4 12h30m Onion soup (1, 3 No (2 7 The head waiter takes the order of the last appetizer Table No: FA Covers: 4 12h30m Onion soup (1, 3 No (2 White soup (4 8 When the order of appetizers is finished, the head waiter writes the total number of dishes ordered Table No: FA Covers: 4 12h30m 2 Onion soup (1,3 1 No (2 White soup (4 9 The head waiter takes the order of the main dish.
The first guest does not take a main dish, the head waiter writes it down on the voucher Table No: FA Covers:4 12h30m 2 Onion soup (1, 3 1 No (2 99  White soup(4 No(1 10 He takes the order of the second guest.
Table No: FA Covers:4 12h30m 2 Onion soup(1,3 1 No (2 White soup (4 No (1 Tournedos(3 11 He asks the guest how he would like his meat cooked.
He indicates this information on the right side of the voucher Table No: FA Covers:4 12h30m 2 Onion soup(1,3 1 No (2 White soup (4 No(1 Tournedos(3R 12 He takes the order for the third guest.
Table No:FA Covers:4 12h30m 2Onion soup (1,3 1 No (2 White soup (4 No(1 Tournedos(3R 2wd 13 He takes the order of the fourth guest Table No: FA Covers:4 100  12h30m 2Onion soup (1,3 1 No (2 White soup (4 No(1 Tournedos(3R 2wd Beef pie(4 14 He writes down the total number of dishes ordered Table No: FA Covers:4 12h30m 2 Onion soup (1,3 1 No (2 White soup (4 1 No(1 2 Tournedos(3R 2wd 1 beef pie(4 15 He separates the different headings.
He writes down the date and appends his initials in the right interior part of the voucher.
He transfers the voucher to his back waiter.
Table No: FA Covers:4 12h30m 4 Cartes 2 Onion soup (1,3 1 No (2 White soup (2 1 No(1 2 Tournedos(3R 2wd 1 beef pie (4 101  26/08 ai 3.5 Methods of taking food and beverage order Essentially there are four methods of taking food and beverage orders from customers.
All order taking methods are based upon the following four concepts: 3.5.1 Triplicate Method Order is taken, top copy goes to the supply point, second copy is sent to the cashier for billing; third copy is retained by the server as a means of reference during service.
3.5.2 Duplicate Method Order is taken; top copy goes to the supply point, second copy is retained for service and billing purposes.
3.5.3 Service with Order Method Order is taken; customer is served and payment received according to that order, for example, bar service or take-away methods.
3.5.4 Pre-Ordered Method · Individually (example room service breakfast) · Hospital tray system · Functions 3.6 Room service Room Service generally includes the same dishes offered in the restaurant.
A three star category hotel should be able to serve at least breakfast in the rooms.
Room service is part of the food and beverage department and not of housekeeping.
The room service can also be responsible, after the closing of the hotel bar, to serve beverages in the rooms and manage the mini-bar.
Waiter will use trays (carried high over the shoulder with the left hand) or rolling tables for the meals.
Every element should be covered (film paper, carton, bells) during transportation and uncovered when entered the room.
The Room Service is often situated inside the kitchen, and close to the service elevator.
In this way hot preparations can be served as fast as possible.
Inside this service, the following are found: · Working station · Toaster · Sink · Coffee / tea machine 102 · Products shelves (cereals, sugar...) · Tray shelf · Refrigerator · Order taking office / desk 3.6.1 Room Service Order Taking One can order room service in two ways: · By “door hanger” · By “telephone” 3.6.1.1 By Door Hanger It is a document that the guest places on the exterior room door knob.
The night audit picks up all the documents during the night.
This system allows the room service employees to be ready and serve the guests on time.
This document is often made up of two faces written down in two languages and is placed by housekeeping on the head of the bed.
The information found in this document are the following: i.The service hour desired by the guest, leaving a margin of a quarter of hour (for example between 8:00 and 8:15 a.m.) ii.The name of the guest iii.The number of people iv.The room number v.The detailed order of breakfast desired (filled in cases) vi.A choice of newspaper proposed by the establishment 3.6.1.2 By Telephone The room service order is placed through telephone.
In fact, it is very difficult to take an order correctly by telephone.
One must be fast, not to forget any important information and try to sell the maximun to the guest.For a maximum efficiency, the Room-service personnel use digital telephones that indicate the name of the person and the room number, and the possibility to display the room number of the previous call in case they forget.
The room service order is written down manually or computerized and it should include the following information: i.Room number ii.Name of the guest iii.Number of persons 103 iv.Detailed order v.Hour the order is taken vi.Service hour The service should be fast and discrete.
The service procedure is as follows: i.Verify the guest's name on the bill ii.Knock on the door iii.Announce "room service" iv.Remove plastic films from the food v.Wait until the guest invites the waiter to come in vi.Express wishes "good morning, good afternoon, good evening, call the guest by his last name (good morning mister X).
vii.Ask where to place the tray viii.List the different food items orderd by the guest ix.Ask the guest to sign the bill x.Thank the guest and explain the procedure to take away the tray .It is left to the room service to clear away the tray when the guests have finished, either by asking them to place their tray outside of their room when they have finished, and to clear it 20 minutes after the service or by asking the guest to call them to come clear away the tray, which is more delicate because the waiter must come into the guest's intimacy the least possible.
It is the object of conflict between housekeeping and the room service departments.
In fact, there is nothing worse than a floor where there are dirty trays lying on the floor.
One should consider that the job of the room service is finished only when all trays have been cleared away.
The room service employee must have general knowledge about the hotel premises.
The room service employee is often the only one to be in direct contact with the guest during his stay.
The guest often asks questions concerning the technical equipment of the rooms, the hotel premises, or any other information, and the waiter must be able to answer to any need.
SELF ASSESSMENT EXERCISES 1.
Highlight the things you as a waiter should note at the corner of the order sheet.
2.
Practice order taking procedure.
3.
Visit a hotel and take note of the order taking procedure followed by the hotel.
104  4.0 CONCLUSION Order taking is skilful art that reflects the efficiency of both the waiter and the establishment, therefore, resources spent on mastering the art is a worthwhile.
5.0 SUMMARY Order taking is a skilful art that reflects the efficiency of both the waiter and the establishment.
The order taking procedure includes welcoming of the guests, attending an order and recording an order.
Essentially there are four methods of taking food and beverage orders from customers.
All order taking methods are based upon these four concepts: triplicate method, duplicate method, service with order method and pre-ordered method.
Room Service generally includes the same dishes offered in the restaurant.
Room service is the responsibility of the food and beverage department and not of housekeeping.
Waiter will use trays or rolling tables for the meals.
Every items should be covered during transportation and uncovered when entered the room.
One can order room service in two ways: by door hanger and by telephone.
6.0 TUTOR-MARKED ASSIGNMENTS 1.
Outline the precautions to be taken in recording an order.
2.
Analyse the service procedure for room service.
7.0 REFERENCES 1.
Kotschevar,L.H.& Luciani,V (2006), Presenting Service: The Ultimate Guide for the Foodservice Professional, John Wiley & Sons Inc. 2.
Strianese,A.J &,P.P Strianese (2002), Dining Room and Banquet Management, Thomson Delmar Learning.
3.Houston,J.& Glenesk,N (1982), The Professional Service of Food and Beverage, Batsford technical Ltd. 105 UNIT 2 ORDER OF SERVING MEALS AND COVER LAYING FOR FOODS CONTENT 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objectives 3.0 Main content 3.1Serving breakfast 3.2 Serving lunch 3.3 Serving dinner 3.4 Five diamond service 3.5 Special observations 3.6 Presenting the check 3.7 Cover laying for various foods 3.7.1 Hors d’oeuvre 3.7.2 Soups 3.7.3 Fish dishes 3.7.4 Farinaceous dishes 3.7.5 Meat 3.7.6 Poultry 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutor-marked assignments 7.0 References/further reading 106 1.0 INTRODUCTION The order of serving meals differs from the type of meal to the time of the day.
In this unit, you shall learn how to serve breakfast, lunch, dinner and the five diamond type of service.
You shall also learn how to lay covers for various dishes ranging from Hors d’ouevres to soups, poultry, etc.
2.0 OBJECTIVES At the end of this unit, you should be able to: 1.
State the order of serving i .Breakfast ii.
Lunch iii.Dinner 2.
Identify at least 6 special things to observe in service.
3.
Lay covers for different foods 3.0 MAIN CONTENT 3.1 Serving Breakfast Many customers at the breakfast hour are in a hurry.
Many people you will discover are not in the best of spirits before they have had their first cup of coffee (or maybe not ever).
A positive and cheerful attitude displayed from the server in combination with prompt and efficient service might help to normalise the situation.
Below is a guide that might be acceptable in most situations: 1.
When a fresh fruit or fruit juice is ordered, it is desirable to serve it first and then to remove the soiled dishes before placing the toast and coffee.
2.
When customers order a combination of cooked food, toast,and coffee, they may ask to have the whole order served at once.
Place the fruit dish, set on an underline, in the centre of the cover, the plate of toast at the left of the forks, and the coffee at the right of the teaspoons.
3.
When the breakfast order includes a cereal and a hot dish, the service procedure may be as follows: a.
Place the fruit course in the centre of the cover.
b.
Remove the fruit course.
c. Place the breakfast plate of eggs, meat, or other hot food in the centre of the cover.
Place the plate of toast at the left of the forks.
Place the coffee service at the right of the spoons.
107 d. Remove the breakfast plate and the bread plate.
e. Place the finger bowl, filled one-third full of warm water.
At times the finger bowl is placed after the fruit course, when fruits which may soil the fingers have been served.
f. Place the sales check, face down, at the right of the cover or present it on a clean change tray.
3.2 Serving Lunch Lunch customers can be generally categorized into two groups: Business people who have a short-lunch period and want quick service, and shoppers or others who just want leisurely service.
A good server will recognize each group and try to accommodate accordingly.
1.
Fill the water glass three-fourths full of iced water.
2.
Place chilled butter on cold bread-and-butter plate.
3.
Place the appetizer in the centre of the cover.
4.
Remove the appetizer when guest has finished.
5.
Place the soup service in centre of cover.
6.
Remove the soup entree.
7.
Place entree plate in centre of cover.
8.
Place individual vegetable dishes above the cover.
9.
Place hot beverages above and a little to the right of cup and sauce, with individual creamer above the cup.
10.
Place an iced beverage or milk at the right and a little below the water glass.
11.
Remove the main-course dishes.
12.
Remove any extra silver not used in the main course.
13.
Crumb the table, if necessary.
14.
Place dessert silver to right of the cover with fork nearest the dessert plate, when fork and teaspoon are used.
When several teaspoons are placed, the dessert fork may be laid on the left side, to "balance the cover" 15.
Place the dessert service in centre of the cover.
16.
Remove dessert dishes and silver.
17.
Place the finger-bowl on the underliner in the centre of the cover.
18.
Present the Check face down.
108 3.3 Serving Dinner Dinner customers are seldom in a hurry.
The server should be able to give leisurely service without making the guest feel rushed.
Although the guest should be allowed plenty of time to complete each course, long waits between courses should be avoided (especially when small children are present.)
An efficient server should observe the guests during the meal in order to serve the next course promptly, and to comply with any requests made by guests for special needs.
This is a generally accepted guideline, but does not apply to all situations.
1.
Place appetizer or hors d'oeuvre service from the left in the centre of the cover.
2.
Remove the first-course dishes.
3.
Place the soup service in the centre of the cover.
4.
Remove the soup service.
5.
When the entree is served on a platter, place it directly above the cover.
Lay the serving silver at the right of the platter.
Place the warm dinner plate in the centre of the cover.
6.
Place the beverage to the right of the teaspoons.
7.
Offer rolls or place them on the centre of the table in reach of all the guests.
8.
Remove the main-course dishes when the guest has finished.
9.
Crumb the table if necessary.
10.
Place silver for dessert course.
11.
Place the dessert service in the centre of the cover.
12.
Offer hot coffee or tea.
13.
Serve the check face down.
3.4 Five Diamond Service 1.
Hostess or Maitre d’ seats and welcomes guests 2.
Front waiter lights the candle and offers mineral or served water.
If mineral water is sold, silver coaster is placed on table under water bottle.
3.
Captain asks for cocktails and gives the wine list.
He will serve cocktails and leave the list on the table, if the guest are a couple, the Captain will point out wine by the glass or half bottles wine selections.
4.
Back server delivers and explains the amuse, after cocktails are served.
5.
Front server clears Amuse and Maitre d’ or Captain presents the menu and explains the specials.
109 6.
Sonmuna’ or Captain takes the wine order, pours and explains each selection.
Captain waiter continues to offer cocktails 7.
Maitre d’ takes order and gives service copy the Front waiter, who proceeds to remove base plates and give proper mis en place for up to two “2 courses.” Front waiter is to keep service copy slips on his person at all times.
8.
Brioche and butter service is done by the Back waiter will maintaining the clearing and replacing of napkins.
9.
First course and brioche refills are delivered by the Runner to the Front server on the floor, who then serves them.
Pepper is to be offered on all salad dishes.
10.
First course are cleared by the back waiter, and mis en place is rechecked by front waiter.
11.
Runner is to correctly number the domes, and entrees are to be served with assistance of the Back waiter.
Back waiter is to know position # 1 on all the tables in his section.
12.
Back waiter clears table after main course and crumbs the table.
Coffee order is taken, cheese selection is explained and the desert, cognac, port, sherry, menu is presented.
13.
Front waiter takes dessert order and gives proper mis en place.
14.
Back waiter delivers desserts and coffee.
15.
Captain brings over cart and offers cognacs, ports, or Sherry 3.5 Special Observations There are many things a server must do to become fully efficient.
Here are a few tips a server can use to take advantage: 1.
Serve hot food hot, on heated dishes.
2.
Serve cold food chilled, on cold dishes.
3.
Inquire how food is to be cooked: a. Eggs - fried or boiled, scrambled etc... b. Steak - rare, medium, or well done etc... c. Toast - buttered or dry 4.
Refill water glasses whenever necessary during the meal.
5.
Refill coffee.
Customer will let you know if they have had enough.
6.
Place silver necessary for a course just prior to serving: a.
Soup spoon on extreme right of teaspoons.
b.
Cocktail fork to right of soup spoon.
110 7.
Offer crackers, bread, other accompaniments with appetizers or soups.
8.
Provide iced teaspoons for ice drinks, straws with appropriate beverages.
3.6 Presenting the Check The guest should never be kept waiting for his check.
It should be presented either immediately after the last course has been served or as soon as he has finished eating.
A check cover should be used to transport the bill to and from the table.
The cover should be placed to the right of the host.
If the host is not known, the check should be placed at the centre of the table.
It is always a courteous practice to ask if any other services are desired.
It is very discourteous to indicate in any way that a tip is expected or that any certain amount is anticipated even if the customer asks (This happens to me a lot.)
Never show any disappointment because the tip is less than what is customarily received.
Always thank the customer for any gratuity with sincerity.
Guests should be shown small courtesies when departing; for example, a server may draw out the chair for a female guest and assist her with her coat etc...
The server should express his goodbye sincerely and welcome the guest to return.
The idea is to make the guest feel completely welcome.
Try to change up your good-bye from time to time as well.
Other customers in the room will get sick of hearing you repeat the same thing to all departing customers, and when it comes there time to leave, they will leave with the feeling, that they were just part of another process.
When guests ask for check, Captains should inquire as to the satisfaction of the guests.
Mignardises and check are then delivered to table.
3.7 Cover laying for various foods The cover or the standard utensils (knife, fork, dishes etc.)
to be provided for various foods is detailed below: Dish Cover 3.7.1 Hors d’oeuvre Grapefruit Cocktail Coupe Doily on sideplate Grapefruit spoon or teaspoon Tomato Juice 5oz goblet/ or club shaped glass Doily on sideplate Teaspoon 111 Ham Mousse Side knife Sweet fork Cold fish plate Potted shrimps Fish knife and fork Cold fish plate Oysters Soup plate or welled silver dish filled with crushed ice and placed on underplate Oyster fork Finger bowl filled with lukewarm water and slices of lemon Doily on sideplate at the top left hand corner of the cover Spare serviette Snails Snail tongs: left of cover Snail fork: right of cover Snail dish: round (holding capacity 6/12) Doily on sideplate Gulls’ Egg Small knife and fork Cold fish plate Finger bowl Doily on sideplate containing luke warm water and a slice of lemon Spare sideplate for the shell Spare serviette Smoked Salmon Fish knife and fork Cold fish plate Asparagus Asparagus rack: grid serviette Asparagus tongs: right of cover Hot / cold joint plate Joint fork Finger bowl as for gulls’ egg Spare serviette Globe Artichoke Joint fork on right of cover Finger bowl Doily on sideplate 112 Spare napkin Hot / cold fish plate as appropriate Corn on the Cob Hot fish plate Corn on the cob holders Fresh Prawns Wine goblet on doily on an underplate Fish and knife fork Cold fish plate Figer bowl as for gulls eggs Spare serviette Chilled Melon Sweet spoon and fork Cold fish plate Teaspoon if charentaise melon is offered Avocado Cold fish plate Teaspoon Shell Fish Cocktail Doily on sideplate Teaspoon Oyster fork Shellfish cocktail holder 3.7.2 SOUPS Crème de tomate Onion Soup Potage Germiny Soup spoon Soup plate Underplate Consomme Sweet spoon Consommé cup and saucer Fish plate Petit Marmite Special earthenware dish called petit marmite Sweet spoon Doily on underplate Bouillabaisse Soup plate 113 Under plate Fish knife / fork Sweet spoon Bortsch Soup plate Underplate Sweet spoon Turtle soup Consommé cup Consommé saucer Fish plate Sweet spoon 3.7.3 Fish dishes Fish (fried) Fish (grilled) Fish (poached) Grilled Herring Poached Salmon Fish knife and fork Hot fish plate Mussels Soup plate Underplate Fish knife and fork Cold fish plate Crawfish Fish knife and fork Spare plate for the shell Finger bowl containing luke warm water and a slice of lemon Spare serviette Cold lobster Fish knife and fork Lobster pick Spare plate for the shell Finger bowl containing luke warm water and a slice of lemon Spare serviette 3.7.4 Farinaceous 114 Spaghetti Joint fork Hot fish plate 3.7.5 Meat Curry Joint knife and fork Sweet spoon Hot soup plate Underplate (fish plate ) or joint plate Roast Beef Roast Lamb Roast Mutton Roast Pork Boiled Mutton Salt Beef Boiled Fresh Beef Joint knife and fork Hot joint plate Mixed grill and grilled steaks Steak knife and fork Hot joint plate Irish stew Soup plate Underplate Joint knife and fork Sweet spoon 3.7.6 Poultry Chicken Turkey Roti Goose Wild Duck Duck Joint knife and fork Hot joint plate 115 Cheese Side plate Side knife Small fork (if necessary) Dessert (Fruits & Nuts) Fruit plate Fruit knife and fork: interlocked on fruit plate Spare serviette One finger bowl: on doily on sideplate containing luke warm water and slice of lemon (for rinsing fingers) One finger bowl: on doily on sideplate containing cold water for rinsing grapes.
It will be placed on the top left hand corner of the cover.
Nut crackers and grape scissors: to be placed on the fruit basket Spare sideplate for sheels and peel Savoury Hot fish plate Side knife Sweet fork SELF ASSESSMENT EXERCISES In your own words, analyse the order of serving breakfast, lunch and dinner 4.0 CONCLUSION For you to be able to excel in your job as a server, you need to acquire quality training, this enables you to get to your highest potential.
5.0 SUMMARY Many customers at the breakfast hour are in a hurry.
Many people you will discover are not in the best of spirits before they have had their first cup of coffee (or maybe not ever).
A positive and cheerful attitude displayed from the server in combination with prompt and efficient service might help to normalise the situation.
Lunch customers can be generally categorized into two groups: Business people who have a short-lunch period and want quick service, and shoppers or others who just want leisurely Service.
A good server will recognize each group and try to accommodate accordingly.
116 Dinner customers are seldom in a hurry.
The server should be able to give leisurely service without making the guest feel rushed.
Although the guest should be allowed plenty of time to complete each course, long waits between courses should be avoided (especially when small children are present.)
There are many things a server must do to become fully efficient.
Here are a few tips a server can use to take advantage, e.g.
1.
Serve hot food hot, on heated dishes.
2.
Serve cold food chilled, on cold dishes.
3.
Inquire how food is to be cooked The guest should never be kept waiting for his check.
It should be presented either immediately after the last course has been served or as soon as he has finished eating.
A check cover should be used to transport the bill to and from the table.
There are so many different covers available for different dishes.
6.0 TUTOR-MARKED ASSIGNMENTS 1.
Identify how to lay the cover for a buffet.
2.
Compare the order of serving breakfast with that of serving dinner 7.0 REFERENCES 1.
Kotschevar,L.H.& Luciani,V (2006), Presenting Service: The Ultimate Guide for the Foodservice Professional, John Wiley & Sons Inc. 2.
Strianese,A.J &,P.P Strianese (2002), Dining Room and Banquet Management, Thomson Delmar Learning.
3.Houston,J.& Glenesk,N (1982), The Professional Service of Food and Beverage, Batsford technical Ltd. 117 UNIT 3 DESIGNING AND DECORATING A RESTAURANT CONTENT 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objectives 3.0 Main content 3.1 Procedures for decorating a restaurant.
3.2 Seven mistakes in designing and decorating a restaurant 3.2.1 Furnishings that look cheap 3.2.2 Bad light 3.2.3 Bad carpeting 3.2.4 Lack of interior divisions in the seating section 3.2.5 The music 3.2.6 Coldness of the place 3.2.7Mis-match of decor 3.3 Decorating ideas for restaurants 3.3.1 Decorate with lights 3.3.1.1 Sources of light 3.3.1.2 Purpose of functional lighting 3.3.2 Adorn the walls 3.3.3 Make good use of colours 3.3.4 Add greenery 3.3.5 Other factors 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutor-marked assignments 7.0 References/further reading 118 1.0 INTRODUCTION While the quality of the food and service in a restaurant should always be the most important factors in operating a restaurant, a good reason that many customers visit a restaurant is for the dining experience.
A well decorated restaurant that speaks to the type of cuisine and intended atmosphere can make all the difference in determining whether a customer will return to the same restaurant.
Regardless of your budget or design needs, decorating your restaurant should be an important concern.
2.0 OBJECTIVES At the end of this unit ,you should be able to: 1.
Describe the procedures to follow in decorating a restaurant.
2.
State the 7 mistakes people make in decorating a restaurant.
3.
Practice the decoration of a restaurant making good use of colours and lighting 3.0 MAIN CONTENT 3.1 Procedures for decorating a restaurant 1.
Develop a theme for your restaurant decor based on your cuisine.
If your cuisine is Mexican, you will likely want to feature elements of Mexican design, such as warm saturated colours, rustic wood and mosaic tile designs.
The style of your restaurant will also come into play.
For example, your restaurant could feature family style seating or intimate tables, depending on whether you want a casual environment or a fine dining feel.
2 .Paint walls and accent walls to add interest to different sections of the restaurant.
A coat of paint can make all the difference in visually enhancing the space.
Combined with decorative accents such as window treatments, flooring styles and lighting, the paint you choose can help create the foundation for your restaurant design.
3.
Furnish your restaurant with furniture that will maintain your restaurant's formality, as well as style.
For example, if your restaurant is casual, vinyl booths and wooden tables are standard.
If your restaurant is more formal, choose tables and chairs for their style and finish.
You can also cover them with tablecloths that add colour to the space.
119 4.
Use lighting fixtures as an opportunity to set the space's ambiance.
Along with overhead lighting throughout, pendant lights over the tables, wall sconces and even candle centrepieces can be effective lighting choices that create presence in the space.
5 Consider the table style as part of your overall design aesthetic.
After all, it is what customers will likely look at the most while they are enjoying their meal.
There are many ways to accent tabletops, such as paint, tablecloths, tile and glass covers with inlaid designs.
6 Hang art to add interest to the walls.
One option is to feature images that are reminiscent of the cuisine.
For example, an Italian restaurant could feature scenes of gondolas in Venice or famous Roman art.
Tips & Warnings • Be unexpected and innovative with your restaurant design.
Consider what makes your menu uniquely different from others, and then consider how you can express that in the restaurant's design.
• Do not clutter the tables of the seating area.
Presenting the food in an appetizing manner should be the primary concern.
3.2 Seven mistakes in designing and decorating a restaurant A restaurant is able to offer a wide range of appeal to the senses.
The quality of your food appealing to your customer's sense of taste, the delightful smells wafting from the kitchen appealing to your customers sense of smell.
But many restaurants fail on appealing to the primary senses, when the customer first enters and looks around to see what kind of place it is.
Do not underestimate the design and decor of your establishment; it sticks in the patron's minds a lot longer than you would think!
3.2.1 Furnishings that look cheap and tacky.
Within the holy triad of bar, booth and table, it is the tables that are the most vulnerable to looking tacky.
Unless you are running a small cafe or deli, the square table on a single pole with four shabby chairs around it just isn't the inviting place to spend time.
You do not have to go overboard on the expense; there are bargain table and seating sets that look great.
Booths, 120 however, are the best, inviting your guests to relax at their leisure, where they wll be inspired to stay and order desert or a cappuccino.
The best bet is to offer variety in seating.
A bar for the business people dashing in for a quick breakfast, tables for the large families with an entourage of children, and booths for the leisure set and intimate couples and friends.
Actually sit down in each seating piece, stay seated for a few minutes, and notice how comfortable or not it is.
Perhaps your hard chairs are why guests are not staying beyond the main course?
Lastly, rips and tears in the fabric need to be repaired or the piece needs to be replaced.
Do not grumble at the cost of replacing a booth seat; be glad instead.
Restaurants that go out of business never live long enough to see their chairs wear out 3.2.2 .Bad light.
Windows, looking out at a hopefully gorgeous view, do wonders to make your environment more inviting.
Besides natural light, you will need to think about lighting fixtures.
Here, the ideal is bright enough to read by - not just for menus, but for today's single person bringing in a book, newspaper, or paperwork from school and office.
But also not too harsh; the lighting should be soft enough to hide blemishes in the face of your sweetheart.
Remember that at some point, the lamp, being the brightest object in the room, will snag the gaze of your patron while they are waiting on their eggs benedict.
Try to make sure the lamp fixture is attractive and clean.
It seems funny, but even the cleanest restaurants forget this detail.
Nothing like looking up to catch an eyeful of a dusty lampshade with a spiderweb and a few dead moths right over your table.
3.2.3 Bad carpeting.
Who knows what gets into restaurant owners' heads when it comes time to pick out a carpet design?
You see this all the time; an otherwise sensibly decorated establishment whose floor covering sports a pattern not seen since Haight-Ashbury in the late 60s.
It is a floor, not a 121 bargain-rack muu-muu.
Tiling and linoleum doesn't suffer from this problem like carpeting does.
Pick a carpet design that is quiet and muted, while going along with the rest of your business' motif.
3.2.4 Lack of interior divisions in the seating section Even one private room for parties will give you a boost in income, as everybody from family reunions to social clubs and business teams will appreciate having an exclusive area to book for an occasion.
Lacking that, even a partition or two or planter boxes work to divide the seating space, helping to drown out the noise and give your guests some other visual stimulation than another chewing person gazing back at them.
Today's restaurant scene no longer has to deal with smoking/ no-smoking sections, as the smokers have now been either ordered outside by law or been badgered out into the fresh air by the disapproving cries of the clean-lunged.
But what about other annoyances?
The persistent cell phone addict, the crying babies, the cracking baritones, the giddy laughter, and the noisy laptop?
You don't have to segregate the space into established zones, but breaking the space up with a few dividers gives guests a chance to pick their own section - even if it isn't officially so.
3.2.5 The music.
Unless it is a bar, music is to be only background noise that fills in the spaces between conversations.
It should neither be too loud nor too quiet.
Subliminal effect is the key here.
It should be present, but almost never noticed.
The exception is if you are going for authentic ethnic atmosphere, in which case music of the same nationality as your menu will be part of the sensory canvas.
In that case, turn the speaker up one, and only one, unit.
With apologies to Spinal Tap, your speakers should most definitely not go to eleven.
3.2.6 Coldness of the place Though it is sweltering in the kitchen, and the wait staff is generating a lot of heat bustling around the tables.
But people never like to keep their coat on for dinner.
Living-room temperature is best for a restaurant seating section.
122 3.2.7 Mis-match of decor.
We have all had the experience of entering a restaurant housed in a building that has been through several owners.
The ghosts of restaurants past is showing in the odd nooks and crannies.
But do, by all means, strive to remove every trace of the building's former past before you lay on the furnishings for its present incarnation.
Ferns and potted palms are not native to a Canadian environment, the charming Bonsai trees in the planter boxes just would not make it in your South American decorating scheme, and that glorious Mediterranean mural is just going to have to be painted over if your steak house is to be taken seriously.
A restaurant that looks like you just flew in and set it up gives patrons the chilling feeling that you might be ready to fly out again just after the next Health Department inspection.
3.3 Decorating ideas for the restaurant Some restaurant owners make the mistake of thinking that food is the only thing they need to focus on when starting a restaurant business.
They soon realize it takes more than just delicious dishes to make a successful restaurant.
Equally important to food is the restaurant ambiance, which as any successful restaurant owner will tell you, is not easy to create.
The atmosphere plays a crucial role in the success of restaurant business.
It is therefore essential that you take time to decorate your place in such a way that the atmosphere would enhance your customers' dining experience.
Here are five fantastic decorating ideas to use for your restaurant.
3.3.1 Decorate with Lights When played right, lights can give your place a cozy atmosphere that would surely keep customers coming back for more.
In the exterior, if you have trees or bushes lining a path to your restaurant, you can light these up with mini white lights to brighten up the façade.
Now for the inside of the restaurant, you can add some candlelight centrepieces on every table as well as wrap lights around pillars.
A well designed colour scheme can easily be spoilt by a badly planned lighting system and therefore the two aspects should be considered together at the design stage.
123  Modern designs tend towards a versatile system of lighting by which a food and beverage service area may have bright lighting at lunch time and a more diffused form of lightning in the evening.
It is also an advantage to be able to change the colouring of the lighting for special functions, cabarets, etc 3.3.1.1 Sources of light Restaurants have many choices available to them.
The three main light sources to be found are low voltage directional down lighters and surface mounted fittings, low energy lamps, and Light Emitting Diodes (LED) luminaires.
Low voltage halogen lighting is warmer in colour but less efficient to operate than low energy bulbs of an equivalent wattage.
It can however be easily directed to specific spots such as a particular table or area.
Low voltage diachroic lamps overcome many of the colour problems found when using mains voltage incandescent lamps, which create a yellow light when dimmed.
One disadvantage of this halogen lighting is the amount of heat generated by the lamps.
The main advantage of low energy lighting is its lower operating cost, but it is often criticized for giving a dull and lifeless illumination.
Food may be made to look appealing by using blue-white light from fixtures, but the blue-white glow may also detract from a warm romantic atmosphere.
It is generally not used where directional lighting is needed, as it is not easily focused or controlled.
LED lighting is a relatively new idea.
Originally used as a low energy, low temperature warning light in televisions and other electrical equipment, it has now become more widely used as general lighting, its advantages are many.
It produces a directional crisp light, ideal for highlighting a particular item.
LED luminaires have an extremely long life, often running into tens of thousands of hours.
Colours can be changed in an instant by varying the input voltage, so one luminaire can produce several different colours or a mixture of colours.
Its low operating temperature makes it safe to use where a customer may touch the luminaire, for example when up lighting a column from below at floor level.
124 A balance is usually needed between the low running costs of low energy lamp and superior light quality from low voltage halogen lighting and LEDs.
This balance will depend upon both the budget for the installation and the running cost of the overall lighting scheme.
The foodservice area needs more than proper decor lightning.Functional lighting is a must, giving proper illumination for chefs to prepare food, staff to serve it and customer to order and eat it.
Functional lighting may amount to as much as 75 per cent of a restaurant’s total lighting system.
In the dining room two basic areas require functional lighting: the table and the room as a whole.
The aim therefore is to mix the right blend of decor and functional lighting at the lowest possible cost.
Table lighting is most flattering to customers when it shines down from the ceiling, and is then reflected back from a horizontal surface.
Halogen down lighters serve the purpose well here.
Care must be taken, however, to ensure that the bulbs used do not give off too bright a light, as this will create too much contrast between dark and light spot?
Clean and well-polished silver, glassware and crockery on a dining table, or a well-polished reflective tabletop in the lounge, will bounce light gently upwards, acting as a softener to overhead lights.
Positioning of these down lights is absolutely critical to ensure lighting the tables and not peoples’ heads.
Table top lighting can add atmosphere and create an ambience and includes candles, gaslights and shaded electric lighting.
These low level lights are the most flattering of all, as they reduce facial shadows by infilling dark areas caused by down tights.
3.3.1.2 Purposes of functional lighting Functional lighting in the dining room must serve a number of purposes: • Fixtures directing light onto ceilings and walls should indicate to customers the dimensions of the room, together with any special attractions, such as pictures and old oak beams.
Low voltage diachronic lamps are best suited for this purpose.
• The lighting should project a subdued atmosphere, with contrasts between bright and dark areas and tabletops capturing much of the light, while ceilings and upper walls remain dark.
• It may be necessary to feature special areas of a dining room, such as a buffet or self-service salad bar.
The food and beverage service area needs to have a good mix of décor and functional lighting.
Brighter lights appear to subconsciously tell customers to eat more quickly and leave and are 125 therefore not the recommended way to illuminate for quick turnover and high volume throughput.
3.3.2 Adorn the Walls Take advantage of the wide spaces on your walls to give your restaurant a terrific look.
One of the best types of wall decoration would be canvas prints.
The great things about this type of wall art are countless.
For one, you can easily transform any photo or painting into canvas prints.
Aside from this, art prints on canvas are not only inexpensive but also very beautiful, elegant, and artistic.
The unique texture on the canvas can give any artwork or photograph a spectacular visual effect.
Subject options on canvas prints may include food (obviously!
), people, movie posters, ingredients, landscape, and many more.
3.3.3 Make good use of Colours Colours have an effect on people's moods and feelings.
This is why; the right choice on colours is an essential aspect of your restaurant decoration to ensure that you evoke the right moods and feelings from your customers.
Bright illumination may be found in bars with light-colour on the walls, but foodservice areas are better with dimmer illumination and warmly coloured walls, as these give a more relaxed and welcoming atmosphere.
Colour should also contribute to a feeling of cleanliness The Colour scheme used in the foodservice area should help to reflect the character of the operation.
There is also an association between colour and the presentation of the food that must be considered.
Colour schemes generally regarded as most useful in allowing; food presentation to shine include: pink, peach, pale yellow, light green, beige, blue and turquoise.
These colours reflect the natural colours found in well-presented foodstuffs While blue is always a popular colour, it is also known to be the least appetizing.
In fact, blue is associated with spoiled food.
So it would not be a smart idea to paint the walls blue, use blue ornaments, or serve food in blue dishes.
126 Instead, utilize green, brown, and red, which are the most popular in food colours, red is the colour most commonly used in restaurant decoration, as it is the most effective in stimulating appetite.
3.3.4 Add some Greenery Mini flower pots lined up in one corner of the restaurant is a good way to start.
Adding tall clear vases filled with fruits topped with greenery on each table would also be a nice touch.
Another great idea would be to decorate one corner of the restaurant with a trellis with some crawling plants.
Be sure to dress up with lights for some cozy ambiance at night.
3.3.5 Other factors You cannot just go on with the decoration without considering some important factors like target market, budget, and theme of restaurant.
When you do the suggestions mentioned above, take into consideration these three factors.
For example, if you would use canvas prints to decorate the wall of your Italian restaurant, you would hang art prints that contain photos of pasta, pizza, and other Italian food you are serving.
If your target market were young people, you would want to dress up the walls with fun and whimsical colours.
SELF ASESSMENT EXERCISE Imagine that your bedroom/sitting room/classroom has become a restaurant, and suggest ways of improving both the interior and exterior.
4.0 CONCLUSION Decorating a restaurant can be challenging but it can also be a lot of fun.
Use the fantastic suggestions mentioned above while taking into consideration the important factors of restaurant theme, target market, and budget.
5.0 SUMMARY A well decorated restaurant that speaks to the type of cuisine and intended atmosphere can make all the difference in determining whether a customer will return to the same restaurant.
127 Regardless of your budget or design needs, decorating your restaurant should be an important concern.
The underlisted are the procedures to follow in decorating your restaurant: 1.
Develop a theme for your restaurant decor based on your cuisine.
2.
Paint walls and accent walls to add interest to different sections of the restaurant.
3.
Furnish your restaurant with furniture that will maintain your restaurant's formality, as well as style.
4.
Use lighting fixtures as an opportunity to set the space's ambiance.
5.
Consider the table style as part of your overall design aesthetic.
After all, it is what customers will likely look at the most while they are enjoying their meal 6.
Hang art to add interest to the walls.
Seven mistakes in designing and decorating a restaurant include making use of cheap furnishing,bad light,bad carpeting,not demarcating the interior in the seating section etc.
6.0 TUTOR-MARKED ASSIGNMENTS 1.Pay a visit to 3 different restaurant and observe their lighting,colour scheme and general décor.
2.
Develop your own colour and lighting scheme,complete with matching furnishing.
3.
Make a sketch of it and use your computer to complete it.
7.0 REFERENCES/FURTHER READING 1.
Lillicrap,D,& Cousins,J.
(2010).Food and Beverage Service.
(8th eds) Bookpower with Hodder Educ.UK 128 UNIT 4 HEALTH, SAFETY AND SECURITY CONTENT 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objectives 3.0 Main content 3.1 Avoiding hazards.
3.2 Procedures in the event of an accident 3.3 Procedures in case of a fire 3.4 Cleaning programmes 3.4.1 Examples of tasks 3.5 Maintaining a secure environment 3.5.1 Dealing with a suspicious item or package 3.5.2 Dealing with a bomb threat 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutor-marked assignments 7.0 References/further reading 129 1.0 INTRODUCTION Essentially safety is a civil duty and negligence is a criminal offence.
The implications for staff under the above legislation are that they should: • Understand the food hygiene regulations and that it is their responsibility to act within the boundaries of these regulations.
• Notify management of any major illnesses • Perform duties in any area concerned with the handling of food in a hygienic manner, paying attention to food and hygiene regulations.
• Make themselves familiar with all escape routes and fire exits in the building • Ensure that fire exists remain clear at all times • Participate in the evacuation drills and practices • Take reasonable care for the health and safety of themselves and of others, and ensure that health and safety regulations are followed.
• Report to heads of department or duty managers any hazards which may cause injury or ill-health to customers and/or staff.
2.0 OBJECTIVES At the end of this unit, you should be able to: 1.
Identify at least 15 things that could arise when working 2.
Describe the procedures to take in case of fire 3.
Suggest some cleaning tasks that are carried out in a food and beverage outlet.
4.
Categorise the above tasks into daily,twice daily,weekly and monthly 5.
Explain how to maintain a secure environment 3.0 MAIN CONTENT 3.1 Avoiding Hazards Employees have a responsibility to themselves, work colleagues and customers to be aware of hazards that may arise when working.
Many accidents occur through carelessness or through lack of thought, for example: • Not having the correct protective clothing such as an apron • Not wearing sensible, (stable and properly fitted) shoes • Delay in clearing spillages or picking up items of equipment that have fallen on the floor • Not being aware of customers’ bags placed on the floor 130 • Items of equipment not stored correctly • Broken glass or crockery not wrapped up sufficiently before being placed in the bin • Forgetting to unplug electrical appliances prior to cleaning • Putting ashtray debris into rubbish bins containing paper (a fire hazard) • Forgetting to switch off and unplug an appliance after use, or at the end of the service • Not being observant with table lamps or lit candles on a buffet • Over-filling coffee pots, soup tureens, glasses, etc.
• Using trays, glasses, soup bowls, etc for storing cleaning agents • Stacking trays incorrectly • Carrying a mix of equipment on a tray, such as cutlery, crockery and glassware • Carpet edges turned up • Faulty wheels on trolleys or castors on sideboards • Being unaware of customers’ walking sticks and crutches • Lack of adequate space for the ‘safe’ service of food and drink due to bad planning • Lack of knowledge in carrying out certain tasks, for example, opening a bottle of sparkling wine.
3.2 Procedure in the Event of an Accident All employees must be able to provide first aid should such a need arise.
In the event of an accident the first course of action is to call for the assistance of a trained and qualified first aid person.
Employers must keep a record of all accidents that occur in the workplace.
If you are involved in or witness an accident you will be required to give information and/or to complete an accident form.
For this reason it is wise to make notes on the event at your earliest convenience.
The information should include: • The location of the accident • The time of the accident • A statement of the event • Details of witnesses • Treatment administered 131 3.3 Procedure in case of a fire All employees should be given fire drill training within their induction programme.
This initial training should then be followed up by regular training sessions on the procedures to be followed in the event of fire.
This training should include: • fire procedures in one’s specific area of work • fire drill instructions for both customers and staff • the location of fire points (safe places where staff and customers should assemble after an evacuation) nearest to one’s particular area of work • the location of the fire exits to the correct type of fire extinguisher to be used in relation to the type of fire • an identification of one’s specific responsibilities in the event of fire In the event of the fire alarm ringing employees must be aware of the following rules.
1.
Follow the fire instructions as laid down for the establishment.
2.
Usher all customers and staff out of the work area promptly and calmly.
3.
Pay special attention to Customers with special needs such as those with mobility problems 4.
Walk quickly but do not run.
Display a sense of urgency.
5.
Do not panic; remain calm as composure will be imitated by others 6.
Proceed as promptly as possible to the nearest assembly point 7.
Ensure that someone watches to see that there are no stragglers.
8.
Follow the exit route as laid down in the establishment fire instructions.
9.
Never use a lift 10.
Never re-enter the building until told it is safe to do so.
11.
Do not waste time to collect personal items Employees have a responsibility to assist in fire prevention, control and safety.
They must therefore ensure that: • Fire exists are not obstructed • Fire-fighting equipment is not damaged or misused • no smoking rules are observed at all rimes • as far as possible all electrical and gas equipment is switched off 132 • all doors and windows are closed when not being used for evacuation purposes • fire doors are not locked or wedged open • sufficient ashtrays /stands are available for the disposal of cigarette ends and used matches • the procedure for making an emergency fire call is known.
3.4 Cleaning Programmes All food and beverage service staff should be made aware of the importance of cleaning programmes to reduce and minimize the build up of dust, bacteria and other forms of debris.
For this reason, together with the considerations needed for safety and hygiene, Full attention needs to be paid by all concerned to cleaning tasks and when they should be carried out.
Overall, regular maintenance makes the service area look attractive and will project the right image for the establishment.
A cleaning programme should be set up for any cleaning tasks that must be done in any area.
Some tasks are done daily, even twice daily, for instance, the washing and polishing of crockery before each service period.
Other tasks might be done weekly, monthly or every six months.
Certain items of equipment will need cleaning immediately after each service period is finished.
3.4.1 Examples of tasks Immediately after use: * carving trolley * sweet trolley * copper pans * refrigerated trolleys * flare lamps Daily: * vacuuming * damp dusting chairs * polishing sideboard tops * cleaning brasses Weekly: * silver cleaning * cleaning pictures * defrosting fridges * wipe down doorframes and all high ledges * washing cellar/crockery store floors 133 Monthly plus * shampoo carpets * dry clean curtains * maintenance checks on still set, chilling units, fridges, air conditioning systems * cleaning all lighting.
Points to note: • always use the correct cleaning materials for the task in hand • clean frequently • rinse all surfaces well • dusters should only be used for dusting and not other cleaning tasks • use cleaning procedures that are adequate and efficient • cloths used for cleaning toilets must not be used for any other purpose • clean and store equipment safely and in its correct place • do not use cleaning cloths for wiping down food preparation surfaces • consider safety at all times and do not stretch or stand on.
Chairs to reach high points -use a stepladder.
3.5 Maintaining a secure environment Depending upon the nature of the establishment, the security measures that are laid down may vary considerably.
As employees, staff should be aware of all such measures as they relate to their own work environment Consideration needs to be given to the aspects of security outlined below.
• The importance of wearing some form of recognised identity badge.
• Being observant and reporting 'suspicious' persons and/or packages • Not discussing work duties with customers or outside of the workplace.
• Allowing bags, packages and one’s person to be searched upon request when either entering or leaving the workplace.
• Being aware of the security procedures for the establishment, should sudden and urgent action need to be taken.
• Ensuring external fire doors are kept shut but not locked, nor left ajar in error.
• Ensuring that all areas have been vacated when responsible for ‘locking up’ duties.
All toilets 134 /cloakrooms must be carefully checked and at the same time all windows and doors should be checked to ensure they are locked .
Keys should only be handled by someone in authority.
A signing out book should be available when staff request keys • Keys are never to be left unattended • When handling cash, all large denomination notes should be checked carefully as well as all cheque and credit card payments, to prevent fraud, the passing of illegal notes and the acceptance of altered credit cards.
• Being alert and observant at all times and not hesitating in reporting anything suspicious to the immediate superior 3.5.1 Dealing with a suspicious item or package All employees should be constantly alert for suspicious items or packages.
• If an object is found then it must immediately be reported to the security officer, manager or supervisor.
• Do not touch or attempt to move the object.
• If there are customers in the immediate vicinity, discreetly attempt to establish ownership of the object.
• If the ownership is established then ask the customer to keep the object with them, or to hand it in for safe keeping.
• If no immediate ownership is established, then the area should be cleared and the authorities notified without delay.
3.5.2 Dealing with a bomb threat Immediate action needs to be taken as a bomb could go off at any moment.
As a result staff should: • Be aware of and follow establishment policy with regard to bomb threats and evacuation procedures • Evacuate the immediate work area • Search the work area to ensure it is cleared, if this is part of their own responsibility • Evacuate the premises and usher all customers/staff through the nearest usable exists to specified assembly areas • Count all persons present to determine their safety and minimize the risk of total accidents.
135 SELF ASSESSMENT EXERCISES 1 What safety measures do you take to avoid hazards at home?
2.
Supposing you find yourself in a building where the fire alarm is rung, what steps would you take?
4.0 CONCLUSION Maintaining a safe environment is important for all members of staff in a catering operation.
5.0 SUMMARY Essentially safety is a civil duty and negligence is a criminal offence.
Employees have a responsibility to themselves, work colleagues and customers to be aware of hazards that may arise when working.
Many accidents occur through carelessness or through lack of thought, for example: • Not having the correct protective clothing such as an apron • Not wearing sensible, (stable and properly fitted) shoes All employees must be able to provide first aid should such a need arise.
In the event of an accident the first course of action is to call for the assistance of a trained and qualified first aid person.
Employers must keep a record of all accidents that occur in the workplace.
All employees should be given fire drill training within their induction programme.
This initial training should then be followed up by regular training sessions on the procedures to be followed in the event of fire.
All food and beverage service staff should be made aware of the importance of cleaning programmes to reduce and minimize the build up of dust, bacteria and other forms of debris.
All employees should be constantly alert for suspicious items or packages.
6.0 TUTOR-MARKED ASSIGNMENTS 1A.Imagine all the activities that go on in a restaurant and the cleaning up involved in them B.Categorise them into daily, twice daily, weekly,monthly and twice a year tasks 136 7.0 REFERENCES/FURTHER READING 1.
Lillicrap,D,& Cousins,J.
(2010).Food and Beverage Service.
(8th eds) Bookpower with Hodder Educ.UK 137
