 NATIONAL OPEN UNIVERSITY OF NIGERIA COURSE CODE :MBA 831 COURSE TITLE: ORGANISATION BEHAVIOUR AND THEORY 1  MBA 831 ORGANISATION BEHAVIOUR AND THEORY Designed by: Josef Bel-Molokwu, PhD Written by: Josef Bel-Molokwu, PhD 2  COURSE GUIDE MBA 831 - ORGANISATION BEHAVIOUR AND THEORY TABLE OF CONTENT 1.0.
Introduction - - - - - - - 3 2.0.
Course Content - - - - - - 3 3.0.
Course Aims - - - - - - - 3 4.0.
Objectives - - - - - - - 3 5.0.
Course Materials - - - - - - 3 6.0.
Study Units - - - - - - - 3 7.0.
The Modules - - - - - - - 4 8.0.
Assignment - - - - - - - 4 9.0.
Assessment - - - - - - - 4 10.0.
Summary - - - - - - - 4 3  1.0.
INTRODUCTION MBA 831 – Organization Behaviour and Theory is a semester course work of three credit hours.
It is available to all students taking the MBA programme in the school of Business and Human Resources Management.
The course consists of 15 units which cover the concept and theory of organization behaviour.
The course guide tells you what MBA 831 is all about, the materials you will be using and how to make use of them.
Other information includes the self assessment and tutor-marked questions.
2.0.
COURSE CONTENT The course content consists of principles and practices of in organization as well as the concepts, scope and contributors to the study of organization behaviour and human relations.
3.0.
COURSE AIMS The aim of this course is to expose you to the concept and practices of organization behaviour.
This aim will be achieved by asking a cursory look at:  The principles and practices in organizations  The theory and behaviour in an organization  The concept and nature of people and organizations.
4.0.
OBJECTIVES After giving through this course, you should be able to:  Explain the theory of organization behaviour  State principle of relationship between staff morale and job performance  Explain the principles and practices in organization.
5.0.
COURSE MATERIALS  Course Guide  Study Units  Text Books  Assignment Guide 6.0.
STUDY UNITS UNIT 1: Principles and Practices in organizations UNIT 2: Theory of Organization UNIT 3: Understanding Behaviour in Organizations UNIT 4: Fundamental Concepts of the Nature of People UNIT 5: The Nature of an Organization UNIT 6: Job Satisfaction UNIT 7: Job Enrichment and Work System UNIT 8: Principles and Theories of Motivation UNIT 9: Human Side of the Enterprise UNIT 10: Group Behaviour and Barriers to Motivation UNIT 11: Culture and Behaviour – The Nigerian Perspective UNIT 12: Motivating the Nigeria Workers UNIT 13: Models of Organization UNIT 14: The Scientific Management Movement UNIT 15: Staff Morale and Job Performance Each study unit will take at least two hours.
You are expected to study each unit and answer the tutor-marked assignments.
4  7.0.
THE MODULES The course is divided into two modules.
The first module will treat the theory of organization behaviour.
It consists of eight units (Units 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 11, 13 and 14).
The second module will take a look at staff motivator and job performance.
It consists of 7 units (Units 6 ,7, 8, 9, 10, 12 and 15).
8.0.
ASSIGNMENT Each unit consists of at least one assignment which you are expected to do.
9.0.
ASSIGNMENT 9.1.
TUTOR-MARKED ASSIGNMENT You are expected to apply what you have learnt in the contents of the study unit to do the assignments and send them to your tutor for grading.
9.2.
FINAL WRITTEN EXAMINATION This will be done at the end of the course.
10.0.
SUMMARY This course MBA 831 (Organization Theory and Behaviour) exposes you to the theory of organization and the concept of staff morale and job performance on successful completion of the course, you would have equip yourself to face on-the-job challenges that may come your way.
5  UNIT 1: PRINCIPLES AND PRACTICES IN ORGANISATIONS TABLE OF CONTENT 1.0 Introduction - - - - - - - 6 2.0 Objectives - - - - - - - 6 3.0 Principles and Practices in Organizations- - - - - 6 3.1 What is an Organization?
- - - - - - 6 3.2 Types of Organization - - - - - - - 6-7 3.3 Principles of Organization - - - - - - 7 3.4 Self Assessment Question - - - - - - 8 3.5 Self Assessment Answer - - - - - - 8 4.0 Conclusion - - - - - - - 9 5.0 Summary - - - - - - - 9 6.0 Tutor-Marked Assignment - - - - - - 10 6.1 Tutor-Marked Assignment (Answers and Marking Scheme)- - 10 7.0 References - - - - - - - 11 6  UNIT 1: PRINCIPLES AND PRACTICES IN ORGANISATIONS 1.0 INTRODUCTION This unit will take a look at principles, types and concepts of Organisations 2.0 OBJECTIVES At the end of this unit, students should be able to: (a) State the meaning of Organization (b) State the types of Organization (c) State the principles of Organization 3.0 PRINCIPLES AND PRACTICES IN ORGANISATION 3.1 WHAT IS AN ORGANISATION?
The concept Organization has been perceived from different perspective.
It is generally believed that every individual belong to one form of Organization or another.
Different authorities have tried to give different but related definitions of the word “Organization”.
The common ones are given below: (a) An Organization is a planned unit deliberately structured for the purpose of achieving specific goals.
(b) An Organization is an assemblage of interacting human beings with a central co-ordination unit (Marsh and Simeon).
(c) Organization is a system of roles graded by authority (Wright Mills).
(d) An Organization is a social unit or human grouping deliberately constructed and re-constructed to seek specific goals (Parson and Harcourt).
(e) An Organization is a collection of those activities directed at organizing.
What is clearly identified from the above definitions is that an Organization is composed of people.
Since an Organization is composed of people whose collective efforts are geared towards the attainment of a collective goal, it becomes necessary that a structure should be provided for the clear allocation of resources.
This is supported Misaazi (1982): Organisations are needed to provide a structure framework for communication, command and coordination of activities and people’s efforts.
Key characteristics of Organisations are:  They are set up to pursue objectives (co-operative mission).
 They have individuals and groups who interact.
 There are jobs and tasks to be performed.
 It is a system of co-operative activities.
 It has an input-output process.
3.2 TYPES OF ORGANISATION Several types of Organization can be distinguished.
Broadly, they classified into two: (a) Formal Organisations, and (b) Informal Organisations FORMAL ORGANISATION A formal Organisation is established to achieve certain goals.
The common features of a formal Organisation are:  Pre-planned pattern of authority and influence; 7   deliberate allocation of functions;  existence stated policies, procedure and regulations;  following of precedent;  defined activities of individuals and departments or units;  existence of long-term objectives;  membership is gained consciously and largely openly.
INFORMAL ORGANISATION This is also referred to as a spontaneous Organization in the sense that it is not as a result of a conscious plan.
In many businesses, large or small, there is usually a tendency for an informal Organization to grow up and operate concurrently.
This may be to remedy inherent shortfalls in the organization or to take advantage of a weak manager, anticipate natural changes eventually requiring the taking of formal action.
In the view of R.B.
Ayanniyi, informal organizations can assist in achieving better co-operation and motivation of workers if properly encouraged.
Some elements of informal organizations are:  They can lead to meritocracy  Employee reactions in certain situations may become unpredictable  Planning becomes difficult  They lead to short-circuiting in the management decision chain.
3.3 PRINCIPLES OF ORGANISATION The principles of organization as formulated by Henri Fayol are: 1.
Division of work: Increase productivity as a result of specialization 2.
Authority & Responsibility: The right to give order.
This should be commensurate with responsibility.
3.
Discipline: There must respect for and obedience to the rules and objectives of the organization.
4.
Unity of Command: Each subordinate should recome under from and be responsible to one superior.
5.
Unity of Direction: Every part should contribute to the attainment of the enterprise objective.
6.
Subordination of Individual Interest: The interest of the employee or group should not prevail over the interest of the organization.
7.
Remuneration: Workers must be paid fair wages for services rendered.
8.
Centralization: There should be a balance between concentration and distribution of authority in the organization.
9.
Scalar Chain: There should be clear line of unbroken authority.
10.
Order: There should be social and material order.
A place for everything and everything in their places.
11.
Equity: Fairness, cordiality, kindness and justice based on predetermined norms.
12.
Stability of Tenure: Job security should be used to reward good performance.
13.
Espirit de Corps: Unity in strength.
14.
Initiatives: All personnel must be allowed to show their initiative in some way.
8  3.4 SELF ASSESSMENT QUESTION Enumerate the common characteristics of an organization.
3.5 SELF ASSESSMENT ANSWER The common characteristics of organization are:-  They are set up to pursue objectives  they have individuals and group who interacts  there are jobs and task to be performed  there is a structure  a system of cooperative activities  input-output process.
9  4.0 CONCLUSION In this unit, you have learnt the meaning, types and principles of organization.
The knowledge you have gained in this unit will assist you in subsequent units.
5.0 SUMMARY An organization is composed of people whose collective efforts are geared toward the attainment of collective goal.
Two types or organizations are identified.
These are formal and informal organizations.
The Henri Fayol principles of organization which should form the basis for the effective administration or management of organizations were also stated.
10  6.0 TUTOR-MARKED ASSIGNMENT State and explain the Henri Fayol principles of organization.
6.1 TUTOR-MARKED ASSIGNMENT (ANSWERS AND MARKING SCHEME) Henri Fayol’s principles of organization are:  Division of work  Authority & Responsibility  Discipline  Unity of Command  Unity of Direction  Subordination of Individual Interest  Remuneration  Centralization  Scalar Chain  Order  Equity  Stability of Tenure  Espirit de Corps  Initiatives N.B: Brief explanation required.
MARKING SCHEME 1½ marks for each principle and brief explanation.
[Total – 20 marks] 11  7.0 REFERENCES 1.
Hicks, H.G.
and Gullet C.R.
(1976): Organisations: Theory and Behaviour, McGraw-Hill Kogak Usha Limited 2.
Musaaz, J.C.S (1982): The Theory and Practice of Educational Administration; (Nigeria), Macmillan Press 3.
Koontz, H and Weihrich, H (1980): Management: A Book of Readings, (New York), McGraw-Hill, Inc. 12  UNIT 2: THEORY OF ORGANISATION TABLE OF CONTENT 1.0.
Introduction - - - - - - - 13 2.0.
Objectives - - - - - - - 13 3.0.
Theory of Organization - - - - - - - 13 3.1.
Neo-Classical Theory of Organization - - - - - 13 3.2.
The System View of Organization Theory - - - - - 13-14 3.3.
Approaches to Organization Study - - - - - - 14 3.4.
Self Assessment Question - - - - - - - 15 3.5.
Self Assessment Answer - - - - - - - 15 4.0.
Conclusion - - - - - - - - - 16 5.0.
Summary - - - - - - - - - 16 6.0.
Tutor-Marked Assignment - - - - - - - 17 6.1.
Tutor-Marked Assignment (Answers and Marking Scheme)- - - 17 7.0.
References - - - - - - - - - 18 13  UNIT 2: THEORY OF ORGANISATION 1.0 INTRODUCTION This unit will take a look at the neo-classical system view and various approaches to organizational study.
2.0 OBJECTIVES At the end of this unit, students should be able to: (a) Explain the Neo-classical Theory of Organization.
(b) Discuss the System View of Organization Theory.
(c) Identify various approaches to organization study.
3.0 THEORY OF ORGANISATION 3.1 NEO-CLASSICAL THEORY OF ORGANISATION The Classical or Traditional Theory of Organization relates organizing to a formal relationship between jobs to be done and the positions.
It is hinged on the assumption that work is a systematic and rational process that can be accomplished in an impressive and logical manner.
The theory is built around  the Scalar Principle  unity of command  span of control  organizational specialization.
This theory does not take into consideration the problem of the staff.
It is efficiency-oriented.
This Neo-classical Theory is commonly associated with the human relations movement.
The inspiration for this movement is largely conceded to the Hawthorne studies.
The introduction of behavioural science with organization theory added more impetus to the neo-classical theory.
The Hawthorne studies challenge the assumption that people in organizations are primarily motivated by economic considerations.
The study regards the human being not as “another factor of production” but as a whole being with emotions and psychic disposition.
3.2 THE SYSTEM VIEW OF ORGANISATION THEORY A system is defined as a set of subsystems whose interaction determines its survival.
This school of thought sees organization as a system with parts that interacts.
It also identifies the process of integration of the system.
The system view tries to overcome the defects identified in the classical and neo-classical schools of thoughts.
The short-comings are:  That the Human Relations School is a tool to manipulate people to their disadvantage  That the Human Relations School gives unfair advantage to the entrepreneur  That the Human Relations School fails to integrate the many facets of human behaviour  That the efforts to improve human relations in the work place have not always produced productive workers.
In order to overcome these identified shortcomings, the system view seeks to integrate all that is known about the various parts of the system.
The issues to be considered are:  What are the strategic parts of the system?
 What is the nature of their mutual dependency?
 What are the goals sought by system?
14   What are the main processes in the system that link the parts together and facilitate their adjustment to each other?
The framework for a systems approach to organization theory is hinged on answers to the above questions.
3.3 APPROACHES TO ORGANISATION STUDY Organization study is carried out from different perspectives.
They include:  Behavioural School  Empirical School  Decision Theory School  Quantitative School  Management Process School.
(a) Behavioural School: This approach is in two parts: (i) The Human Behavioural School: This is based on the notion that management consists of getting things done through the help of people.
The thinking here is that people are the important component of management and that managers that wish to succeed must take cognizance of human relations and use it as a tool to enhance productivity and motivation.
This school of thought equates good management to good leadership.
The key features are motivation, leadership, training and communication.
Proponents of this school of thought include scholars like Mayo, Keith Davis, Roethlisberger, Dickson and McGregor.
(ii) Social System School: This school of thought views management as a social system.
The social system sees formal organization in terms of cultural relationships of various school groups.
The primary concern of this school of thought is how to harmonize the organization goals with those of the group.
Proponent of this school of thoughts are Maslow, Argyris, Herzberg and March and Simon.
(b) Empirical School: This is based on an experience or custom approach.
The thinking here is that a manager’s success depends on how he/she is able to learn from others’ mistakes or successes.
It is essentially management by a study of experience.
The emphasis is on case studies.
(c) Decision Theory School: This school of thought views formal organization as a network of decision making.
That is rational decision making accounts for what most executives do key proponents are Forester, Cyert and March and Simon.
(d) The Quantitative School: This school of thought views management as a system of mathematical models and symbols, processes, relationships and measurable data.
Key proponents of this school are operation researchers, management scientists and mathematicians.
Their methods include simulation and modeling techniques.
(e) Management Process School: 15  This school of thought is referred to as the traditional, universal and functional approach.
It owes its origin to the writings of Henri Fayol.
It simply defines what managements do.
That is, the functions of management.
3.4 SELF ASSESSMENT QUESTION Identify the various approaches to organization study and briefly explain two of them.
3.5 SELF ASSESSMENT ANSWER The approaches to organization study are:  Behavioural School  Empirical School  Decision Theory School  Quantitative School  Management Process School N.B: Brief explanation required.
16  4.0 CONCLUSION This unit took a critical look at organization theory vis-à-vis the Classical and Neo-classical Theories of organization as well the System View and the various approaches to the study of organization theory.
5.0 SUMMARY The Classical Theory of Organization is based on the assumption that work is a systematic and a rational process that can be accomplished inter-personally whilst the Neo-classical believes that a happy worker is a productive worker.
A formal organization is viewed as a system whose parts interact.
The objectives of the organization is integrated and harmonized with those of the groups or individuals.
Various approaches to organization study were also identified.
17  6.0 TUTOR-MARKED ASSIGNMENT What are the short-comings of the Classical and Neo-Classical Theories of organization, and how has the System View tried to overcome them?
6.1 TUTOR-MARKED ASSIGNMENT (ANSWERS AND MARKING SCHEME) The short-comings are:  that the human relations approach is a tool for manipulating people  that the entrepreneur is unjustly placed at an advantage  that it fails to integrate the many facets of human behaviour  it is shortsighted in perspective and incomplete in several respects  that a “happy worker” has not always resulted into a “productive worker”.
The System Views tries to overcome those short-comings by considering:  What are the strategic parts of the system?
 What is the nature of their mutual dependency?
 What are the main processes in the system that link the parts together and facilitate their adjustment to each other?
 What are the goals sought by systems?
MARKING SCHEME 2 marks for each short-coming correctly named 2 marks for each way of overcoming them [Total – 20 marks] 18  7.0 REFERENCES 1.
Koontz, H. et al (1980): Management, International Student Edition, (New York), McGraw Hill, Inc. 2.
Harris, O.J.
(1976): Managing People at Work: Concepts and Cases in Behaviour, (New York), John Wiley and Sons 3.
Hicks, H.G.
and Gullet C.R.
(1976): Organisations: Theory and Behaviour, McGraw-Hill Kogak Usha Limited 19  UNIT 3: UNDERSTANDING BEHAVIOUR IN ORGANISATIONS TABLE OF CONTENT 1.0.
Introduction - - - - - - - 20 2.0.
Objectives - - - - - - - 20 3.0.
Understanding Behaviour in Organisations - - - - 20 3.2.
The Administrative Point of View - - - - - - 20-21 3.3.
Cultural Influences and Organizational Behaviour - - - 21 3.4.
Self Assessment Question - - - - - - 22 3.5.
Self Assessment Answer - - - - - - 22 4.0.
Conclusion - - - - - - - 23 5.0.
Summary - - - - - - - 23 6.0.
Tutor-Marked Assignment - - - - - - 24 6.1.
Tutor-Marked Assignment (Answers and Marking Scheme)- - 24 7.0.
References - - - - - - - 25 20  UNIT 3: UNDERSTANDING BEHAVIOUR IN ORGANISATIONS 1.0 INTRODUCTION This unit is focused on organization behaviour, with specific attention paid to the concepts, view points and key elements in organization behaviour.
2.0 OBJECTIVES At the end of this unit, students should be able to:  Explain the scope and concept of organization behaviour.
 Identify the administrative view point of organization behaviour.
 State the elements in organization behaviour.
3.0 UNDERSTANDING BEHAVIOUR IN ORGANISATIONS The term “Organizational Behaviour” is generally used to refer to the interaction of people within all types of organizations such as corporate organizations, schools government and service organization.
The prime focus of the group of individuals that interacts within any type or organization is to achieve group goals or objectives for which the organization was established.
The elements that interact within an organization are:  The People  Technology  Structure The first three elements are influenced by the external social system and they in turn influence it.
Organizational behaviour is described within the ambit of the resulting mix.
(a) The People: They represent the internal social system of the organization.
They are the individuals and groups which make up the organization.
They have feeling and ego groups are dynamic.
They form, change and disband.
(b) Structure: This shows the role relationship, power and duties.
Work components or activity grouping are well represented.
(c) Technology: This provides the physical and economic conditions with which people to work.
More effectively and also restrict pure in various ways.
(d) Social System: It provides the external environment within which an organization exists as part of a larger social system.
Each exerting its own influence and being influenced by others resulting in a complex system.
The external influence on the organizations affects:  The attitudes of the people  The working conditions  Competition for resource and power.
3.2 The Administrative Point of View Improving organizational behaviour is the prime responsibility of everyone in the organization, but the ultimate responsibility rest with the managers whose duties involve the integration of the social system with the technical system so as to improve people – organization relationship.
21  The main features of the Administrative View Point about organizational behaviour are:  Organizational behaviour focuses on people.
Technical economic, structural and other elements are considered only as they relate to people.
 That the people are in organizational environment rather than in an unorganized social contact.
 That organizational behaviour is concerned with developing an environment in which people are motivated.
 That the direction of motivation is toward the work which requires both co-ordination of the work and co-operation of the person involved.
 That both employees and the organization seek results effectively.
3.3 CULTURAL INFLUENCES AND ORGANISATIONAL BEHAVIOUR Culture is defined as that part of human action that is socially as opposed to genetically transmitted.
It is that which causes one group of people to act collectively in a way that is different from another group of people.
Needle (1999) identifies three different ways in which culture interacts with business.
These are:  Our socialization, the influences which shape our behaviour in a particular social setting, will determine our individual’s orientation to work.
 We see organizations as societies in microcosm with their own specific cultures and ways of transmitting these cultures to their members.
 Culture is used as an analytical device to distinguish one society from another.
Hofstede (1980) as cited by Needle (1999) identified four key cultural variables that tend to show the extent to which business activities are culturally defined.
The variables are power distance, individualism, uncertainty avoidance and masculinity.
Power Distance: This is the extent to which members of a society accept that power is distributed unequally in organizations.
Inequality is based upon physical economic, intellectual or social characteristics.
In a society where power distance is small, attempt is made to reduce the inequality, while in a society where it is large, social relations is based on it.
Individualism: Individualistic society shows preference for looking after oneself or one’s immediate family group, a belief in freedom and a tendency towards a calculative involvement with work organization.
In collective society the reverse is the case.
Uncertainty Avoidance: This is the extent to which members of a society feel uncomfortable with uncertainty.
Those with strong uncertainty avoidance tend to be anxious about the future and have inability to tolerate deviant ideas, while those with weak uncertainty avoidance show a willingness to accept new ideas and take risks.
Masculinity: Masculine societies tend to display a preference for achievement, assertiveness and material success and a strong belief in gender roles, while feminine societies tend to place more emphasis on the quality of life, care for others and equality, more especially between the sexes.
22  Motivation theories such those propounded by Herzberg, McClelland and Vroom reflect high individualism and masculinity.
A generally accepted conclusion that can be drawn from the above is that cultural influences in different societies will result in different styles of organization behaviour and different patterns of organization structure.
3.4 SELF ASSESSMENT QUESTION Identify and explain the main elements in organization behaviour.
3.5 SELF ASSESSMENT ANSWER The key elements are  People  Structure  Technology  Social System.
N.B.
: Brief explanations required.
23  4.0 CONCLUSION Organization behaviour is influenced by the Mix of four key elements and culture.
These elements and culture of different societies should be given proper consideration.
5.0 SUMMARY Organizational behaviour is concerned about people in an organizational environment.
It deals with people who are living, thinking and feeling beings who created the organization.
The key elements in organization behaviour are people, structure, technology and external social system.
The social system is of course a reflection of the culture of the environment.
Culture influences the style and pattern of organization behaviour.
24  6.0 TUTOR-MARKED ASSIGNMENT Enumerate the Administrative View Points of organization behaviour.
6.1 TUTOR-MARKED ASSIGNMENT (ANSWER AND MARKING SCHEME) The view points are:  Organizational behaviour focuses on people, technical, structure and other element as related to people.
 Organization behaviour concerns people in an organizational environment.
 It is concerned with developing an environment in which people are motivated.
 The direction of motivation is towards teamwork.
 Organization behaviour seeks to fulfill both employees’ needs and organizational objectives.
 Both employee and organization seek result effectively.
MARKING SCHEME 3 marks for each view point correctly stated.
[Total – 20 marks] 25  7.0 REFERENCES 1.
Needle, David (1999): Business in Context, (London), Thomson Business Press 2.
Hicks, H.G.
and Gullet, C.R.
(1976): Organisations: Theory and Behaviour, McGraw-Hill Kogak Usha Limited 3.
Scott, W.G.
and Mitcholl, R.R.
(1976): Organization Theory: A Structural Behaviour Analysis, (Homewood), Richard D. Irwin Inc. 26  UNIT 4: FUNDAMENTAL CONCEPT OF THE NATURE OF PEOPLE TABLE OF CONTENT 1.0.
Introduction - - - - - - - 27 2.0.
Objectives - - - - - - - 27 3.0.
Fundamental Concept of the Nature of People - - - 27 3.1.
Individual Differences- - - - - - - 27 3.2.
The Whole Person - - - - - - - 27 3.3.
Caused Behaviour and Human Dignity - - - - 27-28 3.4.
Self Assessment Question - - - - - - 29 3.5.
Self Assessment Answer - - - - - - 29 4.0.
Conclusion - - - - - - - 30 5.0.
Summary - - - - - - - 30 6.0.
Tutor-Marked Assignment - - - - - - 31 6.1.
Tutor-Marked Assignment (Answers and Marking Scheme)- - 31 7.0.
References - - - - - - - 32 27  UNIT 4: FUNDAMENTAL CONCEPT OF THE NATURE OF PEOPLE 1.0 INTRODUCTION This unit will be focused on the nature of people vis-à-vis individual differences and human dignity.
2.0 OBJECTIVES At the end of this unit, student should be able to:  Explain the concept of individual differences.
 Describe the whole person.
 Explain the concept “motivation and human dignity”.
3.0 FUNDAMENTAL CONCEPT OF THE NATURE OF PEOPLE 3.1 INDIVIDUAL DIFFERENCES The world is inhabited by billions of people, each created with unique and diverse features.
From the perspective of the Bible, all men and women are created in the image and likeness of God.
This means that a lot of communalities exist among people of different creeds and races.
The psychologist believes that every person is born unique and different.
This suggests that even like twins are not alike in every person.
The individual’s experiences after birth make people even more different.
In view of this, management must appreciate the fact that standard and across-the-board ways of dealing with employee will not provide the desired motivation.
The greatest motivation is achieved by treating an employee as an individual with feelings and ego by being just and fair to individual.
He or she should be seen not just as a statistical figure or badge but as an individual.
Organization behaviour philosophy should start with the individual.
3.2 THE WHOLE PERSON Employers generally seek employees with skill which are employable.
This suggests that employers of labour would desire only a person’s skill and not the whole person.
Every person has distinct characteristics and traits which can be studied separately but, in the final analysis, they are all part of one system making up the whole person.
It must be noted that skill does not exist separately from background or knowledge and that home life is not totally separable from work life.
In like manner, emotional conditions are not separate from physical conditions.
They affect each other.
Organizational behaviour tries to develop a better employee and a better person in terms of growth and fulfillment.
This confirms the general notion that says the job shapes people.
An improved or better person will bring benefit to the organization and the society at large.
28  3.3 CAUSED BEHAVIOUR AND HUMAN DIGNITY Psychologists believe that there is a motive behind every behaviour of man.
This motive could relate to the person’s needs and or the consequences that results from the act.
People are motivated not by what we think they ought to have but what they themselves want.
Motivation is achieved in two ways:  Show that certain action will increase their need fulfillment.
 Threaten decrease in new fulfillment unless they follow a required course of action.
These causes or motives are expected to give rise to anticipated behaviour.
A well-motivated worker is an efficient worker.
Motivation is the drawing force that drives and keeps the organization going.
As we have learnt from our study of individual differences, human beings are born unique and different and therefore deserve to be treated with respect.
The thinking is that the people are not just factors of production, or a badge number but individuals with emotions and egos.
They want to be treated as human beings.
Their aspirations and abilities to be recognized and be seen not as economic tool, but as a whole being with self respect and dignity.
This thinking agrees with the ethical philosophy “Do unto other what you want them to do unto”.
That is, respect is reciprocal.
29  3.4 SELF ASSESSMENT QUESTION Explain the meaning of the term “Individual Differences”.
3.5 SELF ASSESSMENT ANSWER Everyone is born unique and different, some tall and some short, some fat and some slim, though there are commonalities such as two eye balls, a nose, two hands, two legs etc.
In view of the above, managers must desist from using the same method to deal with different individuals.
They should avoid across the board approach to motivation.
Since the primary aim of management is to encourage the right behaviour that will produce the desired result, it is imperative that organizational behaviour philosophy should start with the individual.
The key attributes are:  Mental abilities  Emotional demand  Personality characteristics  Physical and sensory capacities.
30  4.0 CONCLUSION People are critical to the success of any organization and therefore deserve special attention.
5.0 SUMMARY People in organizations should be treated with respect because they are human beings with aspirations, abilities and egos.
Ethical philosophy requires that we treat others the way we want them to treat us.
Management must recognize this individual uniqueness when dealing with people.
31  6.0 TUTOR-MARKED ASSIGNMENT Discuss the concept of caused behaviour and human dignity.
6.1 TUTOR-MARKED ASSIGNMENT (ANSWER AND MARKING SCHEME) There is a motive for every behaviour of man, the motive could be due to needs of the individual or lack of it.
In view of this, management must try to initiate the right behaviour that will produce the desired result.
This cause behaviour is generally refereed to as motivation.
In an attempt to produce a happy worker using incentives or other means of motivation, managements must appreciate the need to treat the individual with respect and his or her abilities and aspirations recognized.
Then can we boldly say there is dignity in labour.
MARKING SCHEME 2 points for each concept correctly named.
3 points for each successful discussion.
[Total – 20 marks] 32  7.0.
REFERENCES 1.
Pitfield, R. Ronald (1984): Business Organization, (London), M & E Handbooks 2.
Koontz, et al (1980): Management International, Student Edition, (New York), McGraw-Hill, Inc. 3.
Hicks, H.G.
and Gullet, C.R.
(1976): Organisations: Theory and Behaviour, McGraw-Hill Kogak Usha Limited 33  UNIT 5: THE NATURE OF AN ORGANISATION TABLE OF CONTENT 1.0.
Introduction - - - - - - - 34 2.0.
Objectives - - - - - - - 34 3.0.
The Nature of an Organization - - - - - 34 3.1.
Social Systems - - - - - - - 34 3.2.
Mutual Interest - - - - - - - 34 3.3.
The Structure of Organisations - - - - - 34-35 3.4.
Self Assessment Question - - - - - - 36 3.5.
Self Assessment Answer - - - - - - 36 4.0.
Conclusion - - - - - - - 37 5.0.
Summary - - - - - - - 37 6.0.
Tutor-Marked Assignment - - - - - - 38 6.1.
Tutor-Marked Assignment (Answers and Marking Scheme)- - 38 7.0.
References - - - - - - - 39 34  UNIT 5: THE NATURE OF AN ORGANISATION 1.0 INTRODUCTION This unit will take a look at nature of an organization vis-à-vis social systems, structure and mutual interest.
2.0 OBJECTIVES At the end of this unit, students should be able to:  Explain the concept “Mutual Interest” as related to organizations.
 Explain why organizations are regarded as a social system.
 Depict the structure of organizations.
3.0 THE NATURE OF AN ORGANISATION 3.1 SOCIAL SYSTEMS Organisations and every activities of man are governed by laws.
Laws are deliberately constructed to ensure conformity to a pattern of behaviour.
Laws that govern organizations are regarded as social laws and or psychological laws.
This is because the needs of man are largely psychological, social and esteem.
The needs, aspirations and individuals drives as well as the group one belong determine one’s behaviour.
Organisations are regarded as social system because they operate in a dynamic environment which is subject to change.
The relations are not static as depicted on an organization chart.
Every part of the system is independent and subject to influence by any other part.
Social system provides a framework for considering and analyzing the variety of variables involved in any organizational situation.
The complexity of man’s behaviour can be explained within the context of social interaction.
3.2 MUTUAL INTEREST Organisations are established by people with common interest to achieve commonobjectives.
People organized largely  to accomplish goals which are beyond the capacity of an individual  to share risk  to advantage of division of labour  because of synergy.
The reasons for organizing stated above shows that organization need people and people needs organization.
Organization is perceived as a means of achieving personal objectives why organization need people to achieve organizations objectives.
Mutual Interest provides a super ordinate goal that units the wide variety of needs that people being to organizations.
The outcome of this is that people are encouraged to attack organizational problems rather than each other.
The worker represents the interest of labour whilst the employers represent the interest of capital.
35  3.3 THE STRUCTURE OF ORGANISATIONS The organization structure of a business enterprise is the basic framework within which the executive decision making behaviour takes place.
The principle function of the organization structure of a business is to facilitate desire decision and action and to limit or exclude decision and action not desired.
The concept of organization can be seen in two perspectives.
 Static Concept: Here, an organization is seen as a structure or a network of specified relationships among given individuals.
This is known as the static concept.
 Dynamic Concept: Here, an organization is seen as a process of an executive function in which the dynamic of organization change and growth are central.
The static concept enables us to observe and classify and to recognize similar action and differences among organization whilst the dynamic concept enable us to discern the various kinds of executive behaviour that produce growth and change in the structure.
The structure of organizations usually assumes the form of pyramid.
This is because with successful higher levels fewer persons are needed.
Organization structure may also be classified into formal and informal structure.
The formal structure can further be sub-classed into:  Staff Organization Structure  Functional Organization Structure  Lateral Organization Structure  Committee Organization Structure  Matrix Organization Structure.
36  3.4 SELF ASSESSMENT QUESTION Why are organizations regarded as social systems?
3.5 SELF ASSESSMENT ANSWER Organisations are regarded as social systems because the activities of organizations are governed by social laws as well as psychological laws.
Man’s needs can be categorized as psychological, social and esteem.
Man’s behaviour is influenced by his or her aspirations and drives as well as the group to which he belongs.
37  4.0 CONCLUSION Organisations are social systems established on the basis of Mutual Interest.
5.0 SUMMARY Organisations are social systems established on the basis of Mutual Interest.
Man’s needs are psychological, social and statics.
His behaviour is influenced by his personal drives and aspiration as well as the group he belong.
Organisations tend to take the form of a pyramid.
It is the basic framework within which the executive decision making process takes place.
38  6.0 TUTOR-MARKED ASSIGNMENT Explain the term “Mutual Interest” in relation to an organization.
6.1 TUTOR-MARKED ASSIGNMENT (ANSWER AND MARKING SCHEME) Mutual Interest as related to organizations is represented by the statement: “Organizations need people and people need organizations”.
People perceive organizations as a means to help them reach their goals, while at the same time, organizations need people to help reach organizational objectives”.
Within the ambit of Mutual Interest, people are encouraged to attack organizational problems rather than each other.
MARKING SCHEME 3 marks for each explanation and relationship correctly named [Total – 20 marks] 39  7.0 REFERENCES 1.
Karimu, B.O.
(1992): Business Management: An Introduction, (Lagos), Mufa Nig.
Industrial Press Ltd. 2.
Koontz, H. and Weibrich, H. (1980): Management: A Book of Readings, (New York) McGraw-Hill, Inc. 40  UNIT 6: JOB SATISFACTION TABLE OF CONTENT 1.0.
Introduction - - - - - - - 41 2.0.
Objectives - - - - - - - 41 3.0.
Job Satisfaction - - - - - - - 41 3.1.
The Concept and Scope of Job Satisfaction - - - - 41 3.2.
Job Satisfaction and Productivity - - - - - 41-42 3.3.
Job Satisfaction and Other Variables - - - - - 42 3.4.
Self Assessment Question - - - - - - 43 3.5.
Self Assessment Answer - - - - - - 43 4.0.
Conclusion - - - - - - - 44 5.0.
Summary - - - - - - - 44 6.0.
Tutor-Marked Assignment - - - - - - 45 6.1.
Tutor-Marked Assignment (Answers and Marking Scheme)- - 45 7.0.
References - - - - - - - 46 41  UNIT 6: JOB SATISFACTION 1.0.
INTRODUCTION The Unit will consider the concept and scope of job satisfaction.
It will also look at the relationship of job satisfaction to other variables.
2.0.
OBJECTIVES At the end of this unit, students should be able to: (cid:0) Explain the meaning of job satisfaction.
(cid:0) State the relationship between job satisfaction and other variables.
(cid:0) State the relationship between job satisfaction and productivity.
3.0.
JOB SATISFACTION 3.1.
THE CONCEPT AND SCOPE OF JOB SATISFACTION Lawler et al (1972) define Job Satisfaction as the favourableness or un-favourableness with which employees view and their work.
It expresses the amount of congruence between one’s expections of the job and the rewards that the job provides.
It relates to equity them and psychological contact since it is concerned with expectation compared with rewards.
Job satisfaction is dynamic and must therefore be maintained at all times.
An approach to measuring job satisfaction was developed by Porter in which he relates actual conditions to those perceived as ideal by the employee.
The job satisfaction of an employee is measured from the effort made by the employee towards the realization of the goals of the organization.
An individual or group of individuals may feel satisfied, if they are convinced that their salaries and/or wages are comparable to those of other employees or individuals in similar or related industries or organizations.
Factors that could enhance job satisfaction include: (cid:0) Good pay, (cid:0) Regular payment of salaries, (cid:0) Attractive fringe benefits, (cid:0) Conducive work environment, (cid:0) Friendly, understanding colleagues and other personnel.
The above factors are motivators which will create the feeling of contentment, fulfillment, goodness and happiness which are the hallmark of satisfaction.
In other words, to be satisfied with one’s job means that one is fulfilled on the job.
The job fulfills the needs of the individual or group.
3.2.
JOB SATIFACTION AND PRODUCTIVITY In time past, it was assumed that a satisfied worker is a productive worker is a productive worker.
That is, high job satisfaction leads to high productivity.
Recent studies have shown that a satisfied worker may be a high producer or low producer or only an average producer.
42  Satisfaction – productivity relationship - is complex because it is influenced by many variables such as the reward that an employee received.
According to the Human Relation School, a happy worker is a productive worker.
This was countered by Scott as cited by Ejiogu (1983) who says that morale is no longer considered a prerequisite of high productivity, but that the nature of the relationship between morale and productivity is open to serious questioning.
Liphan and and Hoch (1974) are of the opinion that leadership plays a key role in workers’ productivity.
According to them, a participating leader is most likely to have a higher level of productivity and morale among the subordinates than an authoritative leader.
A model developed by Lawler and Porter tends to suggest that productivity leads to job satisfaction.
The model is shown below: Rewards Perception of equity Satisfaction Performance -Intrinsic in the rewards -Extrinsic The model shows that performance leads to job satisfaction, provided the rewards are perceived to the equitable.
3.3.
JOB SATISFACTION AND OTHER VARIABLES A correlation exists between job satisfaction and other variables in the organization.
The variables to be considered are: (cid:0) Turnover and absenteeism (cid:0) Age (cid:0) Occupation (cid:0) Community condition.
1.
Turnover and Absenteeism Job satisfaction has a direct correlation with labour turnover.
Employees who have low job satisfaction are more likely to leave their employment than those with high job satisfaction.
In like manner, employee who have low job satisfaction are more likely to be absent from their job than those with high job satisfaction.
2.
Age A positive correlation also exists between age and job satisfaction.
Older workers who have spent more time in the employment or on the job tend to become more satisfied with the job than younger worker who tend to have high expectations of promotion and other conditions.
The older worker has become adapted to the system probably due to experiences on the job.
3.
Occupation There exists a positive correlation between occupational level and job satisfaction.
Higher level occupation tends to have more job satisfaction than low level occupation.
4.
Community Condition Poor community conditions are expected to pull down job satisfaction while better community conditions lift it.
This however is not the case.
Study has shown that employees compare their job conditions and community conditions.
If they have average job conditions surrounded by poor community conditions such as more slums and more business depression, then their satisfaction is lifted up because they see themselves relatively well off.
3.3.1.
BENEFITS OF JOB SATISFACTION  43  1.
Gives management an indication of the general levels of satisfaction in the company 2.
Job satisfaction surveys bring about valuable communication 3.
It brings about improved attitude 4.
Job satisfaction surveys are useful ways to determine certain training needs.
3.4.
SELF ASSESSMENT QUESTION What are the benefits of job satisfaction?
3.5.
SELF ASSESSMENT ANSWER 1.
It gives management an indication of the general levels of satisfaction in the company 2.
Job satisfaction surveys bring about valuable communication 3.
It brings about improved attitude 4.
Job satisfaction surveys are useful ways to determine certain training needs.
44  4.0.
CONCLUSION Job satisfaction is a dynamic process that should be maintained at all times in every organization.
5.0.
SUMMARY Job satisfaction expresses the feeling of contentment, fulfillment goodness, happiness of an employee in relation to his or her work and work condition.
The Human Relation School of Thought believes that a happy worker is a productive worker, but recent study has shown that a satisfied worker may be a high producer or a low producer.
Related study also shows that a dissatisfied worker is not necessarily unproductive worker.
Job satisfaction is enhanced by some motive factors such as good pay.
Some variables such as occupation, labour turnover etc have a positive correlation with job satisfaction.
45  6.0.
TUTOR-MARKED ASSIGNMENT Discuss the variables that correlate with job satisfaction.
6.1.
TUTOR-MARKED ASSIGNMENT (ANSWER AND MARKING SCHEME) The variables that correlate with job satisfaction are: (cid:0) Absenteeism (cid:0) Labour turnover (cid:0) Occupation (cid:0) Age (cid:0) Community condition etc.
N.B: Brief explanations required MARKING SCHEME 2 Marks for each variable named 2 marks for each explanation [Total – 20 marks] 46  7.0.
REFERENCES 1.
Ejiogu, A.
(1978): Behavioural Decisions in Organizations (Dallas, Scotland) Foresman and Company 2.
Simmons, R.E.
(1978): Managing Behavioural Processes; Applications of Theory and Research, (Illinois), AHM Publishing 3.
Koontz H, et.
al (1980): Management, International Student Edition, (New York), McGraw Hill, Inc. 47  UNIT 7: JOB ENRICHMENT AND WORK SYSTEM TABLE OF CONTENT 1.0.
Introduction - - - - - - - 48 2.0.
Objectives - - - - - - - 48 3.0.
Job Enrichment and Work System - - - - - 48 3.1.
Job Design - - - - - - - 48 3.2.
Job Enrichment - - - - - - - 48-49 3.3.
Application of Job Enrichment - - - - - - 49 3.4.
Self Assessment Question - - - - - - 50 3.5.
Self Assessment Answer - - - - - - 50 4.0.
Conclusion - - - - - - - 51 5.0.
Summary - - - - - - - 51 6.0.
Tutor-Marked Assignment - - - - - - 52 6.1.
Tutor-Marked Assignment (Answers and Marking Scheme)- - 52 7.0.
References - - - - - - - 53 48  UNIT 7: JOB ENRICHMENT AND WORK SYSTEM 1.0.
INTRODUCTION This unit will take a look at the concept of job enrichment and work design.
2.0.
OBJECTIVES At the end of this unit, students should be able to: (cid:0) Explain the concept of job design (cid:0) State the implications of job enrichment (cid:0) Discuss the application of job enrichment 3.0.
JOB ENRICHMENT AND WORK SYSTEM 3.1.
JOB DESIGN Job design specifies the content and relationship of jobs as they affect both people and organizational success.
Classical job design is based specialization and efficiency in the performance of narrow tasks.
It makes effective use of division of labour, rigid hierarchy and the standardization of labour to achieve efficiency.
The logic behind the idea is that cost could be lowered by using unskilled, repetitive labour that could be trained easily to do a small part of the job.
The issue of job design can be tackled from the following perspectives: (cid:0) Leave the job as it is and employ only workers who can fit into the system (cid:0) Leave the job as it is, but pay workers more so that they will better accept the situation.
(cid:0) Mechanize and automate routine jobs so that the labour that is unhappy with the job is no longer needed.
(cid:0) Redesign jobs to have the attributes desired by people.
(cid:0) Redesign organizations to have the environment desired by people (that is, strike a balance between the human and the technical imperatives).
3.1.1.
HUMANIZED JOBS Jobs are designed to have “a human face” or be succinctly humanized to achieve the following: (cid:0) To serve the higher order needs of worker as well as their basic needs (cid:0) To seek to employ higher skills or workers and to provide an environment that enables them to improve their skills.
(cid:0) To ensure that the work does not have excessive disfunctional conditions (cid:0) To ensure that worker humanness is not damage or degraded.
(cid:0) To enable workers perform other life role such as citizen, spouse, and parent.
3.2.
JOB ENRICHMENT Job enrichment can be seen in the context of modern efforts aimed at creating humanized jobs.
It refers to those motivators added to the job so that it become more rewarding.
Job enrichment is interchangeably used with the term job enlargement but job enrichment is more behavioural while enlargement widens the scope and variety of duties to build the role of the worker.
Job enrichment involves: (cid:0) Increasing the physical or motor tasks involved in the job (cid:0) Adding cognitive 49  (cid:0) Affective activities.
The above represent the three key elements of behaviour or learning domain 3.2.1.
IMPLICATION OF JOB ENRICHMENT The implications of job enrichment are: (cid:0) It leads to a reduced need for immediate supervision or management (cid:0) It leads to more training (cid:0) It may result in claims for pay increases based on responsibility (cid:0) It will require re-organization of the work system and working relationships (cid:0) It will involve a different form of management than do traditional forms of work.
3.3.
APPLICATION OF JOB ENRICHMENT From Herzberg’s Motivator-Hygiene Theory, work enrichment is a fulcrum on such factors as achievement, growth, responsibility and recognition.
A job is said to have been enriched when an employee or group of employees feels that there is an improvement in the content of his or her job.
Job enrichment is a tool used by managements to build and maintain motivational factors.
Key factors to be considered are: (a) Variety: This allows employees to perform different operation using several procedure and equipment.
(b) Task Identity: This allows employee to perform a complete piece of the work.
(c) Task Significance: This refers to the impact that the work has on other people as perceived by the workers.
(d) Autonomy: This gives employees some control over their own affairs and it appears to be fundamental in building a sense of responsibility in workers.
(e) Feedback: This helps the workers to know how well they are performing their assigned task.
50  3.4.
SELF ASSESSMENT QUESTION Identify the key dimensions of work that may be used as motivators.
3.5.
SELF ASSESSMENT ANSWER The key dimensions are: (cid:0) Variety (cid:0) Task identity (cid:0) Task significance (cid:0) Autonomy (cid:0) Feed back 51  4.0.
CONCLUSION Job enrichment and work design are key factors in the humanization of works.
Their outcome must be viewed from the perspective of the workers themselves.
5.0.
SUMMARY Job enrichment and work design are deliberate attempts by management to humanize jobs in such a way that the worker feels that his or her work content and environment have been improved and that his or her higher order needs as well as basic needs are met.
52  6.0.
TUTOR-MARKED ASSIGNMENT In what ways can the basic problems of work design be tackled?
6.1.
TUTOR-MARKED ASSIGNMENT (ANSWER AND MARKING SCHEME) The problems can be tackled from the following perspectives: (cid:0) Leave the job as it is and employ only workers who can fit into the system (cid:0) Leave the job as it is but pay workers more so that they will better accept the situation.
(cid:0) Mechanize and automotive routine jobs so that the labour that is unhappy with the job is no longer needed.
(cid:0) Redesign jobs to have the attributes desired by the people.
(cid:0) Redesign organizations to have the environment desired by people.
MARKING SCHEME 3 Marks each for each way correctly spelt out.
[Total – 20 Marks] 53  7.0.
REFERENCES 1.
Koontz, H. et al (1980): Management International Student Edition, (New York), McGraw Hill, Inc. 2.
Dawson, S. (1986): Analysing Organisations, (London), Macmillan Education Ltd. 54  UNIT 8: PRINCIPLES AND THEORIES OF MOTIVATION TABLE OF CONTENT 1.0.
Introduction - - - - - - - 55 2.0.
Objectives - - - - - - - 55 3.0.
Principle and Theories of Motivation - - - - - 55 3.1.
Principles of Motivation - - - - - - - 55 3.2.
Theory of Human Needs - - - - - - - 55-56 3.3.
Theories X and Y - - - - - - - 56-57 3.4.
Self Assessment Question - - - - - - - 58 3.5.
Self Assessment Answer - - - - - - - 58 4.0.
Conclusion - - - - - - - 59 5.0.
Summary - - - - - - - 59 6.0.
Tutor-Marked Assignment - - - - - - 60 6.1.
Tutor-Marked Assignment (Answers and Marking Scheme)- - 60 7.0.
References - - - - - - - - 61 55  UNIT 8: PRINCIPLES AND THEORIES OF MOTIVATION 1.0.
INTRODUCTION This unit will take a cursory look at the principles and theories of motivation.
2.0.
OBJECTIVES At the end of this unit, students should be able to: (cid:0) Explain the meaning and scope of motivation.
(cid:0) State the Theory of Human Needs.
(cid:0) State the Theory X and Y assumption.
3.0.
PRINCIPLES AND THEORIES OF MOTIVATION 3.1.
PRINCIPLES OF MOTIVATION Motivation can be seen in context of caused behaviour.
It is the driving force or impulse which moves somebody towards a desired action or activity.
It is an influencing force that gives rise to behaviour.
The initial concept of motivation was based on the hedonistic view which assumes that man is a pain-avoiding and pleasure-seeking animal and that given alternative, he will choose the option that will cause him pain.
Another school of thought attributes behaviour to various instincts.
This school of thought believes that man has certain basic instincts which course him to act in certain ways.
Sigmund Freud classified these basic instincts into: (cid:0) Sex (cid:0) Aggression or self preservation (cid:0) Death.
A third school of thought attributes man’s behaviour to various motives of needs.
Man spends his or her life trying to satisfy these needs.
The principles of motivator are: (a) Principle of Participation Involve the staff in decision making particularly on matters that directly affect them.
(b) Principle of Communication Inform the staff about the objectives and results achieved.
This will prompt their cooperation.
(c) Principle of Recognition Recognition will make a staff member work hard.
(d) Principle of Delegated Authority Delegation is a fundamental concept in management.
It is a means of personal development.
3.2.
THOERY OF NEEDS 56  A study carried out by Elton Mayo and his team showed that work behaviour at work is affected by many factors other than the nature of economic incentives they are offered.
That is workers have other needs which must be satisfied.
Since man’s behaviour is affected by these needs, they will say needs motivate.
Needs can be classified into the following: (cid:0) Physiological or primary needs (cid:0) Psychological or secondary needs.
Primary needs are important for survival and preservation of life.
These needs can be hunger, thirst, shelter and sleep.
Psychological needs are classified into personal and social needs.
They are more of mind and spirit.
Examples of personal needs are: (cid:0) Desire for self-respect and self-esteem (cid:0) Desire to acquire material possession (cid:0) Desire to invent, creative use (cid:0) Desire for safety and security Social needs are: (cid:0) Desire for recognition (cid:0) Desire for love and social activity (cid:0) Desire for praise and credit for efforts (cid:0) Desire for acceptance Abraham Maslow developed one of the most widely used classifications of the human needs.
He identified five (5) levels of needs as shown below with Level 1 representing the lowest level of need and Level 5 on the highest level of need.
5 Self-actualization 4 Esteem 3 Belonging 2 Safety Needs 1 Physiological Needs Level 1 must be satisfied before Level 2.
Maslow called these levels of need.
Hierarchy of Needs.
3.3.
THEORIES X AND Y Douglas McGregor identified two different viewpoints about people at work.
The view points are referred to as Theory X and Theory Y.
Theory X assumes as follows: 1.
The average human being has an inherent dislike of work and will avoid it if he or she can.
2.
The average human being must be coerced, controlled or threatened with punishment before he works.
3.
The average human being lacks ambition, dislikes responsibility, lacks initiative and prefers to be led by others.
57  4.
The average human being is by nature self centered, indifferent to organizational needs and is just concerned by security and nothing else.
5.
The average human being is gullible, dull, not intelligent or a sort of moron.
6.
The average human being is by nature resistant to change.
He or she prefers to stick to the status-quo or simply leave the sleeping dog alone.
Theory Y makes the following assumptions: 1.
The average human being does not inherently dislike work.
Depending upon controllable conditions, work may be a source of satisfaction.
2.
Man will exercise self-direction and self-control in the pursuit of objectives to which he or she is committed.
3.
Commitment to objectives is a function of the rewards associated with the contribution to their achievement 4.
The average person learns under proper conditions, not only to accept but to seek responsibility.
5.
The capacity to exercise a relatively high degree of imagination, ingenuity and creativity in the solution of organization problem is widely, not narrowly distributed in 6. the population.
Under the conditions of modern industrial life, the intellectual potentials of the average human being are only partly utilized 5 8  3.4.
SELF ASSESSMENT QUESTION What are the principles of motivation?
3.5.
SELF ASSESSMENT ANSWER The principles of motivation are: (cid:0) Principle of participation (cid:0) Principle of communication (cid:0) Principle of recognition (cid:0) Principle of delegated authority.
59  4.0.
CONCLUSION A well-motivated worker is not only a happy worker but also a productive worker.
5.0.
SUMMARY Motivation is a caused behaviour.
To generate the expected behaviour in workers, management must create the enabling environment using the principles discussed in this unit.
60  6.0.
TUTOR-MARKED ASSIGNMENT Identify the factors that motivate a worker or de-motivate a worker.
6.1.
TUTOR-MARKED ASSIGNMENT (ANSWER AND MARKING SCHEME) Positive factors that could motivate a worker are: (cid:0) Appreciation for good work (cid:0) Sincere concern for professional progress (cid:0) Development of individual (cid:0) Good working conditions (cid:0) Encouragement to go beyond minimum expectation.
The negative factors are: (cid:0) Favouritism and victimization (cid:0) Disregard for subordinates’ feeling (cid:0) Lack of concern about workers’ welfare (cid:0) Frequent and unnecessary circulars etc.
MARKING SCHEME 2 marks for each factor correct named.ss [Total – 20 marks] 61  7.0.
REFERENCES 1.
Koontz, H. et al (1980): Management, International Student Edition, (New York), McGraw Hill, Inc. 2.
Otu, D.O.
(2006): Human Resources Management in Education, (Lagos), National Open University of Nigeria 62  UNIT 9: THE HUMAN SIDE OF THE ENTERPRISE TABLE OF CONTENT 1.0.
Introduction - - - - - - - 63 2.0.
Objectives - - - - - - - 63 3.0.
The Human Side of the Enterprise - - - - - 63 3.1.
The Concept and Scope of Human Relations- - - - 63 3.2.
Importance of Human Relations to Worker Productivity - - 64 3.3.
Principles of Human Relations - - - - - 64 3.4.
Self Assessment Question - - - - - - - 65 3.5.
Self Assessment Answer - - - - - - - 65 4.0.
Conclusion - - - - - - - - 66 5.0.
Summary - - - - - - - - 66 6.0.
Tutor-Marked Assignment - - - - - - - 67 6.1.
Tutor-Marked Assignment (Answers and Marking Scheme)- - 67 7.0.
References - - - - - - - - 68 63  UNIT 9: THE HUMAN SIDE OF THE ENTERPRISE 1.0.
INTRODUCTION This unit will examine the concept, scope and principles of human relations.
2.0.
OBJECTIVES At the end of this unit, the students should be able to: (cid:0) Explain the meaning and scope of human relations.
(cid:0) Explain the principles that govern human relations.
(cid:0) State the importance of human relations to workers’ productivity.
3.0.
THE HUMAN SIDE OF THE ENTERPRISE 3.1.
THE CONCEPT AND SCOPE OF HUMAN RELATIONS Beer et al (1984) defined Human Resources Management as that which involves are management decision and actions that affect the nature of the relationship between the organization and its employees.
According to Needle (1994), Human Resources Management involves a focus on: (cid:0) Treating employees as individual but at the same time, developing mechanisms to integrate individuals into teams.
(cid:0) The careful selection, training and development of core staff.
(cid:0) Reward system that stress individual performance and commitment and which are linked to employee appraisal and development.
(cid:0) Integration, not only of all personnel related policies as a meaningful whole.
(cid:0) Communication networks and the involvement of employees, preferably as individual, but allowing for trade union involvement as well.
Aina (1992), while referring to the concept of employees as a resource, claimed that people at work are of critical importance because most organizations’ failures are failures of people.
It is people who employ, promote organize, lead, mobilize and decide which product and quality of service are to be delivered.
This assertion concurred with Kilhan (1976) who summarized the importance of people in organizations thus: (cid:0) Human beings are unique in the sense that they cannot be purchased en masse (cid:0) They cannot be hoarded or warehoused.
(cid:0) They are perishable in the sense that they must be used currently.
(cid:0) The organization, through its reputation and efforts, solicits the human resource.
(cid:0) Each individual has the option not to apply for a job, not to report for work each day and not to expend effort.
(cid:0) The individual has the freedom to resign and the oragnisation has certain options for discharging the individual.
64  From the above submission, it is quite clear that management recognizes the workers as human beings and should endeavour to treat them as such.
Human relations therefore means being with people and interacting with them.
Management recognition of the worker means the workers are to be treated with respect, courtesy, kindness, consideration, confidence, trust, sincerity, open-mindedness, justice and fairness.
The manager must be friendly and accessible to all.
In line with ethical philosophy, respect is reciprocal.
Similarly friendliness begets friendliness.
3.2.
THE IMPORTANCE OF HUMAN RELATIONS TO WORKERS’ PRODUCTIVITY A happy worker is generally assumed to be a productive worker.
This is the submission of the Human Relation School.
Liphan and Hosh (1974) believe that leadership plays a very key role in workers’ productivity.
According to them, a leader who involves his subordinates in decision making is most likely to have higher productivity.
That is, a participatory leader or manager can more obtain the cooperation of his or her subordinates because of their high morale than an authoritative leader whose subordinates have low morale.
Human relations is all about building a relationship between employees and the management.
Good human relations creates the right atmosphere for building confidence, trust, sincerely and friendship and, consequently, high morale.
A highly motivated worker is a productive worker.
3.3.
PRINCIPLES OF HUMAN RELATIONS The general principles of human relations are: (1) Recognition – This is a popular way of reinforcing behaviour.
A worker is happy and willing to improve on his or her performance if he or she feels his or her contributions are being recognized and appreciated.
(2) Effective Communication – It helps the individual worker to be aware of his or her duties and the general progress being made in the organization.
(3) Managers must be friendly and approachable – An atmosphere of warmth and friendliness encourages cooperation.
(4) Participation – When workers participate in decisions that affect them, they are more likely to contribute their best to the attainment of the goals of the organization.
(5) Fairness and Justice – This assures staff members that promotions and appointments will be based on merit alone.
(6) Respect – Respect is reciprocal.
Managers must respect their subordinates.
They must show that they care about their subordinates’ feeling and desires.
65  3.4.
SELF ASSESSMENT QUESTIONS State the principles of human relations.
3.5.
SELF ASSESSMENT QUESTIONS ANSWERS The principles of human relations are: (cid:0) Recognition for all (cid:0) Effective communication (cid:0) Justice and fairness (cid:0) Respect for all (cid:0) Participation in decision making (cid:0) Managers should be friendly and approachable.
66  4.0.
CONCLUSION Staff morale is closely associated with the human relations policy and practices of the organization.
A good human relations policy will enhance the morale of the staff and consequently productivity.
5.0.
SUMMARY Human relations is concerned about building a relationship between labour and employers of labour.
Good human relations creates the right atmosphere for building confidence, trust, sincerity and friendship.
67  6.0.
TUTOR-MARKED ASSIGNMENT Enumerate the importance of people in an organization.
6.1.
TUTOR-MARKED ASSIGNMENT (ANSWER AND MARKING SCHEME) The importance of people in an organization as stated by Killian (1970) are: (cid:0) Human beings are unique in the sense that they cannot be purchased en masse.
(cid:0) They cannot be hoarded or warehoused.
(cid:0) They are perishable in that they must be used currently.
(cid:0) The organization through its reputation and efforts solicits the human resource.
(cid:0) Each individual has the option not to apply for a job, not to report for work each and not to expend effort.
(cid:0) The individual has the freedom to resign and the organization has certain options for discharging individuals.
MARKING SCHEME 3 marks for each importance correctly stated.
[Total – 20 Marks] 68  7.0.
REFERENCES 1.
Aina, Olusola (1992): Personnel Management in Nigeria, (Lagos), Edition F Communications 2.
Needle, David (1994): Business in Context, (London), Thomson Business Press 3.
Killian, A Ray (1976): Human Resources Management, (USA), An ROI Approach, AMACOM 4.
Otu, D.O (2006): Human Resources Management in Education, (Lagos), National Open University of Nigeria 69  UNIT 10: GROUP BEHAVIOUR AND BARRIERS TO MOTIVATION TABLE OF CONTENT 1.0.
Introduction - - - - - - - 70 2.0.
Objectives - - - - - - - 70 3.0.
Group Behaviour and Barriers to Motivation - - - - 70 3.1.
The Concept and Scope of Group Behaviour - - - - 70 3.2.
Motivation and Barriers to Motivation - - - - 71 3.3.
Remedies to Barriers in Motivation - - - - - 71 3.4.
Self Assessment Question - - - - - - 72 3.5.
Self Assessment Answer - - - - - - - 72 4.0.
Conclusion - - - - - - - - 73 5.0.
Summary - - - - - - - - 73 6.0.
Tutor-Marked Assignment - - - - - - 74 6.1.
Tutor-Marked Assignment (Answers and Marking Scheme)- - 74 7.0.
References - - - - - - - - 75 70  UNIT 10: GROUP BEHAVIOUR AND BARRIERS TO MOTIVATION 1.0.
INTRODUCTION This unit will introduce us to group behaviour and barriers to motivation and the remedies to motivation.
2.0.
OBJECTIVES At the end of this unit, the students should be able to: (cid:0) Explain the concept of group behaviour.
(cid:0) Enumerate the barriers to motivation.
(cid:0) State the remedies to the barriers of motivation.
3.0.
GROUP BEHAVIOUR AND BARRIERS TO MOTIVATION 3.1.
THE CONCEPT AND SCOPE OF GROUP BEHAVIOUR Do groups exist?
This is a pertinent question that deserves an answer or, at least, some kind of response.
A group may be seen as the individuals comprising it.
Depending on the side of the divide one belongs to, ascribing reality to a group is tantamount to group-think.
That is, perceiving a group as an entity with emphasis on group importance.
This could bring about demands for blind group loyalty, social prejudice and subordination of the individual to the group.
The converse view is that group like individuals have a structure, integrative characteristics and operate in physical and social setting.
They will therefore resist any attempt to disintegrate them.
One can become a member of a group by application, invitation and mutual consent.
Individuals may seek group membership because of the need to satisfy economic, social and may other needs.
A person will most likely select groups that agree with his or her values.
3.1.1.
TYPES OF WORK GROUP Work groups are categorized into four major groups.
(a) Apathetic Group – made up of low skilled and low paid jobs, not likely to challenge management or union decision, grievances and pressure tactics rare, leadership not clearly defined or accepted, internal disunity and friction, evidence of suppressed discontent.
(b) Erratic Group – found where jobs are nearly identical and primarily workers controlled, large amount of worker interaction group easily inflamed, poor pressure tactics and inconsistent behaviour, quick conversation to good relationship (c) with management offer highly centralized leadership, active in organizational phase of union.
– better jobs than the two previous groups, high self interest activity, Strategic Group heart of union and grievance activity within the respective plants.
Skills identified 71  with the ability of the individual worker to decisions in performing his work; job relatively important to management and employ us.
High degree of internal unity, sustained participation, relatively good production record over the long run.
(d) Conservative Group – these are located at the top rung of promotional and status ladder of the plant.
They are self-assured and successful, restrained pressure for highly specific objectives.
Members are widely distributed throughout the plant, active- inactive cycles of union activity and use of grievance procedure.
3.2.
BARRIERS TO MOTIVATION Motivation is concerned with creating the motive and/or stimulus which will move people toward a desired action or activity.
Barriers are hindrances to effective motivation.
The major barriers are: (a) Fear of losing job * Fear of unemployment if a project is finished * Fear of employment of two people who can do the work of three (b) Belief that if they go slowly they will earn more money * Prospects of overtime * Work-to-rule in order to compel the management to come up with better offers.
(c) Resentment For example, * The office is too hot and staff members are compelled to go outside for fresh air.
* Employees are not appreciated for their efforts (d) Boring Job People take every opportunity to leave a job with the slightest excuse (e) Loss of faith in the leadership of the organization Work is badly planned, coordination is poor and the management is not in control.
Employees lose their fighting spirit.
3.3.
REMEDIES TO BARRIERS TO MOTIVATION (a) Fear of Losing Job  Let the worker know that if the job is not finished on time, the possibility to getting another job is remote.
 Explain what other work is in the pipeline  Explain the company redundancy policy  Let the workers know that if they do not work faster, they could become redundant (b) Belief that if they go slow they will earn more money  Do not let the overtime habit develop  See whether normal working hours provide a reasonable wage  Ensure that wages are fair and reasonable (c) Resentment  Do all you can to remove resentment  Explain the reason for environmental problems  Be sure that you do not add fuel to the resentment.
(d) Boring job  Show an interest in their job 7 2   If possible give the person extra responsibility  Let your own enthusiasm rub off on staff members (e) Loss of faith in the leadership of the organization  Produce a master plan  Define company objectives and the role of every member of staff  Communicate regularly with staff to explain progress and problems.
3.4.
SELF ASSESSMENT QUESTIION Mention and explain the various types of work group.
3.5.
SELF ASSESSMENT ANSWER Work groups are: 1.
Apathetic Group – disorganized, low-skilled, suppressed and not likely to challenge management decision.
2.
Erratic Group – do identical jobs, easily inflamed and quick to convent to good 3. relations with management.
Strategic Group – heart of the union, skills, identify with ability of individual to make 4. decision.
High degree of internal unity and sustain participation.
Conservative group – These are senior officers, self assured.
Restrained, pressure for high specific objectives, use grievance procedure.
73  4.0.
CONCLUSION Group exerts pressure on individuals who deviate from accepted norms.
The attitudes of the management affect individual and group behaviour.
5.0.
SUMMARY A group is an entity comprising individuals.
They have integrative characteristics and structure and operate in a physical and social setting.
Key work groups are Apathetic, Erratic, Strategic and Conservative groups.
74  6.0.
TUTOR-MARKED ASSIGNMENT Identify the barrier to motivation and state their remedies.
6.1.
TUTOR-MARKED ASSIGNMENT (ANSWER AND MARKING SCHEME) The barriers to motivation are: (cid:0) Fear of losing job (cid:0) The belief that if they go slow, they will earn more (cid:0) Resentment (cid:0) Boring job (cid:0) Loss of faith in the leadership of the organization.
N.B: For each barrier, you should list its remedies.
MARKING SCHEME 2 marks for each barrier listed.
2 marks for each remedy stated.
[Total – 20 marks] 75  7.0.
REFERENCES 1.
Sayles, Leonard R. (1958): Behaviour of Industrial Work Groups: Prediction and Control, (New York), Johnson and Sons Inc. 76  UNIT 11: CULTURE AND BEHAVIOUR – THE NIGERIAN PERSPECTIVE TABLE OF CONTENT 1.0.
Introduction - - - - - - - 77 2.0.
Objectives - - - - - - - 77 3.0.
Culture and Behaviour – The Nigerian Perspective - - - 77 3.1.
The Nigerian Socio-Cultural Milieu - - - - - 77-78 3.2.
Work Ethic: An Overview - - - - - - - 78 3.3.
Orientating the Nigerian Worker - - - - - 79 3.4.
Self Assessment Question - - - - - - 80 3.5.
Self Assessment Answer - - - - - - 80 4.0.
Conclusion - - - - - - - - 81 5.0.
Summary - - - - - - - - 81 6.0.
Tutor-Marked Assignment - - - - - - - 82 6.1.
Tutor-Marked Assignment (Answers and Marking Scheme)- - 82 7.0.
References - - - - - - - - 83 77  UNIT 11: CULTURE AND BEHAVIOUR – THE NIGERIAN PERSPECTIVE 1.0.
INTRODUCTION This unit will take a look at culture and behaviour vis-à-vis the Nigerian perspective.
2.0.
OBJECTIVES At the end of this unit, you should be able to: (cid:0) Identify some cultural inhibitions and value-laden practices and attitudes that hinder effective performance of duties.
(cid:0) Appreciate the Nigerian socio-cultural milieu.
(cid:0) State some positive steps that could be taken to re-orientate the Nigerian worker.
3.0.
CULTURE AND BEHAVIOUR – THE NIGERIAN PERSPECTIVE 3.1.
THE NIGERIAN SOCIO-CULTURAL MILIEU Nigeria as a nation came into existence in 1914.
It is by far the most populous black nation on earth.
It is made up of 252 ethnic groups with more than 400 languages.
The ethnic groups have their own different origins, histories, cultures, languages and patterns of social organization.
Apart from its diverse ethnic groupings, the nation also enjoy great diversities in religion and worship.
As a nation, Nigeria is culturally endowed.
The culture of a society is the embodiment of its arts literature, music and all the socially learned and transmitted patterns of behaviour, values, customs, morals, traditions, ideas, attitudes which influence individuals and which they share.
Arguably, Nigeria is a great nation indeed.
It has been described as a nation where nothing works.
This perhaps explains the thought-provoking question posed by Harriman (1982): “Why won’t the telephone or the bureaucrat work?
Why can’t you turn on a switch or tap, or turn up for a scheduled flight with any confidence that light, or a wash, or a journey will result?
Why at almost every level of public or private administration do people expect bribes?
Why is almost everyone so internally aggressive, or why, when aggressive driving kills people, can’t they at least clear the corpses off the streets?
3.1.1 FACTORS THAT AFFECT PEOPLE’S ATTITUDES TO WORK People’s attitudes to work are generally influenced by cultural factors and value laden practices and attitudes.
These factors affect not only their motivation but also their attitude towards work, towards the organization and towards cooperative behaviour.
The factors are: (a) The Problems of Tribalism against Nationalism A new consciousness for national identity was aroused in 1983.
Before then, tribalism played a key role in selection recruitment, promotion and delivery of services, thus creating a 78 problem of nepotism.
(b) Respect for Age and Seniority Orientation Nigeria is a seniority-conscious socially.
This consciousness spans the entire length and breadth of our society.
In the Civil Service, the security forces and even in the family, seniority takes precedence over efficiency.
(c) The concept of time Nigerians generally seem not to be conscious of time.
This perhaps explains why the invitation for a programme scheduled to take off at 10:00am may read 9:00am.
This gives an allowance of 1 hour for guests to arrive for the programme.
Hence, the popular label of “African Time” or “Nigerian Time”.
(d) Bribery and Corruption Despite the anti-corruption campaigns embarked upon by various governments, the problem of bribery and corruption is still widespread in Nigeria.
By and large, it is often condemned by citizens across the board.
(e) A Parasitic Society In Nigeria, it is palpable that social values are changing.
Lofty ideals for which Nigerians were known in the years past seem to be giving way to worship of wealth, apathy, low performance, avarice, cheating, abuse of office and inflation of cost to accommodation kick-backs.
Perceptions are rising that Nigeria encourages the growth of a parasitic culture wherein people expect so much from the society or the government without a corresponding sense of individual or group responsibility towards the society.
3.2.
WORK ETHIC – AN OVERVIEW Work refers to the use of physical strength or mental power in order to make or do something.
It is a profession or an occupation or what one does to earn money.
According to Aina (1992), different countries and religious groups view work and work ethic from different perspectives.
To the ancient Greeks and Romans work was simply a curse.
To the Hebrews, work was not only a painful drudgery but also a way of explaining a sin and recovery of lost spiritual dignity.
To the Christians, work is useful for promoting health of soul and body.
Simply put, any one who fails to work should not eat.
To Luther (Protestant ethic), work was a form of serving God.
This suggests that a profession is a calling and work is valued as a means of spiritual salvation.
To the modern capitalist, work is a calling that should be followed with all of one’s conscience.
In the United States, the Protestant work ethic merged with the Puritan doctrine, so that hard work, avoidance of waste of talent and service of humanity placed one amongst the elect of God.
To Western Europeans, work is characterized by a culture of hard work honest labour, social responsibility and social responsiveness.
In the soviet blocs, work is essentially natural and an end in itself.
In Nigeria, there does not seem to be a defined national ideology or work ethic.
This could be contributory to the nation’s inability to generate and sustain rapid economic growth.
79  Ethics is a system of moral principles or rules of behaviour, while work ethic involves the issue of right or wrong values involved in man’s motivation for work, performance of work and beliefs about work.
It is the bedrock on which work attitudes or concepts are built.
It relates to man’s love and preference for work instead of idleness, even when work offers no natural reward.
3.3.
ORIENTATING THE NIGERIAN WORKER Every individual is influenced by his or her environment and the socially-learned and transmitted patterns of behaviour, values, customs, morals, traditions, ideas and attitudes.
Management on the other hand is a social function embedded in a tradition of values, customs and beliefs and in government and political system.
It is conditioned by culture belief and in governmental and political systems.
It is conditioned by the culture of the operating environment.
Since Nigerian workers operate in the same socio-cultural setting, it necessarily follows that their orientation, their attitudes and education of their mind are the plausible panacea to increase in productivity, commitment to duty and sense of responsibility and urgency.
For mass orientation to work, it must start from the political and traditional leaders.
The leaders need to appreciate the fact that they are accountable to the tax payers and the electorate.
Their sense of responsibility, honesty, probity, self discipline and leadership by example would provide the necessary impetus for improving the Nigerian mentality and perception of: (i) The concept of time (ii) The Nigerian entity (iii) The ills of bribery and corruption (iv) Honesty and hard work (v) Probity and accountability (vi) Cutting corners and getting rich quick.
Several attempts were made to check the growing trends of social malaise that seem to be perverting the social, political and economic life of Nigeria.
Among the attempts were the introduction of WAI (War Against Indiscipline), WAIC (War Against Indiscipline and Corruption), as well as the creation of a special ministry for Mass Mobilization and National Orientation.
The role of the Economic and Financial Crimes Commission (EFCC) in exposing and prosecuting corrupt politicians and public officers is a step in the right direction It is also vital for managers, supervisors and workers in the public and private sectors to appreciate the fact that only improved productivity can significantly improve the standards of living of the average Nigerian.
80  3.4.
SELF ASSESSMENT QUESTION Identify and discuss some positive steps to be taken to re-orientate Nigerian workers.
3.5.
SELF ASSESSMENT ANSWER Positive steps to be taken are: (cid:0) Inculcating a culture of discipline as typified in the enactment of WAI and WAIC (cid:0) Orientation of the altitude and education of the mind (cid:0) Ensuring that the nation’s leaders inculcate the virtues of honesty, probity and self- improved discipline (cid:0) Inculcating in every Nigerian the virtue of commitment to duty and sense of responsibility (cid:0) Public denouncement of corrupt leaders and stress on leadership by example.
81  4.0.
CONCLUSION People’s attitudes and behaviour are intertwined with and are products of the culture.
5.0.
SUMMARY People’s attitudes to work are influenced by culture, and value-laden attitudes and practices.
In view of this, it is pertinent that we reorientate the attitudes and educate the minds of Nigerians to inculcate the virtues of: (cid:0) Honesty, probity and self-discipline (cid:0) Commitment to duty (cid:0) Sense of responsibility and urgency.
82  6.0.
TUTOR-MARKED ASSIGNMENT Identify and briefly discuss the factors that affect the average attitudes of Nigerians to work.
6.1.
TUTOR-MARKED ASSIGNMENT (ANSWER AND MARKING SCHEME) The attitudes of Nigeria workers to work is influenced by so many factors such as: (cid:0) Tribalism versus Nationalism (cid:0) Bribery and corruption (cid:0) The concept of time (cid:0) Respect for age and seniority orientation (cid:0) Parasitic society MARKING SCHEME 2 marks for each factor.
2 marks for each explanation.
[Total – 20 marks] 83  7.0.
REFERENCES 1.
Aina, Olusola (1992): Personal Management in Nigeria: A Work-Centered Approach, (Lagos), Edition of Communication 2.
Ugbona, Okpu (1977): Ethic Minority Problems in Nigerian Politics (Upsala), ACTA University Press 84  UNIT 12: MOTIVATING THE NIGERIAN WORKER TABLE OF CONTENT 1.0.
Introduction - - - - - - - 85 2.0.
Objectives - - - - - - - 85 3.0.
Motivating the Nigerian Worker - - - - - 85 3.1.
The Meaning and Scope of Motivation - - - - - 85 3.2.
Major Assumptions about the Nature of Man - - - - 85-87 3.3.
Motivating the Nigerian Worker for Higher Productivity - - 87 3.4.
Self Assessment Question - - - - - - - 88 3.5.
Self Assessment Answer - - - - - - - 88 4.0.
Conclusion - - - - - - - - 89 5.0.
Summary - - - - - - - - 89 6.0.
Tutor-Marked Assignment - - - - - - - 90 6.1.
Tutor-Marked Assignment (Answers and Marking Scheme)- - 90 7.0.
References - - - - - - - - 91 85  UNIT 12: MOTIVATING THE NIGERIAN WORKER 1.0.
INTRODUCTION This unit will examine the issue of motivation, with specific focus on how to motivate the Nigerian worker, bearing in mind the impact of Nigeria’ socio-cultural practices on intra- organizational behaviour.
2.0.
OBJECTIVES At the end of this unit, you should be able to: (cid:0) State the meaning of motivation.
(cid:0) Identify the various approaches to motivation.
(cid:0) State the techniques of motivating employees for higher performance.
3.0.
MOTIVATING THE NIGERIAN WORKER 3.1.
THE MEANING AND SCOPE OF MOTIVATION Motivation is the creating force or impulse, which will more something towards a desired action or activity.
It is the influencing force that gives rise to behaviour.
It is the stimulus that propels people to make the right move in the right direction.
The implication of this is that people can be nudged from behind with some threat of force or wooed from the front with some promise of rewards.
There are many concepts and theories of motivation.
Some of them will be briefly discussed here.
The first concept of motivation is commonly referred to as the Hedonistic View.
It is based on the assumption that man is a pain-avoiding and pleasure-seeking animal and when given alternatives, he or she will choose a course of action that will maximize his or her pleasure and avoid a course of action that will cause pain.
Another school of thought attributes behaviour to various instincts.
The assumption is that man has certain basic instincts which cause him or her to act in certain ways.
Sigmund Freud identified three basic instincts: sex, aggression or self-preservation and fear of death.
The term instinct was later replaced with the concept that man’s behaviour is built on the pattern of behaviour learnt from in the culture in which he or she lives.
Another school of though attributes man’s behaviour to various motives or needs.
This assumes that man’s behaviour is largely determined by his or her attempt to satisfy these needs.
The need is broadly classified into primary and secondary needs or physiological and psychological needs respectively.
86  Major contributors to the Needs Motivation Theory are Abraham Maslow, Frederick Herzberg and David McClelland.
3.2.
MAJOR ASSUMPTIONS ABOUT THE NATURE OF MAN There are four major assumptions.
They are: (cid:0) The rational economic man (cid:0) The social man (cid:0) The self-actualizing man (cid:0) The complex man.
The Rational Economic Man – This is based on the philosophy of Hedonism which argued that man calculates the action that will maximize his or her self-interest and behaves accordingly.
The rational economic man is characterized as: (cid:0) One who primarily motivated by economic incentives and will do that which gets him or her the greater economic gain.
(cid:0) A passive agent to be manipulated motivated and controlled by the organization that controls the economic incentives.
(cid:0) One whose feelings are essentially irrational and must be prevented from interfering with his or her rational calculation of self interest.
This doctrine classified man into trustworthy money motivated, calculative masses.
The Social Man – Elton Mayo, the proponent of the social man, developed sets of assumption about the nature of man as follows: (a) That man is basically motivated by social needs and the desire to obtain a sense of identity.
(b) Man is more responsive to the social forces of the peer group than to the incentives and control of management (c) Man is responsible to the extent that a supervisor can meet a subordinate’s social needs and needs for acceptance.
(d) That meaning has gone out of work itself and must therefore be sought in the social relationship on the job.
Self-Actualizing Man – Man’s needs are arranged in hierarchical order as shown below: (cid:0) Biological/Physiological needs (cid:0) Social and affiliation needs (cid:0) Ego satisfaction and self-esteem needs (cid:0) Self-actualization needs in the sense of maximum use of all his resources.
The Complex Man – Studies have shown that man is a more complex individual than the rational economic, social or self-actualizing man.
He or she is unique and notably different from his or her neighbour and co-workers.
The assumptions underlying this complexity are: 87  (cid:0) Man is not only complex but highly variable.
He or she has many motives which are arranged in some sort of hierarchy and importance to him or her, but this hierarchy is subject to change from time to time and from situation to situation.
(cid:0) Man is capable of learning new motives through his or her organizational experience.
(cid:0) Man’s motive in different units in the same organization may be different.
A person who is alienated in the formal organization may find fulfillment of his or her social and self-actualization needs in the informal organization.
(cid:0) Man can be productively involved with an organization on the basis of many different kinds of motives.
His or her ultimate satisfaction and effectiveness of the organization depend only in part on the nature of his or her motivation.
3.2.1.
APPROACHES TO MOTIVATION There are many approaches to motivation.
The traditional approach which is commonly practised in Nigeria is the carrot-and-stick approach.
It consists essentially of forcing people to work by threats to fire them or cut their economic reward if they don’t.
It assumes that the main reason why some people work is to earn money.
Other approaches are: (cid:0) The Expectancy Theory (cid:0) The Need Satisfaction Theory (cid:0) Motivator-Hygiene Theory.
3.3.
MOTIVATING THE NIGERIAN WORKER FOR HIGHER PRODUCTIVITY The general perception among Nigerian workers is that their advancement does not depend on how hard they work but on whom they know.
This perhaps explains why the administrative paralysis of neglect, lack of morale, indifference, sagging productivity, callousness and inefficiency could be explained in terms of the underlying culture, attitudes and values inherent in our society.
In the Public Service, a survey showed that appointments, promotions, status and prestige are shared on the basis of “Federal Character” and nepotism rather than merit.
Aina (1990) identifies some key factors involved in monitoring employees for higher productivity.
They are: (cid:0) Salaries and wages (cid:0) Incentives system (cid:0) Work ethic and social values (cid:0) Morale (cid:0) Social and psychological condition of workers.
(cid:0) Quality and style of supervision and management (cid:0) Knowledge and skills of workers (cid:0) The reward system management.
To effectively motivate the Nigerian worker for higher productivity, the following must be borne in mind: (cid:0) Clear objectives and positive reinforcement (cid:0) Monetary incentives (cid:0) Status (cid:0) Participation in decision making (cid:0) Flexible working hours (cid:0) Evaluation of individuals (cid:0) Openness towards others.
88  3.4.
SELF ASSESSMENT QUESTION What are the factors involved in motivating employees for higher productivity?
3.5.
SELF ASSESSMENT ANSWER The factors are: (cid:0) Salaries and wages (cid:0) Incentives system (cid:0) Work ethic and social values (cid:0) Morale (cid:0) Social and psychological condition of works.
(cid:0) Quality and style of supervision and management (cid:0) Knowledge and skills of workers (cid:0) The reward system management.
89  4.0.
CONCLUSION A satisfied worker is a committed worker.
This is why managements must make concerted efforts at motivating the workforce to act in a manner that will produce the desired result.
5.0.
SUMMARY Maximizing productivity is critical in the management planning and decision making process.
To motivate a worker, one must understand the nature of man, or the individual to be motivated.
90  6.0.
TUTOR MARKED ASSIGNMENT Identify and briefly explain the major techniques that can be used to motivate the Nigerian worker for higher productivity.
6.1.
TUTOR-MARKED ASSIGNMENT (ANSWER AND MARKING SCHEME) The major techniques are: (cid:0) Having clear objectives and positive reinforcement (cid:0) Monetary incentives (cid:0) Status (cid:0) Participation in decision making process (cid:0) Flexible working hours (cid:0) Evaluation of the individual (cid:0) Suggestions system.
MARKING SCHEME 1 mark for each technique named.
2 marks for each explanation.
[Total – 20 marks] 91  7.0.
REFERENCES 1.
McGregor D.M., (1960): The Human Side of the Enterprise, (New York), McGraw Hill 2.
Aina, Olusola (1993): Personnel Management in Nigeria: A Work-Centered Approach, (Lagos), Edition F Communications 92  UNIT 13: MODELS OF ORGANIZATION TABLE OF CONTENT 1.0.
Introduction - - - - - - - 93 2.0.
Objectives - - - - - - - 93 3.0.
Models of Organization - - - - - - - 93 3.1.
The Concepts of Overlays - - - - - - 93 3.2.
The Fusion Process and Systems Organization - - - - 93-94 3.3.
The Bureaucratic Model - - - - - - - 94 3.4.
Self Assessment Question - - - - - - - 95 3.5.
Self Assessment Answer - - - - - - - 95 4.0.
Conclusion - - - - - - - - 96 5.0.
Summary - - - - - - - - 96 6.0.
Tutor-Marked Assignment - - - - - - - 97 6.1.
Tutor-Marked Assignment (Answers and Marking Scheme)- - 97 7.0.
References - - - - - - - - 98 93  UNIT 13: MODELS OF ORGANIZATION 1.0.
INTRODUCTION This unit will expose students to the various models of organization primarily designed to achieve organizational effectiveness.
2.0.
OBJECTIVES At the end of this unit, students should be able to: (cid:0) State the concept of system overlaps.
(cid:0) Identify the processes in an organization.
(cid:0) State the characteristic of bureaucratic organization.
3.0.
MODELS OF ORGANISATION 3.1.
THE CONCEPT OF OVERLAYS The Concept of Overlays was proposed by Pfiffner and Shernood.
They see organizations as a variety of complex factors working within the ambit of a formal organizational set-up.
This concept presupposes that an organization is a formal structure deliberately constituted by the framer to show the types of interactions that will be allowed in the organization.
The formal structure is a Job-task Pyramid and represents the foundation of the organization.
The structure can be modified by internal and external pressures.
The pressures were referred to by Orife as a System of Overlay.
The overlays are: (a) Socio-Metric Overlay – This is a problem solving approach.
It depicts special (b) friendship within the organization.
Function Overlay – Depicts a direct relationship between operating departments and (c) specialists assistants.
(d) The Decision Overlay – Depicts the flow of important decisions in the organization.
(e) The Power Overlay – Depicts the centres of power in the organization Communication Overlay – depicits th channel of who talks to whom about a particular problem.
These overlays invariably modify the formal structure of the job-task pyramid.
3.2.
THE FUSION PROCESS AND SYSTEM ORGANISATION The Fusion Process recognizes the existence of individuals whose goals are distinctly separate from those of the organization for which they work.
94  It regards an organization as a dynamic open system containing formal and informal behaviours.
Three processes in an organization were identified as: (cid:0) The Socializing Process, which are activities contributing to achievement of corporate goals.
(cid:0) The Personalizing Process, which are activities contributing to the realization of the individual work.
(cid:0) The Fusion Process, which are simultaneous occurrences of socializing and personalizing processes or the simultaneous achievement of organizational and individual goals.
The concept of organization as a system was based on empirical studies.
It assumes that not all organizations are effective.
An effective organization is regarded as one which encourages the building of an effective work groups with high performance goals.
Likert categorizes such organizations into four, namely: System 1, System 2, System 3, and System 4.
The Likert’s Systems 1 and 2 are equivalent to McGregor’s Theory X while Systems 3 and 4 are equivalent to the Theory Y assumptions.
In system organization, the managers act as link pins.
That is, they connect each group with the immediate supervisor’s group.
3.3.
THE BUREAUCRATIC MODEL Max Weber’s ideal type of organisation, otherwise referred to as Bureaucracy is an attempt at describing an ideal form of an organization which guarantees the predictability of the behaviour of employees of an organization.
The characteristics of bureaucracy are: (cid:0) Rational legal system of goals (cid:0) Authority of office (cid:0) Hierarchy: superior – subordinate relationship (cid:0) Rules, regulations and records (cid:0) Specialization – limited sphere of competence (cid:0) Predictability arising from rules and regulations (cid:0) Universalism or indifference implying apparent impartiality (cid:0) Employment should be based on technical competence.
(cid:0) Offices should be taken as careers.
95  3.4.
SELF ASSESSMENT QUESTION Identify the overlays which are inherent in a formal organization.
3.5.
SELF ASSESSMENT ANSWER The overlays are:  The Socio-metric Overlay  Function Overlay  The Decision Overlay  The Power Overlay  The Communication Overlay.
N.B: Brief explanations required.
96  4.0.
CONCLUSION Organizations are deliberately designed to achieve effectiveness.
5.0.
SUMMARY Different models of organizations are identified.
These are:  The Concept of Overlays  The Fusion Process  System Organization  The Bureaucratic Model.
Organizations must be designed to achieve effectiveness.
Likert identified four categories of an effective organization.
The Likert Systems 1 and 2 are equivalent to McGregor’s Theory X, while Systems 3 and 4 are identical to McGregor’s Theory Y.
97  6.0.
TUTOR-MARKED ASSIGNMENT State the characteristics of Weber’s ideal-type organization or Bureaucracy.
6.1.
TUTOR-MARKED ASSIGNMENT (ANSWER AND MARKING SCHEME) The characteristics of Bureaucracy are:  Rational legal system of goals  Authority of office  Hierarchy: superior – subordine relationship  Specialization – limited sphere of competence  Predictably arising from rules and regulations  Universalism or indifference implying apparent impartiality  Employment should be based on technical competence  Offices should be taken as careers.
MARKING SCHEME 2 ½ marks for each characteristic named.
[Total – 20 marks] 98  7.0.
REFERENCES 1.
Simon, H.A (1945): Administrative Behaviour, (New York), Macmillan 2.
Barnard, C. (1964): The Functions of the Executive, (Cambridge), Harvard University Press 99  UNIT 14: THE SCIENTIFIC MANAGEMENT MOVEMENT TABLE OF CONTENT 1.0.
Introduction - - - - - - - 100 2.0.
Objectives - - - - - - - 100 3.0.
The Scientific Management Movement - - - - 100 3.1.
Frederick W. Taylor (1856 - 1915) - - - - - 100-101 3.2.
Henri Fayol (1841-1925) - - - - - - 101 3.3.
Urwick and Gulick (1937) - - - - - - 102 3.4.
Self Assessment Question - - - - - - 103 3.5.
Self Assessment Answer - - - - - - 103 4.0.
Conclusion - - - - - - - - 104 5.0.
Summary - - - - - - - - 104 6.0.
Tutor-Marked Assignment - - - - - - 105 6.1.
Tutor-Marked Assignment (Answers and Marking Scheme)- - 105 7.0.
References - - - - - - - - 106 100  UNIT 14: THE SCIENTIFIC MANAGEMENT MOVEMENT 1.0.
INTRODUCTION This unit will introduce us to the principal contributors to the scientific movement.
2.0.
OBJECTIVES At the end of this unit, students should be able to:  State the contributions of Frederick Taylor to scientific movement.
 State and explain Henri Fayol’s contributions.
 Explain Urwick and Gulick’s contributions to the principles of management.
3.0.
THE SCIENTIFIC MANAGEMENT MOVEMENT 3.1.
FREDERICK W. TAYLOR (1856-1915) Frederick Taylor is commonly referred to as the father of scientific management movement.
As a staff of the Midvale Street Company in Pennsylvania, USA, he harped on his work experience at various levels of the organization to establish the fact that a substantial amount of inefficiency was prevalent in the performance of all tasks of the operational level.
The high level of inefficiency, according to him, was partly due to the fact that workers were in charge of both planning and performing their job, which he claimed led to wastage.
He perceived that a gap existed between actual production and cost.
He believed that proper work methods and standards would eliminate or reduce the level of inefficiency.
Taylor’s research work was largely focused on:  Improvement of working tools  Analysis and innovation of work methods  Enforced standardization of work methods  Enforced cooperation.
Taylor’s principles as summarized by Villers (1960) are: (a) Time Study Principle – Production effort should be measured by the standard and time and accurate time study established for the work.
101  (b) Piece-rate Principle – Wages should be made proportional to output.
Rate being based on standards already established.
(c) Separation of Planning from Performance – Managements should be responsible for planning and also make sure performance is physically possible.
(d) Scientific Methods of Work Principle – Managements should take charge of the work method and train the workforce accordingly.
(e) Managerial Control Principle – Managers should be taught how to apply scientific principles of management and control (f) Functional Management Principle – Advocates the application of military principles and the design of industrial organizations to serve desired purpose.
In addition, Frederick, Taylor also advocated the following:  That law is the chief instrument for efficient management  That good life for the workforce must be brought about by monetary rewards  That administration should be interrelated with the personal aspirations of the workers.
3.2.
HENRI FAYOL (1841-1925) Henri Fayol developed some principles of management which complemented the work of Frederick W. Taylor.
Fayol’s work was focused on top management.
He defined the functional elements of organization as:  To plan  To command  To coordinate  To control.
Fayol’s 14 principles of management are designed to enhance the organization’s effectiveness and efficiency.
The principles are: (1) Division of Work: This emphasizes on specialization and specialization enhances effectiveness.
(2) Authority and Responsibility: Authority should be commensurate with responsibility.
(3) Discipline: Staff must respect and obey the rules and objectives of the organization.
(4) Unity of Command: Subordinates should be responsible to one superordinate.
(5) Unity of Direction: Unity of purpose.
All work toward the attainment of one goal.
(6) Subordination of Individual Interests: The interests of the whole should take precedence over the interest of a staff member.
(7) Remuneration: Payment should be fair and not exploitative.
(8) Centralization: There should be a balance between concentration and decentralization.
(9) Scalar Chain: Chain of superiors from the highest to the lowest.
102  (10) Order: A place for everything, everything in its place.
(11) Equity: Fairness, cordiality, kindness and justice, based on predetermined norms.
(12) Stability of Tenure: Unnecessary staff turnover is seen to be the cause and effect of bad management.
(13) Espirit de Corps: Unity is strength.
(14) Discipline: This is concerned with respect for agreements aimed at obtaining obedience.
Requires good superiors at all levels.
3.3.
URWICK AND GULICK (1937) Urwick and Gulick worked on Fayol’s principles of management to derive more articulate and up-to-date principles of management.
According to them, the primary works of the executive are: Planning, Organizing, Staffing, Directing, Coordinating, Reporting and Budgeting, which stand for the acronym: “POSDCORB”.
This was later expanded by Enaohwo and Eferakeya (1989) as POSDCORBE, with the “E” standing for Evaluation.
103  3.4.
SELF ASSESSMENT QUESTION Explain the acronym “POSDCORBE”.
3.5.
SELF ASSESSMENT ANSWER P = Planning O = Organizing S = Staffing D = Directing C = Coordinating R = Reporting B = Budgeting E = Evaluation.
The above represent the traditional functions of the chief executive.
104  4.0.
CONCLUSION The Scientific Management Movement was the precursors to the Human Relations Movement.
The movement believed that there is one best way to manage.
5.0.
SUMMARY Frederick Taylor, the Father of Scientific Management, was of the opinion that management should take responsibility for planning design methods for accomplishing or performing a task and monitor performance to ensure effectiveness and efficiency.
105  6.0.
TUTOR-MARKED ASSIGNMENT Identify and explain the six steps into which Viller summarizes Taylor’s Principles of Management.
6.1.
TUTOR-MARKED ASSIGNMENT Viller summarizes Taylor’s Principles of Management into six steps.
These are:  Time Study Principle  Piece-rate Principle  Separation of Planning from Performance Principle  Scientific Method of Work Principle  Managerial Control Principle  Functional Management Principle.
MARKING SCHEME 1 mark for each step correctly named 2 marks for each step explained [Total – 20 Marks] 106  7.0.
REFERENCES 1.
Fayol, H. (1949): General and Industrial Management, (London), Sir Isaac Pitman and Son 2.
Hicks, H.G.
and Gullet, C.R.
(1976): Organizations: Theory and Behaviour, McGraw Hill Kogakusha Limited 107  UNIT 15: STAFF MORALE AND JOB PERFORMANCE TABLE OF CONTENT 1.0.
Introduction - - - - - - - 108 2.0.
Objectives - - - - - - - 108 3.0.
Staff Morale and Job Performance - - - - - 108 3.1.
The Concepts of Morale and Motivation - - - - 108-109 3.2.
The Influence of Motivation on Staff Performance - - - 109 3.3.
Boosting Staff Morale - - - - - - - 109 3.4.
Self Assessment Question - - - - - - 110 3.5.
Self Assessment Answer - - - - - - 110 4.0.
Conclusion - - - - - - - - 111 5.0.
Summary - - - - - - - - 111 6.0.
Tutor-Marked Assignment - - - - - - - 112 6.1.
Tutor-Marked Assignment (Answers and Marking Scheme)- - 112 7.0.
References - - - - - - - - 113 108  UNIT 15: STAFF MORALE AND JOB PERFORMANCE 1.0.
INTRODUCTION The unit will expose us to the concept of staff morale and its attendant effects on job performance.
2.0.
OBJECTIVES At the end of this unit, students should be able to:  Explain the concepts of morale and motivation.
 State the influence of motivation on staff performance.
 Explain the process of boosting staff morale.
3.0.
STAFF MORALE AND JOB PERFORMANCE 3.1.
THE CONCEPTS OF MORALE AND MOTIVATION Motivation is one of the ways of arousing interest and inspiring people to cooperate and when necessary “pull out” something extra.
It is the investigation of behaviour rather than the mere existence of a need.
Environment motivations (incentives) are:  Good objectives towards which good behaviour is directed  A wide variety of stimulating conditions which act as spurs and checks to performance efficiency.
Study has shown that human performance equally depends on the environment’s temperature, humidity and circulation of air.
Man’s attitude to work can be changed by praise or reproof, rewards or punishment, working against a competitor or as a member of a cooperating group, working with the knowledge, achieving success, or failure, working with a definite aim or purpose.
The morale of a worker can be changed by one or more of the reasons mentioned above.
3.1.1. WHO IS INVOLVED IN MOTIVATION?
 Team Leader – Inspires members of the team to create the right response.
 Self Motivation – The desire to excel and achieve target.
 Co-workers – Other varieties such as music could be a stimulant, particularly in monotonous work.
A natural leader could emerge from the working team.
 Personnel Staff – Through effective administration of incentives and other staff welfare packages.
3.1.2.
WHAT IS MORALE?
109  According to Otu (1998), morale is the emotional reaction of a person to his job.
It refers to confidence in the means of goal attainment, i. in leaders ii.
in subordinates iii.
in Oneself.
Morale is an abstract term.
It cannot be isolated or seen.
A correlation exists between low morale and other factors such as:  Labour withdrawal  Absenteeism  Indolence  Loafing  Excessive excuse from work.
Conversely, high morale is associated with:  Promptness  Enthusiasm  Dependability and  Cooperation.
3.2.
THE INFLUENCE OF MOTIVATION ON STAFF MORALE Motivation is a driving force, a propeller that drives an individual to take a desired action.
The human resource plays a pivotal role in the effective attainment of organizations.
In view of this, it is critical that managements address the welfare of this all-important resource.
Addressing these resources will require the integration of the individuals’ needs with the goals of the organization.
This should be pursued in line with Frederick Hertzberg’s Motivator – Hygiene factors.
To be avoided are the hygiene factors which are demotivators.
They are workers’ pay, fringe benefits, working conditions, quality supervision and administration policies, while the motivators to be embraced are: Recognition, advancement, achievement, personal growth and self-fulfillment.
This enables the organization to elicit the following behaviour from its staff:  Staff are induced to enter and remain within the system  Staff are made to carry out their role assignment in dependable manner  Staff are involved in innovative and spontaneous activity in achieving organizational objectives.
3.3.
BOOSTING THE MORALE OF STAFF It is the prime responsibility of the leadership to ensure a conducive work environment is created to give staff members an enabling environment to carry out their work and to boost their self-worth on their jobs.
The leader must be accessible, flexible and willing to effect necessary and practical changes in the leadership style and administration.
Staff morale can be boosted through:  Praise  Responsibility 110   Promotion  Advancement  Professional and academic growth.
3.4.
SELF ASSESSMENT QUESTION In what ways can staff morale be boosted?
3.5.
SELF ASSESSMENT ANSWER Staff morale can be boosted through:  Praise  Reward  Achievement  Career advancement  Recognition.
111  4.0.
CONCLUSION Motivation is a key aspect of morale, while morale is critical to the attainment of organizational goals.
A happy worker is a productive worker.
5.0.
SUMMARY Motivation is an inner drive that compels an individual to act in a desirable way while morale is that emotional response of a person to his or her job.
Low morale correlates with absenteeism, lateness to work, loafing, indolence and unacceptable labour withdrawal.
High morale is associated with:  Promptness and punctuality  Enthusiasm  Dependability  Cooperation.
112  6.0.
TUTOR-MARKED ASSIGNMENT Discuss the effects of motivation on staff morale.
6.1.
TUTOR-MARKEDA ASSIGNMENT (ANSWER AND MARKING SCHEME) Staff morale refers to the confidence a member of staff has in:  The means of goal attainment  The leaders  The subordinates  In himself or herself.
His or her emotional reaction to these situations on the job, as listed above, could translate to low or high morale.
Morale and motivation have a positive correlation.
Morale is the foundation on which motivation is based.
This explains why a demotivated staff is a demoralized staff.
The attendant effects of low morale or demoralization are expressed in:  Absenteeism of the staff  Indolence  Lateness to work  Loafing etc A highly motivated staff will exhibit the underlisted characteristics:  Promptness  Enthusiasm  Dependability  Cooperation  Long stay on the job.
MARKING SCHEME 2 marks for each point effectively discussed.
[Total – 20 marks] 113  7.0.
REFERENCES 1.
Otu D.O.
(2006): Human Resources Management in Education, (Lagos), National Open University of Nigeria 2.
Hicks H.G.
and Gullet C.R.
(1976): Organizations Theory and Behaviour, McGraw Hill Kogakusha Limited 114
