 NATIONAL OPEN UNIVERSITY OF NIGERIA SCHOOL OF BUSINESS AND HUMAN RESOURCE COURSE CODE: MBA768 COURSE TITLE: INTERPERSONAL AND TEAM DYNAMICS MBA768 COURSE GUIDE COURS E GUIDE MBA768 INTERPERSONAL AND TEAM DYNAMICS Course Team Josef Bel-Molokwu, Ph.D (Developer/Writer) NATIONAL OPEN UNIVERSITY OF NIGERIA ii MBA768 COURSE GUIDE National Open University of Nigeria Headquarters 14/16 Ahmadu Bello Way Victoria Island Lagos Abuja Office No.
5 Dar es Salaam Street Off Aminu Kano Crescent Wuse II, Abuja Nigeria e-mail: centralinfo@nou.edu.ng URL: www.nou.edu.ng Published By: National Open University of Nigeria First Printed 2011 ISBN: 978-058-201-0 All Rights Reserved iii MBA768 COURSE GUIDE CONTENTS PAGE Introduction………………………………………………………….
1 Course Contents…………………………………………………….. 1 Course Aims………………………………………………………… 2 Objectives…………………………………………………………… 2 Course Materials…………………………………………………….. 2 Study Units………………………………………………………….. 2 Assignments………………………………………………………… 4 Assessment………………………………………………………….. 4 Tutor-Marked Assignments……………………………………….... 4 Final Examination and Grading…………………………………..… 4 Summary…………………………………………….…………….… 4 iv  Introduction MBA768 (Interpersonal and Team Dynamics) is a semester course work of two credit hours.
It is available for students taking the MBA programme in the School of Business and Human Resources Management.
It is broken into 15 units.
Teams are building blocks for organisation structure and forces for productivity, quality, cost saving, speed, change, and innovation.
They have the potential to provide many benefits for both the organisation and individual members.
Generally, almost all middle-sized and large organisations use teams to produce goods and services, to manage projects, to make decisions and run their operations.
Every individual has two vital implications in the process of interpersonal and team dynamics.
Firstly, you will be working in and, perhaps, managing teams.
Secondly, the ability to work in and lead teams is valuable to your employer and important to your career.
In a group setting, there are usually diverse personal backgrounds, talents, strengths and weaknesses.
The most challenging responsibility of a team leader is to combine all of these strengths and backgrounds to accomplish higher goals (Nurick, 1993).
As a result of the fact that individual persons make up a team, the foundation of personal and professional success lies in understanding others and realising the impact that interpersonal behaviour has on other persons involved in the team.
Apart from enabling us to understand the impact of a team in an organisational system, this course also provides an avenue for us to understand interpersonal dynamics and how to combine interpersonal weaknesses, strengths and talents to achieve higher goals.
Course Contents The contents of the course will comprise the definition of teams as well as interpersonal dynamics and team dynamics.
It will also consist of the dynamics of team formation and relationships, MBA768 INTERPERSONAL AND TEAM DYNAMICS cohesiveness, evaluation and various modes of attaining commitment and improvement.
Course Aims The aims of this course are primarily to expose you to the significance of management of teams and the dynamics of a team, especially in a work environment.
These aims will be achieved in the following ways.
• Explaining the meanings of teams, team dynamics and interpersonal dynamics, • Explaining the composition and roles of teams, • Identifying how teams are formed, • Identifying how teams become cohesive and productive, • Explaining how conflicts are managed in teams, and • Identifying various benefits and contributions of teams in management.
Course Objectives At the end of the course, you should be able to: • define teams, team dynamics and interpersonal dynamics • explain the composition and roles of teams • explain how teams are formed • describe how teams become cohesive and productive • explain how conflicts are managed in teams and • describe various benefits and contributions in management.
Course Materials 1.
Course Guide 2.
Study Units 3.
Textbooks 4.
Assignment Guide Study Units There are 15 (fifteen) units in the course grouped into 3 (three) modules of 5 (five) units each.
These units should be studied very carefully.
ii MBA768 INTERPERSONAL AND TEAM DYNAMICS Module 1 Unit 1 Definition of Interpersonal and Team Dynamics Unit 2 Interpersonal Dynamics Unit 3 Types of Teams Unit 4 Teams: Composition and Roles ….
(1) Unit 5 Teams: Composition and Roles …..(2) Module 2 Unit 1 Managing Team Relationships Unit 2 Team Formation and Team Building Unit 3 Team Cohesiveness Unit 4 Building Team Cohesiveness and High Performance Norms Unit 5 Guidelines for Team Productive Meetings Module 3 Unit 1 Team Decision and Commitment Unit 2 Team Development Unit 3 Team Evaluation and Improvement Unit 4 Team Conflict Management Unit 5 Team Benefits and Contribution The first three units deal with definitions of the relevant concepts, while the next two explain how teams develop.
Units 6 to 10 demonstrate the dynamics of the working of teams, units 11 to 14 depict the operational milieu of teams, while the last unit examines the benefits and contributions of teams in management.
Each study unit is designed to take not less than two hours of work.
Each includes Introductions, Objectives, Main Content, Self Assessment Exercises, Conclusion, Summary, References/Further Reading and Tutor Marked Assignments.
The exercises make it important for you to look beyond this written series.
You should in addition, seek information and practical cases from industries, government organisations, social groups and similar sources.
The internet, textbooks, journals, magazines and newspapers are always most beneficial.
The units are not all of equal length for the reason of their varying content, but this should rather give you the challenge to explore iii MBA768 INTERPERSONAL AND TEAM DYNAMICS further on the issues raised in the shorter units, to achieve the recommended work schedule for not less than two hours per unit.
Assignments There are at least two assignments attached to each unit, except for units 4 and 5 which treat the same topic.
This means that you have not less than 25 assignments to challenge you fully.
Assessments Tutor-Marked Assignments The tutor marked assignments demand that you apply what you have learnt in the study units, augmented by your own reading beyond the units.
The assignments will be submitted to your tutor for grading as part of your overall score.
Final Examination and Grading There will be written examinations at the end of the course.
Summary This course (MBA768 – Interpersonal and Team Dynamics) further exposes you to the nature of teams, their dynamics and the dynamics of interpersonal co-existence.
Upon completing the course successfully, you would have become equipped with the knowledge required to play effective roles in teams.
iv MBA768 INTERPERSONAL AND TEAM DYNAMICS Course Code MBA768 Course Title Interpersonal Team Dynamics Course Team Josef Bel-Molokwu, Ph.D (Developer/Writer) NATIONAL OPEN UNIVERSITY OF NIGERIA v MBA768 INTERPERSONAL AND TEAM DYNAMICS National Open University of Nigeria Headquarters 14/16 Ahmadu Bello Way Victoria Island Lagos Abuja Office No.
5 Dar es Salaam Street Off Aminu Kano Crescent Wuse II, Abuja Nigeria e-mail: centralinfo@nou.edu.ng URL: www.nou.edu.ng Published By: National Open University of Nigeria First Printed 2011 ISBN: 978-058-201-0 All Rights Reserved vi MBA768 INTERPERSONAL AND TEAM DYNAMICS CONTENTS PAGE Module 1 ………………………………………………………….
1 Unit 1 Definition of Interpersonal and Team Dynamics…….
1 Unit 2 Interpersonal Dynamics……………………………….
6 Unit 3 Types of Teams……………………………………….. 15 Unit 4 Teams Composition and Roles (1)…………................. 20 Unit 5 Teams Composition and Roles (2)…………................. 25 Module 2 ………………………………………………………… 30 Unit 1 Managing Team Relationships……………….............. 30 Unit 2 Team Formation and Team Building………………… 34 Unit 3 Team Cohesiveness…………………………………… 40 Unit 4 Building Team Cohesiveness and High Performance Norms………………………………………………….
45 Unit 5 Guidelines for Team Productive Meetings…………… 49 Module 3 ……………………………………………………….. 55 Unit 1 Team Decision and Commitment……………............. 55 Unit 2 Team Development……………………………….….. 61 Unit 3 Team Evaluation and Improvement…………............. 68 Unit 4 Team Conflict Management…………………............. 72 Unit 5 Team Benefits and Contribution…………………….. 76 vii NoneMBA768 INTERPERSONAL AND TEAM DYNAMICS MODULE 1 Unit 1 Definition of Interpersonal and Team Dynamics Unit 2 Interpersonal Dynamics Unit 3 Types of Teams Unit 4 Teams Composition and Roles (1) Unit 5 Teams Composition and Roles (2) UNIT 1 DEFINITION OF INTERPERSONAL AND TEAM DYNAMICS CONTENTS 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objectives 3.0 Main Content 3.1 Teams: Definitions and Characteristics 3.1.1 Definitions 3.1.2 Features of a Team 3.2 Characteristics of Team Dynamics 3.3 Why People Join Teams: The Dynamics of Team Formation 3.3.1 Factors That Aid Team Formation 3.3.2 Other Reasons Why People Join Teams 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutor-Marked Assignment 7.0 References/Further Reading 1.0 INTRODUCTION The behaviour of people in teams is an important domain of organisational behaviour, as it provides an opportunity to understand the larger set-up.
This is because small teams invariably gravitate into larger teams and also because, the smaller the team, the more manageable it becomes.
Therefore, a smaller team ensures more effective study cost wise.
Teams range from a small intimate association of two people in a room, e.g.
room-mate, to larger ones and even more complex ones like political parties.
1 MBA768 INTERPERSONAL AND TEAM DYNAMICS 2.0 OBJECTIVES By the end of this unit, you should be able to: • define a team and team dynamics • explain the basic characteristics of team dynamics • describe the dynamics of team formation.
3.0 MAIN CONTENT 3.1 Teams: Definitions and Characteristics 3.1.1 Definitions A popular definition is the one that emphasises commonalty, i.e.
something that is common to members.
Its features are listed below: • Members share something in common; • It is a collection of individuals with shared perception; • Members share a common motivation or goal, e.g.
for higher wages or salaries.
Shaw (1971) defined a team as two or more persons who are interacting with one another in such a manner that each person influences or is influenced by each other.
Muzafer Sheriff (1968) defines a team as a social unit consisting of a number of individuals who stand in status and role relationships to one another, stabilised in some degree at a given time and who possess a set of values or norms regulating their behaviour, at least in matters of commitment to the group.
3.1.2 Features of a Team The features of any group include the following.
• Interaction among the members • A team endures, usually, for a reasonable period • A group or team has developed at least a rudimentary group structure.
However, no matter how good the “people skills” of the members of a new team, the team’s performance will always be improved by regular practice of teaming skills and by study of team dynamics.
2 MBA768 INTERPERSONAL AND TEAM DYNAMICS Webster’s New World Dictionary defines the word dynamics in the following ways.
• The science dealing with motions produced by given forces • The forces operative in any field.
The Oxford Advanced Learner’s Dictionary defines dynamics as • “The way in which people or things behave and react to each other in a particular situation” It also states: group dynamics is the way in which members of a group react to each other and to issues” In other words, it is the ability to understand interpersonal and group dynamics, i.e.
the behaviour and reaction to each other in a particular situation.
3.2 Characteristics of Team Dynamics Some basic characteristics of a team are as follows.
i.
Members are aware of each other and have some common reaction to each other.
ii.
Groups have mutually interdependent purposes in which the success of one member is dependent on the success of the other in achieving the goal.
iii.
Each person in the team has a sense of belonging or membership, i.e.
identifying with other members of the group.
iv.
In summary, whenever individuals, with similar motives, similar frustrations and similar personal concerns for acceptance, for recognition and for stabilising their perceptions have to operate together, they form a team.
3.3 Why People Join Teams: The Dynamics Of Team Formation The Propinquity theory gives the most popular reasons why people join teams.
That is, individuals affiliate with one another because of spatial or geographical proximity.
For example, students who sit together in a class rather than at different ends of a class are more likely to form a team.
Employees working together in the same unit are also likely to form a team.
This Propinquity theory is, however, a weak theory because it does not explain some of the complexities of team formation.
3 MBA768 INTERPERSONAL AND TEAM DYNAMICS Another theory was popularised by George Homans in his book, “The Human Group”.
Homans based his theory of formation on activities, interactions and sentiments.
These elements are directly related to each other.
The more activities people share, the more interaction they would have, and the stronger will be their sentiments, (i.e.
how much they like or dislike each other.)
The more the interaction, the more will be their activities together and their sentiments.
The major element is interaction.
When people interact with one another as a team, it is not only because of proximity, but also to do some or all of the following and perhaps more: • solve problems • attain some goals • reduce tension, etc.
3.3.1 Factors That Aid Team Formation (a) Propinquity – here, we refer to proximity,nearness, contact and interactions (b) Interpersonal attraction, is a positive function of physical attractiveness (c) Attitude similarity (d) Personality similarity (e) Economic similarity (f) Perceived abilities of the other person in form of success or failure.
3.3.2 Other Reasons Why People Join Teams In addition to the theories specified above, some of the more practical reasons why people join groups or teams include the following reasons - economic, security and social.
(i) People join teams or groups in order to satisfy some individual needs.
Team members tend to satisfy the intended social needs of one another, e.g.
the need for affiliation etc.
(ii) An individual may join a team if it is attractive and rewarding (iii) An individual would join a team if he or she values the goals of the team.
(iv) People join teams for security reasons.
(v) An individual could also join a team if he or she perceives it to be instrumental in satisfying a need outside the group.
4 MBA768 INTERPERSONAL AND TEAM DYNAMICS SELF ASSESSMENT EXERCISE 1.
What is team dynamics?
2.
State three factors that aid team formation.
4.0 CONCLUSION In this unit, we have discussed generally the definitions of a team and team dynamics.
We also looked at the features and the basic characteristics of team dynamics.
We discovered that the reasons why people join teams are based on activities carried out together, interactions and sentiments, apart from the propinquity based theory.
In closing the unit, we identified other reasons why people join teams and factors that aid team formation.
5.0 SUMMARY At the end of this unit, we would have discovered that team dynamics is the interacting of two or more persons with one another in such a manner that each person influences or is influenced by the other.
Apart from looking at the features, we also looked at the dynamics of team formation – why people join teams.
Finally, some other reasons why people join teams or groups were critically analysed.
6.0 TUTOR-MARKED ASSIGNMENT Explain the propinquity theory of team formation and state its significance.
7.0 REFERENCES/FURTHER READING Freeman, James & Gilbert, Jr. (2002).
The Professional Manager.
Prentice-Hall of India Private Limited and M-97, Connaught Circus.
Hart, S. A.
(1997).
Interpersonal Dynamics Turn ‘Group’ Into ‘Team’, Electronic News.
(Management, 6th Edition) pps.
43, 48-49.
Keith, Davis (1962).
Human Relations at Work, (2nd Ed.).
New York: McGraw-Hill.
5 MBA768 INTERPERSONAL AND TEAM DYNAMICS UNIT 2 INTERPERSONAL DYNAMICS CONTENTS 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objectives 3.0 Main Content 3.1 Concept of Interpersonal Dynamics, DISC - Personal Profile 3.1.1 Interpersonal Dynamics 3.2 DISC Personal Profile 3.2.1 Dominance 3.2.2 Influence 3.2.3 Steadiness 3.2.4 Conscientiousness 3.3 DISC Natural Pairing 3.3.1 DISC Irritation 3.3.2 Disc Motivation 3.3.3 Importance of DISC Profile 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutor-Marked Assignment 7.0 References/Further Reading 1.0 INTRODUCTION Perhaps one of the most important, yet frequently overlooked qualities of a group or team leader is the ability to understand the members of the group well enough to motivate each individual according to the member’s unique and special needs.
Team leaders often expect employees to meet them on their level, rather than taking the time to understand and meet the team members on the employee’s level.
A team leader needs to understand group dynamics and communication styles in order to be able to develop employees to their full potential.
The foundation of personal and professional success lies in understanding others and realising the impact personal behaviour has on those around.
A powerful vocational tool to assist in understanding communication styles and motivation is the DISC personal profile (Carlson Learning Company, 1994), which will be discussed in detail in this unit.
6 MBA768 INTERPERSONAL AND TEAM DYNAMICS 2.0 OBJECTIVES By the end of this unit, you should be able to: • explain the concept of interpersonal dynamics • identify and explain the meaning of DISC personal profile • explain styles of pairing under the DISC profile.
3.0 MAIN CONTENT 3.1 Concept of Interpersonal Dynamics, DISC–Personal Profile 3.1.1 Interpersonal Dynamics In a group setting, there are usually diverse backgrounds, talents, strengths and weaknesses.
The most challenging responsibility of a team leader is to combine all these strengths, talents, weaknesses and diverse backgrounds to accomplish a higher goal (Nurick, 1993).
A leader’s level of understanding of the interactions and motivations among employees is a primary indicator of potential success (Ethen, 1997).
In a team-oriented work process, the two major factors that are considered are the tasks at hand and the relationships in the team (Nurick, 1993.)
Relationship competence refers to a team’s ability to solve conflicts, build trust and communicate effectively.
The team members will most certainly take their lead from the team leader regarding relationship interactions.
Therefore, it is important for the team leader to be knowledgeable about interpersonal dynamics in order to mould the individual team members into a truly effective team unit (Hart, 1997.)
“CEO’s, who are skilled in understanding interpersonal relations and psychological needs, will inspire their whole team by motivating each person through supportive insight, respect and recognition” (Hart, 1997).
Many have found that the most useful psychological tool in helping to get the very best out of interpersonal work relationships is the DISC Personal Profile System (Carlson Learning Company, 1994).
The Personal Profile System is designed to help individuals identify his/her behavioural profile, capitalise on his/herbehavioural strengths, increase his/her appreciation of different profiles and anticipate and minimise potential conflicts with others.
By understanding the four different personality types, it is possible to see why individuals function in certain ways.
It is a tool to help leaders at all levels know what to expect from others and how best to motivate others.
7 MBA768 INTERPERSONAL AND TEAM DYNAMICS 3.2 DISC Personal Profile DISC stands for Dominance, Influence, Steadiness and Conscientiousness (Carlson Learning Company, 1994).
These are the major personality types associated with the DISC and everyone possesses at least a small amount of each characteristic.
In reading the descriptions of the four personality types, one can often associate at least one personal friend or acquaintance who falls under each description.
3.2.1 Dominance A person who is strongest in Dominance is primarily concerned with “dominating’ others to accomplish results (Carlson Learning Company, 1994).
Such a person likes to get immediate results, accept challenges, make quick decisions, and take on authority.
A dominant person is most comfortable in an environment of power and authority where the opportunity exists for individual accomplishment.
This type of person likes to be in charge of several things at one time and does not like to be under the control of anyone else.
A positive aspect of the “D” personality is that it has a plethora of ideas, can cause action, take authority and make quick decisions.
However, this personality type is not oriented, does not have good follow-through and is often inconsiderate of other’s feelings.
Because of the dominant person’s characteristics he needs others who think things through and use caution in decision-making.
In order for persons with this personality type to be the most effective, they need to be assigned to difficult task, to recognise their need for others and to slow down and think through before acting.
The “D” personality type is likely to say “let’s get the job done now, or the fastest way”.
In a company’s chain-of-command, “D” most likely serves as a “figure head”, such as a CEO President or Idea Man.
3.2.2 Influence A person who is strongest in influence is primarily concerned with influencing or persuading others.
Such a person loves to be around other people and is concerned with making a good first impression.
The influential individual talks a lot and typically livens up the mood.
This personality type likes to be the centre of attention, and is usually up-beat and positive.
8 MBA768 INTERPERSONAL AND TEAM DYNAMICS The influential person is most comfortable in an environment that enhances the person’s popularity and social recognition.
Such a person functions best in a position that does not involve control or attention to details, but rather places a great deal of emphasis on coaching and counseling others.
Positive aspects of the “I” personality include being very entertaining and optimistic, making a good impression, being out-going and showing a genuine concern for people.
Unfortunately, people with this personality type also tend to wear their feelings on their sleeve, they don’t think things through and they don’t concentrate on the task at hand.
Because of these negative tendencies, this personality type needs others who can concentrate on the task at hand with the ability to follow-through.
They also need others around them who are sincere and direct in their communication.
In order to be more effective, the “I” personality type needs to have better management skills, more realistic judgements of others and to be more assertive with others.
The “I” personality is likely to say, “Who cares how we get the job done, as long as “I get people to see the results”.
In the company’s chain, this person usually serves in a “people-person” position, such as a Director of Personnel or Public Relations.
3.2.3 Steadiness A person who is strongest in steadiness is most likely to cooperate with others to get the job done.
This personality type is notorious for performing a job function in a consistent, predictable manner.
The steady person is patient and helpful to others and is able to calm people who are overly excited.
This individual is excellent at creating harmony in the work place.
The steady person is most comfortable in an environment that is predictable and contains minimal conflict.
This personality type needs to know what is expected, along with a step- by-step process of how to accomplish the desired goals.
The most positive contributions of an “S” personality are being a good listener and being very predictable, helpful, loyal, specialised and patient.
Weaknesses include a lack of self-worth, not being self-motivated, often reluctant to change and reluctant to making decisions.
Because of the steady person’s characteristics, this type of person needs to be surrounded by those who can adjust well to change, can apply pressure to others, can help prioritise tasks, and who are flexible in their work procedures.
In order to have optimal effectiveness, the steady 9 MBA768 INTERPERSONAL AND TEAM DYNAMICS individual needs to be informed of upcoming change as soon as possible in order to be able to adjust.
Persons with this personality type need to be validated about job performance and need to know how the function they perform fits into the big picture and goals of the organisation as a whole.
The “S” personality is likely to say, “What can I do to help get the job done?” This type of person is typically the “operations person” in the company.
3.2.4 Conscientiousness Conscientiousness is scored highest in individuals who work diligently, focusing on quality and accuracy.
The conscientious person gives great attention to detail and he is always analysing and weighing the pros and cons of every situation.
This person is diplomatic in dealing with others and is usually methodical in approaching new situations.
This personality type is most comfortable in an environment in which performance expectations are clearly defined.
Such a person is “at home” in situations that are reserved and business like.
Also, a conscientious person is likely to ask “why” questions.
They are happy to do whatever is expected as long as they understand the reasons behind the request.
This need to understand applies to rules as well.
The conscientious person is a stickler to rules, but must have the freedom to analyse and decide if the rules make sense first.
Positive aspects of the “C” personality include being detail-oriented and analytical, having good follow through, handling conflicts well, separating business from pleasure and having traits of diplomacy and loyalty.
However, the “C”s weaknesses are that they are slow to make decisions, can be overly detail-oriented, question authority, are not very forgiving, are not good at compromising, must have a reason for everything, and are overly self-critical.
Because of these characteristics, the conscientious person needs others who can make quick decisions and compromise with others.
This personality type also needs others who use policies only as guidelines rather than the “be all and the end all” in decision-making.
In order to optimise effectiveness, the conscientious person needs plenty of time to plan things out.
This type of person needs specific job description and specific feedback on performance.
Also, such a person needs to develop tolerance for conflict.
The “C” personality is most likely to say, “Let’s get the job done the right way”.
This type of person is typically immediately under “D “in the company chain of command and may carry the little of Vice- 10 MBA768 INTERPERSONAL AND TEAM DYNAMICS President or Assistant Manager.
In group dynamics terminology, this personality type often fills the role of “unofficial leader”.
3.3 DISC Natural Pairing Based on the characteristics of each personality type, there are some natural pairings of types that work well together.
A “D-C” combination makes a great pair.
The “D” is the ideal person, while “C” provides the follow-through.
While the “C’ is more independent and does not need the “D”, the “D” needs the “C’ for success.
Likewise, a “D-S” combination, makes a good pair as long as the “D” is able to give very specific information regarding the task at hand.
This is important because the “S” requires specific guidance.
“S-C” makes a good pair because they have a shared mindset.
“C” wants quality, while “S’ provides stability and takes instruction well.
In the same way that there are good pairings, there are also pairings that do not work as well.
“C”s and “I’s conflict because a “C” often requires time alone, while an “I” needs to be around people.
Likewise, “D” and “I” naturally conflict.
In fact, this can sometimes be the most volatile combination of personalities.
While a “D” is non- emotional, bordering on anti-emotional, an “I” is almost entirely emotion based.
These differences can cause conflict under pressure.
In a work setting, the personality types can often be identified by their approaches to meetings.
A “D” hates meetings.
“D” feels that meetings are a waste of time.
They could be doing something else that is more important.
While an “I”, on the other hand, considers meetings pleasurable.
“I” tends to go off tangents and absolutely should not be put in charge of leading a meeting.
It is important to note that an “I” personality can get feelings hurt easily during a meeting because these individuals are so emotional.
The “S” likes meetings because they are an opportunity to find out what job is for the week.
An “S” will follow the meeting itinerary unless there is a hurdle.
An “S” can go along with whatever is happening in the meeting.
The “C” type runs the meeting regardless of whether this person is officially in charge or not.
“A” sets the itinerary, sticks to it and prioritises.
The “C” personality type will take as much time as necessary in a meeting if it accomplishes the goal at hand.
11 MBA768 INTERPERSONAL AND TEAM DYNAMICS A point of irony is that “D” and “C” work the best together.
However, in a meeting situation, they become arch enemies because “C” can take all day while “D” would rather be doing something else.
3.3.1 Disc Irritation It is important to understand the things that irritate each personality type and the things that revive them emotionally.
“D”s are typically irritated by “I”s and by overly emotional situations, while “I”s are irritated when people fail to consider their feelings.” S”s are disgusted when others fail to recognise their contributions while “C”s get frustrated when others fail to give them the freedom to make decisions or fail to provide them with enough information to complete a task correctly.
While such things tend to get under their skin, other things can really fill their “emotional tanks”.
“D”s are fulfilled by idea generation and the opportunity to do something – anything.
“I”s are stimulated by being around people and experiencing social interaction, while “S”s get rejuvenated by accomplished tasks that are given to them.
A C’s emotional tank is filled by being alone or having “down time” for introspection.
Also, “C”s love feeling like they have gotten “better” at something based on their own self evaluation.
Interestingly, “D”s and “C”s are natural loners while “S”s and “I”s are not.
3.3.2 Disc Motivation From a team leader’s perspective, the most beneficial information to glean from the DISC profile is how to motivate each personality type.
To motivate a “D”, it is important to set immediate attainable goals that can be accomplished by the use of a “quick fire” method.
Be blunt and straight forward as you cannot hurt a “D”’s feelings with communication.
And remember, long meetings do not motivate “D.” In order to motivate an “I’, you must be emotionally involved.
It is important to show an interest other than just “work-related”.
It is important to show the “I” emotion because this personality type equates emotion with importance.
The “S” requires clear and attainable goals and steps for motivation.
Give the “S” confirmation and feedback regarding performance, but don’t expect an “S” to go above and beyond.
This personality does specifically what you ask.
Finally, to motivate a “C”, you must key in into the person’s competitive desire, challenge the “C” to be “better”.
Give this personality type all the information needed, but allow such persons to make their own 12 MBA768 INTERPERSONAL AND TEAM DYNAMICS decisions.
Give the leeway.
The challenge is to set parameters, but allow “C”s to come up with their own final product.
3.3.3 Importance of DISC Profile The DISC profile (1994) is a useful tool in determining which of these characteristics are stronger and which are weaker in a given individual.
It is a quick assessment tool in which the person being evaluated chooses the word that is most descriptive and least descriptive of the individual for the different groups.
After completing the assessment, one can derive a profile of the individual.
The DISC assessment offers explanations of each profile.
SELF ASSESSMENT EXERCISE 1.
What is Dominance in the DISC personal profile?
2.
What are the basic features of Dominance in the DISC personal profile?
4.0 CONCLUSION The most useful psychological tool in helping get the very best out of interpersonal and team dynamics is the DISC personal profile system.
DISC stands for Dominance, Influence, Steadiness and Conscientiousness.
Apart from analysing the distinctive features of the DISC personal profile system, we concluded the unit by looking at the characteristics of each personality type and some of the natural pairings of types that work well together.
5.0 SUMMARY We have been able to explain the basic concepts of interpersonal dynamics and identify the DISC personal profile.
Dominance - a person who expresses strong desire in dominating others to accomplish results Influence - a person who expresses strong desire in influencing or persuading others Steadiness - a person who expresses strong desire in cooperating with others to get the job done.
13 MBA768 INTERPERSONAL AND TEAM DYNAMICS Conscientiousness – a person who works diligently, focusing on quality and accuracy.
6.0 TUTOR-MARKED ASSIGNMENT Explain the basic significances of DISC personal profile system to: a.
An organisation b.
An individual 7.0 REFERENCES/FURTHER READING Bateman, & Snell, (1999).
Management: Building Competitive Advantage.
McGraw-Hill.
Freeman, James & Gilbert, J.
(2002).
The Professional Manager.
Prentice Hall of India Private Limited and M-97, Connaught Circus.
Hart, S. A.
(1997).
Interpersonal Dynamics Turn ‘Group’ Into ‘Team’.
Electronic News.
Pgs.
43, 48-49.
Lieberman, G. F. (1983).
3,500 Good Quotes for Speakers.
New York: Main Street Books.
14 MBA768 INTERPERSONAL AND TEAM DYNAMICS UNIT 3 TYPES OF TEAMS CONTENTS 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objectives 3.0 Main Content 3.1 Types of Teams 3.1.1 Formal and Informal Teams 3.1.2 A Quality Circle 3.2 High Performance Teams or Super Teams 3.3 Self Managed Teams 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutor-Marked Assignment 7.0 References/Further Reading 1.0 INTRODUCTION A team is defined as two or more people who interact and influence each other towards a common purpose.
Traditionally, two types of teams have existed in organisations: formal and informal.
Today, however, teams exist that have the characteristics of both.
2.0 OBJECTIVES By the end of this unit, you should be able to: • explain the differences between formal and informal teams • describe the characteristics of high performance teams or super teams • explain the meaning of self-managed teams.
3.0 MAIN CONTENT 3.1 Types of Teams 3.1.1 Formal and Informal Teams Formal teams or stet are created deliberately by managers and charged with carrying out specific tasks to help the organisation achieve its goals.
The most prevalent type of formal team is the COMMAND TEAM, which includes a manager and all employees who report to other managers.
In some organisations that want to de-emphasise hierarchy, the titles may change.
For instance, at NCR, the managers of 15 MBA768 INTERPERSONAL AND TEAM DYNAMICS commercial teams are called “COACHES” and the team members are called “ASSOCIATES” Another type of formal team is the “COMMITTEE”, which generally lasts a long time and deals with recurrent problems and decisions.
For instance, your university or college probably has a committee for students’ affairs to deal with recurring issues that involve students’ lives.
While members of this committee may come and go, the committee remains in place over a long period of time.
3.1.2 A Quality Circle A quality circle is a kind of voluntary team drawn from various production teams.
The quality circle makes suggestions about quality.
Quality circles have been a significant component of a quality program that has dramatically improved productivity and quality since 1981.
In a program called Cooperative Hourly and Management Problem Solving (CHAMPS), quality circle teams meet for an hour weekly to discuss work related problems, investigate the causes, recommend solutions, and take corrective actions.
When a team has completed its investigation and identified a solution, it makes a formal presentation to the plant management and staff.
Some formal teams are temporary.
They may be called TASK FORCES OR PROJECT TEAMS.
These teams are created to deal with a specific problem and are usually disbanded when the task is completed or the problem is solved.
For instance, President Clinton, formed a project team headed by Hillary Rodham Clinton (his wife) to formulate a proposal for a national health care plan.
Informal teams emerge whenever people come together and interact regularly.
Such groups develop within the formal organisational structure.
Members of informal teams tend to subordinate some of their individual needs to those of the teams as a whole.
In return, the teams support and protect them.
The activities of informal team may further the interest of the organisation.
Saturday morning soft ball games, for example, may strengthen the players’ ties to each other.
Or women’s team meet to discuss various actions that can make the organisation a better place for women to work.
The following example is a case in point.
In 1990, female employees at the telephone giant, NYNEX Corporation (USA), formed mentoring circles to assist women in moving up the corporate advancement ladder.
NYNEX women created these informal groups independently and outside management auspices.
The groups encourage, recognise and 16 MBA768 INTERPERSONAL AND TEAM DYNAMICS strengthen the bond of women at all levels of the company.
The NYNEX employees turned to the group format because there was a shortage of female upper level managers to serve as mentors.
However, participants believe the team process is actually better than one-on-one mentoring.
In the circles, which have a minimum of eight participants and a maximum of twelve, the mentored women have an increased exposure to different ideas and an increased network.
3.2 High Performance Teams or Super Teams Some groups today have the characteristics of both formal and informal teams.
SUPER TEAMS OR HIGH PERFORMANCE TEAMS comprise of groups of three to thirty workers drawn from different areas of a corporation can be cited as an example.
Initially called “self-managed work teams” or “cross-functional teams” or “high-performance teams”, these kinds of teams were dubbed super teams by Fortune magazine in May, 1990 and the name has stuck.
At Federal Express (USA), super teams figured out how to solve a billing problem and wound up selling the company $2.1 million a year.
At one of General Mills cereal plants in California, super teams run the factory during the night shift without the help of a manager.
Super teams are also becoming important in small businesses such as advertising agencies.
At one time, it was technology that distinguished advertisers.
According to Bill Westbrook, a judge for the one-show advertising awards, the advertising industry is now moving away from technology towards strategy.
With the expansion of the entertainment and communication network to 500 channels, Less Garfinkel of Lowe and Partners explains that advertising is becoming a more appealing industry.
Some agencies are therefore adopting strategies that include the creation of super teams made up of top directors, copywriters and art directors.
What sets super teams apart from other formal teams is that they ignore the traditional “chimney hierarchy” – a strict up and down arrangement with workers at the bottom and managers at the top – which is, often too cumbersome to solve problems workers deal with every day.
Well-run super teams manage themselves, arrange their work schedules, set their productivity quotas, order their own equipment and supplies, improve products quality, and interact with customers and other super teams.
17 MBA768 INTERPERSONAL AND TEAM DYNAMICS 3.3 Self Managed Teams Super teams that manage themselves without any formal supervision are called SELF MANAGED TEAMS OR SELF MANAGED WORK GROUPS.
These teams usually have the following characteristics.
• The teams have responsibility for relatively whole tasks • Team members possess a variety of task-related skills.
• The teams have the power to determine such things as work method, scheduling and assignment of members to different tasks.
• The performance of the group as a whole is the basis for compensation and feedback The presence of such groups in industry means individual strategies for completing tasks are replaced by group method for job accomplishment.
As with super teams in general, this participative approach is seen a great deal in both manufacturing and non-manufacturing organisations within the United States.
For example, in Washington Industries and Chaparral Steel, it is routine for security guard to enter orders and run ambulances, for supervisors to hire and train their own staff, and for supervisors to determine operating procedures for new equipment.
SELF ASSESSMENT EXERCISE 1.
What is a quality circle?
2.
What is the meaning of project team?
3.
State two characteristics of self-managed team.
4.0 CONCLUSION In this unit, we looked at the differences between formal and informal teams and teams that have the characteristics of both, i.e.
the super teams or high performance teams.
In addition, we discovered that super teams that manage themselves without any formal supervision are called self-managed teams.
5.0 SUMMARY Formal teams are created deliberately by managers but informal teams develop when people come together or interact regularly.
A good example of formal teams is the command team.
Apart from looking at the super team, we ended the unit with the basic feature of self-managed teams which is that the teams have responsibility for the task assigned.
Also, the team members possess variety of task related skills.
18 MBA768 INTERPERSONAL AND TEAM DYNAMICS 6.0 TUTOR-MARKED ASSIGNMENT Write short notes on the following: (a) Command team (b) Project team (c) High performance team (d) Self-managed team.
7.0 REFERENCES/FURTHER READING Bateman, & Snell, (1999).
Management: Building Competitive Advantage.
McGraw-Hill.
Freeman, J.
& Gilbert, J.
(2002).
Management,(6th Ed).
India: Prentice- Hall.
Lieberman, G. F. (1983).
3,500 Good Quotes for Speakers.
New York: Main Street Books.
19 MBA768 INTERPERSONAL AND TEAM DYNAMICS UNIT 4 TEAM COMPOSITION AND ROLES (1) CONTENTS 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objectives 3.0 Main Content 3.1 Team Composition and Roles 3.2 The Team Sponsor 3.2.1 Duties of the Sponsor 3.3 Team Leader 3.3.1 Characteristics of a Good Team Leader 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutor-Marked Assignment 7.0 References/Further Reading 1.0 INTRODUCTION It is essential that the right people be assigned to a team.
Each person should be selected based on his or her knowledge and expertise as well as other potential factors.
For example, gender, ethnic diversity and geographic location are also important considerations when assigning team members.
Wrong or irregular selection often mars the performance of teams.
As such, it is vital to understand the key components of teams and the true roles they are expected to play.
2.0 OBJECTIVES By the end of this unit, you should be able to: • describe team composition and structure • explain the meaning of a team sponsor and its functions • explain the meaning of a team leader and its characteristics.
3.0 MAIN CONTENT 3.1 Team Composition and Roles In addition to selecting the appropriate people, there are also key roles that are essential to the overall team’s success.
Key roles include: sponsor, leader, facilitator, member, gatekeeper, recorder, time keeper and devil’s advocate.
20 MBA768 INTERPERSONAL AND TEAM DYNAMICS The figure above illustrates some important aspects of team organisational structure.
Note that the team leader and team facilitator are on the same level as all other team members (i.e.
a flat organisation, as opposed to the more common “hierarchical organisations).
3.2 The Team Sponsor The sponsor oversees and supports the activities of the project teams.
Typically, the sponsor is the manager (or instructor) who chose the projects and appointed the teams; however, other people may be involved.
Sponsors must have a stake in the chosen authority to make changes in the process under study with clout and courage.
Sponsors do not conduct the actual project; they guide the efforts of the project team.
They appoint the project team and together with the team leader determine the project’s boundaries.
They make certain the project team has whatever reasonable resources it needs to be successful.
Sponsors must adjust workloads to make time for the project; team members must not take on the project work in addition to their normal workload.
3.2.1 Duties of the Sponsor The duties of the sponsor occur in two phases.
(a) Before the project, the sponsor should: • identify the project to be studied • determine any boundaries or constraints • select the project team • assign the facilitator (if appropriate) 21 MBA768 INTERPERSONAL AND TEAM DYNAMICS (b) During the project, the sponsor should: • meet regularly with the project team leader • develop and improve systems that allow team members to bring about change.
• “run interference” for the project team, representing its interest to the rest of the organisation, when necessary in the workplace.
• ensure that changes made by the team are evaluated, and implement changes the project team is not authorised to make (in the workplace).
The responsibilities of the sponsor are not finished until these changes are introduced, the improvements accomplished, or the new methods systematised and the project officially completed.
3.3 Team Leader The team leader manages the team: calling and if necessary, facilitating meetings, handling or assigning administrative details, organising all team activities and overseeing preparations for reports and presentations.
The team leader should be interested in solving the problems that prompted the project, and be reasonably skilled at working with individuals and groups.
Ultimately, it is the leader’s responsibility to create and maintain channels that enable team members to do their work.
Team leaders can be appointed by the sponsor or selected by the team itself.
If the team leader is a supervisor or manager in the project area of the workplace, he or she must take extra precautions to avoid dominating the group during meetings.
The leader leaves his/her rank outside the meeting room, facilitating discussions and actively participating as an equal member of the team.
The team leader’s functions are listed below.
• Is the contact point for communication between the team and the rest of the organisation, including the sponsor.
• Is the official keeper of the team records including: copies of correspondence, records of meetings and presentations; meetings’ minutes and agendas, charts, graphs and other data related to the project.
• Is a full-fledged team member.
As such, the team leader’s duties also include attending meetings, carrying out assignments between meetings and generally sharing in the team’s work.
22 MBA768 INTERPERSONAL AND TEAM DYNAMICS • Assists the team by immediately implementing changes that are within the bounds of the team.
Changes beyond these bounds must be referred to the sponsor or other appropriate level of management.
3.3.1 Characteristics of a Good Team Leader The following are the key characteristics of a good leader.
• Is energetic • Is skilled at resolving conflict • Is well organised • Has experience as a group leader • Is respected by group members • Is reliable • Is charismatic • Is intelligent • Is creative • Possesses a sense of humour SELF ASSESSMENT EXERCISE 1.
List the duties of a sponsor during a project.
2.
State five characteristics of a good team leader.
4.0 CONCLUSION From the beginning, we looked at the structure of a team.
We went further to look at the meaning of ‘sponsor’ as a significant aspect of team composition as well as the duties of the sponsor.
We discovered that the team leader and team facilitator are on the same level as all other team members.
We did not examine the team facilitator as this shall be considered fully in part two but we looked at the meaning of a team leader and concluded by stating the characteristics of a good team leader.
5.0 SUMMARY At the end of this unit, you would have discovered that a team comprises the sponsor, facilitator, members etc.
Each member of the team has a key role to play in ensuring the success of the project.
Of more importance is the duty of the team sponsor and the team leaders who not only oversee, support and manage the activities of other project teams but also ensure that proper guidance is given as to the implementation of the project.
23 MBA768 INTERPERSONAL AND TEAM DYNAMICS 6.0 TUTOR-MARKED ASSIGNMENT With the aid of a diagram, briefly explain the roles played by the team’s composition.
7.0 REFERENCES/FURTHER READING Carlson Learning Company (1994).
DISC Personal Profile System, 2800 Series, Minneapolis.
Covey, Stephen.
(1989).
The 7 Habits of Highly Effective People.
New York: Simon and Schuster.
Ethen, T. (1997).
“Staying Focused and Effective”, Association Management.
pps.
49 (1), 45-48.
McNeil, Bellamy & Burrows, (2000).
“Team Dynamics” in Introduction to Engineering Design.
(pps.7 – 10).
24 MBA768 INTERPERSONAL AND TEAM DYNAMICS UNIT 5 TEAM COMPOSITION AND ROLES (2) CONTENTS 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objectives 3.0 Main Content 3.1 Team Composition and Roles of Facilitator, Team Members and Other Miscellaneous Roles 3.1.1 The Facilitator 3.1.2 Team Members 3.1.3 Characteristics of a Good Team Member 3.1.4 Miscellaneous Roles of Team Members 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutor-Marked Assignment 7.0 References/Further Reading 1.0 INTRODUCTION In the last unit of this course, we looked at the structure of team composition and detailed roles of a Team Sponsor and Team Leader and their distinct functions.
In part two of Team Composition and Roles, we shall be looking at the team members, the team facilitator and their miscellaneous roles.
2.0 OBJECTIVES By the end of this unit, you should be able to: • explain the meaning of team facilitators and team members • state the characteristics of a good team member • state and explain miscellaneous roles played by team members.
3.0 MAIN CONTENT 3.1 Team Composition and Roles of Facilitator, Team Members and Other Miscellaneous Roles 3.1.1 The Facilitator The ideal facilitator has a combination of people, technical and training skills.
In the work place, facilitators should be chosen from outside the process area being handled so that they are neutral to the project.
Facilitators attend team meetings but are neither leaders nor team 25 MBA768 INTERPERSONAL AND TEAM DYNAMICS members.
They are “outsiders” to the team and maintain a neutral position.
One of the most important jobs arising from this neutrality is to observe the teams progress, evaluate how the team functions and use these observations to help the team improve its processes (how members interact with others both inside and outside of meetings).
In addition, the facilitator: • focuses on the team’s process more than its product; is concerned more with how decisions are made rather than what decisions are reached.
• continually develops personal skills in facilitating, group processes and planning.
• learns a variety of techniques to control digressive, difficult or dominating participants, to encourage reluctant participants and to resolve conflict among participants.
• learns when and how to employ these interventions and how to teach such skills to team members.
• helps project teams design and rehearse management presentations.
The facilitator plays an important role in a team.
It is this person’s responsibilities to ensure that the process runs smoothly.
In many companies, this role is assigned to a person who may not be familiar with or have a stake in the outcome (the product) of the process.
Some organisations do not provide an unbiased facilitator for each team, in which case a regular team member must act as facilitator.
However, it is sometimes difficult to both monitor the process and participate in it.
In classes (e.g.
school teams), this role is often assummed by the instructor, at least for the “meetings” that take place in his or her presence.
Katzenbach and Smith (The Wisdom of Teams) state that although a true facilitator is often needed to get a team started or to get a “stuck” team moving again, most often a team member can offer effective facilitation.
3.1.2 Team Members Team members are the rest of the people involved in the task or project.
Not everyone, who could contribute something worthwhile, needs to be on the teams; project team members can always consult with experts or other staff as the project unfolds.
26 MBA768 INTERPERSONAL AND TEAM DYNAMICS Team members are appointed by the sponsor.
In the workplace, team members are usually people who work closely with some aspects of the processes under study, often representing different stages of the process and groups likely to be affected by the project.
They can be of various ranks, professions, trades, classification, shifts or work areas (if the project cuts across division boundaries, so should team membership).
In some organisations, team members are selected based on computing skills and geographic location.
Gender and ethnicity are also considered in order to create diversity in class teams.
Team Members: • should remember that management has indicated their support for the project by setting up the project team.
Therefore, team members should consider their participation as a priority responsibility, not an intrusion on their real jobs.
• are responsible for contributing as fully to the project as possible, sharing their knowledge and expertise, participating in all meetings and discussions even on topics outside their areas.
• carry out their assignments between meetings, interviewing other employees or customers, observing processes, gathering data, writing reports and so on.
These tasks will be selected and planned at the meetings.
• should be open minded about the ideas of others, share information and contribute constructively to the team’s process.
3.1.3 Characteristics of a Good Team Member a) Involves others in the decision-making process b) Influences others by involving them in the issue(s) c) Works for consensus on decisions d) Encourages the development of other team members e) Respects and is tolerant of individual differences f) Acknowledges and works through conflict openly g) Considers and uses new ideas and suggestions from others h) Understands and is committed to team objectives i) Encourages feedback on own behaviour.
j) Does not engage in win/lose activities with other team members.
3.1.4 Miscellaneous Roles of Team Members There are a number of common cooperative roles that work well for teams in almost any situation.
The roles should rotate with time.
Assign as many as needed to cover all the members of the team.
27 MBA768 INTERPERSONAL AND TEAM DYNAMICS These are listed here in the order of decreasing importance to the team.
1.
Recorder The recorder is the team member who is responsible for assuring that the process(es) being used by the group is/are documented.
This includes writing down all the important points of a discussion and preparing the minutes of a meeting.
The recorder is also responsible for preparing slides and reports which the team needs.
2.
Time Keeper He has the responsibility of keeping the team moving so that the team finishes the task at hand.
3.
Encourager He has the task of giving encouragement to all the other team members.
When a team member makes a contribution, the encourager can comment “good idea” or “nice thought” etc.
4.
Devil’s Advocate He takes a position at variance with that held by the team to ensure that all sides of an issue are considered.
5.
Gate Keeper It is a role sometimes taken by the facilitator or team leader.
The gate keeper has the responsibility of maintaining a balanced level of participation for all the members.
The gate keeper will encourage the silent members and try to hold back the verbose, dominant members.
A team functions when all members’ ideas and thoughts are heard; the gate keeper helps ensure these.
SELF ASSESSMENT EXERCISE 1.
List two basic functions of the facilitator.
2.
State four characteristics of a good team member.
4.0 CONCLUSION We continued from where we stopped in part one (1).
In this concluding part, we looked at the facilitator and its basic functions in the team 28 MBA768 INTERPERSONAL AND TEAM DYNAMICS structure.
We also discovered that team members are appointed by the sponsor.
5.0 SUMMARY In this unit, the role of team members and team facilitator were identified.
In addition, other miscellaneous roles of team members were considered.
Therefore, it can be said that a facilitator, in addition to possessing technical and training skills, should maintain a neutral position to ensure the success of the project embarked on.
Likewise, the team members can ensure success of the project when they contribute their expertise, give constructive ideas, etc, e.g.
work hand-in-hand.
Miscellaneous roles should be shared dutifully among members of the team.
Four characteristics of a good team member are: • works for consensus on decisions • encourages feedback on own behaviour.
• acknowledges and works through conflict openly.
• encourages the development of other team members.
6.0 TUTOR-MARKED ASSIGNMENT Differentiate between a team member and a facilitator.
7.0 REFERENCES/FURTHER READING Covey, Stephen.
(1989).
The 7 Habits of Highly Effective People.
New York: Simon and Schuster.
Ethen, T. (1997).
“Staying Focused and Effective” Association Management, pps.49 (1), 45 – 48.
McNeill, Bellamy & Burrows, (2000).
“Team Dynamics” in Introduction to Management Design, (pps.
7 – 10).
29 MBA768 INTERPERSONAL AND TEAM DYNAMICS MODULE 2 Unit 1 Managing Team Relationships Unit 2 Team Formation and Team Building Unit 3 Team Cohesiveness Unit 4 Building Team Cohesiveness and High Performance Norms Unit 5 Guidelines for Team Productive Meetings UNIT 1 MANAGING TEAM RELATIONSHIPS CONTENTS 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objectives 3.0 Main Content 3.1 Understanding Team Relationships, Managing Outward Relationships/Lateral Relationships and Patterns of Work Relationships 3.1.1 Managing Outward Relationships 3.1.2 Lateral Role Relationships 3.1.3 Distinct Patterns of Work Relationships 3.2 Work Flow Relationships 3.3 Service Relationships 3.4 Advisory Relationships 3.5 Audit Relationships 3.6 Stabilisation Relationships 3.7 Liaison Relationships 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutor-Marked Assignment 7.0 References/Further Reading 1.0 INTRODUCTION Teams are open systems.
They are not closed systems functioning in a vacuum.
They are interdependent with other teams.
For example, in some companies, major team responsibilities include co-coordinating with other teams and policy groups.
In others, teams are responsible for interfacing with other teams to eliminate production bottlenecks and implement new processes and also for working with suppliers on quality issues.
Thus, activities, crucial to the team, are those that entail dealing with people outside the team.
30 MBA768 INTERPERSONAL AND TEAM DYNAMICS 2.0 OBJECTIVES By the end of this unit, you should be able to: • explain how teams outwardly manage relationships • explain the meaning of lateral role relationships • identify the distinct patterns of team working relationships.
3.0 MAIN CONTENT 3.1 Understanding Team Relationships, Managing Outward Relationships/Lateral Relationships and Patterns of Work Relationships 3.1.1 Managing Outward Relationships Several vital roles link teams to their external environments, that is, to other individuals and groups both inside and outside the organisation.
A specific type of such links is a gate keeper, a team member who stays abreast of current information in scientific and other fields and informs the group of important developments.
Information useful to the group can also include information about resources, trends and political support throughout the corporation or the industry.
A team’s strategy dictates the team’s mix of internally versus externally focused roles and how the mix changes over time.
Generally, team strategies include informing, parading and probing.
Informing strategy entails concentrating first on the internal team process to achieve a state of performance readiness, and then the team informs outsiders of its intentions.
Parading means the team’s strategy is to simultaneously emphasise internal team building and achieve external visibility.
Probing involves a focus on external relations.
This strategy requires team members to interact frequently with outsiders; diagnose the needs of customers, clients and higher-ups and experiment with solutions.
The appropriate balance between an internal and external strategic focus and between internal and external roles depends on how much the team needs information, support and resources from outside.
When teams have a high degree of dependence on outsiders, probing is the best strategy.
Parading teams perform at an intermediate level, and informing 31 MBA768 INTERPERSONAL AND TEAM DYNAMICS teams are likely to fail.
They are too isolated from the outside group on which they depend.
Informing or parading strategies may be more effective for teams that are less dependent on outside groups, for example, established teams working on routine tasks in stable external environments.
But for most important work teams of the future – task forces, new product teams and strategic decision-making teams tackling unstructured problems in a rapidly changing external environment – effective performance in roles that involve interfacing with the outside will be vital.
3.1.2 Lateral Role Relationships Managing relationships with managers of other groups and teams means engaging in a dynamic give-and-take that ensures proper co-ordination throughout the management system.
To many managers, this process often seems like a strategic approach to building constructive relationships.
3.1.3 Distinct Patterns of Work Relationships Different teams, like different individuals have roles to perform.
As teams carry out their roles, several distinct patterns of working relationships develop.
The following are the key ones.
3.2 Work Flow Relationships They emerge as materials are passed from one group to another.
A group commonly receives work from one unit, processes it and sends it to the next unit in the process.
The group will then come before some groups and after others in the process.
3.3 Service Relationships These exist when top management centralises on activity to which a large number of other units must gain access.
Common examples are computing services, libraries and clerical staff.
Such units must service other people’s requests.
3.4 Advisory Relationships They are created when teams with problems call on centralised sources for expert knowledge.
For example, staff members in the human resources or legal department advice work teams.
32 MBA768 INTERPERSONAL AND TEAM DYNAMICS 3.5 Audit Relationships They develop when people not directly in the chain of command, evaluate the methods and performances of other teams.
Financial auditors check the books and technical auditors assess the methods and technical quality of the work.
3.6 Stabilisation Relationships They involve auditing before the fact.
In other words, teams sometimes must obtain clearance from others.
For example, for large purchases, before they take action.
3.7 Liaison Relationships These involve intermediaries between teams.
Managers often are called upon to mediate conflict between two organisational units.
Public relations people, sales managers, purchasing agents and others who work across organisational boundaries serve in liaison roles as they maintain communications between the organisation and the outside world.
By assessing each working relationships with another unit, teams can better understand whom to contact and when, where, why and how to do so.
Co-ordination throughout the working system improves, problems are avoided or short circuited before they get too serious, and performance improves.
SELF ASSESSMENT EXERCISE What do you understand by a team’s strategy?
Name the key group strategies and write explanatory notes on two of them.
4.0 CONCLUSION Human relationships have the power to defuse conflicts and make it easier to resolve.
In fact, establishing personal relationships is often an integral component of peace building and reconciliation.
Intractable conflicts are caused by damage on relationships.
This unit ended with some distinct patterns of working relationships.
5.0 SUMMARY Protracted conflict strains relationships and makes it difficult for parties to recognise that they share common needs and goals.
Hence, this unit purposely dwelt on how to build a relationship.
33 MBA768 INTERPERSONAL AND TEAM DYNAMICS 6.0 TUTOR-MARKED ASSIGNMENT Explain how relationships can be managed by a team.
7.0 REFERENCES/FURTHER READING Bateman, & Snell, (1999).
Management: Building Competitive Advantage.
McGraw-Hill.
Freeman, James.
& Gilbert, J.
(2002).
Management, (6th Ed.).
Prentice, Hall of India.
McNeill, Bellamy & Burrows, (2000).
“Team Dynamics – Topics for Expert Table”, in Introduction to Engineering Design.
34 MBA768 INTERPERSONAL AND TEAM DYNAMICS UNIT 2 TEAM FORMATION AND TEAM BUILDING CONTENTS 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objectives 3.0 Main Content 3.1 Team Formation and Team Building 3.1.1 Team Formation Activities 3.2 The Passage of Time 3.3 Five Issues to be considered in Team Building 3.3.1 Interdependence 3.3.2 Goal Specification 3.3.3 Cohesiveness 3.3.4 Roles and Norms 3.3.5 Communication 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutor-Marked Assignment 7.0 References/Further Reading 1.0 INTRODUCTION As a manager, you will naturally want your team to become an effective team.
To accomplish this, it is imperative to understand how teams can operate as true and effective teams.
Teams become true teams via team formation activities, passage of time and team building.
2.0 OBJECTIVES By the end of this unit, you should be able to: • list the team formation activities • explain the passage of time • list and explain the issues to be considered in team building.
3.0 MAIN CONTENT 3.1 Team Formation and Team Building 3.1.1 Team Formation Activities If teams are to develop successfully, they will engage in various activities as listed below.
35 MBA768 INTERPERSONAL AND TEAM DYNAMICS Forming: team members attempt to lay the ground rules which eventually shape or form their behaviour.
Storming: hostilities and conflict arise and people get positions as a result.
Norming: team members agree on their shared goals and norms and closer relationships develop.
Performing: the team channels its energies into performing its task.
3.2 The Passage of Time A key aspect of development is the passage of time.
Teams pass through critical periods, or times, particularly when they are open to formative experiences.
The first critical period is the Forming Stage, i.e.
at the first meeting, when rules, norms and roles are established that set long-lasting precedents.
A secondary critical period is the initial meeting and a deadline (e.g.
completing a project or making a presentation).
At this point, the team is exposed to enough experience to understand its work; it comes to realise that time is becoming a scarce resource and it must “get on with it”, and there is enough time left to change its approach if necessary.
Without these activities, groups may get off on the wrong footing from the beginning and members may never revise their behaviour in the appropriate direction.
3.3 Five Issues to be considered in Team Building Team building exercises are very important in the development of task- oriented teams that will work together on a complex project for an extended period of time.
Experiences designed to facilitate team development should be focused on some, if not all, of the following issues.
3.3.1 Interdependence Each team member’s outcomes are determined, at least in part, by the actions of the other members.
The structure of the team task should be such that it requires cooperative interdependence.
Functioning independently of other team members, or competing with them, will lead to less than optimal outcomes for the entire team.
The team 36 MBA768 INTERPERSONAL AND TEAM DYNAMICS building task should also have a cooperative interdependent structure.
Tasks that require the successful performance of sub tasks by all team members are called divisible and conjunctive tasks.
The team building exercise should be structured such that the team members become aware of, and experience, their interdependence.
3.3.2 Goal Specification It is very important for team members to have common goals for team achievement; in addition, team members must communicate clearly about individual goals they may have.
Some team building sessions consist entirely of goal clarification (specification) exercises.
Shared goals are one of the definitional properties of the concept “team”.
A simple, but useful, team building exercise is to assign a newly formed team the task of producing a mission and goals statement.
3.3.3 Cohesiveness Teams are cohesive to the extent that membership in them is positively valued; members are drawn towards the team.
Task oriented teams involve both social cohesiveness and task cohesiveness.
Social cohesiveness refers to the bonds of interpersonal attraction that link team members.
Although a high level of social cohesiveness may make team life more pleasant, it is not highly related to team performance.
Nevertheless, the patterns of interpersonal attraction within a team are a very prominent concern.
Team building exercises that have a component of fun or play are useful in encouraging attraction bonds to develop.
Task cohesiveness refers to the way in which skills and abilities of the team members mesh to allow effective performance.
Exercises that require the application of the skills that will be necessary for completion of the team assignment, but require them in a less demanding situation, allow the team members to assess one another’s talents.
Such experiences can lead to consideration of the next issue, the development of team members’ roles and of the norms that govern role enactment.
3.3.4 Roles and Norms All teams develop a set of roles and norms over time.
In task oriented teams, it is essential that the role structure enables the team to cope effectively with the requirements of the task.
When the task is divisible and conjunctive (i.e., divisible into subtasks), as are most of the important team tasks, the assignment of roles to members who can perform them effectively is essential.
Active consideration of the role 37 MBA768 INTERPERSONAL AND TEAM DYNAMICS structure can be an important part of a team building exercise.
Task roles may be rotated so that all team members experience, and learn from, all roles.
It is important that the norms governing the assignment of roles is understood and accepted by team members.
Norms are the rules governing the behaviour of team members, and include the rewards for behaving in accordance with these rules (or normative requirements), as well as the sanctions for norm violations.
Norms will develop in a team, whether or not they are actively discussed.
There are common norms that govern most teams; however, a team building assignment in which those common norms, as well as some that are specific to a team, are discussed and accepted is useful.
3.3.5 Communication Effective interpersonal communication is vital to the smooth functioning of any task team.
There are many ways of facilitating the learning of effective communication skills.
Active listening exercises, practice in giving and receiving feedback, practice in checking for comprehension of verbal messages, are all aimed at developing communication skills.
It is also important for a team to develop an effective communication network; who communicates to whom; is there anybody “out of the loop?” Norms will develop governing communication.
Do those norms encourage everyone to participate, or do they allow one or two dominant members to claim all the “air time?” Team building exercises can focus on skill development, network design, and norms, but even when the exercise is focused on another issue, communication is happening.
Watch it!
Shape it!
SELF ASSESSMENT EXERCISE 1.
State two team formation activities.
2.
Explain the meaning of goal specification 4.0 CONCLUSION The formation activities of a team are forming, storming, norming and performing.
However, there are some basic issues we considered in team building, some of which are interdependence, goal specification and cohesiveness.
5.0 SUMMARY These issues are not intended to present a series of team building exercises.
Rather, they are intended to help you evaluate the potential effectiveness of an exercise.
Team building is not a silver bullet for 38 MBA768 INTERPERSONAL AND TEAM DYNAMICS fixing dysfunctional teams, or assuring that all of your teams will work well.
Team building exercises can be helpful in developing effective task-oriented teams, if they are selected to enable teams to explore the issues identified in this unit.
6.0 TUTOR-MARKED ASSIGNMENT List the key team formation activities and explain the passage of time in the context of building the team.
7.0 REFERENCES/FURTHER READING Bateman & Snell (1999).
Management: Building Competitive Advantage.
McGraw-Hill.
Freeman, James & Gilbert, J.
(2002).
Management (6th Ed.).
India: Prentice-Hall.
McNeill, Bellamy & Burrows, (2000).
“Team Dynamics – Topics for Expert Table”, in Introduction to Engineering Design.
39 MBA768 INTERPERSONAL AND TEAM DYNAMICS UNIT 3 TEAM COHESIVENESS CONTENTS 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objectives 3.0 Main Content 3.1 Team Cohesiveness 3.1.1 Definition of Team Cohesiveness 3.2 Ways of Improving Cohesiveness 3.2.1 Introduce Competition 3.2.2 Increase Interaction 3.2.3 Increase Interpersonal Attraction 3.2.4 Create Common Goals and Common Fates 3.3 Task Interdependence 3.3.1 Outcome Interdependence 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutor-Marked Assignment 7.0 References/Further Reading 1.0 INTRODUCTION The solidarity or cohesiveness of a team is an important indicator of how much influence the team has over its individual members.
The more cohesive the team the more strongly attached it will be.
Its norms are not likely to be violated.
2.0 OBJECTIVES By the end of this unit, you should be able to: • define team cohesiveness • state the four ways to improve cohesiveness • explain the importance of task interdependence.
3.0 MAIN CONTENT 3.1 Team Cohesiveness 3.1.1 Definition of Team Cohesiveness Team cohesiveness plays a role in big as well as in small companies.
“Team cohesiveness is critical in helping the individual feel good about his or her contribution to the effort”, noted James R. Idstein, controller 40 MBA768 INTERPERSONAL AND TEAM DYNAMICS of Kane Graphical Corporation (USA).
When TQM was introduced at Kane, teams of between five and eight employees were set up to deal with specific problems and demonstrate the impact that teams could make.
“We also made sure that our employees understood that no improvement is too small,” recalled Idstein.
Over a period of time, they can make a major difference.
The first team, the “Job Information Team”, worked on improving the clarity of forms used to process orders.
Once the project was completed, the team’s recommendations were accepted and immediately implemented.
Kane continues to emphasise the importance of every team and every employee to TQM.
Highly cohesive teams often have less tension and hostility and fewer misunderstandings than less cohesive teams do.
Additionally, studies have found that cohesive teams tend to produce more uniform output than less cohesive teams, which often have problems with communication and cooperation.
The Software Reusability Department of AR INC Research Corporation discovered that trust is the key to cohesiveness in teams.
What this means is that cohesive teams cannot tolerate extremists, positive or negative.
One of our most difficult realisations, recalled Risa B. Hyman, director of department, was that some talented individuals cannot flourish in a team-oriented environment.
If team cohesion is not to be eroded, management must recognise such a mismatch and address the problem before team goals are jeopardised.
3.2 Ways of Improving Cohesiveness When cooperation is especially vital, for instance, in meeting strategic goals – managers have four ways to improve cohesiveness: introduce competition, increase interpersonal attraction, increase interaction and create common goals and common fates for employees.
These four ways are explained with lessons from organisations known to have applied the highest levels of team operation.
3.2.1 Introduce Competition Conflict with outside individuals or other teams increases team cohesiveness.
With this factor in mind, General Electronic (USA) has developed a new program to train managers in creating and leading competitive work teams.
Competition is also used at Nintendo, the company that created Super Mario Brothers, where creative director, Shiegeru Japanese Miyamoto, often encourages creativity by dividing his 200 designers into opposing teams.
41 MBA768 INTERPERSONAL AND TEAM DYNAMICS 3.2.2 Increase Interaction Although it is not often possible for people to like everyone they work with, increased interaction can improve camaraderie and communication.
Corporations such as Tanden Computers and Genetech, a US biotechnology firm, holds regular beer parties to which employees are invited.
At Norman Cosmetics, managers sponsor Saturday night movies and serve ice cream at a 1920s style movie emporium.
In Huntsville, Alabama, Goldstar of America, Inc, occasionally closes down its plant early for volley ball games in which employees can meet one another in a spirit of camaraderie as well as good-natured competition.
This subsidiary of the South Korean Firm Lucky Goldstar is noted for its success in encouraging parallel production teams to compete against one another.
Hence we see the interaction of two techniques for increasing cohesiveness (competition and interaction).
3.2.3 Increase Interpersonal Attraction People tend to join teams whose members they identify with or admire.
Thus, an organisation may want to attract employees who share certain key values with it..
Some companies use carefully worked advertisements and unique interviewing techniques (such as an impromptu game) to discover associates who share a concern for consideration and service.
More importantly, such companies follow through with training, seminars, and policies that foster pride in meeting the common organisational goal of providing outstanding service.
3.2.4 Create Common Goals and Common Fates Gregory Shea and Richard Guzzo proposed that a group’s effectiveness is a function of three variables: task interdependence, potency and outcome interdependence.
3.3 Task Interdependence This is the extent to which a group’s work requires its members to interact with one another.
A high level of task interdependence increases the group’s sense of potency, which is the shared belief of a group that it can be effective.
3.3.1 Outcome Interdependence This is the degree to which the consequences of the works of the group are felt by all the group’s members.
42 MBA768 INTERPERSONAL AND TEAM DYNAMICS Shea and Guzzo further explain how astute managers can create successful groups.
Managers must first give each group a clear and achievable set of objectives.
A strategic planning group, for example, might be charted to devise a five-year company plan.
Because groups should be given flexibility in arranging their own affairs, the manager should concentrate on getting the charter right and not on details of how a group organises itself.
The members of the group should decide how much task interdependence their work requires.
However, the members must believe the organisation has given them sufficient resources- skills, money, flexibility etc.
to fulfill the charter.
In addition, managers must strive to create a sense of outcome interdependence.
If the members of team do not share some common fate, they will have little sense of belonging.
Team bonuses or peer evaluation can help create this sense of common fate.
Rewards do not have to take the form of money.
In fact, recognition can be as strong as or stronger than money.
For example, a group of managers at Honeywell (USA) won a $100million contract.
Their reward?
Their manager bought them all ice cream cones.
Unusual, perhaps, but many engineers still keep the photos taken that day.
Determinants of work-group effectiveness.
43 MBA768 INTERPERSONAL AND TEAM DYNAMICS SELF ASSESSMENT EXERCISE 1.
Define group cohesiveness.
2.
State four ways of improving cohesiveness in groups.
4.0 CONCLUSION Cohesive groups tend to produce more uniform output than less cohesive teams which often have problems with communication and cooperation.
Though trust is the key to cohesiveness in teams, it cannot however tolerate extremists, positive or negative.
5.0 SUMMARY In Unit 2, cohesiveness was mentioned as one of the building blocks of the group.
In this unit, we took an in-depth look at group cohesiveness.
Apart from the detailed definition of group cohesiveness, ways of improving cohesiveness as: introduction of competition, increased interaction, increased interpersonal attraction and creation of common goals and common fates were examined.
6.0 TUTOR-MARKED ASSIGNMENT List and explain the various ways of improving group cohesiveness.
7.0 REFERENCES/FURTHER READING Lieberman, G. F. (1983).
3,500 Good Quotes for Speakers.
New York: Main Street Books.
McNeill, Bellamy & Burrows, (2000).
“Team Dynamics – Topics for Expert Table”, Introduction to Engineering Design.
Nurick, A. J.
(1993).
“Facilitating Effective Work Teams”.
SAM Advanced Management Journal, 58 (1) pp.
22 – 26.
44 MBA768 INTERPERSONAL AND TEAM DYNAMICS UNIT 4 BUILDING INTERGROUP COHESIVENESS AND HIGH PERFORMANCE NORMS CONTENTS 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objectives 3.0 Main Content 3.1 Cohesiveness and High Performance Norms 3.1.1 Performance Norms and Group Performance 3.2 Building Cohesiveness and High Performance Norms 3.3 Avoiding Dysfunction Inherent In Strong Cohesiveness 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutor-Marked Assignment 7.0 References/Further Reading 1.0 INTRODUCTION Some groups are better than others at ensuring that their members behave the way the group performs.
Cohesive groups are more effective than non-cohesive groups at norms enforcement.
But the next question is: do they have norms of high or low performance?
This we shall analyse in this unit.
2.0 OBJECTIVES By the end of this unit, you should be able to: • explain the correlation between cohesiveness and high performance norms • explain action steps that can help create cohesive and high performance norms • determine how to avoid dysfunction inherent in strong cohesiveness.
3.0 MAIN CONTENT 3.1 Cohesiveness and High Performance Norms 3.1.1 Performance Norms and Group Performance The highest performance occurs when a cohesive group has high performance norms (see figure below).
But if a highly cohesive group 45 MBA768 INTERPERSONAL AND TEAM DYNAMICS has low performance norms, that group will have the worst performance.
In the group’s eyes, however, it will have succeeded on achieving its goal of poor performance.
Non-cohesive groups with high performance norms will be effective from the company’s stand point.
However, they won’t be as productive as they would be if they were more cohesive.
Non-cohesive groups perform poorly and they will not run things for management as effectively as cohesive group can.
LOW HIGH C Poor goal O Moderate goal LOW attainment H attainment and and task E task performance S performance I High goal High goal V attainment attainment E (Group’s and task N perspective) performance E HIGH and lowest task S performance S (management perspective) Performance Norms 3.2 Building Cohesiveness and High Performance Norms As the figure suggests, managers should build groups that are cohesive and have high performance norms.
The following actions can help build such groups.
• Recruit members with similar attitudes, value and backgrounds.
Similar individuals are more likely to get along with one another.
Don’t do this, though, if the group’s task requires heterogeneous skills and input.
For example, a homogenous committee or board might make relatively poor decisions because it will lack different information and viewpoints and may succumb to group’s thinking.
• Maintain high entrance and socialisation standards.
Teams and organisations that are difficult to get into have more prestige.
Individuals who survive difficult interview selection during training processes will be proud of their accomplishment and feel more attachment to the team.
46 MBA768 INTERPERSONAL AND TEAM DYNAMICS • Keep the group small (but large enough to get the job done).
The larger the team, the less important members may feel in their contributions.
• Help the team to succeed and publicise its successes.
Be a goal leader who facilitates success; the experience of winning brings the group closer together.
Then, if you inform superiors of your team’s successes, members will believe they are part of an important, prestigious unit.
Teams that get into a good performance track continue to perform well as time goes on while groups that don’t perform well often enter downward trends in which their problems are compounded over the time.
• Be a participative leader.
Participation in decisions gets group members more involved with one another, striving towards goals accomplishment.
Too much autocratic decision making can alienate the team from management.
• Present a challenge from outside the team.
Competition with other groups makes team members band together to defeat the enemy.
(Witness what happens to school spirit before the big game against an arch-rival).
Some of the greatest teams in business and in science have been completely focused on winning competition.
But don’t you become the outside threat.
If team members dislike you as a boss, they will become more cohesive – but their performance norms will be against you, not with you.
• Tie rewards to team performance.
To a large degree, teams are motivated just as individuals are.
They do the things that are rewarded.
Make sure that high performing teams get the rewards they deserve and that poorly performing ones get relatively few rewards.
Bear in mind that not just monetary rewards, but also recognition for good work, are powerful motivators.
Recognise and celebrate team accomplishments.
The team will become more cohesive and perform better to make their rewards.
Performance will be high, the organisation will benefit from higher team motivation and productivity, and the individual needs of team members will be better satisfied.
Ideally, being a member of a high performing team, recognised as such throughout the organisation, will become a badge of honour.
3.3 Avoiding Dysfunction Inherent in Strong Cohesiveness But keep in mind that strong cohesiveness, encouraging “agreeableness”, can be dysfunctional.
For problem solving and decision making, the team should establish norms promoting an open, constructive atmosphere including honest disagreement over issues without personal conflict and animosity.
Thus, the team can avoid group thinking and other dysfunctional problems.
47 MBA768 INTERPERSONAL AND TEAM DYNAMICS SELF ASSESSMENT EXERCISE List four steps in building team cohesiveness and high performance norms.
4.0 CONCLUSION Managers should build teams that are cohesive and have high performance norms by: (a) recruiting members with similar attitudes, values and backgrounds (b) maintaining high enhance and socialisation standards (c) being participative leaders (d) presenting challenges from outside the team.
5.0 SUMMARY In this unit, we outlined team cohesiveness and high performance norms.
We started with the fact that members with similar attitudes, values and backgrounds, should be recruited.
We concluded with the fact that the performance of any team is a function of the team’s motivation.
6.0 TUTOR-MARKED ASSIGNMENT List the various steps needed for building cohesive and high performing norms in teams.
7.0 REFERENCES/FURTHER READING Lieberman, G. F. (1983).
3,500 Good Quotes for Speakers.
New York: Main Sheet Books.
McNeill, Bellamy & Burrows (2000).
“Team Dynamics – Topics for Expert Table”, Introduction to Engineering Design.
Nurick, A. J.
(1993).
“Facilitating Effective Work Teams”.
SAM Advanced Management Journal, 58 (1) pp.
22 - 26 48 MBA768 INTERPERSONAL AND TEAM DYNAMICS UNIT 5 GUIDELINES FOR TEAM PRODUCTIVE MEETINGS CONTENTS 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objectives 3.0 Main Content 3.1 Uses of Agenda, Facilitators, Etc and Guidelines for Productive Meeting 3.1.1 Contents and Uses of Agenda 3.2 The Facilitator 3.2.1 Take Minutes 3.2.2 Draft Next Agenda 3.2.3 Evaluate the Meeting 3.2.4 Adhere to the “100-Mile Rule” 3.3 Summary Structure of an Effective Meeting 3.3.1 Have a Detailed Agenda 3.3.2 Use Quality Tools 3.3.3 Comply With Team Norms 3.3.4 Continually Check the Team’s Effectiveness 3.3.5 Continually Check the Team’s Efficiency 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutor-Marked Assignment 7.0 References/Further Reading 1.0 INTRODUCTION Although individual team members perform assignments between team meetings, much of the team’s work gets done when all team members are together during meetings.
Many people dislike meetings; however, productive meetings enhance the chance of having a successful project.
Just like other processes, meetings can be studied and constantly improved upon.
It is difficult to have productive meetings because few people know the rules and skills needed for such meetings.
In fact, the goal of having constantly improved meetings may be as hard for the team to reach as the improvement goals set for the project.
The best way to have productive meetings is to follow the guidelines given below from the start of the project when the members expect to learn new ways of working together.
49 MBA768 INTERPERSONAL AND TEAM DYNAMICS 2.0 OBJECTIVES By the end of this unit, you should be able to: • list and explain the contents of agenda and their uses in having productive meetings • explain the functions of a facilitator • describe the mechanisms of meetings in an organisation.
3.0 MAIN CONTENT 3.1 Uses of Agenda, Facilitators, Etc and Guidelines for Productive Meeting 3.1.1 Contents and Uses of Agenda Each meeting must have an agenda, preferably one drafted at the previous meeting and developed in detail by one or two members prior to the actual meeting.
It should be sent to participants in advance, if possible.
(If an agenda has not been developed before a meeting, spend the first five or ten minutes writing one on a flipchart).
The ideal agenda should cover the following.
• The agenda topics (including, perhaps, a sentence or two that defines each item and why it is being discussed), presented in a logical order so that items that need to be decided first are addressed first.
• The process to be used in coming to a decision (i.e.
brainstorming, affinity process, multi-voting etc) and not simply “Discuss…” • The presenters (usually the person who originated each item or the person most responsible or knowledgeable about it).
• A time guideline (the estimated time in minutes needed to discuss each item).
• The item types (Does each item require discussion or decision or is it just an announcement?).
Agenda usually list the following activities.
(a) Warm-ups: short (five or ten minutes) activities used to free people’s minds from the outside world and get them focused on the meeting.
50 MBA768 INTERPERSONAL AND TEAM DYNAMICS (b) A quick review of the agenda: start each meeting by going over the agenda, adding or deleting items and modifying time estimates.
(c) Breaks for long meetings: if the meeting lasts more than two hours, schedule at least one short break.
(d) Meeting evaluation: this is perhaps the most important item on the agenda.
Although some of these elements may be unfamiliar, we encourage team leaders to introduce them at the first meeting and include them in all subsequent meetings.
Team members will probably feel awkward at the first meeting anyway, and a new activity will not add much to that awkwardness.
As members become more comfortable with the group, they will feel less self-conscious about these activities.
3.2 The Facilitator Each meeting must have a facilitator who is responsible for keeping the meeting focused and moving.
Ordinarily, this role is appropriate for the team facilitator; however, your team may rotate the responsibility among its members.
Among the facilitator’s chief responsibilities are to: • encourage compliance with the code of cooperation and other team norms.
• keep the discussion focused on the topic and moving along.
• intervene if the discussion fragments into multiple conversations.
• tactfully prevent anyone from dominating or being overlooked.
• bring discussion to a close.
The facilitator should also notify the group when the time allotted for an agenda item has expired or is about to expire.
The team then decides whether to continue discussion at the expense of other items on the agenda or postpone further discussion until another meeting.
The following steps can assist in achieving successful meetings.
3.2.1 Take Minutes At each meeting, one team member should be recording key subjects and main points raised, decisions made (including who has agreed to do what and by when), and items that the team has agreed to raise again later in the meeting or at a future meeting.
51 MBA768 INTERPERSONAL AND TEAM DYNAMICS Team members can refer to the minutes to reconstruct discussions, remind themselves of decisions made or actions that need to be taken, or to see what happened at a meeting they missed.
Rotate this duty among the team members.
3.2.2 Draft Next Agenda At the end of the meeting, draft an agenda for the next meeting.
3.2.3 Evaluate the Meeting Always review and evaluate each meeting, even if other items on the agenda go overtime.
The evaluation should include decisions on what will be done to improve the meeting next time and helpful feed back to the team leader.
You may want to experiment with mid-meeting evaluations.
3.2.4 Adhere to the “100-Mile Rule” Once a meeting begins, everyone is expected to give it their full attention.
No one should be called from the meeting unless it is so important that the disruption would occur even if the meeting was 100 miles away from the workplace.
The “100-mile rule” will need to be communicated – perhaps repeatedly to those who keep taking phone messages or would interrupt the team’s work for other reasons.
3.3 Summary Structure of an Effective Meeting 3.3.1 Have a Detailed Agenda Issue agenda in advance of the meeting containing the following (a) Pre-assigned meeting roles (b) Agenda topics: (i) A sentence or two defining the team, including a clearly articulated objective.
(ii) Logical order of action (iii) Presenters, resources required, assignments (c) Time guideline.
52 MBA768 INTERPERSONAL AND TEAM DYNAMICS 3.3.2 Use Quality Tools (a) Appropriate tools for the task at hand (b) Team trained in the use of tools 3.3.3 Comply With Team Norms (a) Is everyone participating?
(b) Is no one dominating?
(c) Are team roles being followed?
(d) Is the team staying on task?
(e) Is the team reaching consensus?
(f) Are team members coming prepared to work?
(g) Are team members arriving on time?
(h) Do the team members understand the decision tools being used?
3.3.4 Continually Check the Team’s Effectiveness (a) Are we doing the right things?
(b) Are we asking the right questions?
(c) Are we tackling the right problems?
3.3.5 Continually Check The Team’s Efficiency (a) Are we taking unnecessary steps?
(b) Are we reinventing the wheel?
(c) Are we spinning our wheels?
(d) Are we looking for process-related problems?
(e) Are we using appropriate quality tools?
(f) Are we straying from the agenda?
SELF ASSESSMENT EXERCISE 1.
What are the facilitator’s chief responsibilities?
2.
List three activities included in the agenda.
4.0 CONCLUSION A team might not be able to organise effective or productive meetings without following the prescribed guidelines.
The prescribed guidelines include the use of agenda, facilitators, taking minutes, drafting next agenda, evaluating the meeting and adhering to the “100-mile rule”.
53 MBA768 INTERPERSONAL AND TEAM DYNAMICS 5.0 SUMMARY This unit listed the specific guidelines for team meetings.
We started with the agenda that were previously drafted guidelines of major issues before actual meeting.
Having a facilitator, taking minutes and evaluating the meeting were discussed.
Finally, we outlined a summary structure of an effective meeting.
6.0 TUTOR MARKED ASSIGNMENT Critically examine the importance of the agenda and minutes books in a team meeting.
7.0 REFERENCES/FURTHER READING Ethen, T. (1997).
Staying Focused and Effective.
Association Management, 49 (1), pp 45 – 48.
Hart, S. A.
(1997).
Interpersonal Dynamics Turn ‘Group’ Into ‘Team’, Electronic News, pp 43, 48 -49.
Nurick, A. J.
(1993).
Facilitating Effective Work Teams, SAM Advanced Management Journal 58 (i), Pp 22 – 26.
54 MBA768 INTERPERSONAL AND TEAM DYNAMICS MODULE 3 Unit 1 Team Decision and Commitment Unit 2 Team Development Unit 3 Team Evaluation and Improvement Unit 4 Team Conflict Management Unit 5 Team Benefits and Contribution UNIT 1 TEAM DECISION AND COMMITMENT CONTENTS 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objectives 3.0 Main Content 3.1 Team Decisions, Commitment and Sources of Power 3.1.1 Six Types of Team Decision 3.2 Degrees of Commitment to Consensus 3.2.1 Low Level Commitment (Passive Acceptance) 3.2.2 Moderate Level Commitment 3.2.3 High Level of Commitment (Active Acceptance) 3.3 Sources of Power in Teams 3.3.1 Legitimate Power 3.3.2 Reward Power 3.3.3 Coercive Power 3.3.4 Expert Power 3.3.5 Referent Power 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutor-Marked Assignment 7.0 References/Further Reading 1.0 INTRODUCTION As a team works at a task, or at team maintenance functions, decisions must be made.
The quality of team decision making, and the extent to which a decision is accepted and implemented by team members, is greatly affected by the decision making process.
2.0 OBJECTIVES By the end of the unit, you should be able to: • explain the key types of team decision • identify the degrees of commitment to consensus • list the sources of power in teams.
55 MBA768 INTERPERSONAL AND TEAM DYNAMICS 3.0 MAIN CONTENT 3.1 Team Decisions, Commitment and Sources of Power 3.1.1 Six Types of Team Decision There are six key types of team decision.
i. Unilateral/Authoritarian: One person makes the decision and imposes it upon the team.
Often, there is very little input from team members and acceptance / commitment is low.
ii.
Handclasp: Two team members make a decision and impose it upon the team.
This pattern sometimes looks participatory, but it still involves little input from the other members who will have low level of commitment to the decision.
iii.
Minority: Several members make a decision and impose it upon the majorities who have been disenfranchised.
In the hands of skilled practitioners, this may appear to be participatory decision making, but it is only a handclasp among a few members.
Quality decision suffers because of lack of input from the majority and commitment to the decision is low among those outside the minority.
iv.
Majority: This is the popular “democratic” default option.
When a team is unable to resolve a conflict, there is almost always a suggestion to “take a vote, majority wins”.
Majority rule has the illusion of fairness but it cuts off discussion, thereby reducing decision quality.
Furthermore, there is no commitment to the decision from the losing minority.
The “Loyal Opposition” is often a myth.
Super majorities of 2/3 or 3/4 do not solve the problems associated with voting.
v. Unanimity: This solves the problem of commitment, but it is very cumbersome because these days, some members have the power of veto.
The U.N. Security Council is a classic example.
vi.
Consensus: This can be defined as an agreed-upon decision by all team members that reflect all full exploration of a decision issue and does not comprise any strong conviction or need.
Consensus is difficult to achieve, but results in the best quality decision and the highest level of commitment to the team decision.
A consensus decision often becomes a new policy.
56 MBA768 INTERPERSONAL AND TEAM DYNAMICS The search for consensus decisions is an important facet of teams.
Consensus decisions are not based on the “lowest common denominator”.
The alternatives are discussed and refined until a consensus is attained.
That may mean that no one gets exactly what he or she wanted, but everyone is able to say, “I might take a different course of action if it were entirely upon me, but I commit my support to the plan on which we have all agreed”.
Achieving consensus involves compromises on the part of all members, but it is each member’s responsibility to present her/his position as effectively as possible.
Only then does consensus lead to high quality decisions.
3.2 Degrees of Commitment to Consensus The explicit development and use of “social norm” for a team is the essential ingredient that makes consensus decisions differ from the “lowest common denominator” “Forced” or “one time” compromises, which are common to the political processes, are not desirable and do not represent consensus decisions.
Every team member (and the team sponsor) should be willing for the outcome of the consensus decision process to represent the future policy of the organisation.
There are degrees of commitment to consensus just as there are degrees of internalisation for effective behaviour.
3.2.1 Low Level Commitment (Passive Acceptance) You are willing to accept the decision.
You work to implement the decision but your heart is not really in the implementation.
You do not actively support the decision with your colleagues and team members (but you also do not work to sandbag the decision).
3.2.2 Moderate Level Commitment You feel good about the decision and work to implement it.
Your general attitude is much more positive than at the lower level but you may still not actively support the decision with colleagues.
3.2.3 High Level of Commitment (Active Acceptance) You feel good about the decision, even when it is not the one you initially started out with.
You know that the decision is the best for the team and you actively work to get it implemented and accepted by other colleagues and team members.
57 MBA768 INTERPERSONAL AND TEAM DYNAMICS One other thought: CONSENSUS is not about voting.
If you are voting, then you are not talking about Consensus.
You are talking about UNANIMITY.
Consensus is an attitude or feeling and is something reached or achieved, never voted on.
It sometimes happens that a decision is reached that is apparently a consensus decision - all team members appear to agree (at least, none is objecting), the issue appears to have been fully explored (at least, no one is introducing any new information or concern), and there seems to be no one compromising his/her convictions or needs (at least, no one is complaining).
Unfortunately, when a team is fatigued, the focus of the team is wandering, or team maintenance is overdue, a state of Group-No-Think sometimes occurs.
A No-Think decision can appear to be a consensus decision simply because team members are too fatigued to speak up regarding their concerns, wish not to give offence, or believe that everyone else already agrees and they should just go along.
The following strategies can help overcome Group-No-Think.
(a) De-emphasise status and power differences between members (b) Welcome outside view points.
(c) Encourage disagreement or clash of opinions.
(d) Assign one member the task of being a devil’s advocate.
3.3 Sources of Power in Teams The ability of an individual to influence others within the context of a small, task-oriented team is determined by the power of that individual.
There are five sources of social power.
Some are more effective than others.
They are as listed below.
3.3.1 Legitimate Power This power results from the position the person holds.
A designated or elected leader, a military commander, a manager, all have legitimate power, power that is inherent in the position.
Generally, influence based on legitimate power will be accepted by team members.
However, it is important that members accept the legitimacy of power hierarchy.
3.3.2 Reward Power This power is based on the ability of the person to control important sources of reward and reinforcement.
Salary, bonuses, time-off, access of resources are all rewards that can be used to influence behaviour.
58 MBA768 INTERPERSONAL AND TEAM DYNAMICS Reward power is not usually well accepted by team members if the rewards are administered within clear contingencies and guidelines.
3.3.3 Coercive Power This is the power to administer punishment for noncompliance.
Fines, suspensions, undesirable assignments, verbal abuse, ridicule are all examples of punishment or coercive power.
The application of coercive power usually leads to compliance, but also generates resentment, negative emotions and dislike for the person who uses it.
3.3.4 Expert Power This form is based on the knowledge, special skills, training or experience of the person.
When a person’s expertise is known to the team, influence within that area of expertise is well accepted.
The use of expert power must find a balance between being haughty and being too humble.
Bragging about your skills does not establish useful expert power; however, expert power cannot be used if no one knows about it.
3.3.5 Referent Power This is power based on the person’s attractiveness and qualities as a human being.
It is called “referent” because team members use this person as a point of reference in developing their own personalities.
Referent power depends upon developing positive relationships with team members.
It is not simply mutual attraction, but a relationship that includes a kind of mentoring and guidance that is possible because one person wants to learn from the other.
The use of power in teams is an ongoing process.
The sources of power that is most useful to leaders and facilitators are expert power and referent power.
They produce influence and change in positive way and minimise resistance and negativity.
Reward and legitimate power can also be used effectively and in a positive way.
Coercive power can quickly produce the desired behaviour, but leads to other undesirable consequences.
SELF ASSESSMENT EXERCISE Differentiate between low level commitment and high level commitment in the concept of team commitment.
59 MBA768 INTERPERSONAL AND TEAM DYNAMICS 4.0 CONCLUSION The six types of group decision are very important in building commitment in the team.
In team commitment, there are degrees of commitment to reach consensus just as there are degrees of internalisation for effective behaviour.
Some of these are low level commitment, moderate level commitment and high level commitment.
We concluded this unit with some of the sources of power in teams, which are legitimate power, reward power, expert power, referent power and coercive power.
5.0 SUMMARY This unit analyses the types of group decision.
Consensus was the last item decision which is very important to the team procedure of decision making.
It can be defined as an agreed-upon decision by all group members that reflects full exploration of a decision issue and does not compromise any strong conviction.
We discovered that consensus is a function of the degree of commitment by members of the group.
Such commitment includes low level commitment, moderate level commitment etc.
The ability of an individual to influence others is a function of the person’s sources of power which we also looked at.
Apart from the legitimate sources of power, the unit also examines referent power and expert power, among others.
6.0 TUTOR-MARKED ASSIGNMENT 1.
List three (3) types of group decisions of a team.
2.
State three of the sources of power.
7.0 REFERENCES/FURTHER READING Convey, Stephen (1989).
The 7 Habits of Highly Effective People.
New York: Simon and Schuster.
Ethen, T. (1997).
“Staying Focused and Effective”, Association Management.
49(1), pps.
45-48.
McNeil, Bellamy & Burrows, (2000).
“Team Dynamics – Topics for Expert Table” Introduction to Engineering Design.
Nurick, A. J.
(1993).
“Facilitating Effective Work Teams”.
SAM Advanced Management Journal, 58 (1), pps.
22-26.
60 MBA768 INTERPERSONAL AND TEAM DYNAMICS UNIT 2 TEAM DEVELOPMENT CONTENTS 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objectives 3.0 Main Content 3.1 Stages of Team Development, Phases of Task Performing Teams and Team Maintenance 3.1.1 Team Development 3.2 Recurring Phases in Task Performing Teams 3.3 Team Maintenance 3.3.1 Unwelcome Team Members 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutor-Marked Assignment 7.0 References/Further Reading 1.0 INTRODUCTION Teams, like individuals, pass through predictable, sequential stages over the time.
Tuckman, (1965) labeled the stages of team development as forming, storming, norming, performing, and adjourning.
These stages have stood the test of time and today remain the standard classification of team development.
2.0 OBJECTIVES By the end of this unit, you should be able to: • identify and explain the stages of team development • explain the recurring phases in task performing teams • explain the concept of team maintenance.
3.0 MAIN CONTENT 3.1 Stages of Team Development, Phases of Task Performing Teams and Team Maintenance 3.1.1 Team Development The key stages of team development are: forming, storming, norming, performing and adjourning.
61 MBA768 INTERPERSONAL AND TEAM DYNAMICS i.
Forming (The Orientation Stage) Members of newly formed team often feel anxious and uncomfortable.
They must interact with other individuals whom they do not know well and begin to work on tasks which they may not yet completely understand.
Their roles in the team and the procedure for interaction may be unclear as well.
As members become better acquainted, some of the tension may dissipate.
Members will begin to become more comfortable with their roles.
ii.
Storming (The Conflict Stage) The polite interaction of the orientation stage may soon be replaced by conflict.
False conflict occurs when members misunderstand or misinterpret the behaviour of one another.
Contingent conflicts develop over procedural or situational factors.
These two types of conflicts are relatively easy to resolve, whereas escalating conflicts, a third variety, may cause more serious problems for the team.
Escalating conflicts may begin as simple disagreements which then lead into the expression of more fundamental difference of opinion.
Such conflicts may be characterised by venting personal hostilities and the expression of long-suppressed emotions or ideas.
Although conflict may damage or destroy a team, most researchers agree that conflict is a natural consequence of team membership, and that it may, in fact, strengthen the team as the members learn to accept and constructively resolve their differences.
iii.
Norming (The Cohesion State) During the third stage, team conflict is replaced by a feeling of cohesiveness when the team experiences a sense of unity or team identity.
Membership stability also characterises this stage.
Members are highly involved and turnover is low and increase in members’ satisfaction also happens at this time.
Not only are members pleased with the team, they themselves may experience higher self esteem and lower anxiety as a result of their participation in the team.
The internal dynamics of cohesive teams change as well.
Individual members are more likely to accept or be persuaded by team norms.
One negative aspect of this is that, in some teams, dissent may not be tolerated during this stage.
iv.
Performing (The Task Performance Stage) High productivity is most likely when teams have been together for some time.
Whenever the focus of the team is task oriented or therapeutic, effective performance occurs late in the developmental life 62 MBA768 INTERPERSONAL AND TEAM DYNAMICS of the team.
Although, as a rule, non-cohesive teams are less productive than cohesive teams, not all cohesive teams are productive some cohesive teams may have strong norms which encourage low productivity.
v. Adjourning (The Dissolution Stage) Team may adjourn spontaneously or by design.
Planned dissolution occurs when the team has completed its task or exhausted its resources.
Spontaneous dissolution occurs when members are unable to resolve conflicts, its members grow dissatisfied and depart, or when repeated failures make the team unable to continue.
Either type of dissolution may be stressful.
Members of successful teams may not want to end, and when the dissolution is unexpected, members may experience a great deal of conflict or anxiety.
Table Charting the Five Stages of Group Development STAGE MAJOR PROCESSES CHARACTERISTICS 1.
Orientation Exchange of information; Tentative interactions, (Forming) identification of polite discourse; commonalities concern over ambiguity; self discourse.
2.
Conflict Disagreement over Criticism of ideas, poor (Storming) procedures, expression of hostility, polarisation dissatisfaction, emotional and coalition forming responding, resistance 3.
Cohesion Growth of cohesiveness Agreement on (Norming) and unity, establishment procedure, reduction in of rules, standards and role ambiguity, relationships increased “we feeling” 4.
Performance Goals achievement; high Decision making, (Performing) task orientation; problem solving; emphasis on performance mutual co-operation.
and production.
5.
Dissolution Termination of roles, Disintegration and (Adjourning) completion of tasks, withdrawal, increased reduction of dependency independence, emotionality and regret 3.2 Recurring Phases in Task Performing Teams 63 MBA768 INTERPERSONAL AND TEAM DYNAMICS As teams perform, even those that have reached the performing stage in the team’s development must focus on both the task and team maintenance in order to be highly productive.
When a team directs attention at its primary task, it is almost inevitable that fatigue, tension, and conflict will develop.
Fatigue will set in if the task is demanding, or boredom will develop if it is too easy.
Tension and conflict will develop when alternative approaches to task performance are suggested, or when alternative solutions to a team problem are put forward and discussed.
As these products of task orientation develop and increase, team productivity suffers.
It is then important for the team to shift to a team maintenance orientation.
This is accomplished by setting the task aside and focusing on the relationships between members, resting, reducing tension, and resolving interpersonal conflicts.
In many teams, there is a “rush to performance” in which the stages of team development are side-stepped or truncated.
It is most important to note that these stages of team development provide team members with the skills required during team maintenance activities.
It is also important that members acknowledge the need to take time away from the task to deal with team maintenance issues.
Two separate leadership roles may develop within a team - one person who directs task activities and another who is the team maintenance specialist.
3.3 Team Maintenance At various points in a team’s history, there may be a need for team maintenance requiring various levels of intervention.
There are three levels of intervention.
• Prevention - Set the team for success • Mild Intervention - Interpersonal, group time - Private non-meeting time conversation • Strong Intervention - Private, non-meeting time confrontation - Personal group time 64 MBA768 INTERPERSONAL AND TEAM DYNAMICS Functions Necessary for Task Performing • Analysing the problem or task structure • Suggesting solutions • Asking for information • Summarising • Refocusing team on task • Pushing for a team decision Functions Necessary for Team Maintenance • Telling a joke • Mediating a conflict between team members • Encouraging all to participate • Showing approval • Suggesting a break from work • Reminding members of norms and co-operation • Encouraging and modeling positive, effective tasks for team members.
3.3.1 Unwelcome Team Members Many managers who hesitate to use teams are reluctant because not all groups work well or efficiently.
Even managers who are committed to group work regularly search for ways to make members aware of processes that affect group productivity.
Linda D. Lerner, a renowned team expert, described her strategy for making students aware of counterproductive behaviour in group situations.
She has written a short profile designed to elicit very immediate and clear reactions from students.
Lerner has her students discuss these profiles in small groups.
She asked them to consider questions like the following: Do you see yourself in any of these descriptions?
What about other group members with whom you have worked?
What problems do they present to the group?, What are some strategies for dealing with these problems?
Suggestions that groups offer for dealing with these behaviours can be compiled into a handout shared with all groups subsequently.
This is an especially good preventive strategy.
Lerner also identified the following problem members under this classification.
Nola No-can-Meet: Here, we find the group members who can’t make the meeting.
No matter when the others schedule it, she’s willing to 65 MBA768 INTERPERSONAL AND TEAM DYNAMICS contribute, but she has a busy schedule and lots to do.
The group should carry on without her and she will do her part, as long as somebody lets her know.
Do-it-All Dottie : Dottie doesn’t much trust other people and their ability to do things the way she thinks they ought to be done or up to her standards, so she does it all herself.
If somebody offers to help, she puts them at ease; it is no problem, everything is under control, and they should not worry.
The less involved the others in the group are, the happier Dottie is.
Seldom-seen Steve: Nothing has been heard nor seen of Steve.
He isn’t coming to class, he hasn’t tried to contact anybody else in the group, and nobody knows how to get in touch with him.
The project is just about due.
What should the other members do about Steve?
Always-Right Artie: Artie definitely contributes to the group.
His ideas are good and he’s always ready to offer them.
The problem: he doesn’t take very well to the ideas of others and he tends to force his solution on the group.
He takes charge and pushes the others in the direction that he thinks best, even though some in the group may not agree.
Quiet Quentin: Quentin is so quiet that the others often forget he is there, although he comes to the meeting quite well prepared.
His ideas would really help the group, but unless they call on him, Quentin is unlikely to speak.
Ten Common Team Problems A number of problems are common to teams.
It is necessary to keep them in mind always.
1.
Floundering 2.
Overbearing participants 3.
Dominating participants 4.
Reluctant participants 5.
Unquestioned acceptance of opinions as facts 6.
Rush to accomplishment 7.
Attribution 8.
Discounts and “plops” 9.
Wanderlust, digression and tangents 10.
Feuding members.
66 MBA768 INTERPERSONAL AND TEAM DYNAMICS SELF ASSESSMENT EXERCISE 1.
List the stages of group in team development.
2.
List three functions necessary for group maintenance.
4.0 CONCLUSION The stages of team development are of great importance.
The first stage of group or team development is the orientation stage which is also called forming.
There are also the storming, the norming, the performing as well as the adjourning stages.
We also looked at the recurring phases in task performing teams.
5.0 SUMMARY Members of newly formed teams sometimes feel uncomfortable, hence the need for interaction.
The polite interaction of the orientation stage may soon be replaced by conflict which also can eventually be replaced by a feeling of cohesiveness.
This is also called the norming stage.
We also looked at the performing and adjourning stages and the unit was concluded with a look at group maintenance.
6.0 TUTOR-MARKED ASSIGNMENT List ten common team problems.
7.0 REFERENCES/FURTHER READING Bateman, & Snell, (1999).
Management: Building Competitive Advantage.
McGraw-Hill.
Ebunu, F.C.
(1998).
Revision Notes on Business Management.
Ibadan: Federal Co-operative College.
Stoner, Freeman & Gilbert, J.
(2002).
Management (6th edition).
India: Prentice Hall.
67 MBA768 INTERPERSONAL AND TEAM DYNAMICS UNIT 3 TEAM EVALUATION AND IMPROVEMENT CONTENTS 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objectives 3.0 Main Content 3.1 Characteristics of Effective Teams 3.2 Characteristics of Ineffective Teams 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutor-Marked Assignment 7.0 References/Further Reading 1.0 INTRODUCTION It is not easy to evaluate the effectiveness of team working, other than by the effectiveness of the actual solutions produced and improvements made.
It is, however, important that the “health” of a team is regularly assessed.
Much effort is usually devoted to the measurement of what teams are able to achieve and how well.
This serves as key to the introduction of improvement methods.
2.0 OBJECTIVES By the end of this unit, you should be able to: • identify the basic characteristics of an effective team • identify the characteristics of an ineffective team • state and explain the roles of teams in continuous improvement.
3.0 MAIN CONTENT 3.1 Characteristics of Effective Teams The observable healthy indicators of an effective team are the followings.
• Everyone is participating, making a contribution and is involved in actions and, through this, is achieving their personal potential.
• Relationships are open • Team members trust, respect and support each other and they are prepared to adapt and be co-operative 68 MBA768 INTERPERSONAL AND TEAM DYNAMICS • Members listen closely to the views of other members of the team and have an open mind and maintain a positive attitude.
• Everyone expresses his or her views, ideas and problems and all available means are used to support ideas.
• Members respect the operating procedures and principles of the team and they own the team process.
• There is clarity of focus on the project being targeted and members know what is expected of them.
3.2 Characteristics of Ineffective Teams On the other hand, the usual characteristics of an ineffective team are the following.
• Poor leadership • Cliques, defensiveness, closed minds and blame culture within the team’s membership.
• Downright hostilities, conflict, competition and lack of tolerance between team members.
• Members are not all participating in the activities of the team • Limited communication between team and members; members have a tendency to act on their own.
• Insufficient attention to the team process.
• There is no pride displayed in the team activity.
Members feel they are being taken advantage of and the higher performers reduce their efforts on those of the lowest performers.
Briggs et al (1993) describe the aims of an audit, based on a semi- structured interviewing methodology, of the quality improvement team operating at Staffordshire Tableware Ltd. (UK) in relation to the followings.
a.
What teams were involved?
b.
The members of the teams c. How teams were operating d. What projects were being tackled?
e. How participants felt about the programme.
They go on to say that the information gathered to create a picture of team activity for use is an historical record prior to an expansion of the programme, a feedback tool to improve team effectiveness and to plot a course for future development of the team programme.
Other scholars have developed a “team fitness check” which consists of a questionnaire completed by each member, the leader and the mentor of 69 MBA768 INTERPERSONAL AND TEAM DYNAMICS the team and then discussed and acted on by the team (and the management, if necessary).
The team fitness check is a diagnostic tool which helps a team to pinpoint strengths and areas for improvement of both the team and individual members to develop its effectiveness and efficiency.
The idea came from a Quality Circle Health Assessment developed in the mid-1980 by Eric Barlow at Philips (Hazel Grove).
Teams have the following roles to play in a process of continuous improvement.
• Aid the commitment of people to the principles of total quality management • Provide an additional means of communication between individuals, managements and their direct reports, across functions and with customers and suppliers.
• Provide the means and opportunity for people to participate in decision making about how the business operates.
• Improve relationship and knowledge, develop trust, facilitate co- operative activities and adjust to change.
• Help to develop people and encourage leadership traits.
• Build collective responsibilities and develop a sense of ownership • Aid personal development and build confidence • Develop problem solving skills.
• Facilitate awareness of quality improvement potentials leading to behavioural and attitude change.
• Help to facilitate change in management style and culture • Solve problems • Imbue a sense of accomplishment • Improve the adaptation of new products to the production line • Improve morale • Improve operating effectiveness as people working in a common direction and through this generate interaction and synergy.
In 1993, the American Society for Quality Control (ASQC) commissioned the Gallup organisation to assess employees’ attitude on team work, empowerment and quality improvement.
The survey of 1, 293 adults, who were employed full time focused on a variety of topics, including extent of participation in quality teams, employees’ feelings of empowerment and effects of technology and team work on empowerment.
It was found that there was a high level of employees’ participation in improving team work and there was considerable evidence which 70 MBA768 INTERPERSONAL AND TEAM DYNAMICS pointed to the positive effects of quality and team work on employees’ empowerment.
It was also found that employees were very clear on the purpose of quality-related team work, under its multitude of names, and that those employees participating in such team work are also more likely to receive training than those who do not participate.
SELF ASSESSMENT EXERCISE 1.
State two characteristics of effective teams.
2.
List three roles of teams in continuous improvement.
4.0 CONCLUSION Teams have a number of roles to play in a process of continuous improvement.
One of the roles we discovered is that it aids the commitment of people to the principles of total quality management.
It was also found that there was a high level of employees’ participation in quality improvement team work.
5.0 SUMMARY In this unit, basic characteristics of effective and ineffective teams were identified and explained.
Teams have roles to play in continuous improvement if there is maximum co-operation of each member of the team.
Therefore, it can be said that for improvement of a team, every member of the team should focus on the projects being targeted and there should be full involvement of every member of the team.
Also, everyone expresses his or her views, ideas and problems, and explores all available means of promoting the team to a greater height.
Team members can ensure success of the project when they contribute positively.
6.0 TUTOR-MARKED ASSIGNMENT State and explain five roles of teams in continuous improvement .
7.0 REFERENCES/FURTHER READING Ethen, T. (1997).
“Staying Focused and Effective”, Association Management, 49(i) Pp 45-48.
Hart, S. A.
(1997).
“Interpersonal Dynamics Turn ‘Group’ into ‘Team’.” Electronic News.
Pp.
43, 48-49.
Nurick, A. J.
(1993).
“Facilitating Effective Work Teams”, SAM Advanced Management Journal, 58 (i), pp 22-27.
71 MBA768 INTERPERSONAL AND TEAM DYNAMICS UNIT 4 TEAM CONFLICT MANAGEMENT CONTENTS 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objectives 3.0 Main Content 3.1 Inter-Group Conflict, Managing Conflict and Styles 3.1.1 Inter-Group Conflict 3.2 Managing Conflicts 3.3 Conflict Styles 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutor-Marked Assignment 7.0 References/Further Reading 1.0 INTRODUCTION It is practically inevitable for teams to function effectively without conflict.
As a result, there should be strategic alternatives or ways of managing these conflicts.
Conflict is an integral part of any group’s existence, and it is necessary to understand the nature of conflict to facilitate its management.
2.0 OBJECTIVES By the end of this unit, you should be able to: • explain the concept of inter-group conflicts • describe how to manage conflicts • list the different conflict styles.
3.0 MAIN CONTENT 3.1 Inter-Group Conflict, Managing Conflict and Styles 3.1.1 Inter-Group Conflict The complex maze of interdependencies throughout organisations provides boundless opportunity for conflicts to arise among groups and teams.
Some conflicts are constructive for organisations, as we discussed earlier.
But many things cause great potentials for destructive conflicts: the sheer number and variety of contacts; ambiguities in jurisdiction and responsibility; differences in goals; inter-group competition for scarce resources in which some units attend to long-term considerations and others focus on short-term needs and other factors.
72 MBA768 INTERPERSONAL AND TEAM DYNAMICS Tensions and anxiety are likely to arise in demographically diverse teams or teams from different parts of the organisation or teams composed of contrasting personalities.
These tensions need not be destructive influences.
In fact, they can be important sources of information, new perspectives and reality.
The team must learn not only to accept differences and conflicts but to use them to the advantage of the organisation.
The team must be willing and able to confront disagreements in direct, honest, sincere ways.
3.2 Managing Conflicts Teams inevitably face conflicts and must decide how to manage them.
The aim should be to make the conflicts productive, that is, for those involved to believe they have benefited from a conflict when (1) a new solution is implemented, the problem is solved, and it is unlikely to emerge again and (2) work relationships have been strengthened and people believe they can work together productively in the future.
How can conflict be managed?
A recent study of Human Resource (HR) managers and the conflicts which they deal with provides some insights.
HR managers deal with every type of conflicts imaginable: interpersonal difficulties from minor irritation to jealousy, to fights; operations issues including union issues, work assignments, overtime and sick leave, discipline over infractions ranging from drug use and theft to sleeping on the job, sexual harassment and racial bias; pay and promotion issues and feuds or strategic conflicts among divisions or individuals at the highest organisational levels.
In the study, the HR managers successfully settled most of the disputes.
These managers typically follow a four-stage strategy.
They (1) investigate by interviewing the disputants and others, and gathering more information.
They (2) decide how to resolve the dispute, often in conjunction with the disputants’ bosses.
They (3) take action by explaining their decisions and the reasoning, and advise or train the disputants to avoid future such incidents and they (4) follow up by documenting the conflicts and the resolutions, and monitoring the results by checking back with the disputants and their bosses.
Throughout, the objectives of the HR people are to be fully informed so they understand the conflict, to be active and assertive in trying to resolve it, to be as objective, neutral and impartial as humanly possible, and to be flexible by modifying their approaches to the situation.
There are some other recommendations for more effective conflict management.
Don’t allow dysfunctional conflict to build, or hope or 73 MBA768 INTERPERSONAL AND TEAM DYNAMICS assume that it will go away.
Address it before it escalates.
Try to resolve it, and if the first efforts don’t work, try others.
3.3 Conflict Styles Inter-group conflict can be managed through structural solutions such as the integrating roles discussed before.
A team or an individual in a conflict situation has several additional options regarding the style used in interactions with others.
These personal styles of dealing with conflicts, shown in the figure below, are distinguished based on how much people strive to satisfy their own concerns (the assertiveness dimension) and to what degree they focus on satisfying the other party’s concern (the cooperativeness dimension).
For example, a common reaction to conflict is avoidance.
In this situation, people do nothing to satisfy themselves or others.
They either ignore the problem by doing nothing at all or address it by merely smoothing over or deemphasising the disagreement.
This, of course, fails to solve the problem or clear the air.
ACCOMMODATION means cooperating on behalf of the other party but not being assertive about one’s own interests.
COMPROMISE involves moderate attention to both parties’ concerns being neither highly cooperative nor highly assertive.
This style therefore results in satisfying but not maximising solutions.
FORCING is a highly competitive response in which people focus strictly on their own wishes and are unwilling to recognise the other person’s concern.
Finally, COLLABORATION emphasises both cooperation and assertiveness.
The goal is to maximise satisfaction for both parties.
Different approaches are necessary at different times.
For example, competition or forcing can be healthy if it promotes positive motivation and even necessary when cutting cost or dealing with other scarce resources.
Compromise may be useful when people are under time pressure, when they need to achieve a temporary solution, or when collaboration fails.
People should accommodate when they learn they are wrong or to minimise loss when they are outmatched.
Even avoiding may be appropriate if the issue is trivial or others should solve the conflict.
But when the conflict concerns important issues, when both sets of concerns are valid and important, when a creative solution is needed, and when commitment to the solution is vital to implementation, collaboration is the ideal approach.
Collaboration can be achieved by airing feelings and opinions, addressing all concerned, and avoiding goal displacement by not letting personal attacks interfere with problem 74 MBA768 INTERPERSONAL AND TEAM DYNAMICS solving.
An important technique is to invoke SUPER-ORDINATE GOALS - Higher-Level organisational goals towards which all teams should be striving and that ultimately need to take precedence over preference.
Collaboration offers the best choice of reaching mutually satisfactory solutions based on the ideas and interests of all parties and of maintaining and strengthening work relationships.
Uncooperative Cooperativeness Cooperative A s s e r Assertive Competing Collaborating t i v e Compromising n e s s Unassertive Avoiding Accommodating SELF ASSESSMENT EXERCISE List and explain two likely causes of team conflicts.
4.0 CONCLUSION The effectiveness of team management is a function of team conflict management.
Apart from explaining inter-group conflicts, this unit also proffers some ways of solving managing conflicts, which include investigation, information gathering, documenting the conflict and the resolution.
5.0 SUMMARY This unit outlines the importance and the necessity of conflict in a team.
We started by creating the understanding of inter-group conflicts and how such conflicts can be managed.
We finally concluded with discussion of various conflict styles and how to manage them.
75 MBA768 INTERPERSONAL AND TEAM DYNAMICS 6.0 TUTOR-MARKED ASSIGNMENT Explain the key ways of managing conflicts in a team.
7.0 REFERENCES/FURTHER READING Bateman & Snell (1999).
Management: Building Competitive Advantage.
McGraw-Hill.
Stoner, Freeman.
& Gilbert J.
(2002).
Management (6th Ed.).
India: Prentice-Hall.
76 MBA768 INTERPERSONAL AND TEAM DYNAMICS UNIT 5 TEAM BENEFITS AND CONTRIBUTIONS CONTENTS 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objectives 3.0 Main Content 3.1 Functions, Benefits and Contributions of Teams 3.1.1 Team Functions 3.2 Team Benefits 3.3 The Contributions of Teams 3.3.1 Building Block for Organisation Structure 3.3.2 Force for Productivity 3.3.3 Force for Quality 3.3.4 Force for Cost Reduction 3.3.5 Force for Speed 3.3.6 Force for Change 3.3.7 Force for Innovations 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutor-Marked Assignment 7.0 References/Further Reading 1.0 INTRODUCTION In organisations, teams serve numerous functions.
Some of these functions benefit the organisation directly; others benefit primarily the team’s members.
Whichever way, it is necessary to understand the benefits and contributions of teams as a means of appreciating their critical roles in all organisations and settings.
2.0 OBJECTIVES By the end of this unit, you should be able to: • state the functions served by teams in organisations • explain the benefits of teams to organisations and to team members • list the contributions of teams in the work place.
77 MBA768 INTERPERSONAL AND TEAM DYNAMICS 3.0 MAIN CONTENT 3.1 Functions, Benefits and Contributions of Teams 3.1.1 Team Functions The table below illustrates some of the functions of teams and how these functions benefit the organisations directly, and others, primarily the team members.
For the Organisation For the Individual 1.
Accomplish tasks that could 1.
Aid in learning about the not be done by individuals organisation and its working alone environment.
2.
Bring multiple skills and 2.
Aid in learning about self.
talents to bear on complex tasks.
3.
Provide a vehicle for decision 3.
Provide help in gaining new Making that permits multiple skills.
and conflicting views to be aired and considered.
4.
Provide an efficient means for 4.
Obtain valued rewards that are organisational control of not accessible through individual behavior.
individual initiative 5.
Facilitate changes in 5.
Directly satisfy important organisational policies and personal needs, especially need procedures.
for social acceptance.
6.
Increase organisational stability by transmitting shared beliefs and values to new members.
3.2 Team Benefits The organisation benefits because teams have greater total resources (skills, talents, information, energy) than individuals do.
Therefore, they can perform jobs that cannot be done by individuals working alone.
They also have a greater diversity of resources, which enable teams to perform complex tasks.
Also, teams can aid decision making even as they help to socialise new members, control individual behaviour and facilitate organisational performance, innovation and change.
Teams also provide many benefits for their members.
The team is a very useful learning mechanism.
Members learn about the company and themselves, and they acquire new affiliations and esteem.
Other needs 78 MBA768 INTERPERSONAL AND TEAM DYNAMICS are met as team members receive tangible organisational rewards that they could not have achieved working alone.
Team members can provide one another with feedback, as well as identify opportunities for growth, development and training.
A marketing representative can learn about financial modeling from a colleague on a new product development team, and the financial expert can learn consumer marketing.
Experiencing working together in a team and developing strong team problem-solving capabilities is a vital supplement to specific job skills or functional expertise.
The skills acquired are transferable to new positions.
3.3 The Contributions of Teams Team-based approaches to work can be powerfully effective in the following ways.
3.3.1 Building Block for Organisation Structure Most of the world’s top organisations are based on teams.
Organisations like Kollmorgen, manufacturer of printed circuits and electro-optic devices, are structured entirely around teams.
A team oriented structure is also in place at Kyociera Corporation which was voted the best managed company in Japan.
3.3.2 Force for Productivity Shenandoah Life Insurance Company (USA) credited its new team organisation with a 50 per cent increase in the handling of applications and customer services requests with fewer people.
3.3.3 Force for Quality Quality rose 50 per cent in a northern telecom facility in the United States, while Federal Express reduced billing errors and cost packages by 13 per cent.
Boeing engineering teams built its new 777 passenger jet with far fewer design errors than in earlier programmes and for the first time in Boeing’s history, parts from different suppliers needed little reworking.
As a result, Boeing received the fastest flight certification ever for a new commercial aircraft.
79 MBA768 INTERPERSONAL AND TEAM DYNAMICS 3.3.4 Force for Cost Reduction Honeywells teams saved over 11 millions after reducing production times and shipping over 99 percent of order on time.
Boeing management claims that it could not have developed the 777 without cross-functional teams; it would have been prohibitively expensive.
3.3.5 Force for Speed Chrysler and many other companies are using teams to create new products quicker.
Some others are trying to make their companies a high speed force on the information high way.
Lenders have cut home mortgage improvement times from weeks to hours and life insurance companies have cut time to issue new policies from six weeks to one day.
3.3.6 Force for Change Bell Atlantic Corporation, a formerly monopolistic bureaucracy, became more entrepreneurial in part through the creation of client service teams (CSTs).
At KPMG Netherlands, a strategic integration team of 12 partners, with 100 other professionals divided into 14 task forces, led strategies and cultural changes by studying their trends and scenarios, defining core competencies, and dealing with organisational challenges.
3.3.7 Force for Innovations The auto industry relies on project teams to develop new vehicles, with Chrysler leading the way in the United States and for achieving great success with its Taunus project.
At 3M, work teams turned around one division by tripling the number of new products.
3M’s innovative success stories are numerous and legendary, emerging through the use of teams that are small entrepreneurial businesses within the larger corporation.
SELF ASSESSMENT EXERCISE State the contributions of a team to an organisation.
4.0 CONCLUSION The aim of this concluding unit is to discuss some of the relevant benefits and contributions of a team to organisations and to individuals.
The organisation benefits because teams have greater total resources (skills, talents, information, energy) than individuals do.
In conclusion, we discussed some of the contributions of teams as the building blocks 80 MBA768 INTERPERSONAL AND TEAM DYNAMICS for organisational structures as a force for productivity and a force for quality.
5.0 SUMMARY The use of teams has enormous benefits to the organisation and the individuals that make up the team.
One of the benefits of the team is the greater diversity of resources, which enables teams to perform complex tasks.
The last part of this unit looked at the contributions of teams.
We outlined seven (7) contributions of the team.
It is noted that most of the illustrative cases cited are foreign oriented.
Apart from the fact that the countries drawn from are leaders in team management, they are the only sources of research information in the field.
Hardly any valid cases were found emanating from Nigeria or other African countries.
6.0 TUTOR-MARKED ASSIGNMENT What are the key ways in which a team can benefit the individual?
Explain each of the ways.
7.0 REFERENCES/FURTHER READING Bateman, & Snell, (1999).
Management: Building Competitive Advantage.
McGraw-Hill.
Stoner, Freeman & Gilbert, J.
(2002).
Management, (6th Ed.).
India: Prentice-Hall.
81
