COST ENT 223 ACCOUNTING Course GuideCOURSE GUIDE ENT223 COURSE GUIDE ENT223 COST ACCOUNTING Course Writer Dr. Sani Usman Gurowa University of Abuja, Abuja, Nigeria.
Programme Leader Dr. O. J. Onwe National Open University of Nigeria, Victoria Island, Lagos.
Course Coordinator Dr. S. O. Israel-Cookey National Open University of Nigeria Victoria Island, Lagos.
NATIONAL OPEN UNIVERSITY OF NIGERIA iiCOURSE GUIDE ENT223 National Open University of Nigeria Headquarters 14/16 Ahmadu Bello Way Victoria Island Lagos Abuja Office No.
5 Dar es Salaam Street Off Aminu Kano Crescent Wuse II, Abuja Nigeria e-mail: centralinfo@nou.edu.ng URL: www.nou.edu.ng Published by: National Open University of Nigeria 2008 First Printed 2008 ISBN: 978-058-964-3 All Rights Reserved iiiCOURSE GUIDE ENT223 CONTENTS PAGE Introduction ……………………………………………… 1 Course Contents………………………………………….. 1 Course Aims……………………………………………… 1 Objectives………………………………………………… 2 Course Materials ………………………………………….
2 Study Units……………………………………………….. 2-3 Assignment/Exercises…………………………………….. 3 Assessment ……………………………………………….. 3 Tutor-Marked Assignment ……………………………….. 3 Final Written Examination………………………………… 3 Summary ………………………………………………….. 3 ivCOURSE GUIDE ENT223 Introduction In performing his managerial functions of planning and control, the information about costs is of importance to the cost accountant.
In choosing among alternatives for planning purposes as well as the optimum utilization of resources, he should have an idea of the costs of each alternative.
Costs data are also required to make decision such as pricing, make or buy, replacement, assets acquisition, product mix and others.
Furthermore, the performance of executives and their subordinates can be evaluated when a companion is made between the costs actually incurred and the costs that should have been incurred.
ENT223: Cost Accounting is a semester course work of two credit hours available to students taken the B.Sc Entrepreneurial and Small Business Management in the School of Business and Human Recourse Management.
The Course Guide tells you what the course is all about and the relevant materials that you require to make your study very successful.
Course Contents The course contents include basic concept of Cost Accounting; Elements of Costs; Cost Classification, Behaviour, Ascertainment; Standard Costing; Activity-Based Costing, etc.
Course Aims This course is geared towards equipping you with the basic cost concepts and methods necessary for knowledge of cost classification, ascertainment, behaviour, etc, to enable you take important decision in the aeat of business.
This aim will be achieved by: • Explaining the basic concept of cost accounting, • Exposing you to the element of cost-materials, labour overhead, • Treating, with you, cost classification, behaviour and ascertainment, • Treating, with you, standard costing, activity-based costing and measuring performance in organization.
1COURSE GUIDE ENT223 Objectives On the successful completion of this course, you will be able to: • Define cost accounting; • State the purposes of cost accounting; • Distinguish between cost accounting and financial accounting; • Discuss the essential elements of effective cost accounting information; • Explain the nature of cost classification; • Use cost accounting information to take business decision.
Course Materials • Course Guide • Study units • Textbooks • Assignment Guide Study Texts There are 19 units under 4 modules in this course which should be studied carefully: Module 1 Unit 1 Basic Concept of Cost Accounting Unit 2 Elements of Cost Unit 3 The Methods of Cost Accounting Unit 4 Purchasing Procedure Unit 5 Stores Routine Module 2 Unit 1 Receipts and Issue of Materials Unit 2 Method of Valuing Materials Issues Unit 3 Organization for Wages Contest Unit 4 Methods of Remuneration and effect on Cost Unit 5 Organization for Overhead Control Modules 3 Unit 1 Cost Classification Unit 2 Cost Behaviour Unit 3 Standard Costing Unit 4 Cost Ascertainment 2COURSE GUIDE ENT223 Unit 5 Planning System Concept Modules 4 Unit 1 Short-Term Operational Planning Unit 2 Elements of Cost-Materials, Labour, Overhead Unit 3 Activity-Based Costing Unit 4 Measuring Performance in Organization Assignment/Exercises Self-Assessment Exercises are incorporated in the main text.
You are to do them carefully to enable test your understanding of the materials as you go on.
Assessments Tutor-Marked Assignment The NOUN will direct further on the YMAQ you will do and submit for trading.
They will count for 40% of the total course marks Final Written Examination At the end of the semester, you will write an examination that will count for the remaining 60% of the course marks you are to expect that all the areas of the course will be assessed during the examination.
Summary On the successful completion of the course, you would have been equipped to take important business decision relating to cost.
3
