FRENCH GRAMMAR FRE 221 AND COMPOSITION Course GuideCOURSE GUIDE FRE 221 COURSE GUIDE FRE 221 FRENCH GRAMMAR AND COMPOSITION 1 Course Developer Dr. Olu Akeusola National Open University of Nigeria Victoria Island, Lagos.
Unit Writers Dr. P. O. Alo European Languages Department University of Lagos And Dr. Olu Akeusola National Open University of Nigeria Victoria Island, Lagos Course Editor Dr. Abayomi Kizito Folorunso Nigerian French Language Village Ajara - Badagry Programme Leader Dr. Olu Akeusola National Open University of Nigeria, Victoria Island, Lagos.
Course Coordinator Ms Lucy Jibrin National Open University of Nigeria Victoria Island, Lagos.
NATIONAL OPEN UNIVERSITY OF NIGERIA iiCOURSE GUIDE FRE 221 National Open University of Nigeria Headquarters 14/16 Ahmadu Bello Way Victoria Island Lagos Abuja Office No.
5 Dar es Salaam Street Off Aminu Kano Crescent Wuse II, Abuja Nigeria e-mail: centralinfo@nou.edu.ng URL: www.nou.edu.ng Published by: National Open University of Nigeria 2008 First Printed 2008 ISBN: 978-058-161-8 All Rights Reserved iiiCOURSE GUIDE FRE 221 CONTENTS PAGE Introduction …………………………………………….
1 What you will learn in this course……………………… 1 Course Aims …………………………………………… 1-2 Course Objectives……………………………………… 2 -3 Working through This Course…………………………… 3 Course Materials………………………………………… 3 Study Units……………………………………………… 3- 4 Textbooks and References……………………………… 4 Assignment File………………………………………… 5 Assessment……………………………………………… 5 Tutor-marked Assignments (TMAs) …………………… 5 Final examinations and grading………………………… 5 Course marking scheme………………………………… 6 Course Overview and Presentation Schedule…………… 6- 7 How to get the most from this course…………………… 7- 9 Tutors and tutorials……………………………………… 9 Summary………………………………………………… 10 ivCOURSE GUIDE FRE 221 Introduction This course, FRENCH GRAMMAR AND COMPOSITION I, is a one- semester course in the second year of B.A.
(Hons) Degree in French and International Relations.
It is a three (3) credit course of twenty units.
It intends to introduce you (students) to the Grammar and Composition in French Language.
FRE 221 as FRENCH GRAMMAR AND COMPOSITION I, is a development on FRE 107: FRENCH GRAMMAR I and FRE 108: FRENCH GRAMMAR II.
It is an aspect of Grammar that introduces you to the heart of grammar and composition writing in French Language.
Like the two Basic Grammar courses earlier learned in Year One, the course prepares you for a more advanced grammar that will be taught in FRE 222: FRENCH GRAMMAR AND COMPOSITION II.
Grammar, being the life wire of any human language is highly important for it allows the learners to read, understand and analyse the grammatical structure, with which the contents of other language courses are documented.
This course is thus essential and will be beneficial to any French student because it will enhance your linguistic capability to cope with the grammatical structure of French Language.
It will also enable you to put into practice the grammar of French that you acquire in the course of this programme.
What You Will Learn In This Course The general aim of FRE 221: FRENCH GRAMMAR AND COMPOSITION 1 is to introduce you to the advanced grammar of French language.
This aspect of grammar is centred on the analysis of French Morphology.
It will expose you to the origin of French Morphology and the art of writing good composition in French.
In this course guide, we hope to tell you briefly what the course is all about, the course materials you will use to achieve the objectives of the course, suggestions on some general guidelines for the amount of time you are likely to spend on each unit of the course in order to complete it successfully.
We also provide a detailed separate Assignment File for you.
Course Aims The aims of this course are: • To let you know the definitions, origin and importance of Morphology in the grammar of any human language like French.
• To identify various methods of words formation in French Language.
1COURSE GUIDE FRE 221 • To teach you various techniques, through which you can write good compositions (Essay and Letters) in French Language.
These aims will be achieved through: • A detailed introduction of Morphology as the first and the basic step to analytical grammar.
• Presentation of various processes through which French words could be formed.
• Provision of some methods and techniques that you could follow to write good compositions (Essay and Letters) in French Language.
Course Objectives It is on completion of the entire units of this course that the aims set above could be completely achieved.
Each unit has its specific objectives.
The unit objectives are found at the beginning of each unit.
You need to read them before you start working on the unit.
You may want to refer to them during your study of the unit to check on your progress in the course.
There is need for you to always look at the unit objectives after completing a unit to ensure that you have done what is required.
We would like to itemise the objectives of the course in an explicit and methodical manner.
If you are able to meet these objectives as stated below, you would have achieved the aims of this course.
On successful completion of the course, you should be able to: • Define and trace the origin of French Morphology • State the importance of Morphology in the grammar of any natural language.
• Identify the three major processes of French words formation • Identify the three secondary processes of French words formation • Justification and application of the three major processes of French words formation in Morphological cum grammatical analysis • Justification and application of the three secondary processes of French words formation in Morphological cum grammatical analysis • Define and Explain Composition as an important end result of French grammar • Classify Composition in French Language into Essay and Letter writing • State the techniques and steps to follow when writing good Essays • State the techniques and steps to follow when writing good Letters Working through This Course 2COURSE GUIDE FRE 221 To complete this course you are required to read the study unit, read set books and other materials related to French grammar and Composition.
Each unit contains self-assessment exercises.
You will also have to submit your Tutor-Marked Assignments to your tutors.
The course will take you between 10 and 15 weeks to complete.
Find below the components of the course: what you have to do and how you should allocate your time to each unit in order to complete the course successfully on time.
Course Materials Major components of the course are: 1.
Course Guide 2.
Study Units 3.
Textbooks 4.
Assignments File Study Units There are twenty study units in this course.
They are: Module 1 Unit 1 Définitions et origine de la morphologie française Unit 2 Une brève histoire de l’évolution de la langue française Unit 3 Les vocabulaires français : Les trois procédés majeurs de la formation des mots en français Unit 4 L’emprunt ou les mots empruntés aux autres langues : le grec et le latin Unit 5 L’emprunt ou les mots empruntés aux autres langues : l’italien et l’espagnol Module 2 Unit 1 L’emprunt ou les mots empruntés aux autres langues : l’allemand, l’anglais et l’arabe Unit 2 Les bases morphémiques qui aident la formation des mots français Unit 3 L’affixation: les préfixes empruntés au latin Unit 4 L’affixation: les préfixes empruntés au grec Unit 5 Les suffixes principaux empruntés au latin et au grec Module 3 Unit 1 Les parasynthétiques Unit 2 La composition en morphologie 3COURSE GUIDE FRE 221 Unit 3 Différents types de composition en français : substantifs Unit 4 Les compositions dites verbale, adverbiale et conjonctive Unit 5 Les trois procédés secondaires de la formation des mots en français Module 4 Unit 1 Condiments of Good Composition for French and Other Language Students Unit 2 Types of Linguistic and Pedagogical Composition: Essay and Letter Writing Unit 3 Logical Classification of Essays Unit 4 Structure of Good Essays Unit 5 Methods of Writing Good Letters As it could be seen above, Units 1 to 5 are based on the definitions, origin and the importance of words borrowing (les emprunts) in the morphological formation of words in French Language.
Units 6-10 elaborate on the Affixation as a major process of words formation.
These units also discuss words, base morphemes, prefixes and suffixes borrowed from other languages, most especially Latin and Greek.
Units 11 to 15 explain how words are formed through Parasynthetic as well as compounding (La composition) processes in French morphology.
As from Units 16 to 20, we will be discussing what composition (la rédaction) is, types of composition: essay and letter writing, as well as methods of writing good essays and letters.
Each unit can be studied in one week.
Each unit has its specific objective, reading materials and explanation.
It also contains self-assessment exercises and Tutor- Marked Assignments.
All this information will assist you in achieving the learning objectives of the unit and the whole course.
Set textbooks for this course Akeusola, Olu (1995): French Grammar For Anglophone Students.
Lagos: Tobak Publishers.
Akeusola, Olu (2003): La Morphologie De La Langue Française.
Lagos : Tobak Publishers.
4COURSE GUIDE FRE 221 Assignment File There is an Assignment File where more than twenty assignments are provided.
The assignments carry 40% of the total mark for the course.
The mark you obtain in the assignment will count towards the final mark you obtain for this course.
Assessment The assessment of this course is divided into two main parts.
The first parts are the tutor-marked assignments and the second part is a written examination.
The assignments must be submitted to your tutor for formal assessment in accordance with the deadline stated by the tutor.
The work submitted to your tutor for assessment will count for 40% of your total course mark.
You will sit for a final examination of three hours duration at the end of the course.
This examination will also count for 60% of your total course mark.
Tutor Marked Assignment (TMAs) There are twenty tutor-marked assignments in this course.
You need to submit only six of the twenty assignments of which the highest four marks will be counted.
Each assignment counts 10% toward your total course mark.
When you have completed your assignment, send it together with a TMA (tutor-marked assignment) form, to your tutor.
Make sure that each assignment reaches your tutor on or before the deadline.
Final Examination and Grading The final examination for FRE 221 will be of three hours’ duration and it carries a total mark of 60% of the total course grade.
The examination will reflect the types of self-testing, and tutor-marked assignments.
You need to revise before you sit for the examination.
You may also need to revise the self-assessment tests and tutor marked assignments and comments on them before the examination.
The examination covers information from all parts of the course.
5COURSE GUIDE FRE 221 Course Marking Scheme The table below shows the breakdown of the course marking.
Assessment Marks Assignment 1-6 Six assignments, best four marks of the six count @ 10% each =40 of course marks Final examination 60% of overall course marks Total 100% of course marks Course Overview and Presentation Schedule Course Overview There are twenty (20) units in this Course.
You are to spend one week on each unit.
Assignment 1 will come at the end of the unit 3.
Assignment 2 at the end of unit six.
Assignment 3 after finishing unit nine.
Assignment 4 at the end of unit 12.
Assignment 5 at the end of unit sixteen and assignment 6 comes up after completing unit 20.
Presentation Schedule The dates for submission of all assignments will be communicated to you.
You will also be told the date of completing the study units and dates for examinations.
Unit Title of work Week Activity s Course FRENCH GRAMMAR AND Guide COMPOSITION I Module 1 Unit 1 Définitions et origine de la Week 1 Assignment 1 morphologie française 2 Une brève histoire de Week 1 Assignment 2 l’évolution de la langue française 3 Les vocabulaires français : Les Week 2 Assignment 3 trois procédés majeurs de la formation des mots en français 4 L’emprunt ou les mots Week 2 Assignment 4 empruntés aux autres langues : le grec et le latin 5 L’emprunt ou les mots Week 3 Assignment 5 empruntés aux autres langues : l’italien et l’espagnol Module 2 1 L’emprunt ou les mots Week 3 Assignment 1 6COURSE GUIDE FRE 221 empruntés aux autres langues : l’allemand, l’anglais et l’arabe 2 Les bases morphémiques qui Week 4 Assignment 2 aident la formation des mots français 3 L’affixation: les préfixes Week 4 Assignment 3 empruntés au latin 4 L’affixation: les préfixes Week 5 Assignment 4 empruntés au grec 5 Les suffixes principaux Week 5 Assignment 5 empruntés au latin et au grec Module 3 1 Les parasynthétiques Week 6 Assignment 1 2 La composition en Week 6 Assignment 2 morphologie 3 Différents types de Week 7 Assignment 3 composition en français : substantifs 4 Les compositions dites Week 7 Assignment 4 verbale, adverbiale et conjonctive 5 Les trois procédés secondaires Week 8 Assignment 5 de la formation des mots en français Module 4 1 Condiments of Good Week 8 Assignment 1 Composition for French and Other Language Students 2 Types of Linguistic and Week 9 Assignment 2 Pedagogical Composition: Essay and Letter Writing 3 Logical Classification of Week 9 Assignment 3 Essays 4 Methods of Writing Good Week 10 Assignment 4 Essays 5 Methods of Writing Good Week 10 Assignment 5 Letters Revision 1 Examination 1 Total 12 How to Get the Most from This Course In distance learning, the study units replace the university lecture.
This is one of the great advantages of distance learning; you can read and work through specially designed study materials at your own pace and at a time and place that suit you best.
Think of it as reading the lecture instead of listening to the lecturer.
In the same way a lecturer might give you some reading to do, the study units tell you where to read, and 7COURSE GUIDE FRE 221 which are your text materials or set books.
You are provided with exercises to do at appropriate points, just as a lecturer might give you an in-class exercise.
Each of the study units follows a common format.
The first item is an introduction to the subject matter of the unit, and how a particular unit is integrated with the other units and the course as a whole.
The main body starts with an explanation and techniques on how to master French morphology and composition in French Language.
Self- assessment tests are spread all over the units.
Working through these tests will help you tremendously to achieve the objectives of the units and prepare you for the assignments and examination.
Do each as you meet them in the unit.
Next to this is a set of learning objectives.
These objectives let you know what you should be able to do by the time you have completed the unit.
These learning objectives are meant to guide your study.
The moment a unit is finished, you must go back and check whether you have achieved the objectives.
If this is made a habit, then you will significantly improve your chances of passing the course.
The main body of the unit guides you through the required reading from other sources.
This will usually be either from your set books or from a Reading section.
The following is a practical strategy for working through the course.
If you run into any trouble, telephone your tutor.
Remember that your tutor’s job is to help you.
When you need assistance, do not hesitate to call and ask your tutor to provide it.
1.
Read this Course Guide thoroughly, it is your first assignment.
2.
Organize a Study Schedule.
Design a ‘Course Overview’ to guide you through the Course.
Note the time you are expected to spend on each unit and how the Assignments relate to the units.
Whatever method you choose to use, you should decide on and write in your own dates and schedule of work for each unit.
3.
Once you have created your own study schedule, do everything to stay faithful to it.
The major reason why students fail is that they get behind with their course work.
If you get into difficulties with your schedule, please, let your tutor know before it is too late to help.
4.
Turn to Unit I, and read the introduction and the objectives for the unit.
5.
Assemble the study materials.
You will need your set books and the unit you are studying at any point in time.
As you work through the unit, you will know what sources to consult for further information.
6.
Keep in touch with your study centre.
Up-to-date course information will be continuously available there.
7.
Well before the relevant due dates (about 4 weeks before due dates), keep in mind that you will learn a lot by doing the assignment carefully.
They have been designed to help you meet the objectives 8COURSE GUIDE FRE 221 of the course and, therefore, will help you pass the examination.
Submit all assignments not later than the due date.
8. Review the objectives for each study unit to confirm that you have achieved them.
If you feel unsure about any of the objectives, review the study materials or consult your tutor.
9.
When you are confident that you have achieved a unit’s objectives, you can start on the next unit.
Proceed unit by unit through the course and try to space your study so that you keep yourself on schedule.
10.When you have submitted an assignment to your tutor for marking, do not wait for its return before starting on the next unit.
Keep to your schedule.
When the assignment is returned, pay particular attention to your tutor’s comments, both on the tutor-marked assignment form and also the written comments on the ordinary assignments.
11.After completing the last unit, review the course and prepare yourself for the final examination.
Check that you have achieved the unit objectives (listed at the beginning of each unit) and the course objectives (listed in the Course Guide).
Tutors and Tutorials Information relating to the tutorials will be provided at the appropriate time.
Your tutor will mark and comment on your assignments, keep a close watch on your progress and on any difficulties you might encounter and provide assistance to you during the course.
You must take your tutor-marked assignments to the study centre well before the due date (at least two working days are required).
They will be marked by your tutor and returned to you as soon as possible.
Do not hesitate to contact your tutor if you need help.
Contact your tutor if: • you do not understand any part of the study units or the assigned readings • you have difficulty with the exercises • you have a question or problem with an assignment or with your tutor’s comments on an assignment or with the grading of an assignment.
You should try your best to attend the tutorials.
This is the only chance to have face-to-face contact with your tutor and ask questions which are answered instantly.
You can raise any problem encountered in the course of your study.
To gain the maximum benefit from course tutorials, prepare a question list before attending them.
You will learn a lot by participating actively in discussion.
Summary 9COURSE GUIDE FRE 221 FRE 221: GRAMMAR AND COMPOSITION I intends to introduce you to the advanced grammar of French language.
This preparatory course to the advanced aspect of grammar of French Language is centred on grammatical analysis of French Morphology.
It will expose you to the origin of French Morphology and the art of writing good composition in French.
At the end of this course, you will be able to: • State the definitions, origin and importance of Morphology in the grammar of any human language like French.
• Identify various methods of words formation in French Language.
• Identify various techniques, through which you can write good compositions (Essays and Letters) in French Language.
• Use the various identified techniques to write good compositions (Essays and Letters) in French Language.
10
