NIGERIAN PEOPLES GST 201 AND CULTURE Course GuideCOURSE GUIDE GST 201 COURSE GUIDE GST 201 NIGERIAN PEOPLES AND CULTURE Course Developer/ Writer Dr. Cyrille D. Ngamen Kouassi Department of Sociology/Anthropology Igbinedion University, Okada Benin-City Course Editor Prof. Bertram A. Okolo Faculty of Arts University of Benin Benin-City Programme Leader Prof. Yesufu Dean School of Arts and Social Sciences National Open University of Nigeria Victoria-Island, Lagos Course Co-ordinator Prof. Yesufu Dean School of Arts and Social Sciences National Open University of Nigeria Victoria-Island, Lagos NATIONAL OPEN UNIVERSITY OF NIGERIA iiCOURSE GUIDE GST 201 National Open University of Nigeria Headquarters 14/16 Ahmadu Bello Way Victoria Island Lagos Abuja Office No 5 Dar es Salam Street Off Aminu Kano Crescent Wuse II, Abuja Nigeria e-mail: centralinfo@nou.edu.ng URL: www.nou.edu.ng Published by: National Open University of Nigeria 2008 First Printed 2008 ISBN: 978-058-425-0 All Rights Reserved iiiCOURSE GUIDE GST 201 CONTENTS PAGES Introduction......................................................................... 1 What you will Learn in this Course……………………… 1 Course Aims......................................................................... 1 Course Objectives................................................................. 2 Working through the Course................................................ 2 Course Materials………………………………………….. 2 Study Units........................................................................... 3 Textbooks and References…………………………………... 4 Assignment……………………………………………….. 4 Presentation Schedule…………………………………….. 4 Assessment........................................................................... 4 - 5 Tutor-Marked Assignment………………………………... 5 Final Examination and Grading…………………………… 5 Course Marking Scheme………………………………….. 6 Course Overview………………………………………….. 6 - 7 How to Get the Most from this Course…………………….
7 - 8 Facilitators/Tutors and Tutorials…………………………….. 8 - 9 Summary…………………………………………………… 9 - 10 ivCOURSE GUIDE GST 201 Introduction GST 201: Nigerian Peoples and Culture is a one-semester 2-credit unit course.
It is made up of 14 units which treat the Nigerian's perception of his world, culture areas of Nigeria and their characteristics, evolution of Nigeria as a political unit, concept of functional education, social justice, individual and national development, norms and values and moral obligations of citizens.
There are no compulsory pre-requisites for this course.
The course guide tells you briefly what the course is all about, what you are expected to know in each unit, what course materials you will be using and how you can work your way through these materials.
It also emphasizes the need for tutor-marked assignments.
Detailed information on tutor-marked assignments is found in a separate file which will be sent to you later.
There are periodic tutorial classes that are linked to the course.
What You will Learn in this Course The overall aim of GST 201: Nigerian Peoples and Culture is to introduce you to the history of traditional Nigerian peoples and culture.
This course also attempts to trace the pre-colonial history and the culture areas of Nigeria and the evolution of the country as a political unit.
This course will also teach you how to analyze and understand people's cultures from a historical, sociological and anthropological angle.
Thus, your understanding of Nigerian peoples and culture will equip you, not only to have a sound knowledge of Nigeria, but also to teach other people too.
Course Aims The major aim of this course is to help you understand and have a sound knowledge of the traditional Nigerian peoples and culture.
This will be achieved by: • Introducing you to the traditional Southern and Northern Nigerian peoples and culture; • Helping you understand the evolution of Nigeria as a political unit; • Highlighting some major culture areas of Nigeria; • Analyzing the impact of Western education on national development in Nigeria; and • Helping you understand the concepts of functional education, • national economy, and social justice in Nigeria.
1COURSE GUIDE GST 201 Course Objectives To achieve the aims set out above, there are set overall objectives.
In addition, each unit also has specific objectives.
The unit objectives are always included at the beginning of a unit.
You should read them before you start working through the unit; you may want to refer to them during your study of the unit to check on your progress.
You should always look at unit objectives after completing a unit.
In this way you will be surer of having done what was required of you in the unit.
Stated below are the wider objectives of this course as a whole.
By meeting these objectives, you should have achieved the aims of the course as a whole.
On successful completion of the course, you should be able to: • Have a sound knowledge of the traditional Nigerian peoples and culture; • Discuss the culture areas of Nigeria and their characteristics; • Analyze the impact of Western education on national development in Nigeria; and • Explain the evolution of Nigeria as a political unit Working through this Course To complete this course, you are required to read the study units, read recommended books and read other materials.
Each unit contains self- assessment exercises, and at some points in the course you will be required to submit assignments for assessment.
Below you will find listed all the components of the course and what you have to do.
Course Materials Major components of the course are: 1.
Course Guide 2.
Study Units 3.
Textbooks 4.
Assignment File 5.
Presentation Schedule In addition, you must obtain the materials.
Obtain your copy.
You may contact your tutor if you have problems in obtaining the text materials.
2COURSE GUIDE GST 201 Study Units There are fourteen study units in this course as follows: Module 1 Unit 1 The Peoples of Southern Nigeria and their Culture in Pre- colonial Times Part I Unit 2 The Peoples of Southern Nigeria and their Culture in Pre-colonial Times Part II Unit 3 The Peoples of Northern Nigeria and their Culture in Pre-colonial Times Part I Unit 4 The Peoples of Northern Nigeria and their Culture in Pre- colonial Times Part II Unit 5 The Dynamics of the evolution of Nigeria as a political unit Module 2 Unit 1 The Culture Area of Niger Delta Region of Nigeria Unit 2 The Culture Area of the Rain Forest Region of Nigeria Unit 3 The Culture Area of Guinea Savanna Region of Nigeria Unit 4 The Culture Area of the Sudan Savanna Region of Nigeria Module 3 Unit 1 A Historical Analysis of Education and National Development in Nigeria Unit 2 A Historical Analysis of Economy and National Development in Nigeria Unit 3 A Historical Analysis of Religion and National Development in Nigeria Unit 4 A Historical Analysis of Moral and Socio-political Rights of Citizens in Nigeria Unit 5 A Historical Analysis of Social Justice and National Development in Nigeria The first four units will give you knowledge of the traditional Southern and Northern Nigerian peoples and culture.
The next four units analyze the different culture areas of Nigeria.
The ninth unit deals specifically with the evolution of Nigeria as a political unit.
The last five units discuss and analyze the norms, values, the impact of Western education and addresses the historical perspectives of education, economy, religion, social justice and moral rights of citizens of Nigeria.
3COURSE GUIDE GST 201 Textbooks and References These textbooks are recommended.
The first one is compulsory for this course.
Nzemeke, A.D.and E.O.
Erhagbe.
Nigerian Peoples and Culture.
2nd Edition.
Benin City: University of Benin Press, 2002.
Crowder, M. and G.Abdullahi.
Nigeria: An Introduction to its History.
Lagos: Longman, 1977.
Fafunwa, A.B.
History of Education in Nigeria.
London: Publisher, 1974.
Nnoli, Okwudiba.
Ethnic Politics in Nigeria.
Enugu Fourth Dimension Publisher, 1978.
Onwuejeogwu, M.A.
African Civilizations: Origin, Growth and Development.
Lagos: Uto Publications, 2000.
Ugowe, C. O.O.
The Nigeria Legacy: A Handbook of a Black Africa Culture and Civilization.
Lagos: Hugo Books, 1995.
Assignment File In the Assignment File, you will get the details of the work you are expected to submit to your tutor for marking.
The marks you obtain from these assignments will count towards the final mark you obtain for this course.
Further information on the assignments would be found in the Assessment File itself and later in this Course Guide in the section on assessment.
Presentation Schedule The presentation schedule included in your course materials gives you the important dates for the completion of tutor-marked assignments and the dates to attend tutorials.
Remember, you are required to submit all your assignments by the due dates.
You should guard against falling behind in your work.
Assessment There are two aspects to the assessment of the course: One is the tutor-marked assignments; and the other is a written examination.
In 4COURSE GUIDE GST 201 tackling the assignments, you are expected to apply the information and knowledge acquired in this course.
The assignments must be submitted to your tutor for formal assessment in accordance with the deadlines stated in the Assignment File.
The work you submit to your tutor for assessment will count for 30% of your total course mark.
At the end of the course, you will need to sit for a final three-hour examination.
This will count for 70% of your total course mark.
Tutor-Marked Assignment There are fourteen tutor-marked assignments in this course.
You need to submit all the assignments.
The best four (i.e.
the highest four of the fourteen scores) will be counted.
The total marks for the best four (4) assignments will be 30% of your total course mark.
Assignment questions for the units in this course are contained in the Assignment File.
You should be able to complete your assignments from the information and materials contained in your set textbooks, reading and study units.
However, you are advised to use other references to broaden your viewpoint and provide a deeper understanding of the subject.
When you have completed each assignment, send it, together with TMA [Tutor-Marked Assignment] form to your tutor.
Make sure that each assignment reaches your tutor on or before the deadline given in the Assignment File.
If, however, you cannot complete your work on time, contact your tutor before the assignment is due to discuss the possibility of an extension.
Final Examination and Grading The final examination of GST 122 will be of three hours duration and will have a value of 70% of the total course grade.
The examination will consist of questions which reflect the type of self-testing, practice exercises and tutor-marked problems you have come across.
All areas of the course will be assessed.
You are advised to revise the entire course after studying the last unit before you sit for the examination.
You will find it useful to review your tutor-marked assignments and the comments of your tutor on them before the final examination.
5COURSE GUIDE GST 201 Course Marking Scheme This table shows how the actual course is broken down.
Assessment Marks Assignments 1 – 14 Fourteen assignments, best four of the fourteen count as 30% of course marks Final Examination 70 7 70% of overall course marks Total 100% of course marks Table 1: Course Marking Scheme Course Overview This table brings together the units, the number of weeks you should take to complete them and the assignments that follow them.
Unit Title of Work Week’s Assessment Activity (end of unit) Course Guide 1.
The Peoples of Southern Nigeria 1 Assessment 1 and their Culture in Pre-colonial Times Part I 2.
The Peoples of Southern Nigeria 2 Assessment 2 Culture in Pre-colonial Times Part II 3.
The Peoples of Northern Nigeria 3 Assessment 3 and their Culture in Pre-colonial Times Part I 4.
The Peoples of Northern Nigeria 4 Assessment 4 and their Culture in Pre-colonial Times Part II 5.
The Dynamics of the Evolution of 5 Assessment 5 Nigeria as a Political Unit 6.
The Culture Area of Niger Delta 6 Assessment 6 Region of Nigeria 7.
The Culture Area of the Rain 7 Assessment 7 Forest Region of Nigeria 8.
The Culture Area of Guinea 8 Assessment 8 Savanna Region of Nigeria 9.
The Culture Area of the Sudan 9 Assessment 9 Savanna of Nigeria 6COURSE GUIDE GST 201 10.
A Historical Analysis of Education 10 Assessment 10 and National Development in Nigeria 11.
A Historical Analysis of Economy 11 Assessment 11 and National Development in Nigeria 12.
A Historical Analysis of Religion 12 Assessment 12 and National Development in Nigeria 13.
A Historical Analysis of Moral and 13 Assessment 13 Socio-Political Rights of Citizens in Nigeria 14.
A Historical Analysis of Social 14 Assessment 14 Justice and National Development in Nigeria 15.
Revision 15 Assessment 15 16.
Examination 16 Assessment 16 How to get the Most from this Course In distance learning the study units replace the university lecturer.
This is one of the great advantages of distance learning; you can read and work through specially designed study materials at your own pace, and at a time and place that suit you best.
Think of it as reading the lecture instead of listening to a lecturer.
In the same way that a lecturer might set you some reading to do, the study units tell you when to read your set books or other materials.
Just as a lecturer might give you an in-class exercise, your study units provide exercises for you to do at appropriate points.
Each of the study units follows a common format.
The first item is an introduction to the subject matter of the unit and how a particular unit is integrated with the other units and the course as a whole.
Next is a set of learning objectives.
These objectives let you know what you should be able to do by the time you have completed the unit.
You should use these objectives to guide your study.
When you have finished the units you must go back and check whether you have achieved the objectives.
If you make a habit of doing this you will significantly improve your chances of passing the course.
The main body of the unit guides you through the required reading from other sources.
This will usually be either from your set books or from a reading section.
Reading Section 7COURSE GUIDE GST 201 Remember that your tutor's job is to help you.
When you need help, don't hesitate to call and ask your tutor to provide it.
1.
Read this Course Guide thoroughly.
2.
Organize a study schedule.
Refer to the 'Course Overview' for more details.
Note the time you are expected to spend on each unit and how the assignments relate to the units.
Whatever method you chose to use, you should decide on and write in your own dates for working on each unit.
3.
Once you have created your own study schedule, do everything you can to stick to it.
The major reason that students fall is that they fall behind in their course work.
If you have any difficulties with your schedule, please let your tutor know before it is too late for help.
4.
Turn to Unit 1 and read the introduction and the objectives for the unit.
5.
Assemble the study materials.
Information about what you need or a unit is given in the "Overview" at the beginning of each unit.
You will almost always need both the study unit you are working on and one of your set books on your desk at the same time.
6.
Work through the unit.
The content of the unit itself has been arranged to provide a sequence for you to follow.
As you work through the unit you will be instructed to read sections from your set books or other articles.
Use the unit to guide your reading.
7. Review the objectives for each study unit to confirm that you have achieved them.
If you feel unsure about any of the objectives, review the study material or consult your tutor.
8.
When you are confident that you have achieved a unit's objectives, you can then start on the next unit.
Proceed unit by unit through the course and try to pace your study so that you keep yourself on schedule.
9.
When you have submitted an assignment to your tutor for marking, do not wait for its return before starting on the next unit.
Keep to your schedule.
When the assignment is returned, pay particular attention to your tutor's comments, both on the tutor-marked assignment form and also on what is written on the assignment.
Consult your tutor as soon as possible if you have any questions or problems.
10.
After completing the unit, review the course and prepare yourself for the final examination.
Check that you have achieved the unit objectives (listed at the beginning of each unit) and the course objectives (listed in this Course Guide).
Facilitators/Tutors and Tutorials 8COURSE GUIDE GST 201 There are 8 hours of tutorials provided in support of this course.
You will be notified of the dates, times and location of these tutorials, together with the name and phone number of your tutor, as soon as you are allocated a tutorial group.
Your tutor will mark and comment on your assignments, keep a close watch on your progress and on any difficulties you might encounter and provide assistance to you during the course.
You must mail your tutor-marked assignments to your tutor well before the due date (at least two working days are required).
They will be marked by your tutor and returned to you as soon as possible.
Do not hesitate to contact your tutor by telephone, e-mail, or during discussions if you need help.
The following might be circumstances in which you would find help necessary.
Contact your tutor if: • You do not understand any part of the study units or the assigned • readings, • You have difficulty with the self-tests or exercises, • You have a question or problem with an assignment, with your tutor's comments on an assignment or with the grading of an assignment.
You should try your best to attend the tutorials.
This is the only chance to have face-to-face contact with your tutor and to ask questions which are answered instantly.
You can raise any problem encountered in the course of your study.
To gain the maximum benefit from course tutorials, prepare a question list before attending them.
You will learn a lot from participating in discussions actively.
Summary GST 201 intends to introduce you to the basis of Nigerian peoples and culture.
Upon completing this course, you will be able to answer questions such as: • What are the major ethnic groups of Nigeria?
• What are the origins of these major ethnic groups?
• What are the characteristics of their socio-political organization?
• Is Nigeria, as a country, a vital political unit?
• What is the historical perspective of education, economy, religion, social justice, moral rights of the citizens and national development in Nigeria?
9COURSE GUIDE GST 201 • How would you define and characterize some culture areas of Nigeria?
• What is the impact of We stem education on Nigeria?
Of course, the questions you will be able to answer are not limited to the above list.
Nigerian peoples and culture is a broad and very exciting study.
We wish you success in the course and hope that you will find it both interesting and useful.
10
