MENU DEVELOPMENT AND HCM 232 PLANNING Course GuideCOURSE GUIDE HCM232 COURSE GUIDE HCM232 MENU DEVELOPMENT AND PLANNING Course Developer/Writer Mrs. Jumoke Omozuwa Kwara State Polytechnic Ilorin Programme Leader Dr. O. J. Onwe National Open University of Nigeria Lagos Course Co-ordinator Abdullahi S. Araga National Open University of Nigeria Lagos NATIONAL OPEN UNIVERSITY OF NIGERIA iiCOURSE GUIDE HCM232 National Open University of Nigeria Headquarters 14/16 Ahmadu Bello Way Victoria Island Lagos Abuja Office: NOUN Building No.
5, Dar es Sallam Street Off Aminu Kano Crescent Wuse II Abuja, Lagos e-mail: centralinfo@nou.edu.ng URL: www.nou.edu.ng Published by: National Open University of Nigeria 2008 First Printed 2008 ISBN: 978-058-796-9 All Rights Reserved iiiCOURSE GUIDE HCM232 CONTENTS PAGE Introduction………………………………………………….
1 Course Contents…………………………………………….. 1 Course Aims………………………………………………… 1 – 2 Objectives…………………………………………………… 2 Course Materials…………………………………………….
2 Study Units………………………………………………….. 2 – 4 Assignment File……………………………………………... 4 Assessment ………………………………………………….
4 Tutor-Marked Assignment………………………………….. 4 Final Examination/Grading………………………………….
4 Summary…………………………………………………….
4 ivCOURSE GUIDE HCM232 Introduction HCM232: Menu Development and Planning is a semester course of two credit hours.
It will be available to all the students, who have registered for the B.Sc.
programme in Hotel and Catering Management in the School of Business and Human Resource Management.
This course consists of 15 units in which the nature of Menu Development and Planning.
The course is designed to give students an indepth understanding of the role food and nutrition in the human body.
The course will involve empirical studies of the various food nutrients, basic cookery methods, and the equipment used in food production in kitchens.
The idea is to enable students appreciate the essential food nutrients, the essential factors involved, with a view to developing a standard menu, using standardised recipes, which, when prepared hygienically and presented attractively to a guest, will be as good as the impression the menu conveys; thus reflecting the quality of the food served.
This course guide tells you what HCM232 is all about, the materials needed and how to use such materials.
Other information provided in the course includes how to make use of your time, self assessment exercises and tutor marked assignments.
Also there will be tutorial classes.
Full details about the tutorial classes will be conveyed to you at the appropriate time.
Course Contents The course contents consist of Menu Development and Planning; Food and Nutrition; Basic Principles of Cookery; Food Commodities Portion Control; Types of Menu and Factors to be Considered when compiling a Standard Menu in the Hospitality Industry.
Course Aims The aims of this course are to expose you to Menu Development and Planning, the importance of food and nutrition in the diet, types of food nutrients and functions of food in human body.
Due to the principles of menu planning and the techniques involved in food and beverage production, this course is aimed at making you adapt recipes, using your culinary knowledge and skills, to produce acceptable menu in the hospitality industry.
1COURSE GUIDE HCM232 The aims will be achieved by: • Explaining the meaning of food and nutrition; • Explaining the importance of kitchen and personal hygiene with respect of food preparation; • Describing the various methods of cookery; • Explaining the concepts and principles of kitchen planning; • Identifying the various convenience foods and portion control equipment; • Describing the various cooking equipment; • Highlighting the points to be considered when planning menu; and • Developing standard menu using standardized recipes.
Objectives At the end of the course, you should be able to: • Explain the meaning of foods and nutrition; • List of various nutrients and their functions; • Describe the principles of cookery, • Explain the importance of kitchen and personal hygiene; • Explain the concepts and principles of kitchen planning; • Classify into various groups kitchen equipment and their uses; • Explain the meaning of the common culinary terms used in the kitchen; • Describe the principles of menu construction in relation to the provision of a meal; and • Compile different types of menus.
Course Materials • Course Guide • Study Units • Text Books • Assignment Guide Study Units There are 15 units in this course.
You should study then fully.
Such units are as listed below: 2COURSE GUIDE HCM232 Module 1 Unit 1 Food and Nutrition Unit 2 Kitchen and Personal Hygiene Unit 3 Kitchen Equipment and Tools Unit 4 Basic Principles of Cookery Module 2 Unit 1 The Kitchen Planning Unit 2 Basic Principles of Cookery-?
Unit 3 Convenience Foods Unit 4 Portion Control Module 3 Unit 1 Food Preservation and Storage Unit 2 Planning and Designing the Menu Unit 3 Menu Composing Unit 4 Food Purchasing Module 4 Unit 1 Meat (Beef) and Poultry Unit 2 The Kitchen Basics (Stocks, Soups and Sauces) Unit 3 Culinary Terms Each study unit contains an introduction, the objective of the unit; the main contents, exercises, conclusion, summary, references, tutor-marked assignments.
You are expected to study the material, reflect on it and do the exercises.
Some of the exercises will necessitate your visiting some hospitality establishments and conduct market survey.
You are advised to do so in order to have a practical experience of the concepts taught in the course.
There a list of reference materials, the self assessment exercises and textbooks, for further reading at the end of each unit.
They are to give you additional information.
Practice the tutor-marked assessment for greater understanding.
By so doing the stated learning objectives will be achieved.
The Modules The course is divided into 4 modules.
The first three modules have 4 units each while the last one has 3 units.
The first module treats food and nutrition, the importance of a good diet; the major food nutrients and their functions and contribution to good 3COURSE GUIDE HCM232 health, and it describes how to improve and maintain both personal and kitchen hygiene in the hospitality industry.
The second module examines the concepts and principles of kitchen planning.
It also treats the basic principles of cookery, convenience foods and how to control the portion and sizes of food served to customers.
The third module treats food preservation and storage, menu development and planning, types of menu and the principles that underly a good menu.
It also treats how to develop a standard menu.
The fourth and last module treats food purchasing; preparation of meat (beef) and poultry and the common culinary terms used in the kitchen.
Assignment File You are expected to do all the assignments.
Assessment You are expected to try out all the self assessment exercises.
Tutor-Marked Assignment (TMAs) In doing the tutor marked assignments, you are expected to apply what you have learnt in the contents of the study units.
Submit them to your tutor for grading.
They constitute 40% of the total score.
Final Examination/Grading At the end of the course, you will write the final examination.
It makes up the remaining 60% to make 100%.
Summary HCM232 exposes you to the principles of Menu Development and Planning and the techniques involved in food and beverage production.
On the successful completion of the course you would have been armed with the principles you need to develop or compile acceptable menu using the knowledge and the culinary skill which you must have gained.
4
