MENU PLANNING AND HCM 239 CATERING SERVICES Course GuideHCM239 COURSE GUIDE COURSE GUIDE HCM239 MENU PLANNING AND CATERING SERVICES Course Developer/ Writer Mrs. Jumoke Omozuwa Kwara State Polytechnic, Ilorin Programme Leader Dr. O. J. Onwe National Open University of Nigeria, Lagos Course Coordinator Abdullahi S. Araga National Open University of Nigeria, Lagos NATIONAL OPEN UNIVERSITY OF NIGERIA iiHCM239 COURSE GUIDE National Open University of Nigeria Headquarters 14/16 Ahmadu Bello Way Victoria Island Lagos Abuja Office No.
5 Dar es Salaam Street Off Aminu Kano Crescent Wuse II, Abuja Nigeria e-mail: centralinfo@nou.edu.ng URL: www.nou.edu.ng Published by: National Open University of Nigeria 2008 First Printed 2008 ISBN: 978-058-784-5 All Rights Reserved iiiHCM239 COURSE GUIDE CONTENTS PAGES Introduction……………………………………………… 1 Course Contents………………………………………….. 1 Course Aims……………………………………………… 1 – 2 Objectives………………………………………………... 2 Course Materials………………………………………….
2 – 3 Study Units……………………………………………….
3 – 4 The Modules……………………………………………... 4 Assignments……………………………………………... 4 Assessments……………………………………………… 4 Tutor-Marked Assignments……………………………… 4 – 5 Final Written Examination……………………………….
5 Summary………………………………………………… 5 ivHCM239 COURSE GUIDE Introduction HCM239: Menu Planning and Catering Services is a semester course work of two credit hours.
It is available to all the students, taking the BSc.
Programme in Hotel and Catering Management in the School of Business and Human Resource Management.
This course consists of fifteen units involving the nature of menu planning and catering services.
The course is designed to give students further in-depth understanding on how to produce and serve acceptable menu.
The course involves empirical studies of the characteristics and properties of various food commodities; costing and control, scope of catering operations, pastry, cake making and confectionaries in the hospitality industry.
The idea is to enable students to be able to compile and arrange varieties of standard recipes from different food commodities and cooking methods, with a view to produce palatable, attractive, appetite-stimulating and balanced menus.
This, bearing in mind that the mechanics of menu planning, types of catering establishment, catering for special nutritional needs and special functions, and to improve the standard of catering services, as well as ensuring customers satisfaction of the food and beverage service section in a well established catering industry.
The course guide, in addition to the above, gives detailed information about what the course HCM239 is all about and the materials needed are spelt out for achieving maximum success.
Other important information provided in the course guide includes how to make use of your time on a Tutor-Marked Assignments (TMAs).
There will also be tutorial practical classes.
Full details concerning this will be conveyed to you at your chosen study centre.
Course Contents The course contents for the programme consist of the nature of menu planning and catering services; menu for special nutritional needs, types of catering establishment, pastry and cake making, catering for special functions, food commodities costing and control in the catering establishment.
Course Aims The aims of this course are to further expose you to menu planning and catering services and the importance of the different types of catering establishments and functions.
Due to the principles of menu planning and the techniques involved in food and beverage production, this course is aimed at making you compile different menu, using your 1HCM239 COURSE GUIDE knowledge of the various commodities available, culinary knowledge and skill to produce acceptable menu for an individual’s special nutritional needs and functions in the hospitality industry.
These aims will be achieved by: • Explaining the importance of planning and organizing catering for special functions.
• Explaining the importance of food and nutrition and the correct choice of food for the correct group of people.
• Identifying the classification and sources of food commodities.
• Identifying the different types of catering establishment.
• Explaining the principles involved in cake making and confectionaries.
• Explaining the importance of dish costing and control in the catering industry.
• Describing the preparation of beverages and the processes involved in the preparation of non-alcoholic drinks • Compiling and preparing standard menu from the various food commodities using different methods of cooking.
Objectives At the end of the course, you should be able to: • Explain the different types of catering establishment • Explain the true nature of the principles of meal planning and organizing and special catering function.
• Explain the importance of food and nutrition to the body and the correct choice of food for the different groups of people • Identify the various types of food commodities and assess their use, cost, storage, hygienic handling and nutritional value.
• Identify the different types and the basic ingredients required in pastry, cakes, and confectionary making.
• Explain the importance of dish costing and control in the catering industry.
• Classify the different types of alcoholic and non alcoholic beverages available in the catering industry.
• Demonstrate the production of dishes using different food commodities, test and applying different methods of cooking.
Course Materials • Course guide.
• Study units.
2HCM239 COURSE GUIDE • Text books • Assignment guide Study Units There are 15 units in this course which should be studied carefully.
The units are as follows: Module 1 Unit 1 Types of Catering Establishment Unit 2 Measurements and Measures Unit 3 Herbs and Spices Unit 4 Vegetables and Salads Module 2 Unit 1 Fruit and Nuts Unit 2 Milk and milk Product Unit 3 Egg Cookery Unit 4 Fish Cookery Module 3 Unit 1 Beverages Unit 2 Catering for Special Function Unit 3 Menu for Special Nutritional Needs Unit 4 Bread Making and Dough Product Module 4 Unit 1 Pastry Making Unit 2 Cake Making Unit 3 Costing and Control in the Catering Establishment Each study unit includes an introduction, the objectives of the unit, the main contents, exercises, conclusion, summary, references and tutor marked questions.
It will take at least two hours.
You are expected to study the materials, reflect upon them, and attempt the exercises.
Some of the exercises will necessitate your visiting some hospitality establishments and market survey.
You are advised to do so in order to have practical experience of the concepts taught in the course.
I also advise that you practice some of the recipes given in the course on your own.
This will enhance your practical knowledge.
There are also reference materials, e.g.
text books for further readings.
They are to give 3HCM239 COURSE GUIDE you additional information.
Practice the tutor-marked questions for greater understanding.
By so doing the stated learning objectives will be achieved.
The Modules The course is divided into four modules.
The first module has four units, the same number of units in the second and third module while the last module has three units.
The first module treats the different types of catering establishments, different measuring devices including local and how to measure ingredient accurately before proceeding for production practical; highlights the major common herbs and spices; vegetables and salads; their functions and special contribution to good health.
The second module exposes the different types of food commodities found in the market with special reference to fruits and nuts, milk and milk products, egg cookery and fish cookery.
It further treats the classification and sources of supply of the food commodities, assesses their nutritional value, using cost storage, preservation, hygiene handling, recipes and the various methods of preparation.
The third module classifies different types of alcoholic and non- alcoholic beverages available in the catering industry.
It further treats the preparation of beverages and the processes involved in the preparation of non-alcoholic drinks.
It also treats the correct choice of food for different group of people, how to plan good menu for special catering functions and the production of bread product.
The fourth and last module treats the basic principles involved in cake making, the different types and production of pastry and confectionaries.
It also treats the importance of dish costing and control in the catering industry.
Assignments There will be assignments and you are expected to attempt all of them.
Assessments Tutor-Marked Assignment In doing the tutor-marked assignments, you are expected to apply what you have learnt in the contents of the study units.
After you attempt 4HCM239 COURSE GUIDE them, submit them to your tutor for grading.
They constitute 40% of the total score.
Final Written Examination At the end of the course, you will write the final examination.
It makes up the remaining 60% to make 100%.
Summary HCM239 exposes you to the principles of menu planning and catering services and the techniques involved in compiling acceptable menu bearing in mind the different types of food commodities using standard recipes to produce acceptable dishes.
On successful completion of the course, you would have been adequately equipped with the necessary principles for effective planning, preparation, presentation of menu and improve its delivery service.
5
