BASIC ANATOMY AND PHYSIOLOGY HEM 604 OF HUMAN BODY Course GuideCOURSE GUIDE HEM 604 iiCOURSE GUIDE HEM 604 COURSE GUIDE HEM604 BASIC ANATOMY AND PHYSIOLOGY OF HUMAN BODY Course Developer/Writer Dr. A. O. Osunderu Nigerian Natural Medicine Development Agency, Federal Ministry of Science and Technology, Lagos.
Programme Leader Prof. Afolabi Adebanjo Dean, School of Science and Technology National Open University of Nigeria Lagos Course Coordinator Jane-Frances Agbu School of Science and Technology National Open University of Nigeria Lagos NATIONAL OPEN UNIVERSITY OF NIGERIA iiiCOURSE GUIDE HEM 604 National Open University of Nigeria Headquarters 14/16 Ahmadu Bello Way Victoria Island Lagos Abuja Office No.
5 Dar es Salaam Street Off Aminu Kano Crescent Wuse II, Abuja Nigeria e-mail: centralinfo@nou.edu.ng URL: www.nou.edu.ng National Open University of Nigeria 2008 First Printed 2008 ISBN: 978-058-400-5 All Rights Reserved Printed by …………….. For National Open University of Nigeria ivCOURSE GUIDE HEM 604 TABLE OF CONTENT PAGE Introduction……………………………………………… 1 What you will learn in this course……………………….. 1 Course Aims……………………………………………... 1 Course Objectives……………………………………….. 1-2 Working Through This Course………………………….. 2 Course Materials………………………………………… 2 Study Units……………………………………………… 2 Recommended Text……………………………………... 2 Assignment File………………………………………….
3 Presentation Schedule…………………………………… 3 Assessment……………………………………………….
3-4 Tutor Marked Assignment (TMAs)……………………… 4 Final Examination and Grading………………………….
4 Course Marking Scheme………………………………… 5 Course Overview………………………………………… 5 How to Get The Most Out of This Course……………….
5-7 Tutors and Tutorials……………………………………… 7-8 vNoneCOURSE GUIDE HEM 604 Introduction HEM 604: Basic Anatomy and Physiology of Human Body is a first semester, two-credit course.
It will be available to all students to take toward the course module of their PGD in HIV Education and Management.
This course will develop in you the knowledge of Basic Anatomy and Physiology human body.
This course guide tells you briefly what the course is about, what course materials you will be using and how you can work your way through these materials.
It suggested some general guidelines for the amount of time you are likely to spend on each unit of the course in order to complete it successfully.
It also gives you some guidance on your tutor-marked assignments.
Detailed information on tutor-marked assignments, are similarly made available.
These are regular tutorial classes that are linked to the course.
You are advised to attend these sessions.
What you will learn in this course: The overall aim of HEM 604: Basic Anatomy and Physiology of the Human Body is to enable you learn and understand basic anatomy and physiology of human body which includes: the human skin, skeletal system, the nervous system, endocrine system, reproductory system, circulatory system, etc.
Course Objectives To achieve the aims set out above, the course sets overall objectives.
In addition each unit also has specific objectives.
The unit objectives are always included at the beginning of a unit; you should read them before you start working through the unit.
You may want to refer to them during your study of the unit to check on your progress.
You should always look at the unit objectives after completing a unit.
In this way you can be sure that you have done what was required of you by the unit.
Set out below are the wider objectives of the course as a whole.
By meeting these objectives you should have achieved the aims of the course as a whole.
On successful completion of the course, you should be able to: • Define the concept of anatomy and physiology • Describe levels of organization in the body • Describe the Skin and Skeletal system • Explain the digestive, respiratory and circulatory systems • Discuss the nervous and endocrine system • Explain the constituents and role of the immure system 1COURSE GUIDE HEM 604 • Describe sexual organs Working through this Course To complete this course you are required to read the study units, read books and others materials provided by the National Open University of Nigeria (NOUN).
Each unit contains self-assessment exercises.
At the end of the course is a final examination.
The course should take you about 14 weeks in total complete.
Below you will find listed all the components of the course, what you have to do and how you should allocate your time to each unit in order to complete the course successfully on time.
Course Materials Major components of the course are: 1.
Course Guide 2.
Study Units 3.
References 4.
Presentation Schedule.
Study Units The study units in this course are as follows: Course Guide Module 1 Unit 1 Basic Concepts in Anatomy and Physiology Unit 2 Levels of Organization Unit 3 Fundamental Organic Chemistry Unit 4 Haematology Module 2 Unit 1 The Integumentary System Unit 2 The Skeletal System Unit 3 The Nervous System Unit 4 The Endocrine System Module 3 Unit 1 The Digestive System Unit 2 The Respiratory System Unit 3 The Circulatory System 2COURSE GUIDE HEM 604 Module 4 Unit 1 The Immune System Unit 2 The Urinary System Unit 3 The Reproductive System Each study unit consists of some work, and includes introduction, specific objectives, reading materials, conclusion, summary, tutor marked assignments (TMAs), reference, further reading and other resources.
The units direct you to work on exercises related to the required readings.
In general, these exercises are on the material you have just covered.
Together with tutor-marked assignments, these exercises will assist you in achieving the stated learning objectives of the individual units and of the course.
Assignment File The course assignment will cover: 1.
Basic Anatomy and Physiology; concept, meaning and the relationship between these sub specialties of basic biology 2.
Levels of organization of the human body and basic organic chemistry 3.
The organs and the regulatory, roles of the nervous and endocrine systems.
4 The Skeletal, circulatory, digestive, nervous systems, etc.
and their functions.
Presentation Schedule The presentation schedule included in your course materials gives you the important dates for this year for the completion of tutor-marked assignment, by the due date.
You should guard against falling behind in your work.
Assessment There are two aspects to the assessment of the course.
First are the tutor- marked assignment, second, there is a written examination.
In tackling the assignments, you are expected to apply information, knowledge and strategies gathered during the course.
The assignments must be submitted to your tutor for formal assessment in accordance with the deadlines stated in 3COURSE GUIDE HEM 604 the Presentation schedule and the Assignment File.
The work you submit to your tutor for assessment will count for 50% of your course mark.
At the end of the course, you will need to sit for a final written examination of two hours’ duration.
This examination will also count for 60% of your total course work.
Tutor-Marked Assignments (TMAs) There are some tutor-marked assignments.
You are encouraged, however, to submit all the assignments, in which case the best four will be counted.
The total assignment counts towards 40% total course mark.
Assignment questions for the units in this course are contained in the assignment file.
You will be able to complete your assignments from the information and materials contained in your reading, and study units.
However, it is desirable to demonstrate that you have read and researched more widely than the required minimum.
Using other reference will give you a broader viewpoint and may provide a deeper understanding of the subject.
When you have completed each assignment, send it, together with a TMA (tutor-marked assignment) form, to your tutor.
Make sure that each assignment reaches you tutor on or before the deadlines given in the Presentation Schedule and Assignment File.
If, for any reason, you cannot your work on time, contact your tutor before the assignment is due to discuss the possibility of an extension.
Extensions will not be granted after the due date unless there are exceptional circumstances.
Final Examination and Grading The Final Examination for HEM 604 will be two hours’ duration and have a value of 60% of the total course grade.
The examination will consist of questions which reflect the types of self-testing, practice exercises and tutor- marked problems you have previously encountered.
All areas of the course will be similarly assessed.
Use the time between finishing the last unit and sitting the examination to revise the entire course.
You might find it useful to review your self-tests, tutor-marked assignments and comments on them before the examination.
The final examination covers information from all parts of the course.
Course Marking Scheme 4COURSE GUIDE HEM 604 The following table lays out how the actual course making is broken down.
Assessment Marks Assignment Best four TMAs at 10 marks each = 40% of course marks Final Examination 60% of overall course marks Total 100% of course marks.
Table 1: Course marking scheme Course Overview This table brings together the units, the number of weeks you should take to complete them, and the assignments that follow them.
Unit Title of Work Weeks Assessment activity (end of Unit) 1 Course Guide 1-2 1 Basic concept of Anatomy and Physiology 2 Level of organization 3 2 3 Fundamental Organic Chemistry 3 3 4 Haematology 4 4 5 The Intergumatory System 4 4 6 The Skeletal System 5 5 7 The Nervous System 6 5 8 The Endocrine 7 6 9 The Digestive system 8 7 10 The Respiratory system 9 8 11 The Circulatory system 10 9 12 The Immune system 11 10 13 The Urinary system 12 11 14 The Reproductive system 13 12 How to get the most from this course 5COURSE GUIDE HEM 604 This a specially designed study materials used at your pace, and at a time and place that suit you best.
Think of it as reading the lecture instead of listening to a lecturer.
The study units tell you when to read your course material.
Just as a lecturer might give you an in-class exercise, your study units provide exercise for you to do at appropriate points.
Each of the study units follows a common format.
The first item is an introduction to the subject matter of the unit and how a particular unit is integrated with the other units and the course as a whole.
Next is a set of learning objective.
These objectives let you know what you should be able to do by the time you have completed the unit.
You should use these objectives to guide your study.
When you have finished the unit you must go back and check whether you have achieved the objectives.
If you make habit of doing this you will significantly improve you chances of passing the course.
The main body of the unit guides you through the required reading form other sources.
This will usually be either from a reading section or some other courses.
The main body of the unit guides you through the required from other sources.
This will usually by either from a reading section or some other courses.
Self-tests are interspersed throughout the units, and answer are given at the ends of units.
Working through these tests will help you to achieve the objectives of the unit and prepare you for the assignments and the examination.
You should do each self-tests as you encounter it in the study unit.
There will also be numerous examples given in the study units; work through these when you come across them too.
The following is a practical strategy for working through the course.
If you run into any trouble, telephone your tutor.
Remember that your tutor’s job is to help you.
When you need help so don’t hesitate at all to ask your tutor to provide it.
1.
Read this Course Guide thoroughly.
2.
Organize a study schedule.
Refer to the “course overview” for more details.
Note the time you are expected to spend on each unit and how the assignments relate to the units.
Important information, e.g details of your tutorials, and the date of the first day of the semester is available.
You need to gather all this information in one place, such as your diary or on a wall calendar.
Whatever method you choose to use you should decide on and write in your own dates for working on each unit.
3.
Once you have created you own study schedule, do everything you can 6COURSE GUIDE HEM 604 to stick to it.
The major reason that students fail is that they get behind with their course work.
If you get into difficulties with your schedules, please let your tutor know before it is too late for help.
4.
Turn to unit 1 and read the introduction and the objectives for the unit.
5.
Assemble the study materials.
Information about what you need for a unit is given in the ‘table of Contents’ at the beginning of each unit.
You will almost always need both the study unit you are working on and one of the materials for further reading on yours desk at the same time.
6.
Work through the unit.
The content of the unit itself has been arranged to provide a sequence for you to follow.
As you work through the unit you will be instructed to read sections form other sources.
Use the unit to guide your reading.
7.
Keep in mind that you will learn a lot by doing all your assignment carefully.
They have been designed to help you meet the objectives of the course and, therefore will help you pass the exam.
Submit all assignments not later then the due date.
8. Review the objectives for each study unit to confirm that you achieved them.
If you feel unsure about any of the objectives, review the study materials or consult your tutor.
9.
When you are confident that you have achieved a unit’s objectives, you can then start on the next unit.
Proceed unit by unit through the course and try to pace your study so that you keep yourself on schedule.
10.
When you have submitted an assignment to your tutor for making do not wait for its return before starting on the next unit.
Keep to your schedule.
When the assignment is returned, pay particular attention to your tutor’s comments, both on the tutor-marked assignment form and also on the written assignment.
Consult your tutor as soon as possible if your have any question or problems.
11.
After completing the last unit, review the course and prepare yourself for the final examination.
Check that you have achieved the unit objectives.
(Listed at the beginning of each unit) and the course objectives (listed in the Course Guide).
7COURSE GUIDE HEM 604 Tutors and Tutorials There are 8 hours of tutorials provided in support of this course.
You will be notified of the dates, times and location of these tutorials, together with the name and phone numbers of your tutor, as soon as you are allocated a tutorial group.
Your tutor will mark and comment on your assignment, keep a close watch on your progress and on any difficulties you might encounter and provided assistance to you during the course.
You must mail your tutor-marked assignments to your tutor well before the due date (at least two working days are required).
They will be marked by your tutor and returned to you as soon as possible.
Do not hesitate to contact your tutor by telephone, e-mail or discussion board if you need help.
The following might be circumstances in which you would find help necessary.
Contact your tutor if: • You do not understand any part of the study units or the assignment • You have difficulty with the self-tests or exercises • You have a question or problem with an assignment, with your tutor’s comments on an assignment or with the grading of an assignment.
You should try your best to attend the tutorials.
This is the only chance for face to face contact with your tutor and to ask questions which are answered instantly.
You can raise any problem encountered in the course of your study.
To gain the maximum benefit from course tutorials, prepare a question list before attending them.
You will learn a lot from participating and discussion actively.
GOODLUCK 8
