PRIMARY HEALTH CARE AND HEM 609 HIV/AIDS Course GuideCOURSE GUIDE HEM 609 COURSE GUIDE HEM 609 PRIMARY HEALTH CARE AND HIV/AIDS Course Developer Kayode S. Olubiyi National Open University of Nigeria, Lagos.
Course Writer Kayode S. Olubiyi National Open University of Nigeria, Lagos Programme Leader Prof. Afolabi Adebanjo Dean, School of Science and Technology National Open University of Nigeria, Lagos Course Coordinator Jane-Frances Agbu National Open University of Nigeria, Lagos NATIONAL OPEN UNIVERSITY OF NIGERIA iiCOURSE GUIDE HEM 609 National Open University of Nigeria Headquarters 14/16 Ahmadu Bello Way Victoria Island Lagos Abuja Office No.
5 Dar es Salaam Street Off Aminu Kano Crescent Wuse II, Abuja Nigeria E-mail: centralinfo@nou.edu.ng URL: www.nou.edu.ng National Open University of Nigeria 2008 First Printed 2008 ISBN: 978-058-616-4 All Rights Reserved Printed by… For National Open University of Nigeria iiiCOURSE GUIDE HEM 609 TABLE OF CONTENTS PAGE Introduction……………………………………………… 1 What You Will Learn in this Course……………………….
1 Course Aim……………………………………………… 1 Course Objectives……………………………………….. 1-2 Working through this Course…………………………….
2-3 Course Materials………………………………………… 3 Study Units……………………………………………… 3-4 Recommended Texts…………………………………….. 4 Assignment File………………………………………….
4 Presentation Schedule…………………………………….
4 Assessment……………………………………………….
5 Tutor Marked Assignments (TMAs)…………………….. 5-6 Final Examination and Grading………………………….
6 Course Marking Scheme………………………………… 7 Course Overview………………………………………… 7-8 How to Get the Most Out of this Course………………….. 8 Tutors and Tutorials…………………………………….. 9 ivCOURSE GUIDE HEM 609 Introduction HEM 609: Primary Health Care and HIV/AIDS is a three credit course for students in the PGD HIV/AIDS programme.
The course is broken to five modules with 15 study units.
It will introduce you to primary health care, health concepts and prerequisite as well as a general analysis of health care services.
It will also touch on health for all, assessment of health and health promotion.
Other areas that will be covered are HIV and AIDS treatment, opportunistic infections and safety measures, the health system based health care, public health organisations with a bias for HIV/AIDS, sexuality and gender issues, stigma and HIV/AIDS and health education.
At the end of the course, you will be expected to demonstrate a clear understanding of primary health care, explain your expected role in the care of HIV/AIDS victims and be prepared to apply it in true life experiences.
This course guide provides you with what to expect in the course, how to work through the course material as a distance learner saddled with the responsibility of studying on your own and your overall responsibilities and expectations.
Tutorial sessions are also linked up with the course to provide the needed support you require.
What You Will Learn In this Course Today, Nigeria has a growing population of 140 million people.
There is still a great imbalance in the provision of medical care facilities and providing such facilities for the larger population has become a great challenge.
HEM 609: Primary Health Care and HIV/AIDS will therefore help you see the important role of primary health care as the main instrument for providing the needed health care for those affected with the disease.
It will also help you to understand the importance of primary health care to those living with the affected people.
Course Aim This course aims at providing you with an in-depth understanding of primary health care with the hope that you will become better equipped to contribute meaningfully to healthy living for all and sundry.
1COURSE GUIDE HEM 609 Course Objectives To achieve the aim set out above, the course sets the overall objective.
In addition, each unit has specific objectives stated at the beginning of a unit.
You are advised to read them carefully before going through the unit.
You will have to refer to them during the course of your study to monitor your progress.
You are encouraged to always refer to the unit objectives after completing a unit.
This is the way in which you can be certain that you have done what was required of you in the unit.
The wider objectives of the course are set below.
By meeting these objectives, you should have achieved the aims of the course as a whole.
On successful completion of the course, you should be able to: • Explain your concept of primary health care • Highlight the principles of primary health care • Define health and health for all • Discuss the determinants of health • List and explain the prerequisites of health • Highlight the concept of health organisation • Describe the behaviours that promote health • Identify different levels of health care in different societies • Appreciate various channels for receiving health care services • Describe the global strategy for attaining health for all • Explain the national strategy adopted to achieve the goal of health for all • Discuss theoretical models of health and illness together with their assumptions • Differentiate health preventive or protective care from health promotion • Discuss their roles in health promotion and illness prevention • Describe the various types of treatment available • Highlight the drugs for managing HIV/AIDS • Describe the combination of drugs/Highly Active Antiretroviral Therapy(HATT) • Explain the concept of opportunistic infections • Describe how they are acquired by the HIV/AIDS victim • Enumerate different opportunistic infections • Identify the class of treatment and method of control.
Working through this Course To complete this course, you are required to study through the units, the recommended textbooks and other relevant materials.
Each unit contains 2COURSE GUIDE HEM 609 some self assessment exercises and tutor marked assignments and you are expected to submit the tutor marked assignments at some point.
This will be followed by an end of term examination.
Course Materials The following are the components of this course: 1.
The course guide 2.
Study units 3.
Textbooks 4.
The assignment file 5.
The presentation schedule Study Units This course is made up 15 study units in 5 modules.
These are: Module 1 Primary Health Care and the Analysis of Health Care Services Unit 1 Introduction to Primary Health Care Unit 2 Health Concepts and Prerequisites Unit 3 General Analysis of Health Care Services Module 2 The Concept of Health and Health Promotion Unit 1 Health for All Unit 2 Assessment of Health Unit 3 Health Promotion Module 3 HIV and AIDS Prophylaxis Unit 1 Introduction to HIV and AIDS Treatment Unit 2 HIV/AIDS and Opportunistic Infections Unit 3 Safety Measures Module 4 The Health System Based on Primary Health Care and Public Health Organisations Unit 1 Organisation of the Health System Based on Primary Health Care Unit 2 Health Care Resources, Monitoring and Evaluation of Health Services Unit 3 Public Health Organisations 3COURSE GUIDE HEM 609 Module 5 Dealing with the HIV/AIDS Stigma Unit 1 Sexuality and Gender Issues Unit 2 Stigma and HIV/AIDS Unit 3 Health Education Each unit contains self assessment exercises and tutor marked assignments which you should attempt.
Expectedly, it is believed that the exercises will help you to achieve the stated objective.
Recommended Textbooks for this Course Cox, C.L.
(1995).
Health and Human Needs.
In Heath, B.
M.(ed.)
Potters and Perry’s Foundations in Nursing Theory and Practice.
Italy: Mosby, an imprint of Times Mirror International.
Ewles and Simnett (1985).
Health Education and Patient Teaching in Watsons Medical Surgical Nursing and Related Physiology p. 23 Kozier, B., Erb, G., Berman, A.U.
& Burke, K.
(eds.)
2000.
Health, Wellness and Illness.
Fundamental of Nursing: Concepts Process and Practice (6th edition).
New Jersy: Prentice Hall, Inc. Lucas, A. O and Guiles, H. M (1984).
Preventive Medicine for the Tropics.
Kent: Hodder and Stoughton Ltd. Lucas and Guiles (1989).
A Short Textbook of Preventive Medicine for the Tropics, 2nd (ed) ELBS.
Santhosh, M. (2000).
Primary Health Nursing (PHN) Indria Gandhi National Open University, New Deli: Berny Art Press.
The Assignment File The assignment file will contain the Tutor Marked Assignment (TMA) which will constitute part of the Continuous Assessment (CA) of the course.
There are 15 assignments in this course with each unit having an activity/exercise for you to do to facilitate your learning as an individual.
The Presentation Schedule The presentation schedule in this course provides you with the dates for the completion of each tutor marked assignment.
Please try to meet the deadlines.
4COURSE GUIDE HEM 609 Assessment There are two aspects to the assessment of the course.
These are the tutor marked assignments and the written examination.
In tackling the assignments, you are expected to apply the information, knowledge and strategies which you must have gathered during the course.
You must turn in the assignments to your tutor for formal assessment in accordance with the stated presentation schedule.
The work you submit to your tutor for assessment will count for 40% of your total course work.
At the end of the course you will need to sit for a final written examination which will last for three hours .
This examination will also count for 60% of your total course mark.
Tutor Marked Assignment (TMA) There are 15 tutor-marked assignments in the course.
You are advised in your own interest to do and submit the assignments at the stipulated time at study centre.
You will be able to complete the assignments from the information and materials contained in your reading and study units.
There are self assessment activities contained in the instructional material to facilitate your study.
Do all of them.
Feel free to consult any of the references to provide you with a broader view and a deeper understanding of the course.
Extensions will be granted for submission after the deadline only in exceptional cases.
Tutor Marked Assignments (TMAs) Unit 1: Clearly define primary health care showing its significance in the prevention/control of HIV/AIDS Unit 2: In view of the changing concepts of health, describe the prerequisites for optimal health by individuals and the society.
Unit 3: A good number of patients tend to utilise the services of traditional healers before seeking help from Western-style health workers and facilities.
Discuss.
Unit 4: Describe the strategies being employed by the government at the three levels to provide health for all.
Unit 5: Assessing health status is a major component of primary health care.
Discuss the major ingredients for assessment.
5COURSE GUIDE HEM 609 Unit 6: Discuss with examples the justification of needs identification in the expected role of the health care providers in health promotion.
Unit 7: Describe three classes of antiretroviral drugs being used for the treatment of HIV.
Unit 8: People with advanced HIV infection are vulnerable to infections.
Describe three opportunistic infections that are often attached to HIV/AIDS.
Unit 9: Describe the place of behavioural change as a means to ensuring safety in the fight against HIV/AIDS.
Unit 10: What are the expected roles of the following in the control of HIV/AIDS?
• The National Council on Health • The Primary Health Care Agency Unit 11: Enumerate the elements for monitoring and evaluating a health care facility.
Unit 12: Since the emergence of AIDS funds and materials have been committed to the various activities by non-governmental bodies in the fight against the disease.
Clearly justify the roles of UNDP, WHO and UNFPA in this regard.
Unit 13: Highlight the various gender issues that are often associated with the incidence of HIV/AIDS.
Unit 14: HIV/AIDS is always asassociated with stigma, repression and discrimination.
Discuss these in line with your experience in the life of a 35 year old business executive.
Unit 15: Using the process of health education, prepare a presentation for the control of HIV/AIDS spread among secondary school students.
Final Examination and Grading The final examination of HEM 609 will be for 3 hours and it will have a value of 60% of the total course grade.
The examination will consist of questions which have bearings with the self assessment exercises and tutor marked assignments that you would have encountered.
Furthermore, all areas of the course will be evaluated.
Make sure you spend enough time to revise the entire course.
6COURSE GUIDE HEM 609 Course Marking Scheme The following table includes the course marking scheme Table 1 Assessment Marks Assignment 1 – 15 15 assignments for the best 4 Total = 10% x 4 = 40% Final examination 60% of overall course marks Total 100% of course marks Course Overview This table indicates the units and the number of weeks required to complete the assignments.
Unit Title of Work Week Assessment Activity Course Guide Week 1 Module 1 Primary Health Care and the Analysis of Health Care Services Unit 1 Introduction to Primary Health Care Unit 2 Health Concepts and Prerequisites Unit 3 General Analysis of Health Care Module 2 The Concept of Health and Health Promotion Unit 1 Health for All Unit 2 Assessment of Health Unit 3 Health Promotion Module 3 HIV and AIDS Prophylaxis Unit 1 Introduction to HIV/AIDS Treatment Unit 2 HIV/AIDS and Opportunistic Infections Unit 3 Safety Measures Module 4 Health System Based on Primary Health Care and Public Health Organisations Unit 1 Organisation of the Health 7COURSE GUIDE HEM 609 System Based on Primary Health Care Unit 2 Health Care Resources, Monitoring and Evaluation of Health Services Unit 3 Public Health Organisations Module 5 Dealing with the HIV/AIDS Stigma Unit 1 Sexuality and Gender Issues Unit 2 Stigma and HIV/AIDS Unit 3 Health Education How to Get the Most Out of the Course In distance learning, the study units replace the university lecture.
This is one of the greatest advantages of distance learning.
You can read and work through specially designed study materials at your own pace and at the time and place that suit you best.
Think of it as reading the lecture notes instead of listening to a lecturer.
The study units tell you when to read your other material, the same way a lecturer would set you reading tasks.
Also, your study units provide exercises for you to do at the appropriate points just as a lecturer would give you in-class exercises.
The following are practical strategies for working through the course: • Read the course guide thoroughly • Organise a study schedule • Stick to your own created study schedule • Read the introduction and objectives very well • Assemble your study materials • Work through the unit • Keep in mind that you will learn a lot by doing all your assignments carefully • Review the stated objectives • Don’t proceed to the next unit until you are sure you have understood the previous unit • Review the course and prepare yourself for the final examination.
8COURSE GUIDE HEM 609 Tutors and Tutorials There are eight hours of effective tutorials provided in support of this course.
Details will be communicated to you together with the name and phone number of your tutor through the study centre.
Your tutor will mark and comment on your assignments, keep a close watch on your progress, handle any difficulties you might encounter and also provide you with assistance during the course.
You must ensure that you submit your assignments as and at when due.
You will get a feedback from your tutor as soon as possible.
Do not hesitate to contact your tutor or study centre on phone or by e- mail in case of any of the following circumstances: • You do not understand any part of the study units or the assigned reading • You have difficulty with the self tests or exercises.
• You have questions or problems with an assignment, the tutor’s comments or grading of an assignment.
You are encouraged to attend the tutorials to allow for face to face contact with your tutor and ask questions to which you needed answers immediately.
It is also an opportunity to discuss any grey area with your tutor.
You can equally prepare questions for the tutorial class, for meaningful interactions.
You are sure to gain a lot from actively participating in the discussions.
GOODLUCK!
9
