COMMUNICATION AND HEM 631 COUNSELLING IN HIV/AIDS Course GuideHEM 631 COURSE GUIDE COURSE GUIDE HEM 631 COMMUNICATION AND COUNSELLING IN HIV/AIDS Course Developers/Writers Mr Umeh Charles Staff Clinic Lagos University Teaching Hospital (LUTH), Lagos Ms. Titi Tade Department of Medical Social Services Lagos University Teaching Hospital (LUTH), Lagos Programme Leader Prof. Afolabi Adebanjo Dean, School of Science and Technology National Open University of Nigeria Lagos Course Coordinator Jane-Frances Agbu National Open University of Nigeria, Lagos NATIONAL OPEN UNIVERSITY OF NIGERIA iiHEM 631 COURSE GUIDE National Open University of Nigeria Headquarters 14/16 Ahmadu Bello Way Victoria Island Lagos Abuja Office No.
5 Dar es Salaam Street Off Aminu Kano Crescent Wuse II, Abuja Nigeria e-mail: centralinfo@nou.edu.ng URL: www.nou.edu.ng Published by: National Open University of Nigeria 2008 First Printed 2008 ISBN: 978-058-340-8 All Rights Reserved iiiHEM 631 COURSE GUIDE CONTENTS PAGE Introduction……………………………………………….. 1 What you will learn in this Course……………………....... 1 Course Aim………………………………………………... 1 Course Objectives………………………………………….
1 – 2 Working through this Course……………………………… 2 Course Materials…………………………………………... 2 Study Units………………………………………………… 2 – 3 Recommended Texts……………………………………….
3 – 4 Assignment File…………………………………………… 4 Presentation Schedule……………………………………... 4 Assessment………………………………………………… 4 Tutor Marked Assignments (TMAs)……………………….
4 – 5 Final Examination and Grading…………………………… 5 Course marking Scheme…………………………………… 5 Course Overview………………………………………….. 5 – 6 How to get the most out of this course…………………….
6 – 8 Tutors and Tutorials……………………………………….. 8 ivHEM 631 COURSE GUIDE Introduction HEM 631: Communication and Counselling in HIV/AID is a 3 credit course for PGD HIV/AID Education and Management and related disciplines The course is broken into 6 modules and 23 study units.
It will introduce the students to concepts of communication, approaches to HIV counselling, counselling process, pre and post test counselling and other specific counselling for HIV/AIDS, counselling skills and styles, stigma and discrimination, etc.
At the end of this course, it is expected that students should be able to understand, explain and be adequately equipped with issues of communication and counselling in HIV/AIDS The course guide, therefore, tells you briefly what the course: HEM 631 is all about, the types of course materials to be used, what you are expected to know in each unit, and how to work through the course material.
It suggests the general guidelines and also emphasises the need for self assessment and tutor marked assignment.
There are also tutorial classes that are linked to this course and students are advised to attend.
What you will learn in this Course The overall aim of this course, HEM 631, is to introduce students to the variables associated with communication and counselling in HIV/AIDS.
During this course, you will learn about concepts and forms of communication, HIV pre and post counselling, counselling process and styles.
Course Aim This course aims to give students an in-dept understanding of communication and counselling in HIV/AIDS.
It is hoped that the knowledge would equip students with the conceptual issues of HIV counselling.
Course Objectives Note that each unit has specific objectives.
Students should read them carefully before going through the unit.
You may want to refer to them during your study of the unit to check on your progress.
You should always look at the unit objectives after completing a unit.
In this way, you can be sure that you have done what is required of you by the unit.
1HEM 631 COURSE GUIDE However, below are overall objectives of this course.
On successful completion of this course, you should be able to: • Define the concepts of communication and counselling • Illustrate the counselling process • Describe HIV/AIDS and modes of transmission • Explain HIV pre and post test counselling • Identify specific HIV counselling • Identify counselling skills and styles • Explain HIV/AIDS related stigma and discrimination Working through this Course To complete this course, you are required to read the units, the recommended text books, and other relevant materials.
Each unit contains some self assessment exercises and tutor marked assignments, and at some point in this course, you are required to submit the tutor marked assignments.
There is also a final examination at the end of this course.
Stated below are the components of this course and what you have to do.
Course Materials The major components of the course are: 1.
Course Guide 2.
Study Units 3.
Text Books 4.
Assignment File 5.
Presentation Schedule Study Units There are 23 study units and 6 modules in this course.
They are: Module 1 Counselling and Communication: An Introduction Unit 1 Communication Unit 2 Characteristics of Communication Unit 3 Introduction to Counseling Unit 4 Approaches to Counseling 2HEM 631 COURSE GUIDE Module 2 The Counselling Process Unit 1 Counseling Process Unit 2 Types of Counselling Unit 3 Special Areas in Counseling and Evaluation of Counseling Module 3 Introduction to HIV/AIDS Unit 1 HIV/AIDS: An Introduction Unit 2 HIV Transmission facts Unit 3 Link between STIs and HIV Transmission Unit 4 HIV Testing Module 4 HIV/AIDS Pre/Post Test Counselling Unit 1 HIV/AIDS Counselling: Definitions Unit 2 Pre-Test Counselling Unit 3 Preventing Mother-to-Child Transmission (PMTCT) Counselling Unit 4 Post-test counseling: Module 5 Specific Counselling for HIV/AIDS Unit 1 Prevention Counselling: Unit 2 Bereavement Counselling Unit 3 Crisis Counselling Unit 4 Disclosure Counselling Module 6 Counselling skills/Styles/Stigma and Discrimination Unit 1 Counselling Skills Unit 2 Counselling Style Unit 3 Difficult Counselling Situation Unit 4 Stigma and Discrimination Recommended Texts These texts will be of immense benefit to this course: Anne-Marie Barry, Chris Yuill (2002).
Understanding Health.
SAGE Allot, M and Robb, M. (1997).
Understanding Health and Social Care.
SAGE.
Crane, D. R., Marshall, E. S. (2005).
Handbook of Families and Health.
SAGE 3HEM 631 COURSE GUIDE Davies, C and Bullman, A.
(1999).
Changing Practice in Health and Social Care.
SAGE.
D’Cruz, Premilla (2004).
Family Care in HIV.
SAGE.
Lucas, K. and Lloyd, B.
(2005).
Health Promotion.
SAGE Melia, K. M. (2004).
Health Care Ethic.
SAGE Neill McKee, Jane Bertrand and Antje Becker-Benton (2004).
Strategic Communications in the HIV/AIDS Epidemic.
SAGE.
Parker, R. (2006).
Global Public Health.
Routledge Richard Nelson-Jones (2005).
Practical Counselling and Helping Skills.
SAGE.
Assignment File The assignment file will be given to you in due course.
In this file, you will find all the details of the work you must submit to your tutor for marking.
The marks you obtain for these assignments will count towards the final mark for the course.
Altogether, there are 23 tutor marked assignments for this course.
Presentation Schedule The presentation schedule included in this course guide provides you with important dates for completion of each tutor marked assignment.
You should therefore try to meet the deadlines.
Assessment There are two aspects to the assessment of this course.
First, there are tutor marked assignments; and second, the written examination.
You are thus expected to apply knowledge, comprehension, information and problem solving gathered during the course.
The tutor marked assignments must be submitted to your tutor for formal assessment, in accordance to the deadline given.
The work submitted will count for 40% of your total course mark.
At the end of the course, you will need to sit for a final written examination.
This examination will account for 60% of your total score.
4HEM 631 COURSE GUIDE Tutor Marked Assignments (TMAs) There are 23 TMAs in this course.
You need to submit all the TMAs.
The best 4 will therefore be counted.
When you have completed each assignment, send them to your tutor as soon as possible and make sure that it gets to your tutor on or before the stated deadline.
If for any reason you cannot complete your assignment on time, contact your tutor before the assignment is due to discuss the possibility of extension.
Extension will not be granted after the deadline, unless on exceptional cases.
Final Examination and Grading The final examination of HEM 631 will be of 3 hour’s duration and have a value of 60% of the total course grade.
The examination will consist of questions which reflect the self assessment exercise and tutor marked assignments that you have previously encountered.
Furthermore, all areas of the course will be examined.
It is also better to use the time between finishing the last unit and sitting for the examination, to revise the entire course.
You might find it useful to review your TMAs and comment on them before the examination.
The final examination covers information from all parts of the course.
Course marking Scheme The following table includes the course marking scheme Table 1 Course Marking Scheme Assessment Marks Assignment 1-23 23 assignments, 40% for the best 4 Total = 10% X 4 = 40% Final Examination 60% of overall course marks Total 100% of Course Marks Course Overview This table indicates the units, the number of weeks required to complete them and the assignments.
Table 2: Course Organizer Unit Title of Work Weeks Assessment Activity (End of Unit) Course Guide Week 1 Module 1 Counselling and communication: An introduction 5HEM 631 COURSE GUIDE Unit 1 Communication Week 1 Assignment 1 Unit 2 Characteristics of Week 2 Assignment 2 Communication Unit 3 Int.
to Counselling Week 3 Assignment 3 Unit 4 Approaches to Counselling Week 3 Assignment 4 Module 2 The Counselling Process Unit 1 Counselling Process Week 4 Assignment 5 Unit 2 Types of Counselling Week 4 Assignment 6 Unit 3 Special areas in Counselling Week 5 Assignment 7 Module 3 Introduction to HIV/AIDS Unit 1 HIV/AIDS: An Introduction Week 6 Assignment 8 Unit 2 HIV Transmission Facts Week 6 Assignment 9 Unit 3 Link Between STI and HIV Week 7 Assignment 10 Unit 4 HIV testing Week 8 Assignment 11 Module 4 HIV/AID/Pre/Post Test Counselling Unit 1 HIV/AIDS counselling: Week 9 Assignment 12 Definitions Unit 2 Pre test counselling Week 9 Assignment 13 Unit 3 PMTCT Counselling Week 10 Assignment 14 Unit 4 Post test counselling Week 10 Assignment 15 Module 5 Specific Counselling for HIV/AIDS Unit 1 Prevention Counselling Week 11 Assignment 16 Unit 2 Bereavement Counselling Week 12 Assignment 17 Unit 3 Crisis Counselling Week 13 Assignment 18 Unit 4 Disclosure Counselling Week 14 Assignment 19 Module 6 Counselling skills/Styles/Stigma and Discrimination Unit 1 Counselling Skills Week 14 Assignment 20 Unit 2 Counselling Style Week 15 Assignment 21 Unit 3 Difficult Counselling Week 15 Assignment 22 Situation Unit 4 Stigma and discrimination Week 16 Assignment 23 How to get the most out of this course In distance learning, the study units replace the university lecturer.
This is one of the huge advantages of distance learning mode; you can read and work through specially designed study materials at your own pace and at a time and place that suit you best.
Think of it as reading from the teacher, the study guide tells you what to read, when to read and the relevant texts to consult.
You are provided exercises at appropriate points, just as a lecturer might give you an in-class exercise.
Each of the study units follows a common format.
The first item is an introduction to the subject matter of the unit and how a particular unit is integrated with the other units and the course as a whole.
Next to this is 6HEM 631 COURSE GUIDE a set of learning objectives.
These learning objectives are meant to guide your studies.
The moment a unit is finished, you must go back and check whether you have achieved the objectives.
If this is made a habit, then you will significantly improve your chances of passing the course.
The main body of the units also guides you through the required readings from other sources.
This will usually be either from a set book or from other sources.
Self assessment exercises are provided throughout the unit, to aid personal studies and answers are provided at the end of the unit.
Working through these self tests will help you to achieve the objectives of the unit and also prepare you for tutor marked assignments and examinations.
You should attempt each self test as you encounter them in the units.
The following are practical strategies for working through this course 1.
Read the course guide thoroughly 2.
Organize a study schedule.
Refer to the course overview for more details.
Note the time you are expected to spend on each unit and how the assignment relates to the units.
Important details, e.g.
details of your tutorials and the date of the first day of the semester are available.
You need to gather together all these information in one place such as a diary, a wall chart calendar or an organizer.
Whatever method you choose, you should decide on and write in your own dates for working on each unit.
3.
Once you have created your own study schedule, do everything you can to stick to it.
The major reason that students fail is that they get behind with their course works.
If you get into difficulties with your schedule, please let your tutor know before it is too late for help.
4.
Turn to Unit 1 and read the introduction and the objectives for the unit.
5.
Assemble the study materials.
Information about what you need for a unit is given in the table of content at the beginning of each unit.
You will almost always need both the study unit you are working on and one of the materials recommended for further readings, on your desk at the same time.
6.
Work through the unit, the content of the unit itself has been arranged to provide a sequence for you to follow.
As you work through the unit, you will be encouraged to read from your set books.
7.
Keep in mind that you will learn a lot by doing all your assignments carefully.
They have been designed to help you meet the objectives of the course and will help you pass the examination.
7HEM 631 COURSE GUIDE 8. Review the objectives of each study unit to confirm that you have achieved them.
If you are not certain about any of the objectives, review the study material and consult your tutor.
9.
When you are confident that you have achieved a unit’s objectives, you can start on the next unit.
Proceed unit by unit through the course and try to pace your study so that you can keep yourself on schedule.
10.When you have submitted an assignment to your tutor for marking, do not wait for its return before starting on the next unit.
Keep to your schedule.
When the assignment is returned, pay particular attention to your tutor’s comments, both on the tutor marked assignment form and also written on the assignment.
Consult you tutor as soon as possible if you have any questions or problems.
11.After completing the last unit, review the course and prepare yourself for the final examination.
Check that you have achieved the unit objectives (listed at the beginning of each unit) and the course objectives (listed in this course guide).
Tutors and Tutorials There are 12 hours of tutorial provided in support of this course.
You will be notified of the dates, time and location together with the name and phone number of your tutor as soon as you are allocated a tutorial group.
Your tutor will mark and comment on your assignments, keep a close watch on your progress and on any difficulties you might encounter and provide assistance to you during the course.
You must mail your tutor marked assignment to your tutor well before the due date.
At least two working days are required for this purpose.
They will be marked by your tutor and returned to you as soon as possible.
Do not hesitate to contact your tutor by telephone’ e-mail or discussion board if you need help.
The following might be circumstances in which you would find help necessary: contact your tutor if: • You do not understand any part of the study units or the assigned readings.
• You have difficulty with the self test or exercise.
• You have questions or problems with an assignment, with your tutor’s comments on an assignment or with the grading of an assignment.
You should try your best to attend the tutorials.
This is the only chance to have face to face contact with your tutor and ask questions which are answered instantly.
You can raise any problem encountered in the 8HEM 631 COURSE GUIDE course of your study.
To gain the maximum benefit from the course tutorials, prepare a question list before attending them.
You will learn a lot from participating in discussion actively.
GOODLUCK!
9
