GLOBAL INITIATIVES ON HEM 642 HIV/AIDS Course GuideCOURSE GUIDE HEM 642 COURSE GUIDE HEM 642 GLOBAL INITIATIVES ON HIV/AIDS Course Developer/Writer Dr. Raphael Olayemi Olawoye Department of Epidemiology Ministry of Health, Ilorin Course Co-ordinator Agbu Jane-Frances O.
National Open University of Nigeria Programme Leader Professor A. Adebanjo Dean, School of Science and Technology National Open University of Nigeria NATIONAL OPEN UNIVERSITY OF NIGERIA iiCOURSE GUIDE HEM 642 National Open University of Nigeria Headquarters 14/16 Ahmadu Bello Way Victoria Island Lagos Abuja Office No.
5 Dar es Salaam Street Off Aminu Kano Crescent Wuse II, Abuja Nigeria e-mail: centralinfo@nou.edu.ng URL: www.nou.edu.ng National Open University of Nigeria 2007 First Printed 2007 ISBN: 978-058-388-2 All Rights Reserved Printed by …………….. For National Open University of Nigeria iiiCOURSE GUIDE HEM 642 TABLE OF CONTENT PAGE Introduction ……………………………………………………….. 1 The Course …………………………………………………………1 Course Aim ……………………………………………………….. 2 Course Objectives ………………………………………………… 2 Working through the Course …………….…………………………3 Course Material …………………….…….………………………...4 Study Units………………………………………………………… 4 Reading List ………………….……….……………………………5 Assessment …………………………..………………….………….8 Summary ………………………………………………..………… 9 ivCOURSE GUIDE HEM 642 Introduction This handbook tells you in concise terms what to expect as you wade through the course material, and also provides information about the course including details on course aims, objectives, assessments and reading lists.
This course guide also gives you a total insight to the issue of HIV/AIDS in almost all its ramifications.
The course material as a package on its own will help you to have a better understanding of HIV/ AIDS in both its social and scientific contexts and in greater details too, as there are no conventional books for now to consult except journals, news letters, news paper articles, posters and others of such.
Please keep this course guide properly as you will be referring to it from time-to- time because it will serve as a good reference material for you.
This course also serves as a good foundation for the acquisition of skills in HIV/AIDS control.
Discussions are on the relationship between poverty and HIV/AIDS, prevention program and treatment will further throw light on the reason why the epidemic has been on the increase, turning into a pandemic particularly due to the high cost of procuring Antiretroviral drugs which is way beyond the reach of the common people, while funds available from donor agencies appear insufficient to cater adequately for drugs procurement and for research activities.
The Course This course is titled global Initiatives on HIV/AIDS.
AIDS essentially is the advanced form or stage of HIV, which is viral infection.
Since its emergence in the 80’s, it has become very devastating in impact, becoming a dreaded pandemic.
The world bodies including the United Nations (UN) has been concerned and has been working in partnership with other international agencies such as WHO, UNAIDS, UNDP, UNICEF, UNFPA, UNESCO, UNDCP, FAO etc.
so as to find a lasting solution to the problem.
This course is therefore very basic to most health-related training programmes for obvious reasons which include the fact that; 1.
AIDS knows no cure yet and operates by weakening the body’s immune system.
2.
HIV spreads through unprotected sex, (intercourse without condom) transfusions of unscreened blood, contaminated needles, (most frequently for injecting drugs) and from an infected woman to her child during pregnancy, childbirth or breast-feeding.
1COURSE GUIDE HEM 642 3.
HIV is a slow-acting virus.
The majority of infected individuals looks healthy and feels well for many years after infection; they may not even suspect that they harbour the virus, though they can transmit to others.
It is estimated that 90% of all HIV-infected people worldwide do not know they have the virus.
A laboratory blood or saliva test is only certain way to determine whether an individual is HIV positive.
4.
Once people have an established HIV infection, they are infected for life and will probably succumb to serious opportunistic infections caused by the weakening of their immune system.
Treatment with antiretroviral drugs can slow the progression of HIV infection but these expensive medications are not available to most people in the developing world, who often lack access to drugs that combat opportunistic infections.
In individuals who do not get antiretroviral therapy, the time between infection with HIV and the development of serious illnesses that define AIDS is about eight years, and most patients do not survive much more than two years after the onset of AIDS.
The course proper includes the full meaning of HIV/AIDS, its biology, epidemiology and pathogenesis; cause and methods of spreading; global initiatives on HIV/AIDS and forms of initiatives; the relationship between poverty and HIV/AIDS; treatment, prevention and control programmes; demographic incidence and prevalence, social and scientific research efforts as well as sources of funds and forms of foreign assistance.
Course Aims The ambitious aim of this course is to impart HIV/AIDS knowledge into learners, to make them competent individuals in HIV/AIDS control and prevention activities anywhere in the world.
Course Objectives This course is set to achieve the following objectives in addition to the aforementioned aims: 1.
To enable the student, to successfully operate in a health setting that engages in the care of HIV/AIDS activities.
2.
To assist you to have a good understanding and appreciation of the dreaded disease, HIV/AIDS, and work effectively on any aspect of it in a professional manner.
3.
To enhance the development of skills in case load and client management in the student.
2COURSE GUIDE HEM 642 4.
To know what HIV and AIDS stand for and the basic difference between the two.
5.
To understand the effects of virus on the body, how it is contracted and it’s spread as well as what measures should be taken to prevent and control it.
6.
To appreciate the relationship between poverty and HIV/AIDS.
7.
To identify sources of funds, forms of foreign assistance, donor governments, other funding streams such as the global fund, UN and the World Bank.
8.
To have insight to social and scientific research efforts on HIV/AIDS Working through the Course It is opined that you will make conscious effort to read through this Course Guide and the study materials as many times as possible, spending quality time on each occasion.
You are obviously required to spend as much time as possible to thoroughly read the course materials, not mere wading through as you need a good understanding of the basic principles of the course so as to be able to properly master the subject matter.
We therefore encourage you to take good care of your study materials and read them as often as possible.
The study materials are highly simplified, readable, explicit and self- explanatory.
It is also well illustrated with definitions, descriptions and examples, making it comprehensive.
We will however encourage you to try as much as possible to attend tutorial sessions where you will have the opportunity of interpersonal relationships with both instructors and peers We wish to also encourage you to learn to make regular contact and interact well with your mates so that you have the opportunity to exchange ideas, share knowledge and rub minds together, possibly through e-mails, text messages, phoning and physical contacts.
Course Material You will be provided with the following materials: (i) Course Guide (ii) Study units Of course, in addition to the aforementioned course materials, you will also be given a list of recommended resources such as Newspapers, magazines, journals, research reports, website and other resources for latest development and information on the subject matter.
3COURSE GUIDE HEM 642 However, these materials are not imposed on you as they are optional but you are enjoined to check them out as additional sources of emphasis.
Study Units The following are the study units contained in the course: Module 1 Unit 1 HIV/AIDS Diagnosis And Clinical Symptoms I Unit 2 HIV/AIDS Diagnosis And Clinical Symptoms II Unit 3 HIV/AIDS Diagnosis And Clinical Symptoms Ill Unit 4 Modes / Routes Of HIV Transmission Unit 5 Demographic Incidence And Prevalence Of Module 2 Unit 1 The Relationship Between Poverty and HIV/AIDS Unit 2 HIV/AIDS Global Initiatives I Unit 3 HIV/AIDS Global Initiatives II Unit 4 Sources of Funds and HIV/AIDS Financing Unit 5 Development Assistance for HIV/AIDS Capacity Building In Nigeria.
Module 3 Unit 1 Research and HIV/AIDS Unit 2 Quests for an HIV Vaccine Unit 3 Aids: The Impact of Other Sexually Transmitted Diseases Unit 4 Prevention, Treatment and Control of the HIV/AIDS Scourge I Unit 5 Prevention, Treatment and Control of HIV/AIDS Scourge II Module 4 Unit 1 The Right mix of Treatment and Prevention Unit 2 Drug Resistances in HIV/AIDS Treatment Prevention Unit 3 AIDS Blood Transfusions Unit 4 HIV and breastfeeding 1 UniT 5 HIV and Breast Feeding II 4COURSE GUIDE HEM 642 Module 5 Unit 1 Integrating AIDS Control into Family Planning (FP) Services Unit 2 Changing High Risk Behaviour through Peer Education Unit 3 HIV and Prostitution Unit 4 General Information about Deadly AIDS Reading List Adeyi, O.kanki, P.J; Odutolu , O and Idoku, J.A (20026) AIDS IN NIGERIA: A Nation on the threshold.
USA: Harvard University Press: Britton, A.F.H (1988): Making blood transfusions safer.
In AIDS: a shadow in our world.
Geneva WHO: Cohen, D (2002) Poverty and HIV/AIDS in sub-Saharan Africa.
HIV and Development Program UNDP Coordinating Committee of the Global HIV/ AIDS Vaccine Enterprise Scientific Strategic Plan.
Plosmed 2005; 2(2) c25 Dialogue on Diarrhoea (1995) HIV and infant feeding.
The International Newsletter on the control of diarrhoea diseases.
AHRTAG: London: Federal Government of Nigeria (2003) National policy on HIV/AIDS.
Abuja: F G N Federal Ministry of Health (2005) National Situation and Response Analysis of the Health sector Response to HIV and AIDS in Nigeria.
Abuja: FMOH: FMOH Technical Report (2005) National HIV/Syphilis sero-prevalence sentinel survey among women attending antenatal clinics in Nigeria.
Published by Dept of Public Health National AIDS/STI control programme FMOH (2002) Guidelines for the use of antiretroviral (ARV) drugs in Nigeria FMOH (1992) Care of a person with AIDS in the community.
Federal Ministry of Health and Social Service, Lagos Nigeria 5COURSE GUIDE HEM 642 FAO and UNAIDS (1999) Sustainable Agricultural \Rural Development and Vulnerability to the AIDS epidemic UNAIDS Best Practice Collection December 1999 Federal Ministry of Health (2005): National HIV Sentinel Survey.
Nigeria: FMOH Gould, B and Huber, U (2002) HIV/AIDS; poverty and schooling: an AIDS epidemic or a poverty epidemic.
UK: Liver pool University: Gallo, R (1988) Quest for a vaccine.
In AIDS: a shadow in our world.Geneva: WHO; Web site – www.plosmedicine.org Global AIDSNEWS (1993) Effective prevention could halve new HIV infections.
The Newsletter of the World Health Organization Global programmes on AIDS.
1993 No 3.
Hatcher, R.A; Rinehart, W; Blackburn, R; Geller, J.S and Shelton, J.D (1997) the essentials of contraceptive Technology: John Hopkins University: USA Handsfield HH, Ashley RL, Rampalo AM, et.
al.
1987: Association of anogenital ulcer disease with human immunodeficiency virus infection in homosexual men.
Third International Conference on AIDS, Kreiss JK, Koech D, Plummer FA, et al.
1986 AIDS Virus Infection in Nairobi prostitutes: spread of the epidemic to East Africa.
New Eng J Med 314 (7):414, Katzenstein DA, Latif A, Basset MT, Emmanuel JC.
1987: Third International Conference on AIDS, Washington DC, June 1-5, Life tract (2006) The Way Out of the HIV/ AIDS Pandemic.
Deeper life magazine Life Press Ltd. Lagos, Nigeria.
Najera, R and Herrera, M (1988) Biology of the virus.
In World Health Organization Health Magazine Geneva:WHO Network (1990) AIDS and Blood transfusions: Ensuring safe blood supplies.
6COURSE GUIDE HEM 642 Family Heath International.
Volume 11 number 2 Network (1990): HIV and Breast Feeding: risk and realities.
Family Health International.
Vol II Number 2 April 1990: Network (1993) AIDS: the second decade.
Family Health International Vol:13 Number 4, May 1993: Network (1990): Peer Education: learning how to change high risk behaviour.
FHI research news April, 1990.
Network (1987) Maternal Mortality is global problem Family Health International Vol.
9.No 1, 1987.
Olusoji, A; Phyllis, I.K; Oluwole, O and John, A.I (2006) AIDS in Nigeria: A nation on the threshold.
U.S.A.: Harvard University Press Progress in Human Reproductive Research (1992) Breast- feeding and HIV.
Progress No 23.
Geneva: WHO Population Report (1983).Sources of Population and Family Planning Assistance-Family Planning programs population reports series 1 Number 26, January to February 1983 Piot P, Plummer FA, Rev MA, et.
Al.
1987: retrospective seropidemiology of HIV infection in Nairobi populations J Infect Dis 155:1108, Piot P, Kreiss JK, Ndinya-Achola JO, et.al.
1987: Heterosexual transmission of HIV/ AIDS 1(4): 199, Plummer FA, Simonsen JN, Ngugi EN, et al.
1987: incidence of human immunodeficiency virus infection and related disease in a cohort of Nairobi prostitutes.
Third International Conference on AIDS.
Real Health News (2006) Research: the minister views.
The magazine of real action and research N06 October, 2006 .
St Albam: The Plain Truth (1985) Sexually Transmissible Diseases: Even you could become infected.
England: Ambassadors Press LTD. Senayake, P and Klinman, R (1992) Meeting Challenges and Promoting Choices.
USA: The Parthenon Publishing Group 7COURSE GUIDE HEM 642 The International Newsletter on the control of diarrhoea diseases (1995) Breastfeeding is best feeding.
LONDON, AHRTAG The International newsletter on the control of diarrhea diseases (1993) back to basics: What is ORT?
LONDON: AHRTAG The International newsletter on the control of diarrhea diseases (1990) Anti- diarrhea withdrawn.
LONDON: AHRTAG TDR news (2007) Enhancing drug discovery for neglected tropical diseases.
Geneva: WHO.
Topouzis, D and Olu Guemy, J (1999) Sustainable Agricultural/ Rural Development and Vulnerability to the AIDS epidemic.
Geneva.
: FAO and UNAIDS UNFPA (2002) State of the world population 2002.
USA: UNFPA: UNAIDS (2001) sources and price of selected drugs and diagnostics for people living with HIV/AIDS.
Geneva: UNAIDS: Verwohit, A (2002) Innovative Approaches to HIV prevention- selected case studies.
Geneva: UNAIDS World Health Organization and United Kingdom Government (1988) London Declaration on AIDS prevention 26 – 28 January 1988.
(1988).
Assessing Aid: what works, what doesn’t and why.
Washington D .C: World Bank WHO (1985) Sexually transmitted diseases, and AIDS; Diabetes in youth; Nutrition and care.
The magazine of the World Health Organization.
WHO: Geneva: Web Site: www.google.co.uk Assessment There are components of assessment for this course.
They are as indicated below (1) Tutor marked Assessment (TMA) (2) End of course examination 8COURSE GUIDE HEM 642 (1) Tutor marked Assessment (TMA) The TMA is the continuous assessment component of the course and it accounts for 40% of the total score.
You will have 4 TMAs to answer, 3 of which will be done prior to the end of course examination without which you might not be allowed to sit for the end of term examination.
The TMAs will be given to you by your course facilitator which you will return at the stipulated deadline.
(2) End of course examination This is the examination that concludes the list of assignments for this course and it constitutes 60% of the whole course.
You will definitely be informed of the due date(s) for the examination(s).
Summary This course intends to provide you with basic knowledge about HIV/AIDS locally, nationally and globally, so that at the end of this course you will be handy with enough information, latest ideas and general awareness about HIV/AIDS in term of: • What HIV and AIDS are generally • Biology, pathogeneses and epidemiology of HIV/AIDS • Aetiology (Origin) of the disease • Signs and symptoms plus diagnosis • How HIV can be contacted • How HIV will not be spread • Demographic incidence and prevalence of HIV • Global initiatives on HIV/AIDS and forms of initiatives • Relationship between HIV/AIDS and poverty and sources of funds • Treatment, prevention and control programs • HIV/AIDS research effort e.t.c.
I wish you the very best in this course.
Please enjoy the course.
Good luck!
9
