ECONOMICS OF HEM 617 HIV AND AIDS Course GuideCOURSE GUIDE HEM 617 COURSE GUIDE HEM617 ECONOMICS OF HIV AND AIDS Course Developer/Writer Dr E. Adenrele Haastrup Department of Health Education University of Lagos, Lagos, Nigeria Programme Leader Prof. Afolabi Adebanjo Dean, School of Science and Technology, National Open University of Nigeria Lagos Course Coordinator Jane-Frances Agbu National Open University of Nigeria Lagos NATIONAL OPEN UNIVERSITY OF NIGERIA iiCOURSE GUIDE HEM 617 National Open University of Nigeria Headquarters 14/16 Ahmadu Bello Way Victoria Island Lagos Abuja Office No.
5 Dar es Salaam Street Off Aminu Kano Crescent Wuse II, Abuja Nigeria e-mail: centralinfo@nou.edu.ng URL: www.nou.edu.ng Published by: National Open University of Nigeria 2007 First Printed 2007 ISBN: 978-058-484-6 All Rights Reserved iiiCOURSE GUIDE HEM 617 TABLE OF CONTENT PAGE Introduction……………………………………………… 1 What you will learn in this course……………………….
1 Course Aims…………………………………………….. 1 Course Objectives……………………………………….. 1-2 Working Through This Course………………………….. 2 Course Materials………………………………………… 2 Study Units……………………………………………… 2-4 Recommended Text……………………………………... 4 Assignment File………………………………………….
4 Presentation Schedule…………………………………… 4 Assessment……………………………………………….
4 Tutor-Marked Assignment (TMAs)……………………... 5 Final Examination and Grading………………………….
5 Course Marking Scheme………………………………… 5 Course Overview………………………………………… 5 How To Get The Most Out of This Course……………… 7-8 Tutors and Tutorials……………………………………… 9 ivCOURSE GUIDE HEM 617 Introduction HEM 617: Economics of HIV and AIDS is a 3-credit course designed for PGD HIV/AIDS Education and Management programme.
It will also be available to other courses, if need be The course is broken into 24 study units.
It will introduce the students to concepts of health and the health continuum, STIs and their relationship to HIV/AIDS, prevalence of HIV/AIDS in Nigeria, peer education, economic implications of HIV/AIDS, HIV/AIDS programmes in the work place, evaluations and interventions of HIV/AIDS, etc.
At the end of this course, it is expected that students should be able to understand, explain and be adequately equipped to deal with the economic components and implications of HIV/AIDS.
The course guide, therefore, tells you briefly what the course: ‘Economics of HIV/AIDS’ is all about, the types of course materials to be used, what you are expected to know in each unit, and how to work through the course material.
It suggests the general guidelines and also emphasises the need for self-assessment and tutor-marked assignments.
There are also tutorial classes linked to this course and students are advised to attend.
What You Will Learn In This Course Material The overall aim of this course, HEM 617: Economics of HIV/AIDS is to equip students with basic economic components and implications of HIV/AIDS.
Course Aims This course aims to give students an in-depth understanding of the economics of HIV/AIDS.
It is hoped that the knowledge would equip students with the conceptual, evaluative and economic components of HIV/AIDS.
Course Objectives Note that each unit has specific objectives.
Students should read them carefully before going through the unit.
You may want to refer to them during your study of the unit to check on your progress.
You should always look at the unit objectives after completing a unit.
In this way, you will be sure that you have done what is required of you by the unit.
1COURSE GUIDE HEM 617 Below are overall objectives of this course.
On successful completion of this course, you should be able to: • Define health • Illustrate the health continuum • Define health behaviour • Define STIs • Identify the connection between STIs and HIV • Discuss peer education • Identify the economic benefits of peer education • Describe the national HIV/AIDS prevalence • Discuss HIV/AIDS and the business sector • Explain economic implications of HIV/AIDS • Discuss HIV/AIDS and the work place • Discuss the health sector and HIV/AIDS • Evaluate HIV/AIDS programmes Working through this Course To complete this course, you are required to read the units, the recommended textbooks and other relevant materials.
Each contains some self-assessment exercises and tutor-marked assignments, and at some points in this course, you are required to submit the tutor- marked assignments.
At the end of this course, there is also a final examination.
Stated below are the components of this course and what you have to do.
Course Materials The major components of the course are: 1.
Course Guide 2.
Study Units 3.
Textbooks 4.
Assignment File 5.
Presentation Schedule Study Units There are 24 study units and 6 modules in this course.
They are: 2COURSE GUIDE HEM 617 Module One Unit 1 Meaning of Health Unit 2 Components of Health, the Health Continuum and Wellness Unit 3 Determinants of Health Unit 4 Health Behaviour Unit 5 Behaviours as a Factor in the Spread of HIV Module Two Unit 1 What are Sexually Transmitted Infections (STIs)?
Unit 2 Consequences of STIs Unit 3 Why STIs Are Difficult to Control Unit 4 Connection between HIV and other STIs Module Three Unit 1 What is Peer Education?
Unit 2 Economic Benefits of Peer Education Unit 3 Impact of HIV and AIDS on the Economy Unit 4 Economic Status as a Factor in HIV and AIDS Module Four Unit 1 National HIV and AIDS Prevalence in Nigeria Unit 2 HIV and AIDS and the Business Sectors Unit 3 Stages of HIV and AIDS and Cost Implications to Business Module Five Unit 1 Components of HIV and AIDS Programme in the Workplace Unit 2 Developing HIV And AIDS Programmes in the Workplace.
Unit 3 The Health Sector and HIV And AIDS Unit 4 Nigeria’s Public Health Facilities Module Six Unit 1 Evaluating HIV and AIDS Programme Unit 2 Meaning and Need for Evaluation Unit 3 Evaluation of HIV and AIDS Intervention Unit 4 Types of Evaluation 3COURSE GUIDE HEM 617 Each unit contains a self-assessment exercise and a tutor-marked assignment, of which students are required to attempt.
These exercises will assist you to achieve the learning objectives of the units.
Set Textbooks These texts will be of immense benefit to this course: Cockerham, W. C. (2003), Medical Sociology, 9th Edition, NJ: Prentice Hall.
Taylor, S. (2006), Health Psychology, 6th Edition, NY: McGraw Hill The Body: The complete HIV/AIDS Resource.
Visit web site @ http://www.thebody.com/index/financial/economics.html Assignment File The assignment file will be given to you in due course.
In this file, you will find all the details of the work you must submit to your tutor for marking.
The marks you obtain for these assignments will count towards the final mark for the course.
Altogether, there are 24 tutor-marked assignments for this course.
Presentation Schedule The presentation schedule included in this course guide provides you with important dates for completion of each tutor-marked assignment.
You should therefore try to meet the deadlines.
Assessment There are two aspects to the assessment of this course.
First, there are tutor-marked assignments; and second, the written examination.
You are thus expected to apply knowledge, comprehension, information and problem-solving skills gathered during the course.
The tutor-marked assignments must be submitted to your tutor for formal assessment, in accordance to the deadline given.
The work submitted will count for 40% of your total course mark.
At the end of the course, you will need to sit for a final written examination.
This examination will account for 60% of your total score.
4COURSE GUIDE HEM 617 Tutor-Marked Assignments (TMAs) There are 24 TMAs in this course.
You need to submit all the TMAs.
The best 4 will therefore be counted.
When you have completed each assignment, send them to your tutor as soon as possible and make sure that it gets to your tutor on or before the stated deadline.
If for any reason you cannot complete your assignment on time, contact your tutor before the assignment is due, to discuss the possibility of extension.
Extension will not be granted after the deadline, unless on exceptional cases.
Final Examination and Grading The final examination of HEM 617 will be of 3 hour’s duration and have a value of 60% of the total course grade.
The examination will consist of questions, which reflect the self-assessment exercise and tutor-marked assignments that you have previously encountered.
Furthermore, all areas of the course will be examined.
It is also better to use the time between finishing the last unit and sitting for the examination, to revise the entire course.
You might find it useful to review your TMAs and comment on them before the examination.
The final examination covers information from all parts of the course.
Course-marking Scheme The following table contains the course-marking scheme Table 1: Course-Marking Scheme Assessment Marks Assignment 1-19 24 assignments, 40% for the best 4 Total = 10% X 4 = 40% Final Examination 60% of overall course marks Total 100% of Course Marks Course Overview This table indicates the units, the number of weeks required to complete them and the assignments.
5COURSE GUIDE HEM 617 Table 2: Course Organizer Weeks Assessment Title of Work Activity (End of Unit) Course Guide Week 1 Meaning of Health Week 1 1 Components of Health, the Health Continuum and Wellness Week 2 2 Determinants of Health Week 2 3 Health Behaviour Week 3 4 Behaviour as factor in the spread of HIV Week 4 5 What are Sexually Transmitted Infections (STIs)?
Week 5 6 Consequences of STIs Week 5 7 Why STIs Are Difficult to Control Week 6 8 Connection between HIV and other STIs Week 7 9 What is Peer Education?
Week 7 10 Economic Benefits of Peer Education Week 8 11 Impact of HIV and AIDS on the Economy Week 8 12 Economic Status as a Factor in HIV and AIDS Week 9 13 National HIV and AIDS Prevalence in Nigeria Week 9 14 HIV and AIDS and the Business Sectors Week 10 15 Stages of HIV and AIDS and Cost Implications to Business Week 10 16 Components Components of HIV and AIDS Programme in the Workplace Week 11 17 Developing HIV And AIDS Programme in the Workplace Week 12 18 The Health Sector and HIV And AIDS Week 13 19 Nigeria Public Health Facilities Week 13 20 Evaluating HIV/AIDS Programme Week 14 21 Meaning and need for evaluation Week 14 22 Evaluation of HIV/AIDS Intervention Week 15 23 Types of Evaluation Week 15 24 6COURSE GUIDE HEM 617 How to get the most out of this course In distance learning, the study units replace the university lecturer.
This is one of the huge advantages of distance-learning mode.
You can read and work through specially designed study materials at your own pace and at a time and place that suit you best.
Think of it as reading the lecture instead of listening to the lecturer.
In the same way that a lecturer might set you some readings to do, the study guide tells you what to read, when to read and the relevant texts to consult.
You are provided exercises at appropriate points, just as a lecturer might give you an in- class exercise.
Each of the study units follows a common format.
The first item is an introduction to the subject matter of the unit and how a particular unit is integrated with the other units and the course as a whole.
Next to this is a set of learning objectives.
These learning objectives are meant to guide your studies.
The moment a unit is finished, you must go back and check whether you have achieved the objectives.
If this is made a habit, then you will significantly improve your chances of passing the course.
The main body of the units also guides you through the required readings from other sources.
This will usually be either from a set book or from other sources.
Self-assessment exercises are provided throughout the unit to aid personal studies, and answers are provided at the end of the unit.
Working through these self-tests will help you to achieve the objectives of the unit; and also prepare you for the tutor-marked assignments and examinations.
You should attempt each self-test as you encounter them in the units.
The following are practical strategies for working through this course: 1.
Read the course guide thoroughly 2.
Organize a study schedule.
Refer to the course overview for more details.
Note the time you are expected to spend on each unit and how the assignment relates to the units.
Important details, e.g.
details of your tutorials and the date of the first day of the semester are available.
You need to gather all these information in one place such as a diary, a wall chart calendar or an organizer.
Whatever method you choose, you should decide on it and write in your own dates for working on each unit.
3.
Once you have created your own study schedule, do everything you can to stick to it.
The major reason that students fail is that they get behind in their course works.
If you get into difficulties 7COURSE GUIDE HEM 617 with your schedule, please let your tutor know before it is too late for help.
4.
Turn to Unit 1 and read the introduction and the objectives for the unit.
5.
Assemble the study materials.
Information about what you need for a unit is given in the table of content at the beginning of each unit.
You will almost always need both the study unit you are working on and one of the materials recommended for further readings, on your desk at the same time.
6 Work through the unit.
The content of the unit itself has been arranged to provide a sequence for you to follow.
As you work through the unit, you will be encouraged to read from your set books.
7.
Keep in mind that you will learn a lot by doing all your assignments carefully.
They have been designed to help you meet the objectives of the course.
They will help you pass the examination.
8. Review the objectives of each study unit to confirm that you have achieved them.
If you are not certain about any of the objectives, review the study material and consult your tutor.
9.
When you are confident that you have achieved a unit’s objectives, you can start on the next unit.
Proceed unit by unit through the course and try to pace your study so that you can keep yourself on schedule.
10.
When you have submitted an assignment to your tutor for marking, do not wait for its return before starting on the next unit.
Keep to your schedule.
When the assignment is returned, pay particular attention to your tutor’s comments, both on the tutor- marked assignment form and also on the assignment paper itself.
Consult you tutor as soon as possible if you have any questions or problems.
11.
After completing the last unit, review the course and prepare yourself for the final examination.
Check that you have achieved the unit objectives (listed at the beginning of each unit) and the course objectives (listed in this course guide).
8COURSE GUIDE HEM 617 Tutors and Tutorials There are about 14 hours of tutorial provided in support of this course.
You will be notified of the dates, time and location, with the name and phone number of your tutor as soon as you are allocated a tutorial group.
Your tutor will mark and comment on your assignments, keep a close watch on your progress and on any difficulties you might encounter and provide assistance to you during the course.
You must mail your tutor- marked assignment to your tutor well before the due date.
At least, two working days are required for this purpose.
They will be marked by your tutor and returned to you as soon as possible.
Do not hesitate to contact your tutor by telephone, e-mail or discussion board if you need help.
Contact your tutor if: You do not understand any part of the study units or the assigned readings.
You have difficulty with the self-test or exercise You have questions or problems with an assignment: with your tutor’s comments or with his/her grading.
You should try your best to attend the tutorials.
This is the only chance to have face-to-face contact with your tutor and ask questions which are answered instantly.
You can raise any problem encountered in the course of your study.
To gain the maximum benefit from the course tutorials, prepare a question list before attending them.
You will learn a lot from participating in discussion actively.
Good luck!
9
