 NATIONAL OPEN UNIVERSITY OF NIGERIA SCHOOL OF ART AND SOCIAL SCIENCES COURSE CODE: ISL 451 COURSE TITLE: MAJOR SUFI ORDERS IN AFRICA 1  COURSE GUIDE Course Code / Title ISL451: Major Sufi Orders in Africa Course Team Asif Folarin Ahmed (Course Developer/Writer &Programme Leader) NOUN Dr. Lateef O. Jimoh Adeniran Ogunsanya College of Education (Editor) Dr. Adejoro Raheem Mustapha (Course Coordinator, NOUN) Dr.I.Kahar.
Wahab.Sarumi (Course Coordinator, NOUN) 2  Headquarters 14/16 Ahmad Bello Way Victoria Island Lagos.
Abuja Annex 245 Samuel Adesujo Ademulegun Street, Central Business District, Opposite Arewa Suites, Abuja.
e-mail centralinfo@nou.edu.ng URL: www.nou.edu.ng National Open University of Nigeria First Printed 2013 ISBN: All Rights Reserved Printed by …………………………….
For National Open University of Nigeria 3 Introduction ISL451: Major Șūfī orders in Africa - is a two credit units course available in the first semester of B.A.
Islamic Studies programme at the 400 level.
The course is designed in a way that it will let you appreciate the growth and development of Qādiriyyah, Tijāniyyah, Sanūsiyyah, and the Shādhiliyyah Sūfī Orders and their contribution to the spread and development of Islam in Africa.
Special consideration of the anti-Șūfī activities of the Izālatu ‘l-bid’ah and its other impacts in Nigeria will also be highlighted.
The Aim of this Course The general aim of this course is to facilitate your knowledge of the major șūfī orders and their impact in Africa.
To achieve this you will be introduced to the: 1) Emergence of the șūfī orders.
2) The religious, social and political impact of the șūfī orders 3) emergence of the Izalah anti-Șūfī organization and its activities in Nigeria.
Course Objectives There are fourteen study units in the course and each unit has its objectives.
You are expected to read the objective of each unit and bear them in mind as you go through the unit.
Nevertheless, the following are overall objectives of the course.
After the reader had gone through the whole course he/she should be able to:  discuss the emergence, growth and development of Șūfī orders in Islam.
 Discuss the emergence and spread of the major sufi orders.
 Identify the doctrines and ritual practices of the Șūfī orders and critically analyse them.
 Discuss the contribution of the șūfī orders to the spread and development of Islam in Africa.
 Expound the political, social and religious roles of the Șūfī orders in Africa.
 describe the emergence of the Jamā ‘atu Izālah anti-Șūfī movement in Nigeria.
Working through this Course There are fourteen units in the course which you are expected to work through without leaving anyone un-touched.
Course Materials The major components of the course are: 1.
This course Guide 2.
Study Units 3.
Textbooks 4.
Presentation Schedule 5.
Assessments.
4 Study Units The study consists of fourteen units listed as follows: Unit 1: Introductory: The Emergence of the Tarīqāhs.
Module 1: The Qādiriyyah Unit 2: The Beginning, Spread and Development of Qādiriyyah Unit3: The Qādiriyyah in the North and West Africa Unit 4: The Qādiriyyah in Bornu, the Hausaland and Sokoto Unit 5: Organizational Set Up, Initiation, Doctrines and Rites of the Qādiriyyah Unit 6: Political, Social and Religious Roles of the Qādiriyyah in Nigeria Module 2: The Tijāniyyah Unit 7: The Beginning of Tijāniyyah Order Unit 8: Spread of Tijāniyyah in West Africa Unit 9: Doctrines and Rites of the Tijāniyyah Order Unit 10: Social-political Roles of the Tijāniyyah MODULE 3: The Sānūsiyyah and Shādiliiyyah.
Unit 11: The beginning, spread, doctrines and rites of Sānūsiyyah Order Unit 12: The beginning, spread, doctrines and rites of Shādiliiyyah Order Unit 13: The formative period, Aims and Objective and Emergence of the Izālah Unit 14: The Yan Izālah Relation with the Qādiriyyah and Tijāniyyah, Its Social and Educational Impacts.
References and Other Resources Every unit has a list of references and further reading designed to enhance and deepen learner’s knowledge on the course.
These are some of them, try as much as possible to lay your hands on the materials (some are in soft and hard copies).
Trimingham, J. S. (197), The Sufi Orders in Islam, London Martins, B. G. (1967), The Muslim Brotherhoods of Nineteenth Century Africa O `Brien, D.
B.
(1969), The Mourides of Seneghal Abdul, M.O.A.
(n.d), Translation and Commentary on Alhaji Abubakar Gumi’s Treatise al-‘Aqīdatu `ș- Şaħīħah; Istambul.
Abun Nasr, A. J.
(1965), The Tijāniyya: a Șūfī Order in the Modern World, London.
Clarke, P.B.
(1982), West Africa and Islam.
London: Jilānī, Sayyid Abdu`l-Qādir (1979), Al-Fāt-hu `r-Rbbānī wa `l-Fayđu `r- Rahmānī; 5  Cairo.
Paden, J.N (1973), Religion and Political Culture in Kano, London.
Quadiri, Y.A.
(1981), “The Tijāniyyah in Nigeria” an unpublished Ph.D Thesis University of Ibadan, Nigeria.
Ahmed, A. F. (1986), The Qādiriyyah and its Impact in Nigeria; an unpublished Ph.D Thesis, University of Ibadan, Nigeria.
Tijani, D.A.A.
(1997), A Handbook on the Doctrine and Rites of the Tijāniyyah; Ede; Nigeria.
Jimoh, L.O.
(2006).
The Contributions of Shaykh Nasiru Kabara to the Development of Qādiriyyah Order in Nigeria, unpublished Ph.D Thesis, University of Ilorin, Ilorin.
Sunusi, Sīdī Ahmed Sharif (n.d.) ةيـسونـسلا ةـقيرطلا ةمدـقم :ةـيـــسدــقـلا راوــنلأا www.ghrib.net Web Sources www.shadhili.com www.sanusi.com Assignment File Your assessment will be based on tutor-marked assignment (TMAS) 30% and a final examination which you will write at the end of the course 70%.
Tutor marked assignment Each unit has at least three or four assignments.
You are expected to work through all the assignments and submit them before assessment.
Your tutor will assess the assignments and select three, which will constitute the 30% of your final grade.
The tutor-marked assignment may be presented to you in a separate file.
Final Examination and Grading At the end of this course you will write a final examination which shall constitute 70% of your grade.
In the examination, you will be required to answer three (3) questions out of at least five (5) questions.
This table shows the actual marks allocation.
Assessment Marks Four Tutor Marked Assignments Best three marks of the four assignments count as 30% Final Examination 70% of overall marks Total 100% Of Course Marks 6  Presentation Schedule The presentation Schedule included in your course materials gives you the important dates for the completion of tutor-marked assignments and attending tutorials.
Remember, you are required to submit all your assignments by the due date.
You should guard against falling behind in your work.
Course Overview and Presentation Schedule Unit Title of Work Weeks Assessment Activity Unit 1: Introductory - Emergence of the Tariqāhs.
Week 1 Module 1: The Qādiriyyah Unit 2 The Beginning, Spread and Development of Week 2 Assignment 1 Qādiriyyah Unit 3 The Qādiriyyah in the North and West Africa Week 3 Unit 4 The Qādiriyyah in Bornu, the Hausaland and Week 4 Assignment 2 Sokoto Unit 5 Organizational Set Up, Initiation, Doctrines Week 5 and Rites of the Qādiriyyah Unit 6 Political, Social and Religious Roles of the Week 6 Assignment 3 Qādiriyyah in Nigeria Module 2 The Tijāniyyah Unit 7 The beginning of Tijāniyyah Order Week 7 Assignment 4 Unit 8 Spread of Tijāniyyah in West Africa Week 8 Unit 9 Doctrine and Rites of Tijāniyyah Order Week 9 Unit 10 Social-political Roles of the Tijāniyyah Week 10 Module 3: The Sānūsiyyah and Shādhiliyyah Unit 11 The beginning, spread, doctrines and Week 11 rites of Sānūsiyyah Order Unit 12 The beg inning, spread, doctrines, rites and Week 12 ritual/practices of Shadiliiyyah Unit 13 The formative period, Aims and Week 13 Objective and Emergence of the Izālah Unit 14 The Yan Izālah Relation with the Qādiriyyah Week 14 and Tijāniyyah, Its Social and Educational Impacts.
Revision Examinations 7 How to Get Most from This Course In distance learning, the study units replace the university lecture.
This is one of its great advantages.
You can read and work through specially designed study materials at your own pace, and at a time and place that suits you best.
Think of it as reading the lecture instead of listening to the lecturer.
In the same way a lecturer might give you some reading to do, the study units tell you when to read, and which are your text materials or set books.
‘You are provided exercises to do at appropriate points just as a lecturer might give you an in-class exercise.
Each of the study units follows a common format.
The first item is an introduction to the subject matter of the units, and how a particular unit is integrated with the other units and the course as a whole.
Next to this is a set of learning objectives.
These objectives let you know what you should be able to do by the time you have completed the unit.
These learning objectives are meant to guide your study.
The moment a unit is finished, you must go back and check whether you have achieved the objectives.
If this is made a habit, then you will significantly improve your chances of passing the course.
The main body of the unit guides you through the required reading from other sources.
This will usually be either from your set books or from a reading section.
The following is a practically strategy for working through the course.
If you run into any trouble, telephone your tutor.
Remember that your tutor’s job is to help you.
When you need assistance, do not hesitate to call and ask your tutor to provide it.
1.
Read this course guide thoroughly, it is your first assignment.
2.
Organize a study schedule.
Design a ‘Course Overview’ to guide the course.
Note the time you are expected to spend on each unit and how the assignments relate to the units.
Important information, e.g.
details of your tutorials, and date of the first day of the semester is available from the study center.
You need to gather all the information into one place, such as your diary or a wall calendar.
Whatever method you choose to use, you should decide on and write in your own dates and schedule of work for each units.
3.
Once you have created your own study schedule, do everything to stay faithfully to it.
The major reason that students fails is that they get behind with their course work.
If you get into difficulties with schedule, please let your tutor know before it is too late for help.
4.
Turn to unit 1, and read the introduction and the objectives for the unit.
5.
Assemble the study materials.
You will need your set books and the unit you are studying at any points in time.
6.
Work through the unit.
As you work through the unit you will know what sources to consult for further information.
7.
Keep in touch with your study center.
Up-to-date course information will be continuously available there.
8 8.
Well before the relevant due dates (about 4 weeks before the dates), keep in mind that you will learn a lot by doing the assignment carefully.
They have been designed to help you meet the objectives of the course and, therefore, will help you pass the examination.
Submit all assignment not later than the due date.
9. Review the objectives for each study unit to confirm that you have achieved them.
If you feel unsure about any of the objectives, review the study materials or consult your tutor.
10.
When you are confident that you have achieved a unit’s objectives, you can start on the next unit.
Proceed unit by unit through the course and try to pace your study so that you keep yourself on schedule 11.
When you have submitted an assignment to your tutor for marking, do not wait for its return before starting on the next unit.
Keep to your schedule.
When the Assignment is returned, pay particular attention to your tutor’s comments, both on the Tutor-marked Assignment form and also the written comments on the ordinary assignments.
12.
After completing the last unit, review the course and prepare yourself for the final examination.
Check that you have achieved the unit objectives (listed at the beginning of each unit) and the course objectives (listed in the Course Guide).
Tutors and Tutorials The dates, times and location of these tutorials will be made available to you, together with the name, telephone number and address of your tutor.
Your tutor will mark each assignment.
Pay close attention to the comments your tutor might make on your assignments as these will help you in your progress.
Make sure that assignments reach your tutor on or before the due date.
Your tutorials are important; therefore try not to skip any.
It is an opportunity to meet your tutor and your fellow students.
It is also an opportunity to get the help of your tutor and discuss any difficulties encountered on your reading.
Conclusion Much as I cannot promise you a too-easy ride on this course, I equally do not envisage much difficulty as long as you play the roles assigned to you in the whole exercise.
Summary In this Course Guide, we have provided you a general overview of ISL 451: Major Șūfī orders in Africa in which students pursuing Degree in Islamic Studies programme must earn two credit Units.
The Course Aims and Objective and what learners will gain working through the Course Material and its study Units are stated clearly at the onset.
We have also provided you a list of textbooks and references for your further reading.
As an inference in the Guide, to develop an active interest in the Course is a prerequisite for 9 its successful completion.
Asses yourself through the Self Assessment Exercises (SAEs).
You will equally be assessed for grading purposes through the Tutor-Marked Assignments (TMAs).
Thus to do well- in the course, you must get yourself organized and try to conform to the presentation schedule.
We wish you best of luck and success in the course.
10 COURSE MATERIAL CONTENTS PAGES Course Guide 1 Unit 1: Introductory: The Emergence of the Şūfī Orders (Ţarīqahs) 12 MODULE 1: The Qādiriyyah Unit 2: The Beginning, Spread and Development of Qādiriyyah 16 Unit 3: The Qādiriyyah in the North and West Africa 21 unit 4: The Qādiriyyah in Bornu, the Hausaland and Sokoto 29 Unit 5: Organizational Set-up, Initiation, Doctrines and Rites 33 Unit 6: Political, Social and Religious Roles of the Qādiriyyah in Nigeria 38 MODULE 2: The Tijāniyyah Unit 7: The Beginning of Tijāniyyah Order 43 Unit 8: Spread of Tijāniyyah in West Africa 49 Unit 9: Doctrines and Rites of the Tijāniyyah Order 55 Unit 10: Socio - Political Roles of the Tijāniyyah 59 MODULE 3: Unit 11: The beginning, spread, doctrines, and rites of Sanūsiyyah Order 64 Unit 12: The beginning, spread, doctrines and Rites of Shādhiliyyah order 70 Unit 13: The formative period, Aims and Objective and Emergence of the Izālah Movement 75 Unit 14: The Yan Izālah Relation with the Qādiriyyah and Tijāniyyah 81 11 UNIT 1: INTRODUCTORY: THE EMERGENCE OF ŞŪFĪ ORDERS.
CONTENTS 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objective 3.0 Main contents 3.1 Foundation of Şūfī Convents 3.2 The Khānaqas 3.3 The Tarīqahs 4.0 Conclution 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutor-Marked Assignment 7.0 Refrence / Futher Readings 1.0 INTRODUCTION The 5th/11th century was a turning point in the history of Islamic mysticism.The overthrow of political power enjoyed by the Shī‘ites in the dynasties of the Buwyhids in Persia and Fatimids in North Africa was brought about by the Turkish Seljuk rulers from Central Asia.
They took control in Baghdad from the Buwayhids in 447/1055.
In the Maghrib and Egypt the power of Fatimids weakened until fainally they were overthrown by the Kurd, Salah-Dīn the Ayubid in 567/1175.
The new rulers were upholders of Sunnism and opponents of Shi‘ism.
One of the reforms they introduced was the re- organization of the madrasah system from being private schools, circles around learned masters to official institutions.
In these institutions emphasis was placed on the religious sciences while the profane sciences which had flourished equally under the early ‘Abbasids and Shi‘ite dynasties were discouraged or banned.
1.0 OBJECTIVE At the end of this unit, you should be able to:  Discuss the emergence of Şūfī Orders.
 Differentiate between Silsilah and Khānaqah 2.0 MAIN CONTENTS 3.1 Foundation of Şūfī Convents.
Since religious spiritualities could not be confined within the madāris alone it was to the credit of the Turks that they encouraged the foundation of Şūfī convents, endowed them liberally and imposed a degree of control over them.
By the end of this century, the change in the attitude of the theologians and the Fuqahā’ i.e.
jurists, had been brought to a conclusion by Abu Hamid Muhammad Al-Ghazzālī (d. 504/1111) and the association of Şūfīsm in its Khānaqa form with the official patronage of Nūru l-Dīn, Şalāhu-Din and their lieutenants and successors had made Şūfī associations respectable.
Then the development of the inner Islam started in earnest.
During the period under discussion certain personalities became founders of mystical Orders (Turuq, sing; Ţarīqah.).
This happened when a centre or circle became focused on one Shaykh and turned into an Order designed to perpetuate his name, type of teaching, 12 mystical exercises and rule of life.
Each such tarīqa was handed down through a continuous chain (silsilah) or mystical Isnād.
The derivative shaykhs become successors after him and therefore spiritual heirs of the founder.
The link of a person with this silsilah acquired an esoteric characteristics, an initiation whereby the seeker swore an oath of allegiance to the founder or his deputy and received in turn the secret wird (litany).Ibn Khallikan describes fuqara’ having such a link with Ahmed al-Rufa’ī (d. 575/1182) whose silsilah is probably the earliest consciously maintained chain.
Self Assessment.
Discuss the foundation of Şūfī convents.
3.2 The Khānaqahs.
By the 6th /12th century, many Khānaqas had become rich and flourishing establishments and Ibn Jubayr who traveled around 576/1183 in the Near-East in Salah- Dīn’s time, writes of Damascus.
Ribāts for Şūfīs, which here go under the name of Khawāniq,are ornamented palaces through all of which flow streams of water, representing as delightful a picture as anyone could wish for.The members of this type of Şūfī organizations are really the kings in these parts, since God has provided for them over and above the material things of life, freeing their minds from concern with the need to earn their living so that they can devotee themselves to His service.
He has lodged them in palaces, which provide them with a fore taste of those in paradise.
So these fortunate, the favoured ones among the Şūfīs, enjoy through God’s favour the blessings of this world and the next.
These tarīqahs never developed sectarian tendencies.
Their founders maintained careful links with the orthodox institution and did not repudiate the formal duties of Islam.
The difference between the tarīqahs lay in such aspects as loyalty to the head of the Order and belief in a particular power-line, in types of organizations, method of teaching, practices and rituals.
They differed considerably in their inner beliefs but their link with orthodoxy was guaranteed by their acceptance of the law and ritual practices of Islam.
How the process of ascription came about is not clear, pupils had normally been tracing or ascribing their madhhab or tarīqahs to their revered teachers for he was their guarantee of validity and training, but so far, this had been primarily a direct personal link.
Ali Hujwīrī enumerates twelve schools of Şūfīsm when he asserts: The whole body of aspirants to Şūfīsm is composed of twelve sects, two of which are condemned (mardūd) while the remaining ten are approved (maqbūl).
The latter are the Muhasibīs, the Qassārīs, the Tayfūrīs, the Hafīfīs and the Sayyārīs.
All these assert the truth and belong to the mass of orthodox Muslims.
The two condemned sects are firstly the Hulūlis, who derive their name from the doctrine of incarnation (hulūl) and incorporation.
(imtizāj), and with whom are connected, the Salīmi’s sect of anthropomophists, and secondly, the Hallājis who have abandoned the sacred law and have adopted heresy, and with whom are connected the Ibāhatīs and the Fārisīs.
13 But these are theoretical ways, none of which developed into silsilah-Ţarīqah.
Their teachings were modified by their pupils in accordance with their own mystical experience.
Self Assessment Discuss the Khawāniq in 6th /12th century and their roles.
3.3 The Ţarīqahs Dhu n-Nūn al-Mişrī (d.
246/861?
), though continually quoted in support of mystical thought, is missing from the Isnads.
Similarly, Ibn Manşūr Al-Hallāj (d. 309/922) is not normally found in them, whereas Al-Bisţāmī is found in the chains of some orders.
Taqiyyu ‘d-Dīn ‘Abd al-Rahman Al-Wāsitī, author of Tiryāq al-muhibbīn, writing around 721/1320 when the Orders were fully founded says that there were two distinctive ancient Sanads to which all the then existing lines went back, the Junaidis and the Bistamis and two extinct lines, the Bilaliyyah and the Uwaisiyyah.
The most significant of the ţarīqahs were the Suhrawardiyyah, attributed to Abu l-Najib Al-Suhrawardi (d. 562/1168) but developed by his nephew, Shihabu l-Din Abu Hafs ‘Umar (d.632/1234); the Qādiriyyah attributed to ‘Abd al-Qādir al-Jilānī (d.561/1166), the Rifā‘iyyah deriving from Ahmad al-Rifa‘ī (d.576/1182),theYāsawiyyah of Ahmad al-Yāsawī (d. 561/1166); the Kubrawiyyah of Najmu ‘d-Din Kubrā (d.619/1221), the Chistiyyah of Mu’inu l-Din Muhammad Chishtī (d.634/1236) mainly confined to India; the Shādhiliyyah, deriving form Abu Madyan Shuayb (d.591/1197), centred in Egypt; the Mawlawiyyah inspired by the Persian Şūfī Poet, Jalālu ‘d-Dīn al-Rūmī (d.672/1273) which was restricted to Anatolia in Turkey, and the Central Asian Naqshabandiyyah, a mystical order which owes its initial insights to Yusuf al-Hamdani (d.533/1140) and ‘Abdu I- Khāliq al-Ghujdawāni (d.573/1179), but was eventually associated with the name of Bahā’ al-Dīn Al-Naqshabandī (d.791/1389).
Self- Assessment Exercise Give ten names of Tariqahs mentioning the names of the Shaykhs after whom they are named.
4.0 CONCLUSION There were many other small independent lineage Orders which had only restricted local influence, but those mentioned above, together with the Western Turkish Khalwatiyyah were the foundation lines sponsoring distinctive ways of mystic thought and spiritual exercises.
Through the Ţarīqahs, the Şūfī message was communicated to the Muslim world.
5.
SUMMARY This unit traces the emergence of Şūfī orders.
The roles of the Khawaniq and the Ţarīqahs including their founders are also discussed.
14 6.
TUTOR MARKED ASSIGNMENT Trace the emergence of Şūfī Orders.
Give names of the major ones.
7.
REFERENCES Margoliouth, D.S.(1960).
Articless: ‘Ţarīqah’, ‘Kadiriyyah’ and ‘ Tijāniyyah’ in Encyclopaedia of Islam.
Schimmel, A., Mystical Dimensions of Islam, (Chapel Hill, 1975).
Trimingham, J. S. (1971).
The Şūfī Orders in Islam, Oxford, London.
Sharīf, M. M., A History of Muslim Philosophy, (Germany, 1983) Arberry, A. J., Muslim Saints and Mystics, (London, 1966) 15 MODULE 1: THE QĀDIRIYYAH Unit 2: The Beginning, Spread and Development of Qādiriyyah Unit3: The Qādiriyyah in the North and West Africa Unit 4: The Qādiriyyah In Bornu, the Hausaland and Sokoto Unit 5: Organization Set Up, Initiation, Doctrine and Rites Unit 6: Political, Social and Religious roles of the Qādiriyyah in Nigeria UNIT 2: THE BEGINNING, SPREAD AND DEVELOPMENT OF QĀDIRIYYAH CONTENT 1.
Introduction 2.
Objectives 3.
Main Content 1.1 Life history of ‘Abd Al-Qādir al-Jilānī 1.2 His activities and heritage 2.
Conclusion 3.
Summary 4.
Tutor marked assignment 5.
Reference and further reading 1.0 INTRODUCTION In the previous unit you learnt about the beginning of Tariqāh and the growth and development of șūfī orders in Islam.
In this unit we shall discuss brief life history of the Shaykh ‘Abd al-Qādir al-Jilānī and the beginning of the first and most widespread Șūfī Order named after him, the Qādiriyyah.
2.0 OBJECTIVES At the end of this unit you should be able to:  Provide a life profile of Shaykh Abdu `l-Qādir al-Jīlānī.
 Analyse the legacy of Shaykh Abdu `l-Qādir al-Jīlānī  Trace the emergence and early spread of the Qādiriyyah șūfī order 16 3.0 MAIN CONTENTS 3.1 Life history of ‘Abd al-Qādir al-Jilānī The Shaykh after whom the Qādiriyyah șūfī order was named was ‘Abd Al-Qādir al- Jilānī who was born on the first day of Ramadan 40/108 in the township of Naif in the Persian district of Jilān in Tabaristan, south of Caspian sea.
His father was Abu Şāliħ Musa Jengi Dost, a saintly man and a direct descendant of Hasan, the eldest son of Ali b. Abi Talib and Fatimah Prophet Muhammad’s (S) daughter.
His mother was Umm Al- Khayr Fatimah, also, a saintly woman and a daughter of saintly man, Abdullah Şawma and a direct descendant of Husayn the younger brother of Hasan and the son of Ali and Fatimah.
In his first eighteen years of age ‘Abd Al-Qādir al-Jilānī lived in Jilān and attended schools where he learnt subjects which could be taught to young boys of his age at that period.
It was also reported that at the early age he showed his love for learning, his desire to acquire knowledge and his love for association with holy men of his time.
He asked his mother to dedicate him to God and to allow him to proceed to Baghdad, a city renowned for learning.
At the age of eighteen ‘Abd Al-Qādir al-Jilānī arrived in Baghdad to advance in his quest for knowledge and the city, Baghdad, remained the scene of his activities up to his death.
He moved from one teacher to another.
In the course of his studies he met Abu Khayr Hammad b. Muslim Al-Dabbās a syrup monger and a great șūfī of the time who introduced him to șūfī sm.
Inspite, of the hardship he went through and by dint of his natural talents and dedication, he became very soon the master of different subjects.
By the age of fifty years, ‘Abd Al-Qādir al-Jilānī appeared in public as a teacher.
He took charge of his old teacher’s school Abu Sa‘īd Al-Mukharrimī where he became an active șūfī exponent, a Quranic exegeitist, a traditionalist, a jurist and a preacher.
On account of his profound learning, eloquence and sonorous sermon his fame soon spread throughout the different quarters of Baghdad and beyond in the Muslim territories.
Self Assessment Exercise  Give a short biography of Shaykh ‘Abd Al-Qādir al-Jilānī 17 3.2 His activities and Heritage In the school, he used to deliver lectures on details of Islamic law and differences among the schools of law.
Every day, particularly in the morning, he delivered lectures on the differences on the commentaries of the Qu’rān, Hadīth, usul al-Fiqh and Qawā‘id.
The students of ‘Abd Al-Qādir al-Jilānī had no cause to go to any other teacher for the completion of their education because he was capable of training them all in the subjects which were generally taught at the time.
Further ‘Abd Al-Qādir al-Jilānī used to deliver sermons thrice a week at his Madrasah, in the morning of Fridays, in the evening of Tuesdays, and at his Ribat on Sunday mornings.
He carried on this duty for a period of forty years till the year of his transition to heaven (561/1166).
He was a powerful preacher whose charismatic personality was capable of stirring congregation to enthusiasm.
On account of his profound learning, eloquence and sonorous sermons, his fame soon spread to all the Muslim cities and towns.
So many crowds flocked to him for knowledge and to hear his sermons.
As his audience continued to increase, the school could no longer accommodate them.and its adjacent houses were acquired for expansion purposes in 528/1124.
The project was executed with financial assistance from the rich and free labour from the poor.
Thus ‘Abd Al-Qādir al-Jilānī became an important famous șūfī leader.
3.3 The Legacies of Shaykh Abdu `l-Qādir al-Jīlānī Out of the mystic figures of his time, Shaykh ‘Abd al-Qādir al-Jilānī survived in a unique way to become the most popular wali (saint) in the Muslim world and inspirer of millions right from his life time up till the present day due largely to many reasons: First, he was an embodiment of mujāhadah, the mystic struggle to rise above the animal self, who, after reaching the stage of wilāyah (sainthood), retired to the life of teaching and preaching.
Secondly, he was an erudite sage, a Qur’anic exegete, an exponent of Hadiths, a luminary in the Jurisprudence of the Hambali school of Islamic law and also a powerful preacher whose sermons were in most cases extraordinary.
Thirdly, his mystical prose writings such as the Ghawthiyyah, and his poetical compositions such as the Khamriyyah and the Mi‘rājiyyah are all beautiful religious pieces capable of moving any reader endowed with little quality of Arabic literary appreciation which seem composed in ecstatic conditions.
18  Lastly, account of his mystical career and most especially his ability to work miracles, have contributed in no small scale to his popularity and the popularity of his Order through the ages.
Among the legacies of Shaykh ‘Abd Al-Qādir al-Jilānī are his works which were preserved and conveyed to Muslim world, among which are the following.
i. Al-Ghunyah: It is a work which vividly portrays the personality of Shaykh ‘Abd Al-Qādir al-Jilānī.
ii.
Al-Fath Al-Rabbānī: a collection of his 62 sermons delivered to his audience at his school between 545/1150.
Both the content and style of the collection reflect that it was not exclusively for șūfī circles.
iii.
Futūħu `l-Ghayb: This is a collection of eight sermons on various subjects mostly relating to șūfī sm compiled by his son `Abdur-Razāq.
iv.
Ecstatic Sermons: These sermons are contained in many books of his followers such as Al-Fuyūđāt Al-Rabbānī compiled by Ismail bn.
Sīdī Muhammad Sa `īd al-Baghdādī.
However, the most important heritage of Shaykh ‘Abd Al-Qādir al-Jilānī is the disciplined order Qādiriyyah he left behind.
The Shaykh, ‘Abd Al-Qādir al-Jilānī, was the most universally revered of all the saints of Islam.
His order, Qādiriyyah up to the present time, found followers in most parts of the Islamic world.
Self Assessment Exercise  Describe the activities and legacies of ‘Abd Al-Qādir al-Jilānī ?
4.0 CONCLUSION The Qādiriyyah șūfī order was named after Shaykh ‘Abd Al-Qādir al-Jilānī whose father and mother were acclaimed to be direct descendants of Fatimah, the Prophet’s (SAW) daughter.
By the age of eighteen Shaykh ‘Abd Al-Qādir al-Jilānī moved to Baghdad, a city famous for learning and civilization having had traditional education in his native district of Jīlān.
In Baghdad by dint of his natural talent, his dedication and encyclopedic knowledge he became very famous for erudition and sainthood and people from different parts of Muslim territories flocked his sanctuary/ribat.
19 When Shaykh ‘Abd Al-Qādir al-Jilānī died in 561/1166 at the age of ninety-one years his heritage in form of doctrines, writings, sermons, and prescriptions for spiritual training and deciples were left behind.
These constituted enough factors for the emergence of the Qādiriyyah, the disciplined șūfī order for cultivation of Islamic spirituality named after him and found in numerous Muslim countries all over the world.
5.0 SUMMARY This Unit introduces you to a brief life history of Shaykh ‘Abdu `l-Qādir Al-Jilānī (d. 561/1166), It highlights his birth, parentage and early life and education in his native land.
The Unit also contains an account of Shaykh ‘Abdu `l-Qādir Al-Jilānī`s educational, devotional and Dawah activities.
It concludes by an account of his legacies in form of religious writings, collection of sermons and spiritual prescriptions for soul purification.
It makes the emergence of the Qādiriyyah șūfī order for cultivation of Islamic spirituality as the greatest of his spiritual legacy.
6.0 TUTOR MARKED ASSIGNMENT Give a brief life history of of Shaykh ‘Abdu `l-Qādir Al-Jilānī Discuss the legacies of Shaykh Abd Al-Qadir Al-Jillani 7.0 REFERENCES AND FURTHER READING 1.
H. A. R. Gibb and J. H. Kramers, in Shorter Encyclopedia of Islam, Leiden,1961 2.
Al-Shattanufi, ‘Ali bn Yusuf’ Bahjatu `l-Asrār, Cairo, 1304 A.H./1886.
3.
Ahmed, A. F. The Qādiriyyah and its Impact in Nigeria, Ph.D. Thesis, University of Ibadan, 1986.
4.
Abdu `l-Qādir al-Jilānī, Futuhu `l-Ghayb, on the margin of Bahjatu `l- Asrār .
20 UNIT 3: THE QĀDIRIYYAH IN THE NORTH AND WEST AFRICA CONTENT: 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objectives 3.0 Main contents 3.1 Spread of Qādiriyyah in the North and West Africa 3.2 The Contribution of Shaykh Ahmad al-Bakkāī al-Kuntī (d. 1504) 3.3 The Spread and Socio – political role of Qādiriyyah in the Senegambia 3.4 Involvement of the Murīdiyyah branch of the Qādiriyyah in politics 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutor marked assignment 7.0 References and further reading 1.0 INTRODUCTION The initiation of aspirants into the Qādiriyyah Order, spread to Yemen, Egypt and Mesopotamia, right from the lifetime of Shaykh Abdu `l-Qādir.
A body of doctrines and devotional exercises were then formulated to give the required rules and regulations to the Order.
The doctrines and practices, which originated from the Shaykh himself, improvised by the leaders of the branches of the Order or borrowed from other sources, were compiled in manuals, which had won wide circulation.
And from the Qādiriyyah, not less than sixty branches have derived.
2.0 OBJECTIVES At the end of this unit you should be able to:  Give detailed account of spread of the Qādiriyyah in North West Africa  Discuss the contribution of Shaykh Ahmad al-Bakkāī al-Kuntī (d. 1504)  Relate the Spread and Socio – political role of Qādiriyyah in the Senegambia  Assess the Involvement of Murīdiyyah branch of Qādiriyyah in politics.
3.0 MAIN CONTENTS 3.1 Spread of Qādiriyyah in the Maghrib (North West Africa) In the Maghrib (North Africa) the earliest known șūfī to have contact with the Qādiriyyah was Abu Madyan Shu’ayb b. Al-Hassan (d.594/1197).
It is widely reported that the he met Shaykh ‘Abd al-Qādir al-Jilani on the plane of ‘Arafah the year of his piligrimage to the Holyland.
He was invested with the Khirqat al-barakah (vest of blessing) by Shaykh ‘Abd al-Qadir, listened to some of his teachings and sat down in front of him’ (i.e.
like to novice enduring initiation).
In fact, it has been claimed that on his arrival in the Maghrib, Shaykh Abu Madyan wasted no efforts in obtaining proselytes for the new order among the people of the territory.
Abu Madyan however, became a renowned șūfī personality that, he did not 21 escape the notice of ‘Ali b. Yusuf al-Shatanufi who included him in the list of Saints accorded his high esteem.
The view that seems to enjoy a wider recognition however, is that the Qādiriyyah was introduced into Fas by the posterity of two of ‘Abd al-Qadir’s sons, Ibrahim (d. 592/1196) in Wasit and \’Abd al-Aziz, died in Jiyal village of Sinjar (d. 602/1206).
They had migrated to Spain and shortly before the fall of Granada (897/1492), their descendants fled to Morocco.
Perhaps, to them should be traced the origin of Jilaliyyah, which has been described as a common Moroccan name for the cult of Shaykh ‘Abd al- Qādir as distinguished from the order.
The system has also been described as the application of Șūfī sm to beliefs that are certainly pre-Islamic, and the materialization of that mysticism under the form of a cult of hidden substerranean powers.
Here, the word Khalwah is used for a heap of stones where women attach rags to reeds planted between the stones and where they burn benzoin and styrax in potsheds.
Such Khalwas are said to be found in Arab villages.
The cult of ‘Abd al-Qadir is most ardently practiced by the women who come to the Khalwas are said to be found in Arab villages.
The cult of ‘Abd al-Qadir is most ardently practiced by the women who come to the Khalwah for every sort of objectives.
The men on the other hand, chiefly go to the Khalwah when they are ill.
The full geneology of the Shurafa’ Jilāla of Fez is given in Archive Maroc on the authority of Al-Durr al-Sani of Ibn al-Tayyib al-Qādirī who claimed to have used a series of authentic documents.
A Zāwiyah of Shaykh ‘Abd al- Qādir in Fas is mentioned as early as 1692-3 CE.
The most prominent Qādiriyyah personality of the late 15th century West Africa was Shaykh Ahmad al-Bakka’ī al-Kuntī (d. 1504) whose full contribution to the development of the Qādiriyyah among the Moors of the western Sahara and Muslims of the western Sudan shall be examined after the next paragraph.
In the 18th century, the Manzaliyyah group of the Qadiris emerged in Algeria and Tunisia.
Its lines derive from ‘Ali b.
‘Amar al-Sha’ib and its zawiyahs scattered all over Algerian – Tunisian territories.
‘Ammāriyyah on the other hand is a 19th century Qādiriyyah branch whose centre of activities is also Algeria and Tunisia while Bu’Aliyyah is another one with centre at Nefta where Bu’Ali’s tomb is situated.
This branch has succeeded in establishing sub-branches, also in Algeria, Tunisia and Egypt.
The Qādiriyyah has also been firmly – footed in Tripoli and Fezzan to which it has come from Tunis and earlier from Fas.
The ‘Arūssiyyah which is known as the Salamiyyah is a 19th century branch of the Qādiriyyah developed in Tripoli and founding sub-branches at Zulaytin and Sabha.
Self Assessment Exercise Give a critical account of the spread of Qādiriyyah into the North West Africa.
3.2 The Contribution of Shaykh Ahmad al-Bakkāī al-Kuntī (d. 1504) In the 15th century, Muhammad al-Kunti, the ancestor of the Kunta Arabs, migrated from Tawat in the Maghrib territory to Azawad a town near the historic city of Timbuktu 22 where his son Ahmad al-Bakkai established the Qādiriyyah as a movement after him.
The Tarīqah was therefore known as Bakkāiyyah.
It was however, Ahmad’s own son, ‘Umar al-Shaykh (d. 1553), in his turn who undertook the spread of the Tarīqah among the indigenes.
He was a follower of the celebrated Shaykh ‘Abd al-Karīm al-Maghīlī who is reputed for visiting Islamic strong holds and sending disciplines to preach Islam throughout the Sahara, Niger Area and Hausaland.
After ‘Umar al-Shaykh’s demise, the order appears to have had no active leader worthy of note until the emergence of Shaykh al-Mukhtār b. Ahmad (1729 – 1811) who was also a Kunta Arab.
During this period, the order became more widespread since the two famous Jihad leaders of the time Shakyh ‘Uthman bn.
Fūdī and Shaykh Hamad of Masina were members of the order and recommended it to the people under their jurisdiction.
Another famous Shaykh initiated into the Qādiriyyah order by Shaykh Mukhtār was Shaykh Sīdī al-Kabir (1780 – 1869) whose grandson Sīdī Baba (1869 – 1924), from his Zawiyah at Bu Tilimat in the Trarza region gained great influence over Moorish tribe in Mauritania and the Sudan especially the Wolof traders in Senegal.
This branch of his is sometimes known as Tarīqah Sīdiyyah.. Another branch formed by a contemporary of Shaykh Sīdī al-Kabir, Muhammad al-Fādil (1780 – 1869) appears to have developed into a new order, the Fādiliyyah.
He is said to have adapted his teachings to the needs of his people and to have introduced certain modifications to the rites and practices of his own branch of the Qādiriyyah.
His son, Sa’d Bu (1850 – 1917) and Sīdī Mau’l-‘Aynayn were two influential personalities of this Fādiliyyah branch of the Qādiriyyah.
From Muhammad al-Fadili’s teacher, Muhammad al-Aghdaf (d. 1860) another tribal branch has been derived which has been described as characterized by extravagant dhikr in the circle of Islam in Mauritanian.
The actual founder of this branch was his pupil Ahmad b.
‘Umar known as Bu Ghifārah (d. 1888), but it is known as Ghudfiyyah after his master.
Self Assessment Exercise Discuss the contribution of Shaykh Ahmad al-Bakkāī al-Kuntī (d. 1504) to the spread of Qādiriyyah in West Africa.
3.3 The Spread and Socio – political role of Qādiriyyah in the Senegambia In the South of Senegambia, Imam Ahmad Samadu (b.
1846), a Mandingo popularly known as Samuri, collected a force of about 500 brave and valiant men for a Jihād against the Wasulu tribes.
Emerging victorious and reaching the height of his power in 1885, he founded an empire on the Upper Basin of the Niger and its tributaries where Qādiriyyah marabouts were left with the task of spreading Islamic culture and civilization and winning more adherents to the Qādiriyyah.
The Imam came into conflict with the French colonial authorities who arrested him around the year 1898.
He died in 1900.10 Also, a famous Qadiri saint in the Senegal was Ahmad b. Muhammad b. Habib Allah (d.1923) popularly known as Ahmad Bamba.
His Murīdiyyah branch of the Qādiriyyah derived from Shaykh Sīdī al-Kabir.
His order spread rapidly since 1886 and has once been regarded as the most powerful religious force in Senegal.
Trimingham claims that Murīdiyyah membership increased from 20,000 adherents in 1912 to over 350,000 in 1965.
23 The rites and practices of the branch was primarily Qādiriyyah.
When Ahmad Bamba died, his sons on after the other succeeded him.
Ahmad Mustapha Mbake (d. 1945) and Fāđil Mbake (d. 1987) respectively.
Thus the expansion of the order continued up to this moment.
The Mouridiyyah of Ahamd Bamba had deeply influenced social structure and relationship between an and land agriculture had been sanctified to the service of God and the Shaykh and a system of collective farming has been developed.
Under the inspiration of Ahmad Bamba an Islamic Șūfī order has been given an impetus for the exploitation of the unculyivated land, the greater productivity of land owned by member and price control of products.
Upon joining the Ţarīqah of Ahmad Bamba, the new aspirant agrees to surrender himself body and soul to the Shaykh.
If he possesses anything, it is for the service of the community.
If landless he is allotted a plot provided with the seed and loaned implements and animals.
Shaykh Ahmad Bamba’s deputies (khalifahs) take control of the harvest which being a cash crop, especially groundnuts, is assured a more remuneration sale than would be obtained by an isolated cultivator.
The system also embraces craftsmen and traders; revenue is distributed among members either in cash or goods.
It is therefore a system of collective security in which the Shaykh as a trustee of the land and controller of capitals and labour is responsible for the welfare of the affiliated mmbers.
The great festival of Islam among the followers of Ahmad Bamba are reported to be grand occasions for joy and spiritual development.
The mosque of Toubah, the spiritual centre situated on the spot where Ahmad Bamba was inspired is one of the largest in West Africa.
When Ahmad Bamba died the expansion of Murīdiyyah was not arrested by his death.
He was succeeded in the leadership of the Order by his son, Ahmad Mustafa, who died in 1954 and Falilu Mbake who was bornin 1887.
Self Assessment Exercise Discuss the spread and socio-religious roles of the Muridiyyah branch of the Qādiriyyah in the Senegambia.
3.4 Involvement of Murīdiyyah in Politics The emergence of Ahmad Bamba, the founder of the Murīdiyyah Branch of the Qādiriyyah coincided with the French administration in Senegal.
As a Leader of an order which has a considerably large followership, he was subjectedto the French Colonial Masters in Senegal who feared that he might wage a Jihad.
The ruler of the city of Baol attempted to allay the fears of the colonialists on behalf of the Muridiyyah leaders; and Shaykh Ahmad Bamba himself visited the French Governor at Sait Louis in 1891 to declare his loyalty and to give the names of his compromising disciples.
Yet he remained under much suspicion of the colonialists.
His followers were forcibly dispersed by the French Military detachment in that year.
But his followers soon returned to him at his new place Daru ‘Salam.
In the same year, warriors and followers of the ruler of Jolof Al-Bur Ndiaye with his followers who were dismissed by the French in 1890 added to the number of the disciples of Ahmad Bamba.
24 The French authorities became more concerned when they learnt about this development.
In 1895 when they took direct control of Baol the district where Ahmad Bamba’s place of domicile was situated they thought it prudent to move to the state of Jollof which still enjoyed some degree of autonomy under French control.
Ahmad Bamba was taken a prisoner by French Detarchment that year (1895) and subsequently sentenced with samba Laobe the ruler of Jollof to indefinite exile in Gabon.
The charges against him were not clearly stated and it was admitted that no clear instance of preaching a holy war could be held against him.
But it was evidenced that the administration was perturbed by the fact that they had a potentially warlike following.
This was considered a threat on their own authority.
The Murīdiyyah tradition relates that when arrested Ahmad Bamba told his followers not to lament.
He claimed that it was God who was sending him to exile so that he would be free from distractions of this world to enable him concentrate on meditation and religious studies.
The exile in Gabon which was to last seven years gave a new dimension to Ahmad Bamba’s prestige.
During the first four years the followers of Ahmad Bamba had no contact with their leader.
At this moment they believed him to have endured extra- ordinary trials at the hands of the French authorities from which he only emerged by miraculous means.
He was said to have been imprisoned in a cell with a hungary lion, cast into a furnace, buried for seven days in a deep well, kept on island inhabited by snakes and devils.
All these he survived.
One of the popular legend concerning the voyage to Gabon was when the ship captain was said to have refused him permission to pray.
The founder jumped overboard, laid his mat on the ocean and said his prayer in peace before the astonished crew.
He wrote about this exile in his own verses describing some of the more inhuman discomfort he endured.
Many of his religious verses appeared to have been composed at this time.
While Ahmad Bamba was in exile, his following in Senegal continued to grow.
New disciples came to declare their submission to his close relatives and associates.
Meanwhile, one of the Ahmad Bamba’s brothers Muhammad Shehu acted as interim leader of the Mouridiyyah.
His principal associates applied themselves to securing his pardon from the French administration.
A stream of letters to the French Government proved unavailing.
The pardon was however granted eventually after the intervention of the newly elected deputy of Senegal, Francois Carpon in 1902.
Carpøn had received financial and electoral support from some of Ahmad Bamba’s brothers and chief disciples in the elections of 1902.
He returned this support by securing a pardon within a year.
Ahmad Bamba’s return to Senegal was of course greeted with as a miraculous victory by his followers.
They went to him in procession to declare their solidarity.
The anxiety of the Government began to grow again as Senegales chiefs were writing to complain of subverted authority.
Parents wrote to sy that their sons had abandoned them to serve Ahmad Bamba.Traders wrote to complain that their clients were spending all their money on him.
In view of these complaints and of a rumour that Ahmad was collecting weapons for a holy war, the administration decided to send him on exile again this time to the 25 Zawiyah of Shaykh Sīdī Baba in Mauritania where it was proved that the latter’s submissiveness to French authority will have some impact on him.
The Mauritania exile came to an end in 1907 when the French decide to lift the ban imposed upon him once again at the intervention of Carpot.
Ahmad Bamba was allowed to return to Senegal, this time to the remote village of Kayon in the district of Jollof where he was kept unde administrative surveillance.
Here again the followers came in stream but the administration admitted only those with certificate of tax payment to see the Shaykh.
The year 1912 in which Ahmed was authoricsed by the Administration to return to the district of Baol ws a turning point in the history of the Mouridiyyah.
It marked the beginning of a good relationship with the colonial Administration and further expansion of the brotherhood.
The decision to allow the Shaykh back to Baol was taken yet again under political pressure from the Deputy of Senegal.
But the colonial administration by that magnanimous gesture might facilitate military recruitment drive in Ahmad Bamba’s area of influence.
The decision implies realization of the fact that any further attempt to curtail expansion of the Brotherhood would prove futile.
The policy proved succcessful during the recruitment drives for the first world-war when the Mouridiyyah leders allowed a considerably large number of their followers to be recruited in !918.
Ahmad Bamba received the Croass of Legion of Hounour in recognission of his services in this connection.
Ahmad Bamba lived quietly until his death in 1927 in Dioubal writing religious verses, studying and receiving religious visitors.
Self Assessment Exercise Narrate the involvement of Murīdiyyah branch of the Qādiriyyah in politics.
4.0 CONCLUSION Abu Madyan Shu’ayb b. Al-Hassan (d.594/1197) was the first known Șūfī acclaimed to have introduced and spread the Qadiriyyah in the Maghrib (the extreme Western territory of Islam.
That the Qādiriyyah was introduced into Fas by the posterity of two of ‘Abd al-Qādir Jilānī’s sons, Ibrahim (d. 592/1196) and ‘Abd al-Azīz, (d. 602/1206).
Has become another popular opinion regarding the introduction of Qadiriyyah in the Maghrib region.
They migrated to Spain and shortly before the fall of Granada (897/1492), their descendants fled to Morocco.
The Kunta Arabs led by Shaykh Muhammad al-Kunti, and Shaykh ‘Abd al-Karīm al- Maghīlī contributed to the wide-spread of the Taqriqah in West Africa in the 15th century.
Shakyh ‘Uthman bn.
Fūdī and Shaykh Hamad of Masina were members of the order and recommended it to the people under their jurisdiction.
The Mouridiyyah branch of the Qadiriyyah played significant socio-political role in the Senegambia.
26 5.0 SUMMARY This Unit gives a brief account f emergence of Qādiriyyah order and its spread to West Africa through the Maghrib region.
Then it traces the Spread of the Order to the West African teritaries of Senegal and Gambia.
It focuses on the religious, social and political roles of the Mouridiyyah as a branch of the Qādiriyyah in the region.
Prominent Qādirīs and their roles are briefly presented.
Such Qādiriyyah personages include Shaykh Abu Madyan Shuayb, Shaykh Mukhtār al-Kuntī, Shaykh Ahmad Banba etc.
etc.. 6.0 TUTOR – MARKED ASSIGNMENT Assess the factors responsible for the popularity of ‘Abd al-Qādir al-Jilānī.
Highlight the role played by each of the prominent Qādiriyyah Shaykhs in the propagation of the Order in West Africa.
7.0 REFERENCES/FURTHER READING.
Margoliouth, D.S.(1960).
Articless: ‘Kadiriyyah’’ in Encyclopaedia of Islam.
O’Brien, D. B.
(1971).
The Mourides of Senegal, Oxford.
Trimingham, J. S. (1971).
The Şūfī Orders in Islam, Oxford, London.
Trimingham, J. S. (1972).
Islam in West Africa, London.
Martins, B. G. (1976).
The Muslim Brotherhoods of the Nineteenth Century Africa.
Cambridge.
27 UNIT 4: THE QĀDIRIYYAH IN BORNU, THE HAUSALAND AND SOKOTO CONTENTS 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objectives 3.0 Main Contents 3.1 The Position of Sufism in Bornu before the Sokoto Jihad: 3.2 The Qādiriyyah in the Hausaland and the Sokoto Caliphate 3.3 The Twentieth Century Qādiryyah in Nigeria 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutor – Marked Assignment 7.0 References and Furher Reading 1.0 INTRODUCTION Unit 3 gives a brief account f emergence of Qādiriyyah order and its spread to the North-West African Maghrib region, the Western Sahara, and the Senegambia.
It focused on the roles played by prominent Qadiriyyah personages, the religious, social and political roles of the Mouridiyyah as a branch of the Qādiriyyah in the region.
This Unit traces the position of șūfī sm in Nigeria through the ages with particular references to the Qadiriyyah.
2.0 OBJECTIVES At the end of this Unit you should be able to  Describe the position of Șūfī sm in Bornu before the Sokoto Jihad  Provide an overview of the Qādiriyyah in the Hausaland during the Sokoto Caliphate.
 Summarize the place of the Qādiriyyah in our contemporary Nigeria.
3.0 MAIN CONTENTS 3.1 The Position of Șūfī sm in Bornu from 200/800 A.H. to 1200/1860 In the oral tradition of the Bornu Muslims, a notion suggests that the Qādiriyyah was introduced into the area by the Arab immigrants from Yemen.
This may be an extension of the tendency towards tracing their Origin to Yemen which has become fashionable among the pro-Arab Muslim historians of that area.
On the other hand, the notion may be based on the statement that the religion of Islam was first introduced into the Bornuland by a descendant of the Ummayads called al-Hādi al-‘Uthmānī.
On the other hand, in a note sent to the Secretary of State for the colonies in 1953, the then Governor of the Northern Region claims that the Qādiriyyah reached what was then known as the Bornu Province in the twelfth or the thirteenth century by the caravan 28 routes which crossed the Sahara from the Nile to Lake Chad.
This Governor’s view seems to have considered Qādiriyyah synonymous to Islam.
At Ngazaragama which was established by Mai ‘Ali (Ghazi) Ibn Dunama (1476 – 1503) were reported to be many God fearing mallams and many blameless nobles and many learned Șūfī s and Saints of the Ţarīqah.
The Emir Alis learning itself did not fall short of the wisdom of the learned Imams and the pious God-fearing saints.
Also about 1600 – 1660, at a place called Kulumbardu in Bornu, about fifty miles west of Mir, there sprang up a large zāwiyah, which acquired great celebrity its inhabitants being noted for their piety and learning.
The first among the holy men of Bornu and during the period for whom we have scanty information is Shaykh Abu al-Makarim Muhmmad al-Bakri (c. 1000/1600).
Shaykh ‘Umar Waldidah and Shaykh Hasan ibn al-Jarmi were two other saints of Bornu.
The two are reported to have lived in Kulumbardi and have been preachers and propagandists of Șūfī sm in the area thus acquiring a large following.
Reports of their activities were during the reigns of Mai ‘Huma b. Qasam (1032 – 1062/1626 – 1645).
Shaykh Waldidah died in Baghirmi while Shaykh Waldidah travelled to Aghades and Timbuktu.
Before his death, it is claimed, he prophesied the advent of a Saint who would revive religion, acquire large following and wage a Jihad in the area.
Two other holy men were Muhammad al-Wali b. Shaykh Sulayman and Abubakr al- Barikum.
The former has been described as an erudite, ascetic and prolific writer.
Some of his surviving works include Al-manhal fi ‘ilm al-tawhid, a verse—work in which he condemns his contemporaries who were deserting the study of Qur’ān, Hadīth and Fiqh taking keen interest in the cabalistic sciences such as astronomy, letter symbolism, and astrology.
The latter, known as a Shaykh Tahir b. Ibrahim al—Fulati, inhabited Dhati `l- Baqar.
He too acquired reputation as a teacher, pious learned man and author of many books in prose and poetry and predicted the advent of a Jihadist in the Sudanese land.
The foregoing accounts of those holymen do not provide us the required insight into their mystical inclination so as to enable us determine the Ţarīqahs to which they were affiliated.
The travel of some of them in Egypt, Timbuktu and Western Sahara in search of knowledge or during their pilgrimage to Mecca and the proximity of their area of activities to the Nilotic Sudan where the impact of the Qādiriyyah was already being felt should have exposed them to the order.
However, the existence of a Zāwiyah and a large number of Șūfī s and pious learned men at Ngazaramu as established earlier on, is an evidence of the fact that the people of the area were conversant with mystical practices.
Self Assessment Exercise Describe the position of Șūfī sm in Bornu before the Sokoto Jihad.
3.2 The Qādiriyyah in the Hausaland and the Sokoto Caliphate Meanwhile, we have now known through reliable sources that ‘Abd al-Karīm al-Maghīli, the Algerian Arab Tilmisan who visited Hausland during the reign of Emir Muhammad 29 Runfa around 868 - 905/1463 – 1499 was a qādiri.
He was responsible for the spread of the Qādiriyyah in West Africa.
He initiated ‘Umar al-Shaykh b. Ahmad al-Bakkā’ī of the Kunta Arabs 865 – 959/1460 – 1553 who in turn contributed immensely to the spread of the order in the area by sending disciples to preach it.
It is also reported that he took a wife there and left behind him three children namely Ahmad, Sīdī Abyađ and ‘Isa Fari to whom he bequeathed his rosary.
The rapid spread of the Qādiriyyah and its contribution to the religious, literary, social and political fields in the Hausa- land was accomplished with the emergence of Shaykh ‘Uthmān bn Fūdī as a Jihadist, a religious revivalist and indisputably the greatest Qādirī in the history of Hausaland.
Among ‘Uthmān bn Fudi’s relations, noteworthy Qādirīs included Abdullah, his brother, Muhammad Bello and Muhammad Thambo, his two sons; ‘Aishah, one of his wives and his daughter Asmā who was an indefatigable composer of Arabic poems and writer on religious themes.
They all distinguished themselves not only as staunch Qādirīs but also as its exponents.
Evidence of their Qādiriyyah affiliation abounds in their many writings and utterances, which are still largely in manuscripts.
General șūfī themes and the particular way of the Qādiriyyah both in prose and in poetry are treated in such works.
Sources of the works as provided by them are mainly the Holy Qur’ān, the Hadith and works of the great renowned Şūfī intellectuals such as al-Muhasibi, al-Ghazali, al-Jilānī and several others.
Other personages who held key posts in the Sokoto Sultanate both male and female were also found to be outstanding Qādirīs.
Among them were emirs, viziers, judges, soldiers and disciples.
The role of the Jihad flag-bearers can not be overemphasized in this connection.
Each of them was invested with turban in accordance with ‘Uthmān b. Fūdī’s interpretation of khirqah (şūfī gown) and were mostly his disciples who belonged to the Qādiriyyah fold.
Flag bearers such as ‘ Umar Dalaji of Kano, Lamido of Adamawa and ‘Alimi of Ilorin were to become the first known Qādiriyyah emirs of their respective domains.
In fact, the 19th century witnessed the consolidation of the Qādiriyyah in the Hausaland.
The Order acquired the status of official Ţarīqah in the Sultanate; the various communities under Sokoto jurisdiction through successive generations considered themselves brethren and were called and addressed Jamā‘ah Qādirāwā until they were dis-integrated as a result of the British conquest by the end of the century.
Self Assessment Exercise Provide an overview of the Qādiriyyah in the Hausaland during the Sokoto Caliphate.
30 3.3 The Twentieth Century Qādiryyah in Nigeria A remarkable event in the history of Qādiriyyah in Nigeria was the arrival of Shaykh Sa’d ibn.
Ahmad, in Kano during the reign of Emir Aliyyu 1894-1903.
He was an Arab from Ghadamis township in the Western Sahara.
He introduced a new line of Qādiriyyah authority.
He founded the Hala-Halla mosque in Jinga ward of Kano, pioneered the practice of group wazīfah (daily office of prayer formulae recitation) and use of bandiri, a basin- shaped drum.
Since 1935 or thereabout, followers of the various branches of the Qādiriyyah in Kano embarked upon a vigorous programme of reform and propagation under the leadership of Shaykh Nasiru Kabara, who started his early life as an Islamic pupil.
His period of novitiate as a young Qadiri, his success in establishing direct contact with the primary sources of authority in the Qādiriyyah in Baghdad and other parts of Arabia, led to his subsequent emergence as the defender, the exponent, national and recognized continental leader of the Qādiriyyah in Nigeria.
On the introduction of the Qādiriyyah into the Yoruba speaking area of Southern Nigeria comprising – Oyo, Ondo, Ogun, Lagos and most parts of Kwara states, it is established that Shaykh Salihu Fulani (d.1831) was the first known Qādirī in the area not only by virtue of his position as the flag bearer of the Sokoto Jihad but also by the fact that abundant records lend credence to his membership of the brotherhood.
Before him we know only of a few ascetics.
A number of other migrant Muslim clerics from the Hausaland such as Abubakr Buba Fulani (d.1850), Ibrahim Hausa, ‘Abdullah Dindī, an indirect student of ‘Abdullah bn Fūdī, from Katsina and Mahmud Beygi Fulani (d. 1913) including Salih Fulani’s sons were also known to have joined him to form the nucleus of the Qādiriyyah impact in this area.
Some of them were renowned preachers, teachers and Qādiriyyah preceptors.
Some of their disciples later became distinguished as Muslim leaders whose names are now being celebrated as great Qadiris .
These include Bukhari Baba Agba, Khalil Gbodofun, Alufa Dogo and Muhammad bn Abdu `l-Qadir popularly known as Taju `l-Adab (d. 1922).
The career of Ahmad Rufai Nda Salati (1896-1966) as a Qādiriyyah propagandist in the Yorubaland has not been paralleled by any other person.
Although oral tradition claims the existence of Qādiriyyah adherents in Ibadan, Ijebu-Ode, Badagry, Osogbo, Abeokuta, and Lagos, he was the first to introduce group devotion and bandiri sessions as a deputy of Shaykh Nasiru Kabara, and above all, the greatest of its propagandists in the area.
Through his activities Qādiriyyah became consolidated not only in the Yorubaland but also in neighbouring states like Togo.
Shaykh Najmu `l-Din of Ibadan (d. ), and Shaykh ‘Abd al-Aziz Olohungbo of 31 Abeokuta (d. ) were staunch companions of Nda Salati.
They all contributed immensely in consolidating the movement in the region and beyond.
Self Assessment Exercise Summarize the place of the Qādiryyah in our contemporary Nigeria.
4.0 CONCLUSION Oral tradition claims that Qādiriyyah was introduced in Bornu by Arab immigrants from Yemen.
The Colonial governor reported advent of Qādiriyyah in Bornu between the twelveth and thirteenth centuries.
Evidence of existence of șūfī saints at Ngazargamu 1476 – 1503 and a large zāwiyah at Kulumbarde 1600 -1660 were recorded respectively.
Many holymen were established to be propagandists of șūfī sm in the Bornuland around 1000/1600.
The earliest known Shaykh known to be responsible for the wide spread of the Qādiriyyah in West Africa around 1460/1500 was ‘Abdu`l-Karīm al-Maghīlī.
The wider spread of the Qādiriyyah and its contribution to the religious, literary, social and political fields in the Hausa- land were accomplished during the Sokoto Caliphate.
The Order assumed official status during the period.
There has been significant reform and remarkable events in the order since the twentieth centuy till date.
5.0.
SUMMARY This Unit traces the advent and spread of the Qādiriyyah Şūfī Order in Nigeria.
It opens with an account of the position of Șūfī sm in Bornu from 200/800 A.H. to 1200/1860.
Thereafter, an overview of the Qādiriyyah in the Hausaland and the Sokoto Caliphate is presented.
The third section discusses the twentieth century Qādiryyah in Nigeria briefly.
6.0 TUTOR MARKED ASSIGNMENT 1.
Give a critical account of tasawwuf in Bornu 1200 – 1860.
2.
Discuss the place of Qādiriyyah in the Sokoto Caliphate.
3.
‘Twentieth century is a turning point in the history of Qadiriyyah in Nigeria’.
Elaborate on this statement.
7.0 REFERENCES AND FURTHER READING Muhammad Bello (d.1836) Infāqu `l-Maysūr Shaykh Ibrahim Salih Al-Islam fi Imbraturiyyah Kanem Bornu Al-Ilūrī, Adam Abdullah: al-Islām fī Nījīriyah wa Jihād Uthmān bn Fūdī.
Paden, J.N (1973) Religion and political culture in Kano, London.
Ahmed, A. F. (1986) The Qādiriyyah Șūfī Order and its Impact in Nigeria, PhD Thesis, University of Ibadan.
Martins, B. G. (1976).
The Muslim Brotherhoods of the Nineteenth Century Africa.
Cambridge.
32 UNIT 5: ORGANIZATIONAL SET UP, INITIATION, DOCTRINES AND RITES CONTENTS 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objective 3.0 Main Contents 3.1 The Zāwiyah and Organizational Set-Up of the Ṭarīqah 3.2 Initiation Ceremony 3.3 Doctrine and Rites 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutor – Marked Assignment 7.0 References/Further Reading 1.0 INTRODUCTION In the foregoing Units you have been acquainted with a brief life history and legacies of Shaykh Abdu ‘l-Qādir al-Jilānī who was instrumental to the foundation of the Qādiriyyah Order in Baghdad.
How the order spread to the North West and from there to the West African territories were also presented to you.
A focus on the spread of the Order in Nigeria at different times and climes was also made in one of the Units.
This Unit presents you new other significant matters pertaining to Șūfī Orders in general and the Qadiriyyah in particular.
Welcome!
2.0 OBJECTIVES At the end of this Unit you should be able to:  Discuss the concept of zāwiyah and the organizational set up of the șufī Orders.
 Describe the initiation ceremony of the Tarīqahs.
 Enumerate the ethical teachings usually imparted to the novice.
 Relate the rites / ritual practices of the Qādiriyyah in West Africa.
3.0 MAIN CONTENTS 3.1 Organizational Set - Up The Qādiriyyah in Nigeria is made up of circle of murids (aspirants) and adepts surrounding a master.
According to Shaykh Abdu `l-Qadir, a murīd is he whose heart inclines towards seeking the Truth and abandonment of all other than Him.
This is the beginning of a sālik, i. e.traveller in the Way (Ţarīqah), Shaykh Abdu `l-Qādir continues, and the name of the first station of an aspirant.
The basis of the name according to him is the Q.6:52 which contains in part yad‘una rabbahum bi`l-ghuduwwi wa`l-așāl yuriduna wajhahu, i. e. calling their Lord morning and evening seeking him.
The location of the guiding master is usually his house, or mosque.
Despite its limited scale due to the fact that it is located in the city, Shaykh Nasiru Kabara’s center in Kano can be 33 considered a standard zāwiyah (center).
It consists of a big Central mosque, large hall for visitors, chambers for retreats and rooms wherein lived the Shaykh and other members of his family, and even housing for relatives and travelers.
Nda Salati’s center at Mushin in Lagos is another good example of a zāwiyah center.These centers are usually frequented by the murids for training and devotional exercises.
It also serves as school where the master or an adept among his disciples teaches elementary or advanced Islamic Religious Knowledge.
The tomb of Nda Salati at the Qādiriyyah cenre in Ilorin is a focal point for the Qādiriyyah in Yorubaland and even Nigeria at large.
; and a center of veneration to which visitations (ziyārah) are made.
The authority of the keeper of Abdu `l-Qādir’s tomb in Baghdad is particularly recognized by the keeper of Kabara’scentre in Kano.
At the head of each center is the Shaykh; and succession is spiritual and the Shaykh is not necessarily a descendant of the founder.
The head nominates his successor from among the members and if he fails to do this before his death election is held by the ikhwān (brethren), and approval is sought from the main branch which has never been turned down.
The succession to the leadership of Qādiriyyah continued among the members of the family of Shaykh ‘Abd al-Qādir al-Jilānī until the present day with a brief interruption during the raid of Baghdad by the Monghols in 636/1258.
Under the Shaykh are a number of khalifahs and muqaddams, appointed directly to take charge of branches.
Each is given a license (ijāzah) stating what he is authorized to undertake.
Heads of small local centers retain the power of initiation in their own hands but when an Order expands khalifahs are authorized to confer it.
One may be nominated the wakīl of the khalifah or the naqīb who will be responsible for administration and finance.
He sends out delegation to collect dues or levies.
He also spearheads organization of mawlid and other celebrations.
Immediately under the Shaykh is a nāib and often the naqibs are guardians of ħađrah and director of music sessions.
Titles however do not necessarily make clear actual positions.
Muqaddam in one center is equivalent to khalīfah elsewhere.
Subordinate leaders often train aspirants and organize local dhikr gatherings.
The position of many Muqaddams or Khalifahs is often maintained in the same family.
Self Assessment Exercise Discuss the concept of zāwiyah and the organizational set up of the șufī Orders.
3.2 Initiation and Doctrines Any individual could be admitted as an affiliated member.
He is admitted at a pledge-taking ceremony, which includes the oaths of allegiance to the founder and his living khalīfah associated with assent to a formula of promises.
He receives little șūfī training mainly on how to take part in rituals and receives permission to recite one or more hizbs.
Members carry on their normal occupations and mode of life, but are subject to the guidance and authority of the Shaykh and his Khalīfah and take part in the collective assemblies.
It is through initiation in 34 the real sense of it taken by an aspirant that he enters into this spiritual world in such a way that silsilah is guaranteed.
The points, ethics and doctrines usually recited at the initiation ceremony of the Qādiriyyah and other șūfī orders in genral are the following: i.
A member must be an adult Muslim.
ii He must be initiated by a Muqaddam or khalifah who has competence and authorities.
iii.
He must be constant in the recitation of the Glorious Qur’an, standing, sitting day and night in the correct spirit.
iv.
He must be visiting the Zawiyyāh regularly and take cognizance of others rights while there.
v. He must have the fear of Allah (Taqwā) and obey His injunctions (Ṭā‘ah) vi.
He must cultivate the attribute of șabr (patience).
vii.
He is expected not to harm others and to pardon when harmed.
viii.
He must be generous.
ix.
He must refrain from all indecency in words and deeds such as rumour- mongering, lying, back-biting and slandering.
x.
He must be in state of ritual purity always and whenever deemed necessary.
xi.
He is expected to be reciting the formula of repentance, Istigfaru always.
xii.
He is also expected to be constantly reciting șalāt ‘alā `n-Nabiyy (asking for blessing and benediction on the Prophet (SAW).
Self Assessment Exercise How is a murīd (aspirant/ novice) initiated into a Ţarīqah.
Enumerate the ethical teachings usually imparted to the murīd at the initiation stage.
Rites It is unlikely that any rigid system of dhikr, wīrd or hizb was initiated by Shaykh ‘Abdu `l-Qādir al-Jilānī.
However, the body of prayers rules and doctrines which have his authority can be found in some of the Qādiriyyah books, such as al-Ghunyyah, al- Fuyūđāt and some others.
Five different kinds of the wirds of the Qādiriyyah have been identified as wide-spread among the Muslims in Nigeria; the Ahl al-Bayt, the Kuntiyyah, the Manzaliyyah, the Uthmaniyyah and the Sammāniyyah.
Each of these consists of two categories of devotional duties called lāzim (compulsory recitation) and wazīfah (the daily duty).
The observance of wīrd, dhīkr of the Qādiriyyah according to Muhammad Bello consists of recitation of (i) Hasbuna Allah (ii) Istigfar (iii) La ilaha illa allah (iv) Salatul Ala-Nabiy.
Participation in the mī‘ād which is the term for the Friday evening meeting of the brethren is also desireable from members.
It can however take place any day of the week.
It always begins after ’Asr prayer and lasts till sunset.
Observance the underlisted six special nights are also desireable: i. Nisf Al-Shabān, the night of 14th day of Shabān 35 ii.
Laylāt Al-Qadīr, the night of power, the 27th day of Ramadān iii.
Laylāt Al-’Arafāh, the 9th day of the month of Dhul Al-Hijjah iv.
Laylat al-Ashurā, the 9th day of Muhāram v. Mawlid Al-Nabiyy, the 11th day of Rabi’ul-Awal vi.
Laylat Al-’Isra, the 27th day of Rajab Other recommended devotional exercises to be performed for special purposes such as Şalātu `l-Hājjah (Prayer for special request) and Şalātu `l-Istikhārah (Prayer for inspiration) are also found emphasized for members of theQādiriyyah.
These wirds and hizbs are significant pillars of the Qādiriyyah and the distinctive worships of its adherents – ritual and free prayers being aspects of Muslims spiritual life shared by mystics and non-mystics alike.
A summary of the merits claimed for the wirds as contained in the Qādiriyyah manuals and which have acquired a status of doctrinal beliefs are: (i) that the divine mercy will shower upon a person who supplicates with them.
(ii) that Shaykh ‘Abdu `l-Qādir will be present to rescue any of their adherents who falls in trouble in any of his mundane affairs; (iii) that the Shaykh will be present when the adherent will confront terrors of the Last Things at death bed, during interrogation in the Grave by the Angels Munkar and Nakir andother eschatological ordeals.
On the other hand, the merits presuppose that ‘Abdu `l-Qādir still performs certain functions after his death, as he was wont during his life-time (tașarruf).
These functions which belongs to the sphere of the extraordinary powers with which the Shaykh was endowed include his ability to practice burūz “exteriorization.” which means he could appear at different places at the same time, and tayy al-makān, which implies he was endowed with the faculty of being beyond spatial restriction.
Allusion to these phenomena abounds in the Qādiriyyah hagiography and it is not uncommon to see Qādirīs invoking their Shaykh to come to their aid.
Meanwhile, the climax of the devotional rites of the Qādirīs in Nigeria is their occasional celebrations, the Babbandere, which takes place during any important occasion in the life of a prominent member of the Order.
Members converge from various centers to keep a night vigil beating the Bandiri - drum and chanting various hymns cherished in the Order in addition to normal recitation of the wirds and hizbs.
The Babandere during mawlid at Kano, Ilorin and Abeokuta and during the beginning of new Hijrah year in Ibadan is sometimes brought to an end by a procession round the towns.
What remains to be pointed out at this juncture is that the Babandere has constituted a major factor responsible for fetching for the Qādiriyyah those who love the emotional kind of worship which the Islamic ritual devotions do not allow.
Thus the Qādiriyyah becomes the first Islamic association to attract Muslim youths through music which has now become a wide-spread phenomenon among the muslims of theYorubaland.
Before departing this examination of the Qādiriyyah rites and doctrines we must remark that the existence of multiple dhikrs and wirds in the Order and lack of rules and regulations spelt out in clear terms were perhaps some of the factors responsible for the 36 quick displacement of the Order which was an official Ţarīqah for a whole century in the Hausaland by the rival Tijāniyyah.
Self Assessment Exercise 1.
Assess some of the doctrines of Qādiriyyah.
2.
Discuss the occasional ceremonies of the Qādiriyyah 5.0 CONCLUSION The basis of the term murid (aspirant is Q.6:52.
Shaykh Nasiru Kabara’s center in Kano consists of necessary compartments expected of a standard zāwiyah (șūfī center).
Succession to the leadership of Qādiriyyah continued among the members of the family of Shaykh ‘Abd al-Qādir al-Jilānī with brief interruptions e.g.
during the raid of Baghdad by the Monghols in 636/1258.
At the head of each center is the Shaykh an institution which is supposed to be spiritual and not hereditary.
Khalīfah, Muqaddam, Naqīb, Nāib and Wakīl are other titles in the organizational structure of the Tariqahs in general.
They serve the brotherhood in various capacities.
Affiliation takes place through initiationof an aspirant which integrates him into this spiritual world in such a way that silsilah is guaranteed.
Some of the ethics and doctrines of the Order are usually recited at the intiation ceremony.
Recitation of dhikr, wird and hizb are some of the essential rites of the Orders while participation in the mī‘āds assemblies, hadrah and mawāsim (nights of six special occasions) are believed to attract high rewards and meritorious.
The Bandiri usually accompanies the rituals of the Qādiriyyah.
5.0.
SUMMARY This Unit presents a general survey of the organizational structure of the Şūfī Orders.
It describes the method of affiliation into a șūfī Order and enumerates ethics to be observed and doctrines usually imparted to aspirants during initiation ceremony.
The Unit also discusses the șūfī rites in general and the Qādiriyyah doctrines and practices in particular.
6.0 TUTOR MARKED ASSIGNMENT Discuss the establishment of a șūfī Order and its Organizational structure.
Elaborate on the ritual practices of the Qadiriyyah.
Give a critical analysis of the various Qadiriyyah doctrines.
7.0 REFERENCES AND FURTHER READING Muhammad Bello (d.1836) Infāqu `l-Maysūr Al-Fuyudat Trimingham J. S. The Șūfī Orders in Islam Ahmed, A. F. (1986) The Qadiriyyah Șūfī Order and Its Impact I Nigeria, PhD Thesis, University of Ibadan.
37 UNIT 6: POLITICAL, SOCIAL AND RELIGIOUS ROLES OF THE QĀDIRIYYAH IN NIGERIA CONTENTS 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objectives 3.0 Main contents 3.1.
The socio-politico roles of Qādiriyyah in Nigeria 3.2 The religious roles of Qādiriyyah in Nigeria 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutor marked assignment 7.0 Reference and further reading 1.0 Introduction The Qādiriyyah order had played prominent roles in the history and development of Islam in Nigeria.
The Ṭarīqah has been involved in the propagation of Islam to the nooks and crannies of the country particularly in the Northern areas.
In Unit 5, you learnt about the initiation ceremony, organizational set-up, doctrines, rites and ritual practices of the Qādiriyyahh in most West African regions while in this unit we shall discuss the socio- politico and religious roles of Order.
2.0 Objectives At the end of this unit, you should be able to:  explain the socio-politico roles of Qādiriyyahh in Nigeria.
 mention some of their contributions in the field of education  discuss the religious events of the Qādiriyyahh in Nigeria 3.0 MAIN CONTENT 1.1.
The socio-politico roles of Qādiriyyah in Nigeria 3.1 Political Role We regard some of the achievements of the Jihad led by Shaykh cUthmān bn.
Fūdī as one of the political impacts of the Qādiriyyah in Nigeria because the loyalty of the Shaykh to the Order played a significant role in its outbreak and successful execution.
The highlight of these political achievements is the unification of various Fulani groups for the first time in the Hausaland and the establishment of Fulani control over the Hausa states which culminated in the foundation of the various emirates which still exist in most of the then Northern States of Nigeria.
The efforts of Shaykh cUthmān bn.
Fūdī, ‘Abdullah and Bello, his brother and son respectively, in setting standards of state administration and political theories through their writings which provided much of the 38 theoretical frame-work of Government throughout the nineteenth Century Sokoto Sultanate was also a noteworthy impact of the Qādirīs in this regard.
The eclipse of the Sultanate was brought about by the British interference in the internal affairs of the area from the end of the nineteenth century till independence in 1960.
When prospects of elections resulted in the formation of political parties in the 1950s, members of the Qādiriyyah were again involved in the politics of Northern Nigeria.
Reports show that leaders of political parties appealed to the members of the Order to cast votes in favour of their parties.
The Northern Peoples Congress (N.P.C.)
under the leadership of Ahmadu Bello, the Sardauna of Sokoto, murdered in coup de` tat in 1966, was more successful in this regard.
It won immense support from emirs and native authorities whose subjects comprised a good number of Qādirīs and Tijānīs.
The votes won by the other parties in the elections were mostly from Tijānīs who were opponents of Qādirīs because of an age-long rivalry and strained-relations between the two Orders.
Thus in Nigeria, like in Algeria, Mauritania and Senegal, the Qādirīs have been involved in the politics of these countries.
Thus the Qādiriyyah became one of the Şūfī Orders found to have played a non- esoteric role.
It was utilized as a means of mobilizing members through oaths of allegiance to execute a cause such as Jihad and to obtain votes during elections.
Hence, it is not a defeatist attitude of the escapists as some writers depict it.
Rather, it is spending only part of ones time in devotion and the rest in worldly pursuit.
Self Assesment Exercise Give a bird’s eye view of the political role of the Qadiriyyah in Nigeria.
3.2 Socio-Religious Role.
The socio-religious impact of the Qādiriyyah has also been in the educational and Islamic missionary fields.
The career of Qādiriyyah personages such as Shaykh cAbdu `l-Karīm al-Maghīlī, cAbdullah Suka, Jibrīl ibn cUmar, Uthmān ibn Fudi, Nasiru Kabara, Waziri Junayd and several other reputable Qādirīs has constituted shining examples of Qādirī teachers and itinerant preachers of their ages.
They not only founded institutions where they imparted knowledge to students, preached the ideals and realities of Islam but they also encouraged their disciples to embrace Islamic mysticism.
Some of them, reputed for their knowledge, piety and holiness, played the role of officiating ministers at Islamic socio-religious activities such as naming, wedding and funeral ceremonies.
In no time and like their non- Qādirī counterparts, faith in their powers and efficacy of their prayers became very strong among the people in the midst of whom they resided.
As a result, the practice of charms-making, foretelling the future and even the use of black arts has been incorporated in their practices and the training their 39 novices receive from them.. By this practice, although they have watered down the high ambition of the early Şūfīs, they have been able to meet the need of a large segment of the members of their societies.
We shall not fail to mention however, that many Muqaddams and Khalīfahs were not learned enough to be able to educate their disciples in religious sciences and that there exist some professed novices of few Muqaddams who are not pursuing formal education.
They are just serving the Khalīfahs or Muqaddams for the most part of their time, leaving very little time for their studies.
Some of them even believe the barakah, (blessing) which they will derive from such services, is more important than the formal education.
For receiving informal education, several of these categories of disciples remain idle most of their time and sometimes take to begging career, thus resulting in the institutionalization of the al-mājirīs system.
It will not be out of place to think that those idle al-Mājirīs have been contributing to the outbreak and execution of Maitatsene and other religious disturbances witnessed in recent years in Nigeria.
Tombs of some past great Qādirīs like those of ‘Uthmān bn Fūdī in Sokoto, Muhammad Bello in Wurno, Nda Salati in Ilorin and the Kano Qādiriyyah burial ground, which have become objects of visitation for petitioners who go there for various requests are always besieged by such al-Mājirīs day and night.
`To serve as a yearly meeting for the Qādiriyyah brotherhood leaders and members throughout Nigeria, the Mawlid of Abdu `l-Qādir’s celebration was initiated in Kano by Shaykh Nasiru Kabara in 1959.
Delegates from each of the major centers congregate in Kano for a full day of prayers and other activities.
A group procession from the house of Shaykh Nasiru Kabara in the Kabara ward of Kano to the Kano Qādiriyyah burial ground west of the city usually constitute the central attraction of the day.
The order of procession indicates roughly the hierarchy of authority within the brotherhood.
There is the inner circle of Khalīfas and Muqaddams who accompany Shaykh Nasiru during the procession.
Participating members, men and women, lay men and clerics, elders and children, all dress in green and white uniforms which are made specially for the occasion .
Also, each center, ward, town or city has a flag that is carried with its unit during the procession.
About 15,000 persons are estimated to be participating every year.
The procession which follows a dusk to dawn night of spiritual exercises, leaves the home of Shaykh Nasiru at about 10.00 a.m. and leaves the burial ground still in procession around noon.
On arrival back at Nasiru’s Zāwiyah center the congregation disperse.
Self Assessment Exercise  Assess the socio-politico contribution of Qādiriyyah in Nigeria .
 Discuss the religious contribution of Qādiriyyah in Nigeria.
40 4.0 CONCLUSION On the whole the Qādiriyyah in Nigeria emphasizes strict adherence to the Qur’ān and Sunnah and its doctrines, rites and practices are quite in consonance with the spirit of Islam except in few cases.
It has not in anyway been a barrier in the social, educational, economic and political advancement of any society.
It is only a voluntary extra - spiritual activity whose objective is religious realization through occasional devotions, struggle against the lower self and substitution of moral rectitude as alternative panacea to social maladies.
Therefore not withstanding the exigencies of modern times which have permeated all facets of Muslims lives and have resulted in the new breed of Muslims favouring new Islamic Associations with more emphasis on exotericism we need not suppose the Qādiriyyah or any other Şūfī Order be put to sleep for good because the needs for them are always there.
5.0 SUMMARY In the realm of the political impact of the Qādiriyyah in Nigeria, this Unit identifies the achievements of the Sokoto caliphate in the area of establishment of emirates, unification of the existing scattered clans and tribes and people of racial differences, colours and climes.
Also identified as involvement of members of the Order in politics was the enlistment of members during formation of political party in the Northern Nigeria in the 1950s.
The Unit also considers the teaching, preaching and counselling roles of al- Maghīlī, the Ibn Fūdīs, the Kabara and several other Shaykhs shinning examples of the social roles of the prominent proponents of the Order.
The ceremonies and celebrations usually organized at different occasions are also identified in this regard.
6.0 TUTOR MARKED ASSIGNMENT 1.
Assess some of the contribution of Qādiriyyahh to the polity in Nigeria.
2.
Discuss some of the impacts of the Qādiriyyah in the Nigeria Society.
7.0 References and further reading 1.
A. F. Ahmed.
(1986).
The Qādiriyyah and its Impact in Nigeria, Ph.D. Thesis, University of Ibadan.
2.
Last, D. M. (1967) The Sokoto Caliphate, London.
3.
Paden, J. N. Religion and Political Culture in Kano, Califonia, 1973.
4.
Al-Iluri, Adam Abdullah (1971).
Al-Islam fi Nijiriya, Beirut.
5.
Ahmad, A. F. (1992).
Sha‘āiru `l- Qādiriyyah, (The Qādiriyyah Rites), Al-Fikr (Journal Dept of Arabic and Islamic Studies, University of Ibadan) vol.
No 13.
41 MODULE 2: THE TIJĀNIYYAH Unit 7: The Beginning of Tijāniyyah Order Unit 8: Spread of Tijāniyyah in West Africa Unit 9: Doctrines and Rites of the Tijāniyyah Order Unit 10: Social Role of the Tijāniyyah UNIT 7: THE BEGINNING OF TIJĀNIYYAH ORDER CONTENT 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objective 3.0 Main contents.
3.1 Brief life history of Shaykh Ahmad Tijani.
3.2 His activities and heritage 3.3 The Spread of Tijāniyyah 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutor Marked Assignment 7.0 Reference and Further Reading.
1.0 INTRODUCTION Our focus in Module 1 has been on the Qadiriyyah Order, its beginning, and spread into various Islamic territories.
We specifically traced its advent and spread into North WestAfrica and the west Africa.
The political and socio – religious roles of the Order was expatiated upon.
And of course the rites, doctrines and ceremonies of the Order weren also presented.
In this Module our aapproach will follow similar pattern of discussion.
Thus a discussion of the beginning of the Tijaniyyah is treated in this opening unit of the module.
2.0 OBJECTIVES At the end of this unit, you should be able to  Narrate the life history of Shaykh Ahmad Tijānī  discuss the emergence and development of Tijāniyyah order  mention some of the activities of Shaykh Ahmad Tijāni and heritage.
3.0 MAIN CONTENTS 3.1 Brief life History of Shaykh Ahmad at-Tijānī.
The appellation at-Tijānī (from which the name Tijānīyyah is derived) comes from the name of an Algerian Berber tribe near Tlimisān called Tijān and Tijānah.
The name was acquired when one of Shaykh Ahmad Tijānī`s forefathers, settled in the oasis of ‘Ain Māđin, in the south of Algeria.
After he had founded his order Ahmad Tijānī claimed the title of Sharif and produced a pedigree which traced his Ancestors to Al- 42 Hassan, son of Ali b. Abi Ţālib, the Prophet’s cousin.
Subsequently he called himself Ahmad b. Muhammad al- Ţijānī, al-Hasanī.
One of the proofs which he sought and which enabled him to assume the title was that the prophet appeared to him in a day- dream and told him ‘verily you are my son’ three times.
Ahmad Tijānī’s father, Muhammad al- Mukhtār was a venerated man of learning.
He lived and taught in ‘Ain Māđin.
His two parents died when he was only sixteen years old.
In 1171 (1757-8) Ahmad Tijani traveled to Fez seeking to meet ṣūfī shaykhs of the time.
By then he had already had a sound grounding in religious learning in his native village of ‘Ain Māđī.
When only seven, he had read the Qur’ān, learnt the Mukhtaṣar Khalīl, a summary of muslim jurisprudence according to the mālikī school widely studied in the north and west Africa.
He later read the Risālat Jamā‘at `ṣ-Ṣufiyyah bi bilād al-Islam by Abu `l-qāsim al- Qushayrī.
(986 – 1074 A.D.) Ali Harāzim, Ahmad Tijānī’s greatest disciple and the most authoritative author of his biography tells us that his master also studied the Muqaddimat of ibn Rushd and al-Akhđarī and applied himself to the study of Hadiths.
Before Ahmad returned to the south of Algeria he had joined three șūfī brotherhoods viz: the Qādiriyyah, the Nāṣiriyyah and the Ţarīqah of Ahmad al-Ħabīb bn Muhammad.
The prophecy of Muhammad b. al-Hasan al-Wanjili that ahmad al-Tijānī was to achieve spiritual realization (fath) in the desert, made him depart Fez.
He went next to the village called al- Abyađ on the outskirt of the desert and settled in the zāwiyah of Sīdī Shaykh, ‘Abdu ‘l-Qādir b. Muhammad where he spent five years occupying part of his time in teaching.
Al- Tijānī’s pilgrimage to Mecca in 1186 A.H. (1772-30), confirmed him in his pursuit of șūfī way of life.
On his way to Mecca, he stopped at the town of Azwawī near Algiers, where he was initiated into the Khalwatiyyah order at the hands of a muqaddam called Muhammad Abdu’l Rahmān.
He then spent a year in Tunisia, partly in the capital and the rest in Sūs.
In Tunis he was said to be a successful teacher that the ruling Bey Ali (1758) invited him to remain in Tunis and teach at the Zaitunah mosque.
He was offered a house and substantial salary, both of which, Ali Harāzim tells us; al – Tijānī rejected and decided instead to resume the journey to Mecca at once.
On his way to Makkah he sought out for Mahmud Kurdi, chief of the Khalwatiyyah in Cairo, as soon as he arrived there.
Ahmad Tijānī reached Mecca in Shawwal 1187 (December 1773 –January 1774).
After performing the rites of Hajj he came in touch with an Indian Șūfī Shaykh called Ahmad bn Abdullah.
When two months after their meeting the shaykh died, Ahmad Tijānī is said to have inherited all his occult mystical knowledge.
While in Hijāz, Ahmad Tijānī also visited the tomb of the prophet in Madina; and there he met the chief of the Sammāniyyah branch of the Khalwatiyyah, Shaykh Abdu ‘I- Karīm al-Sammānī, who is said to have informed him that he was to become the dominant quṭb, i.e the spiritual head of the ṣūfī saints.. On his way home Ahmad Tijānī again stopped in Egypt where Mahmud al-Kurdi authorized him to propagate the Khalwatiyyah Order in North Africa.
43 On his return from the pilgrimage in 1191 (1777-8), Ahmad Tijānī undertook visitation (ziyārah) the shrine of Mawlay Idris in Fez.
He settled in Tlimisan until 1196 (1781 -2) after which he returned to the desert.
He went to Shalalah then settled in Abi Samghun, an Algerian oasis township.
Self Assessment Exercise Give a brief life history of Shaykh Ahmad Tijānī before the declaration of his Ṣūfī order.
3.2 The Beginning of the Tijāniyyah Order During the first years of his stay in Abi Samghun he announced to his followers that the Prophet appeared to him in daylight and authorized him to start his work of spiritual guidance (tarbiyah), and assigned him the wirds (litanies) of his Order.
This year1196 A.H. marked the beginning of the Tijānīyyah Order.
Ahmad Tijānī migrated from Abi Samghun and arrive in Fez on 18 September 1789 according to Tijānī sources in order to seek wider horizons when he found that the Tijānīyyah Order had flourished in the desert.
He remained their till his death in 1815.
His residence in the town put him in the most important center of religious and cultural life in the Maghrib; and his arrival noted by the religious and learned circles, as well as by the government authorities.
Scholars went to discuss theological questions with him while the Sultan, Mawley Sulaiman, received him on his arrival in Fez and gave him a house.
At first he was observing prayers in the mosque of Mawley Idris and performed the rites of the order with his followers in his house.
He started building his zāwiyah in Hawmat al- Dardas (now called Hawmat al- Blida) in 1215 (1800).
After his death the zāwiya was expounded, and a mausoleum which now contains his remains has been built in it.
In spite of the hostility of the population of Fez towards him, Ahmad Tijānī could live in the town with great comfort.
As he promised Paradise to every person who did him favour, his income from the contributions of his followers, in Fez and elsewhere, was substantial.
The Sultan, Mawley Ismail paid him a salary, and besides the donations of his followers in Fez, who were rich if only few, he had a regular income from followers who were scattered all over the Algerian desert.
He had a herd of camels which were reared for him in Abi Samghun, and one of his most trusted lieutenants, a man called Sīdī Mahmud al-Tūnisī was responsible for bringing to fez the money accruing to him from his properties in the southern districts of Algeria.
It is related that Al-Tunisī brought to Fez a considerable sum of money every year from the sale of sheep, wool, butter, and dates.
The people in the town of Gummar, in the south eastern Algeria were making offerings to him in the form of palm trees, and dates of which they gathered and put aside for his agents to collect.
The friendliness of the Sultan to Ahmad Tijānī was an inducement to many of the high government functionaries to attach them to the order.
While in Fez, Ahmad Tijānī appointed Muqaddams and his adherents preached Tijānīyyah in Oran, Algiers, Costantine and other neighbouring countries such as Tunisia and Mauritania.
44  Before his death Ahmad Tijānī, had appointed to succeed him as the supreme head of the Order, Sīdī Ali al- Tammāsīnī from the (from the town of Tammāsin in the valley of Ṣūf), whose piety and devotion he had always extolled.
On appointing Sīdī Ali as his successor, he stipulated that the leadership of the Order after him should be held by the eldest male member of his own family and that of Sīdī Ali alternately.
Self assessment Exercise Trace the events that led to Ahmad Tijanis declaration of the șūfī Order declared by him.
Discuss the succession arrangements to the leadership of his Ţarīqah.
3.3 Legacies of Ahmad Tijānī Ahmad Tijānī did not leave on his death any treatise on the general subject of Șūfī sm which his followers could take as basis for the doctrines of their Order.
However, three of his companions wrote books which contained his prescripts, expositions of theological questions, and aphorisms; and from these, the doctrines and beliefs of the Tijānīyyah were evolved by learned memebers of the Order.
The best known of the three books is Jawāhiru ‘l- Ma’ānī.
The accredited author of this book Ali Harazim bn al-Arabī Barādah, a native of Fez.
He first met Ahmad Tijānī in the town of Wajah, in Morroco, immediately after his return from the pilgrimage in 1191.
(1777-8).
The Jawāhiru ‘l- Ma’ānī , in some measure, an autobiography of Ahmad since he dictated to Ali Harazim most part of the book which dealt with his life history, besides the theological discourses.
Furthermore when Harāzim finished the Jawāhir, he read it to Ahmad al-Tijānī, who approved it on 3 January 1802.
The founder of the Tijānīyyah later attributed the book to the Prophet by stating that the latter appeared to him in one of his daylight visions and told him that the book was the Prophet’s own book and it was he who composed it.
The sayings and life history of Ahmad Tijānī are cited in another book written but not published, during his life time, namely Kitāb al- Jāmiu li ‘ulum al- Faydah min biħār al- Qutb al- Maktūm.
The compiler of the book is another companion of Ahmad Tijānī called Muhammad b. al- Mushri‘ (d. 1224/1809 -10).
His place of origin was Takart in the district of Constantine in Algeria.
He like Ali Harāzim first met Ahmad Tijānī in Tilmisān on the latter’s return from his pilgrimage.
In many respects Ahmad Tijānī’s sayings and life history contained in al-Jāmi’ are identical with those in the Jawāhir.
Several MS.
Copies of this book exist in the hand of Tijānī’s in North Africa.
The third book (likewise not published) which has been considered a reliable source for the study Ahmad Tijānī’s beliefs is a compilation of the most characteristics of his sayings called Kitāb al-Ifādah al- Ahmadiyyah li murīd al-sa‘ādah al- abadiyyah.
It was prepared by Muhammad al- Tayyib al-Sufyānī (d. 1259/1843 -4).
He was aclose companinon of Ahmad Tijānī n Fez, and he recorded the sayings contained in his book directly after hearing them from the Shaykh, arranged them alphabetically, and later 45 accompanied them by his annotations.
Al-Ifādah is widely read among the Tijānī’s because of his brevity and the clarity with the founders assertions about his lofty spiritual rank are presented.
Self Assessment Exercises Mention and comment on the three underlisted sources of Ahmad Tijānī’s legacies.
(1) Jawāhir al-Ma‘ānī (2) al- Jāmiu li ‘ulum al- Faydah min biħār al-Qutb al- Maktūm (3) al-Ifādah al- Ahmadiyyah 4.0 CONCLUSION The appellation Tijāniyyah derives from an Algerian tribal name.
Shaykh Ahmad Tijani later added the title Sharif to his name by tracing his origin to Fatimah the daughter of the Prophet Muhammad.
(S).
The Tijaniyyah Shaykh sojourned in several cities of Maghrib in search of knowledge and receiving trainng in the Qadiriyyah, Sammaniyyah, Nasiriyyah, Habibiyyah and the Khalwatiyyah șūfī orders before his declaration of the Tijaniyyah.
It was also claimed that he inherited all the mystical knowledge of the Indian Shaykh called Ahmad bn Abdullah while on pilgrimage to Makkah.
Ahmad Tijanis declaration at Abu Samghun that the Prophet appeared to him in daylight and authorized him to start his spiritual guidance and assigned him the wird of his order marked the beginning of the Qadiriyyah.
The Jawahir al-Maani, al-Jamiu li-‘ulum `l-Faydah and al-Ifadah constitutes the three main sources of information on the origin of the Tijaniyyah.
5.0 SUMMARY This Unit presents a brief biography of the founder of the Tijaniyyah.
It highlights the series of knowledge and șūfī training received by the Shaykh before the declaration of the Tijaniyyah and the manner in which the declaration was made.
Other issues highlighted include succession arrangement made by the Shaykh and sources of the legacies he left behind.
4.0 TUTOR – MARKED ASSIGNMENT Discuss the mystical life of Shaykh Ahmad Tijani.
Highlight the sources of information on the legacies of Shaykh Ahmad Tijānī.
46 7.0 REFERENCE AND FURTHER READING (1) Jawāhir al-Ma‘ānī (2) al- Jāmiu li ‘ulum al- Faydah min biħār al-Qutb al- Maktūm (3) al-Ifādah al- Ahmadiyyah Abun Nasir (1965) The Tijāniyyah: A șūfī order in the modern world, London: Oxford Universal Press Clarke, P.B.
(1982) West Africa and Islam, London: Edward Arnold Publishers Ltd. Qadri, Y.A.
(1981) “The Tijāniyyah in Nigeria” an unpublished Ph.d Thesis in the department of Arabic and Islamic Studies, University of Ibadan, Ibadan.
Tijani, D.A.A (1997) A handbook on the doctrines and rites of the Tijāniyyah, Ede, Moyanjuola Islamic Publication.
47 UNIT 8: SPREAD OF TIJĀNIYYAH IN WEST AFRICA CONTENTS 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objective 3.0 Main Contents 3.1 Further Spread of the Order in the the Western Sahara 3.2 The advent and spread of the Order in Nigeria.
4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutor – Marks Assignments 7.0 References and Further Reading 1.0 INTRODUCTION By 1815 when the Shaykh of the Tijāniyyah died, the Order had flourished in the desert around Abi Samghun.
The Shaykh migrated to Fez in 1789 to propagate the Order and seek wider horizon for the Order.As he promised reward of paradise for whoever followed him or did him favour the membership of the Order multiplied in record time.
Before he died he had constructed a monumental zāwiyah and a magnificent mausoleum which has become object of veneration was erected as his permanent place of rest.
This Unit explores the spread of the Order outside Algeria.
2.0 OBJECTIVES At the end of this Unit you should be able to Give account of the spread of the Order in the the Western Sahara Narrate the story of the advent and spread of the Order in the West African sub-region.
3.0 MAIN CONTENTS 3.1.
Further Spread of the Order in the the Western Sahara When the Shaykh Ahmad Tijānī passed away in 1815 C.E.
he left behind two children, Muhammad al-Kabīr and Muhammad al-Habīb.
The two children joined hands with great disciples of their father to move the order into the next level.
The disciples of the Shaykh did a lot to propagate the order and to see that his teachings and doctrines continued to be upheld.
They also succeeded in ensuring that there is uniformity in the rites practiced in various parts of the Islamic world.
Unlike Qādiriyyah which 48 developed on different lines and of which various systems developed, the Tijāniyyah order remains united up till today.
Through the efforts of the disciples with that of dynamic propagators and preachers as well as the itinerant teachers, the new Tariqāh got spread to many nooks and crannies of the Western Sahara and beyond.
The leader of Tijāniyyah to Mauritania sometimes called Shinqīt was commissioned to move to Western Sahara by the founder Ahmad Tijānī himself before his death in 1815 C.E.
There, he initiated Muhammad Hafiz b. al-Mukhtār bn Habīb while he was passing through Fez and nominated him as Khalifah for Western Sahara.
On his arrival in Mauritania Muhammad Hāfiz preached the Tijāniyyah doctrines successfully his own tribe Kaolah Ali was won over to the Tijāniyyah and ever since became the stronghold of the Tariqāh in that country.
The task of popularizing the order was however not quite easy in view of the fact that the Moors in Mauritania were too much attached to the Bakkāiyyah and there was a strong resistance to propagation of any new Tariqāh.
Ali bn Isa befor his death in (d. 1844) succeeded Ahmad Tijānī as chief of the zāwiyah in Tilmisan.
He embarked upon a wide spread missionary activities associated with commercial venture.
Along with his caravan, he was accompanied with Muqaddams and the Ikhwān across Shinqīt to Senegal, Timbuctu and Segou.
Tijāniyyah zawiyahs were also founded as far as Kano, Bornu and Wadai in Chad.
Thus, through the efforts of these and other dynamic propagators and preachers and some intenerant teachers, the new Tariqāh got spread to many places.
Self Assessment Exercise Give account of the spread of the Tijaniyyah in the Western Sahara.
3.2 The Advent and Spread of Tijāniyyah in Nigeria B. G. Martins in his Islamic Brotherhoods of the Eighteenth Century Africa claims that Tijāniyyah centers were established at Kano and Borno during the lifetime of its founder Ahmad al-Tijānī (1737 -1815).
Apart from oral traditions there is no existing document to support the contention and should be accepted only with reservation.
Martins himself, however admits that the foundation of the centres do not appear to have made converts beyond the cicle of the ruling class.
In any case, Shaykh ‘Umar Sa‘īd Tal al-Fūtī was the major Tijāniyyah muqaddam, who initiated a period of widespread conversion to the Tijāniyyah order in what is now Northern Nigeria.
After visiting Mecca and Medina where as he claimed, he was 49 appointed Khalīfah of the Tijāniyyah for the Western Sudan by Muhammad ‘Umar al – Ghālī, the wakīl of the Tijāniyyah in Mecca, he stayed in Sokoto for some eight years (1830 – 1838) where he sought proselytes for the new Order in which Muhammad Bello appeared to have developed interest .
For, his wazīr, Gidado ( 1817 -1842) was reading the Jawāhir al-Ma‘ānī on Ahmed Tijānī to him.
Ahmad Madaniyo, the grandson of Umar recorded that Umar arrived at Kukawa in Borno where the apparent groups of convert made by him was from the Shuwa Arabs.
From Borno, Umar reportedly travelled to Bauchi , Kano, Zaria and Kastina.
Apparently, only in Zaria did he establish a zāwiyah.
Tijāniyyah was accepted by the heads of the mallawa, one of the four rulings Fulani clans of Zaria.
In Kano city according to Paden, oral traditions says that ‘umar received proselytes in certain Hausa wards.
However, the Tijāniyyah spread widely in the late 1840s and 1850s in Gwandu, Kano and Zaria the years immediately following ‘Umar’s departure from Sokoto in 1838.
In Gwandu, there were Tijānī scholars like Muhammad Raji b.
‘Ali, who was Emir Khalilu’s before he set out in about 1850 on pilgrimage with a large following of students from Gwandu and Kano and Sa’d b. Muhammad Awwal in whose era the son Ahmad became the Qādī of Gwandu.
In Zaria, there was among others, ‘Umar b. Ahmad a young son of the vizier of Zaria and memberof the ruling Bornawa dynasty who was inducted into the Tijāniyyah in 1850 by a visiting Tijānī named Ishāq al-Futi.
The Tijāniyyah acquired a greater force when some 10,000 Tokolor and other remnants of the bands of Ahmadu, son of al- Hajj ‘Umar Sa‘īd Tal al- Fūtī who were driven from Segou and Banbara, entered Nigeria during the reign of ‘Abd al-Rahman of Sokoto (1891 -1902).
Oral reports claim that it took years to reach Sokoto from the French territory and there Ahmad Shaykh died to be succeeded in the leadership of the Tijānī refugees by his brother Bashir.
They were all equipped with guns and ammunition thus forming a powerful army.
So they went to Kano where they asked Emir ‘Abbas if they could have land.
Again they were refused.
So they went to Emir of Hadejia, Mai Shahada where they were received and given a place called Yan Leman.
And when the British took over control in 1902, the group scattered very widely mainly as traders, farmers and mallams.
In the middle of twentieth century, the first major event in the history of Tijāniyyah in Northern was the visit paid by Shaykh ‘Alamī, a Maghribī mallam, to Kano in 1923.
His arrival was welcomed with great enthusiasm by the existing Tijāniyyah muqaddams and their followers because of his call for group worship and unity.
During his stay, he concerned himself with the training of more cadres of muqaddams for the propagations of Tijāniyyah in Kano and in other parts of Hausaland.
He ordered the building of the first Tijāniyyah zāwiyah in Kano in the Kawarin Maguga area of Koki ward.
According to Abu Bakr ‘Atiqu, with the coming of ‘Alami, the brotherhood spread in Kano and its surrounding areas; and people embraced it in groups because of the building of the zāwiyah.
Shaykh Alami left Kano in 1926.
50 On the departure of Shaykh Malami from Kano to Marakish , he left behind Shaykh Muhammad Salga as the Imam of the central Tijāniyyah zāwiyah in Kano.
The reputation of Salga as a teacher of Sharī‘ah and Haqīqah and a distinguished leader in the Tijāniyyah was soon known throughout Hausaland and Bornu from where he received students and aspirants for training thus exerting remarkable influence in the extension of Tijānīyyah Community throughout Northern Nigeria before his death in 1938.
One of the chief Assistant of Salga was Shaykh Abubakr Mijinyawa (d. 1946).
He was an author of many books and poems, teacher of many Tijāniyyah students and liason of the Tijānīyyah brotherhood not only in Hausaland but also at the international level.
Another significant episode in the spread of Tijāniyyah in Northern Nigeria was the conversion tour conducted by Shaykh b. Umar, a direct descendant of Shaykh Ahmad al- Tijānī who later became the Imam of the Tijāniyyah zāwiya at ‘Ayn Madī in Algeria.
Between 1948 and 1949, Ben Umar travelled for about 23 days throughout Northern Nigeria and stopped in Kano, Kaduna, Zaria, Kastina, Gusau and Adamawa.
The response of the people to the tour was described as very enthusiastic which suggests that Ben ‘Umar succeeded in wining more converts for the Tijāniyyah movement.
The emergence of Shaykh Niass and his dynamic leadership also contibuted immensely to the spread of the Tijāniyyah not only in the area under study but also all over West African Countries.
Ibrahim Niass who was born in 1904 was brought up in a Tijāniyyah home in Senegal.
His father Shaykh, initiated him into thr Tijānīyyah early in life.
In 1936, he decided to travel to Mecca and to renew his Ţarīqah authority en rout at Fez.
On his arrival back in Senegal a successful mission to Fez, he came to believe that he had been chosen for the overall leadership of the Tijāniyyah brotherhood.
His youthfulness at that time, and his piety and eudition helped to make him well- reputed.
Since 1946 and up till now, many young Nigerian Tijānīs,mainly Hausa trader from Kano have been trooping to his coenobium at Kawlakh in Senegal in quest of knowledge and share of Ibrahim’s barakah.
Shaykh Abu Bakr ‘Atiqu (d. 1975), Ahmad Tijānī b. Uthman (d.1970) and Shaykh Umar Falke (d. 1962) were the readily remembered pioneers.
They were to form later the core of the Contemporary Tijāniyyah authorities in Hausaland.
Since then however, there have always been an average of 300 Northern Nigerians in Kawlakh at any given time.
By 1951, Ibrahim had become very active in visting Tijāniyyah Communities throughout West Africa.
On his way to Mecca in that year, he visited Kano where he made his first public appearance and was received by crowds of people from various parts of the North and various walks of lifes.
He visited Kano again in 1952, and in 1953.
In each visits he won over to the Tijāniyyah hundreds of new converts.
51 It may be pertinent to conclude here, therefore, that since the post World- War 11 period, owing largely to the Hausa trader – mallams who travelled to Kawlakh and to the influence of Shaykh Ibrahim’s visits to Northern Nigeria- Tijāniyyah had been consolidating its dominance over all other Orders steadily and gradually.
This was true of all urban Muslim Areas of the North, such as Kano, Kastina, Jos, Gasau and Kaduna.
This extended to similar towns such as Liafiaji and Ringim hich were on the railway lines and were in regular contacts with the urban centers.
This has also extended to non- Muslim towns of the Middle – Belt such as Wukari, Makurdi, Makurdi and Lokoja and their neighouring towns of Minna, Bida, Ofa and Ilorin.
In Adamawa and Sadauna province, such town as Yola, Gwande, and Shendam became predominantly associated with Tijāniyyah; and in certain cases new towns were founded as communities of Tijānīs most notable being Niyamalfulatu (a corrupt form of ni‘ma `l-faydatu `t- tijāniyyah.)
.
The Qādī of little Gombe, Modibo Ahmadu Aminu, was also a student from the Kawlakh School after World War 11.
On his return, he set out on the task of converting the Chamba tribe.
The present leader of Tijāniyyah in Adammawa, Modibbo Zailani has also built a zawiya at Song.
The Tijāniyyah has also been consolidated in Muslim cities that had been traditionally opposed to Sokoto such a Argungu and Maiduguri which resisted Uthman bn Fūdi’s led Jihad throughout the early part of the 19th century.
It has also spread to all other parts of the North.
During the cause of our study, certain personages emerged as accredited Qādirīs while others emerged as accredited Tijānīs.
These and some others that had not been mentioned who contributed in no small scale to the spread and expansion of the Orders have also contributed immensely to the Arabic literary activites of their Areas in both poetry and prose.
Their poetical works having șūfī bearings have become topics for graduates and post graduate studies in the African and even European higher institutions.
Self Assessment Exercise Narrate the story of the advent and spread of the Order in the West African sub-region.
4.0 CONCLUSION On the declaration of the Tijāniyyah by Shaykh Ahmad Tijānī the Order spread rapidly in the Algerian desert settlements.
When the Shaykh of the Order travelled to settle Fez, the Order acquired wider horizon and before the death of its founder his representatives have been winning proselytes for the Order in Mouritania, Timbuktu and even as far as Katsina, Kano and Borno.
Widespread conversion to the Tijāniyyah in Nigeria was accomplished through the da‘wah activities of scholars and Jihadists from North and West Africa respectively.
Such prominent Tijanis were Umar Sa ‘īd Tal al-Futī, Ahmad Masina, Shaykh Malamī in Kano in 1923, Shaykh Salga (d.1938), Shaykh Mijinyawa in Zaria (d. 1946), Ben Umar a 52 descendant of Shaykh Ahmad Tijani visted Norhern Nigeria 1948-49, Shaykh Ibrahim Niass al-Kawlakhī (d.around 1966) and Abubakr Atiqu (d. 1975).
It can further be concluded that owing largely to Hausqa trader mallams, Tijaniyyah has been consolidating its dominance on the Qādiriyyahsince post world-war II.
5.0 SUMMARY This Unit focuses on spread of the Tijāniyyah in North and West Africa after the demise of the founder.
It particularly focuses on the spread of the Order in Nigeria.
Major factors responsible to the spread of the order recorded in the Unit as findings are mainly the role of prominent Shaykhs, Jihadists, Muqaddams and Hausa trader mallams.
6.0 TUTOR MARKED ASSIGNMENT To what extent did Tijāniyyah received acceptability during the life time of the founder?
Narrate the story of the advent and spread of the Tijāniyyah in Nigeria.
7.0 REFERENCE AND FURTHER READING Abun Nasir (1965) The Tijāniyyah: A șūfi order in the modern world, London: Oxford Universal Press Clarke, P.B.
(1982) West Africa and Islam, London: Edward Arnold Publishers Ltd. Qadri, Y.A.
(1981) “The Tijāniyyah in Nigeria” an unpublished Ph.d Thesis in the department of Arabic and Islamic Studies, University of Ibadan, Ibadan.
Tijani, D.A.A (1997) A handbook on the doctrines and rites of the Tijāniyyah, Ede, Moyanjuola Islamic Publication.
Ahmed, A. F. (1983).
Arabic Șūfī Poetry of Northern Nigeria, M. Phil.
Dissertation, University of Ibadan.
53 UNIT 9: DOCTRINES AND RITES OF THE TIJĀNIYYAH ORDER CONTENTS 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objectives 3.0 Main content 3.1 Conditions of being a member of the Tijāniyyah 3.2 The Rites of the Tijāniyyah.
4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutor marked assignment 7.0 Reference and further reading 1.0 INTRODUCTION It should be pointed out from the onset that anybody can be initiated into the Tijānīyyah as long as he is a Muslim, male or female, major or minor, free born or slave, obedient or disobedient.
The Order however has some sets of rules and regulations which a prospective member is excepted to accept before he can initiated.
This Unit enumerates and expatiated upon in this Unit.
: 2.0 OBJECTIVES At the end of this unit, you should be able to:  Enumerate conditions of being a member of the Tijāniyyah  Relate the rites of the Tijāniyyah 3.0 MAIN CONTENTS 3.1 Conditions of being a member of the Tijāniyyah 1.
Availability of a Muqaddam who possesses a sound initiation authority.
2.
The prospective Murīd shall not be a member of another Ţarīqah already except he is prepared to renounce his membership and resolve not to go back to it.
3.
No member of theTijāniyyah is expected to pay visit to any non – Tijāniyyah walī, dead or alive, with the intention of seeking his blessing.
4.
A member of the Tijāniyyah must observe the five daily obligatory prayers punctually and in congregation as much as possible.
5.
He must have perpetual love for Shaykh Ahmad Tijānī.
6.
He must not feel save from the plan (makr) of Allah.
(See Q.7:99) 7.
HE should not insult, harbor hatred or enmity for the Shaykhs, the muqaddams or their relatives.
8.
He must recite the adhkār of the Order till he dies.
9.
He must have faith in the deeds and sayings of Shaykh Ahmad Tijānī.
10.
He must not criticize him.
54 11.
He must be properly initiated into the Order.
12.
He must do the wazīfah and dhikru ‘l-Jum-‘ah congregationally where there are other members.
13.
Jawharatu ‘l-kamāl must be recited only with al-wuđu and not with tayammam.
14.
He must not severe relationship with the members of the Ţarīqah in particular and the Muslims in general.
15.
He must not neglect his duties to the Ţarīqah.
16.
He must not give out the dhikrs of the Ţarīqah to non-members if not duely authorized.
17.
He must respect all acquaintances of the Shaykh and the leaders of the Ţarīqah.’ 18.
A murīd must ensure that his body, cloth and place of worship are clean.
19.
He must face the qiblah.
20.
Silence must be maintained during the observance of the wird.
21.
He must show goodness to his parents and seek their permission for initiation.
22.
He must hold fast to he Qur’ān and Sunnah, keep commandments of Allah and avoid his prohibitions in accordance with the Sharī‘ah.. 23.
He must keep away from the critics of Shaykh Ahmad Tijānī and those who deny his claims and hate him.
24.
He must recite basmallah and Sūrah Fātiħah in his wirds.
25.
He must observe the five daily prayers with full attention, piety and seriousness.
26.
He must always observe tahajjud even if it is only two rakahs.
27.
He must form the habit of visualizing the picture of the Prophet or that of the Shayk Ahmad Tijānī if he can.
He can assume that he is sitting before them with full attention and respect if he cannot.
28.
He must try to follow the meaning of what he is reciting in his wird.
29.
He must express his intention, and specify whether it is morning or evening wird.
30.
Many Muqaddams in Nigeria will not initiate cigarette smoker.
Self Assessment Exerdcise Enumerate conditions governing membership of the Tijāniyyah.
3.2.
The rites of the Tijāniyyah.
There are two categories of adhkār in the Tijāniyyah viz.
lāzimī (obligatory) and ikhtiyariyyah (voluntary).
The lazimīs are two viz the wird and the dhikr al-Jumu’ah.
The Wird Wird is performed twice daily.
The first one comes up between Şubħ prayer and before noon while the second is said between ‘Așr and ‘Ishā’ prayers.
Wird is performed individually and not congregationally.
The content of wird as believed by the Tijānīs to have been given to Ahmad Tijānī by the Prophet is as follows: 55 (a) Recitation of the formula of penitence: Astaghfirullah ( I seek forgiveness of God) 100 times (b) Recitation of Şalātu ‘l- Fātiħ 100 times.
(c) Recitation of Lā ilāha illallāh 100times.
The recitation of niyyah (Intention), ta‘awwudh, (Seeking Proctection) Basmallah (Starting in the Name of God) and al- Fātiħah (the Opening chapter of the holy Qur’ān precedes the recitations.
Dhikr al- Jumu’ah The second obligatory duty in the Tijāniyyah is the dhikr al–jumuah (remembrance of God on Fridays).
This is also known as al-Adhkār al-Kubrā.
It is observed either weekly on Fridays after ‘Asr prayer till Maghrib prayer.
Unlike the Wird, the dhikru ‘l-Jumu‘ah can be observed either individually or in congregation.
It is performed as follows: (a) The devotee begins with the saying of Niyyah (Intention), Ta’awwudh, (Seeking Protection) Basmallah (Starting in the name of God) and al- Fātihah (the Opening chapter of the holy Qur’ān precedes the recitations.
(b) He then recites the formula of Istighfar, preferably: Astagfirullaha `l-‘aƶīma lladhī lailaha ila huwa al-ħayyu `l-qayyum.
3 times.
(c) He recites Şalātu’l- Fātiħ (3 times); and ends it with the the verse: Innallaha wamalaikatahu……… (d)After this he remembers God by recitings either haylallah or Ismu ‘l-Jalālah i.e.
‘’Allah’’, or combines the two both of which are repeated at least 1000 times but not exceeding 1600 times.
Usually, Kubrā is observed congregationally; though it can be observed individually when a Murid is observed congregationally, the adhkar are not counted, they are repeated until sunset.
Sitting arrangements sometimes vary.
The haylallah is chanted melodiously in some centres.
Some accompanied it with Raqș (dancing) or moving of the body to both sides.
The Waƶīfah Waƶīfah is another rite of the Tijāniyyah.
It is considered obligatory (lāzim) by some writers while it is seemed to be voluntary in the Jawāhir; a murīd may decide to leave it.
It is considered obligatory in Nigeria and prescribed a new murid during his initiation ceremony along with the other obligatory duties which he must carry out.
The Waƶīfah is performed either once or twice daily; unlike wird which must be performed twice daily .
The Waƶīfah is performed as follows: The murīd declares his niyyah (Intention), recites ta’awwudh, (Seeking Protection) Basmallah (Starting in the name of God) and al- Fātiħah (the Opening chapter of the holy Qur’ān) 56 He recites the formula of penitence i.e Astaghfirullah….
(30 times) Şalātu’l- Fātiħ (50 times) which he ends with Subhana Rabbika Rabbi ‘l- zzat….
He recites Hailallah (100 times) and ends it with Muhammad Rasūlullah (Ş).He recites Jawharatu ‘l-kamāl eleven times or twelve times if he belongs to the Hammalliyyah branch.
At the end of this, the devotee recites Inna llah wamalaikatatahu … and Subhana Rabbik..
He then offers general supplications.
If the Waƶīfah is led by Muqaddam he led the supplications.
Self Assessment Exercise Describe the Lāzimī and Waƶīfah rites of the Tijāniyyah.
4.0 CONCLUSION The Tijāniyyah is based on adhering to certain thirty conditions and doctrines by a member of the Order.
The major rites of the Order are: Wird Lāzim performed twice daily.
The first is performed between Şubħ prayer and before noon while the second is said between ‘Așr and ‘Ishā’ prayers.
Dhikr al–jumuah (remembrance of God on Fridays) which is also known as al-Adhkār al- Kubrā is the second obligatory duty in the Tijāniyyah observed weekly on Fridays after ‘Asr prayer till Maghrib prayer.
The Waƶīfah is the third rite of the Tijāniyyah.
It is considered obligatory (lāzim) by some writers while others consider it voluntary.
The Waƶīfah is performed either once or twice daily.
4.0 SUMMARY The focus of this Unit is enumeration of the conditions for the validity of being a member of the Tijāniyyah.
Thirty items are listed in this regard.
The Unit also expatiates on the rites of the which a member should be performing on daily of weekly basis.
This includes the wird lāzim, the wazīfah and the dhikru `l-Jumu‘ah.
6.0.
TUTOR MARKED ASSIGNMENT What are the conditions governing validity of membership of Tijāniyyah adherents?
Expatiate upon the ritual practices of the Tijāniyyah.
7.0 REFERENCES AND FURTHER READING Abun Nasir (1965) The Tijāniyyah: A șūfī order in the modern world, London.
Qadri, Y.A.
(1981) “The Tijāniyyah in Nigeria” an unpublished Ph.d Thesis; University of Ibadan, Ibadan.
Tijani, D.A.A (1997) A handbook on the doctrines and rites of the Tijāniyyah, Ede.
57 UNIT 10: SOCIAL ROLE OF THE TIJĀNIYYAH AND INTERACTION WITH THE QĀDIRIYYAH CONTENT 1.0.
Introduction 2.0.
Objectives 3.0.
Main Contents 3.1.
Social roles of Tijāniyyah in West Africa.
3.2.
Qādiriyyah and Tijāniyyah relation.
4.0.
Conclusion 5.0.
Summary 6.0.
Tutor marked assignment 7.0.
Reference and further reading 1.0 INTRODUCTION In the previous unit, you learnt about the doctrines and rites of Tijāniyyah.
In this unit we shall learn about the social roles of Tijāniyyah.
In the same vein the relationship between Tijāniyyah and Qādiriyyahh shall be discussed.
2.0 Objectives At the end of this unit, you should be able to:  discuss the socio-politico roles of Tijāniyyah in Nigeria  assess the relation between the Qādiriyyahh and Tijāniyyah in Nigeria 2.0 MAIN CONTENTS 2.1 Social roles of Tijāniyyah in West Africa It is quite important to mention that the emergence of Tijāniyyah in West Africa and particularly in Nigeria had great impact on the development and spread of Islam in West Africa.
The roles could be discussed under two dimensions, the socio-religious and socio- political roles.
On the socio-religious angle the conditions for the validity of membership were in form of strict set of codes the observance of which not only results in spiritual fellowship but also requires social interaction which attracted many observers to embrace the Order.
The occasional coming together of members for the special prayers and recitation of the dhīkr, wīrd, wazifāh, also served to attract adherents.
The code specified the responsibilities which the individual follower had to his leaders and vice versa.
i. e. as the Shaykh has special role to mplay in the material and spiritual life of the follower.
Consequently, the coming up together of the brethren in wazifāh, wīrd and dhīkr had a 58 greater appeal among the Tijāniyyah who now found themselves more as one and attributed a special power to their leaders.
In Tijāniyyah like in other brotherhood groups there is always an extensive hierarchy linking the ordinary follower murīd at the bottom to the leading Shaykh at the top through a network of other subordinate Shaykhs.
During initiation, the murid would pronounce an oath of allegiance formally binding him to all the senior members of the order.
It should also be mensioned that the establishment of schools and zawiyahs and coming together of people for the celebration of Mawlid Nabiyy and Laylatu `l-Qadr, from one town to another and even from countries to another are all activities that has become centre of attraction in the social impact of the Tijāniyyah in Nigeria.
On the Socio–political role, the strained relation between the Qādiriyyah and Tijāniyyah brotherhoods in Sokoto province took another dimension in 1956 when the members of the Tijāniyyah introduced political strategy by joining the then Northern Elementss Progressive Union (NEPU) political party under the leadership of Mallam Aminu Kano which took a radical leftist approach against the domineering influence of the traditonal rulers.
This was done to slight the then Sultan who was the patron of another political party, the Northern Peoples’ Congress (NPC).
The strategy worked positively for the Tijāniyyah because all the stringent rules against it were relaxed while the support of Shaykh Ibrahim Niass (d. 1975), the international leader of the Reformed Tijāniyyah world-wide, was secured.
Self Assessment exercise  Discus some of the social roles of Tijāniyyah order in West Africa 3.2 Qādiriyyah/ Tijāniyyah Relation The allegation that Muhammad Bello converted to the Tijāniyyah towards the end of his life revealed that it was an attempt by the Tijānīs to win more converts for their newly developing Order at that time.
Sadly indeed, the manner the allegation was made contributed to the strain in the relation between the two Orders.
The allegation generated vehement reactions from influential Qādirīs such as Gidado b.Laima (d. 1258/1842) who issued a warning banning all members of the Qādiriyyah community from joining the Tijāniyyah, a ban which seems effective for quite some time.
However, during the period between 1948 and 1965, a number of violent incidents occurred between the Qādiriyyah and Tijāniyyah followers in Sokoto and Adamawa areas.
The Sokoto authorities who would not like to see the Qādiriyyah die in the Hausaland after Shaykh cUthmān ibn.
Fūdī and would not also like to tolerate Tijānīs claim of superiority over the Qādirīs and the punitive measures taken involved arrest or exile of certain Tijāniyyah leaders and the demolition of certain Tijāniyyah mosques.
59 The strained Qādiriyyah – Tijāniyyah relation during the Sokoto Sultunate improved considerably when an influx of Tijāniyyah refugees from the disintegrated state of Shaykh Umar Sacīd Tal al-Fūtī arrived in Sokoto area around 1891-1902.
The refugees who numbered about 10,000 came under the leadership of Ahmad, a son of Muhammad Bello’s daughter who was married to cUmar al-Fūtī during his stay at Sokoto.
Perhaps it was due to the consanguinity factor that the Tijānī refugees were accommodated in Sokoto.
In return, the refugees identified themselves with the Sokoto course during its resistance of British encroachment at the beginning of the twentieth century.
Meanwhile, during the first two decades of the twentieth century, many Qādiriyyah adherents including some emirs and cUlemā relinquished the Order and embraced the Tijāniyyah due to the dynamic approach of the latter to evangelization.
The efforts of the Qādiriyyah leader, Shaykh Nasiru Kabara to rescue the order from total eclipse were in form of literary campaign, devotional reforms and public preaching.
Although the success of his efforts to reform the Order and regain its popularity has been tremendous and remarkable, not all the Qādiriyyah Muqaddams rallied round him.
Some, along with their disciples, have refused to align with him and preferred to remain traditional.
Perhaps this is because they did not like to submit to another Shaykh other than those with whom they had allegiance most especially when most of them were older than Nasiru himself; and probably, this is because they are not well exposed to the use of bandiri, a newly introduced instrument of Nasiru.
Politically the traditional Qādirīs who are largely in Sokoto might perhaps be conscious of the fact that Nasiru, the champion of the Reformed Qādiriyyah was from Kano and acknowledging his leadership would tantamount to relinquishing the Sokoto supremacy over Kano.
Another factor which caused a strained relationship between the two groups who are supposed to display love and mutual understanding among their members was the declaration of Qādiriyyah as the state Tariqāh by the British colonial adminitration in Sokoto.
The Tijāniyyah on the other hand was referded to as a revolutionary order by the imperialist.
Thus, the unhealthy and needless competition among the two șūfī brotherhood were the orders of the day.
The issue of membership drive among the two groups is one of the unhealthy competitions.
The ruling Sultan in supporting the Qādiriyyah prevented the members of the Tijāniyyah from holding the ritual șūfī prayers such as wazīfah and dhikr in any mosque or any public place as he declared doing so as offence.
He also declared the raising of their voices during any of their prayer session as illegal and offensive.
The law was enforced throughout Sokoto Province while the offenders were jailed.
For example according to Quadri (2013:8) in Gusau some twenty-eight people were arrested and sentenced to various terms of imprisonment ranging between two and three months.
60 The religious intolerance from which member of Tijāniyyah in Sokoto Province suffered was not limited to their being prevented from holding their religious rite in the existing mosques but disallowed to build their own private mosque.
This is evident in the destructure of their on going mosque in 1949 in Gusau and Kaura -Namoda opined Quadri (1981) .
Another interesting factor is the issue of qabd, folding of arms in prayers which the Tijāniyyah adopted as the Sunnah of the Prophet (S.A.W) whereas the Qādiriyyah seriously opposed it.
These violent reaction led to the death of many people including eleven policemen in 1965 in riot which occurred in the village of Toranke, Jankuku and Jaja, all in Yeldu district of Argungu division of Sokoto Province (Quadri:2013).
Also, there was literary attacks among the two groups Shaykh Nasiru Kabara, the leader of Qādiriyyah order in West Africa wrote a book tittled al-Nafahāt where in he attacked Tijāniyyah muqadām and accussed them of fabricating lies that their Tariqāh was better than other.
Abubakar Atiqu in 1958, a leader of Tijāniyyah almost immediately replied Shaykh Nasiru Kabara.
Thus, the two major Șūfī brotherhood engaged in physical wars and wars of pen.
However with the establishment of Izalāh group, an anti-șūfī organization the two groups, Qādiriyyah and Tijāniyyah reconciled their differences and jointly faced the Izālah in order to remain relevant in șufism.
Self Assessment Exercise  Describe the relationship between Qādiriyyah and Tijāniyyah in Nigeria.
3.0 CONCLUSION Tijāniyyah, the order founded by Shaykh Ahmed Tijani had contributed immensely to the socio-religio aspect of Nigeria.
The contribution was by their gathering for their dhīkr, wīrd and wazifāh rites which bring the members together.
On the other hand, the relationship of Qādiriyyah order which predated Tijāniyyah in Nigeria are at loggerheads and also engaged in unnecessary rivalry and unhealthy competition among themselves.
The Qadiriyyāh leader at the arrival of the British colonial administration in Sokoto displayed hostility towards the Tijāniyyah by thwarting their efforts in the membership drive.
In the same vein, the religious intolerance of Qadiriyyāh also prevented the Tijāniyyah in holding their religious rites in the existing mosques.
Thus, the two major șūfī brotherhoods are seen engaging in physical war and war of pen.
4.0 SUMMARY This Unit presents to you the social role of Tijāniyyah in Nigeria.
It also highlights the Qādiriyyah and Tijāniyyah relationship in the country.
In the realm of socio-religious impact the Unit identifies relationship between murids and their Shaykhs, occasional religious celebrations, establishment of centers, mosques and schools.
The contributions are of two folds socio-politico and religious contributions.
In thee socio-political Arena 61 of the Order, the declaration of Qādiriyyah as the state Tariqāh in Sokoto by the British colonial adminitration and consideration of the Tijāniyyah a revolutionary was identified.
The unhealthy rivalry and competition between the Tijāniyyah and the Qādiriyyah which predated the Order in Nigeria was also identified.
5.0 TUTOR MARKED ASSIGNMENT 1) Examine the contributions of Tijāniyyah on the social condition of Muslims in Nigeria.
2) Discuss some of the doctrines, rites and rituals of Tijāniyyah in Nigeria.
3) Examine the relationship between Qādiriyyahh and Tijāniyyah in Nigeria 7.0 REFERENCES AND FURTHER READING Jimoh, L.O.
(2006).
The contributions of Shaykh Nasiru Kabara to the development of Qādiriyyah order in Nigeria unpublished Ph.D thesis, University of Ilorin, Nigeria.
Paden, J.N (1973) Religion and political culture in Kano, London.
Qadri, Y.A.
(1981) “The Tijāniyyah in Nigeria” an unpublished Ph.d Thesis; University of Ibadan, Nigeria.
Tijani, D.A.A (1997) A handbook on the doctrines and rites of the Tijāniyyah, Ede.
62 MODULE 3 : THE SANŪSIYYAH, SHĀDHILIYYAH AND THE YAN IZĀLAH Unit 11: The beginning, spread, doctrines and rites of Sanūsiyyah Order Unit 12: The beginning, spread, doctrines and rites of Shādhiliyyah order Unit 13: The formative period, aims, objective and emergence of the Izālah Movement Unit 14: The Yan Izālah Activities and Relation with Qādiriyyah and Tijāniyyah UNIT 11: THE BEGINNING, SPREAD, DOCTRINES AND RITES OF SANŪSIYYAH ORDER CONTENT 1.0.
Introduction 2.0.
Objectives 3.0.
Main Contents 3.1.
The origin and development of Sanūsiyyah Order 3.2.
Doctrines and ritual practices of Sanūsiyyah Order 4.0.
Conclusion 5.0.
Summary 6.0.
Tutor marked assignment 7.0.
References and further reading 1.0.
INTRODUCTION By the second half of eighteenth century the world of Islam, to which the Ottoman had for centuries stood as guardians and to which they had claimed the right of privacy started to disintegrate.
With this the call for political and spiritual reforms began to be heard.
Attempts were now been actively made to resuscitate the empire and to return it once more into a vigorous and superior puritanical state.
It was against this background that the Sanūsiyyah Order was founded and began to grow.
Thus in this unit we shall learn about the founding of the Sanūsiyyah sufi movement by Sayyid Muhammad b. Ali al- Sanusi, a great reformer and a șūfī leader (born 1787).
2.0.
OBJECTIVES At the end of this unit you should be able to  Give a brief account of the life history of the founder of Sanūsiyyah order.
 Discuss the emergence / development of Sanūsiyyah order.
 Expound the doctrines and attitude of Sanūsiyyah to ritual practices.
.
3.0.
MAIN CONTENTS 3.1.
The Origin and Development of Sanūsiyyah Order The founder of the Sanūsiyyah order, Sayyid Muhammad b. Ali al-Sanusi, popularly known as the Grand Sanusi, was born in Ali Wasit village near Mustaghanem, in Algeria 63 in the year 1202/1787.
He was born at the time when politically, socially and economically there was a instability and discontent in Algeria.
The Grand Sanusi received his early education from a number of Shaykhs at Mustaghanem and other townships in Algeria.
From his numerous instructors he studied the Qur’ān, the Hadīth and Muslim jurisprudence in general.
After sometimes, he moved to Fez, where for eight years he studied at the grand mosque school generally known as Jāmi‘u `l-Qarawiyyīn to which a number of scholars and students used to flock from all parts of North Africa.
There he studied undits celebrated learned Shaykhs.
But he did not seem to have been happy in Fez.
This was not only because of pathetic state of moral decadence and the lack of security and stability in the place, but also on account of discouraging attitude which seems to have been taken by the authorities towards teaching.
While in his early thirties the Grand Sanusi left Fez for Egypt where he also studied under several teachers including Shaykh al-Milī, Tha‘labī, al-Şawī, al-Najjār etc.
From Egypt he left for Ħijāz where he studied under many instructors, including Shaykh Sulayman al-‘Ajamī, Abu Hafș b.
‘Abdu `l-Karīm al-‘ Attār and Imam Abu `i-‘Abbās Ahmad b. Abdullah b. Idrīs.
While studying under these various teachers, the Grand Sanusi seems to have fallen under the influence of their șūfī teachings particularly those of Tijāniyyah order in Morocco.
He later became a member of șūfī orders which included Shādhiliyyah, Nāșriyyah and Qādiriyyah.
However, it does not seem to have wholeheartedly been in favour of their teachings which defeated the purpose of being a member.
Having realized that the purpose of accepting the teachings of these șūfī orders have been defeated the Grand Sanūsī decided to seek for a puritanical Islam.
Thus, while pursuing his studies in Algeria, Morocco and Egypt Sayyid Muhammad al-Sanusi had many opportunities to examine the sorry state of affairs into which the Muslims had drifted particularly the state of decadence prevailing in North Africa at the time.
While comparing the state of affairs in the glorious time with that of his time, the condition of his time had occupied his mind greatly and the thought that the Muslims were in a state of material and spiritual degeneration haunted him constantly.
In trying to discover the cause of this backwardness and the remedy for it; he came to conclusion that only the restoration of the original puritanical Islam and the unity of the Muslims the world over could be the future of Islam which can guarantee the security of the Ummah With this in mind Sayyid Muhammad now made it the mission of his life and as well as the objects of all his efforts and preaching.
And in order to obtain further spiritual strength he decided to pay a visit to the Ħijāz; the birth place of the Prophet Muhammad (SAW) and the original spring board of the Muslims.
The main objective for this journey 64 was to perform the pilgrimage but his actual motive was much more than that.
Among the motives was to invigorate his yearning spiritual stamina which he wished to obtain during his visit to holy cities of Islam In addition to this there seem to be a political reason for his journey.
While he was teaching in Fez, Sayyid Muhammad appears to have shown a critical attitude towards the Ottoman authorities in a mild and constructive manner by drawing their attention to the maladministration and the sorry condition prevailing in Fez.
Thus, as a consequence, his presence in Morocco was considered dangerous, the Ottoman authorities considered him a threat to their prestige, fearing that his religious teachings could develop into a political challenge which could lead to the end of the Ottoman rule in Morocco.
In order to avoid further friction with authorities, Sayyid Muhammad decided to leave for Laghout in Algeria from where he now received a large number of disciples who were attracted to his teachings.
As it has already been mentioned the main aims and objectives of the Sanūsiyyah movement when it was first began was to purify the religion of Islam from heresies, alien beliefs and practices which had in the course of centuries crept into the religion.
It was therefore, a puritanical and reformist movement.
It continued to be an internal reformist movement until its founder, the Grand Sanusi moved the seat of the order to Jaghbub in 1273/ 1856.
It was at this time that the order now had a new colour, that of political movement by concerning itself essentially with policy matters.
In its nature, the Sanūsiyyah order was strictly a șūfī order calling for puritanical Islam and return to the true tenets and rites of Islam.
However, the Sanūsiyyah order differed in many respects from the other șūfī orders.
The other șūfī orders believe in and encourage meditation, liturgical recitations with the practice of singing, dancing and beating of bandir.
The belief of these other șūfī orders is that these practices are supposed to enable the șūfī to rid himself of his physical self and attain some spiritual union with God.
On the other the Sanūsiyyah leaders declared their approach to religious reformations and guidance to the Muslims.
The basic feature of Sanūsiyyah philosophy is its attempt to reconcile the Islamic religious thought of the ulamah who strictly adhered to Sharī‘ah and that of the șūfī who were more of dhīkr, remembrance of Allah.
It could be observed that the Grand Sanusi carefully studied the teachings of some of the șūfī orders, such as Muhammadiyyah, Siddīqiyyah, Uwaisiyyah, Qādiriyyah, Rifaiyyah , Suhrawaridiyyah, Ahmadiyyah and Shādhiliyyah before he decided to establish his own.
What he did was to make it a point of duty to choose from each of these șūfī orders those principles which he considered most suited to incorporate into his order, Sanūsiyyah .
And his major intention was to bring together and unite the various existing șūfī orders.
65 Self Assessment Exercise  Narrate briefly the life history of Sayyid Muhammad Ali al-Sanusi.
 Trace the events that led to the formation of the Sanūsiyyah order.
3.2 Doctrines and ritual Practices of Sanūsiyyah order Shaykh Sayyid Muhammad b.
‘Ali al-Sanusi the founder of Sanūsiyyah order incorporated some doctrines of other orders and sufficiently enriched it with his own ideas and experiences.
The Order combined what is considered to be the least elements of the earlier Șūfī writings and practices as their rites.
Major aim of the Sanūsiyyah was to restore the prestine beauty of Islam as enshrined in the Glorious Qur’ān and the Prophetic Sunnah.
Therefore, the major rites and rituals of the Sanūsiyyah was the prohibition of music, dancing, singing, tobacco and even coffee.
Yet like other Șūfī orders it had certain devotional peculiarities, for instance in dhīkr, they had certain formulae to be repeated in given number for different categories of the ikhwān.
It would be interesting to note here that adherents of the order were divided into three categories: 1) Ahl al-Tabarruk, people seeking spiritual blessings.
The group in this category were not formal members of the Sanūsiyyah order but only attended the zāwiyyah to seek for barakah, spiritual blessing.
They were only requested to repeat the given formulae three hundred times.
2) Ahl al-Iradah, people of devotion.
This set of people are formal members of Sanūsiyyah order and are expected to repeat the formulae twelve thousand times.
3) Ahl al-Tajrīd, people of abstraction.
In this category are people who had moulded their lives according to the divine pleasure and scaled down the height of self- spiritual.
They are expected to repeat the formulae twenty four thousand times.
As part of the ritual practices of the Sanūsiyyah they are expected and duty bound to carry out the rigid rules of the Qur’ān in accordance with the most strictly monotheistic principles, whereby worship is to be given to Allah alone and pilgrimages to their tombs are absolutely interdicted.
Members of Sanūsiyyah must abstain from coffee and tobacco, avoid all intercourse with Jews and Christians, contribute a certain portion of the income to the funds of society.
They should give themselves up entirely to the service of the order and devote all their energies to the advancement of Islam, resisting at the same time any concession to western influences.
In conclusion it would be observed that Sayyid Muhammad b. Ali al-Sanusi, the founder of Sanūsiyyah brotherhood believed that all the Șūfī orders are fundamentally the same 66 but the difference only lies in the approach and outlook.
He also admitted that they all lead to the same goal which is spiritual perfection as well as nearness to Almighty Allah.
Self Assessment Exercise  Expound the doctrines and attitude of Sanūsiyyah to ritual practices.
.
4.0 CONCLUSION The rise of Sanūsiyyah was indeed a reaction to both spiritual disintegration of and the external political threat to the very existence of Islam.
The aims and objectives of establishing Sanūsiyyah order were three fold, first to work for the restoration of the original purity of Islam and the advancement of Islamic society.
Secondly, to bring about the solidarity and unity of the Muslim Ummah and to revive the community of Islam, thirdly to combat the growing encroachments of the European imperialism upon the Muslim land.
Consequently, the founder of Sanūsiyyah order Sayyid Muhammad b. Ali al-Sanusi who was born in 1202/ 1881 in the village known as al-Wasite near Mustaghamen rose to confront the situation.
He used the movement to end Italian imperialism in Libya.
5.0 SUMMARY In summary, it could be observed that the Grand Sanusi was initiated into about sixty-five șūfī orders which prevailed in the Muslim world of his time.
But finally he made making a man a good Muslim rather than a good mystic or ascetic the chief aim of his movement Therefore, Grand Sanusi did not introduce any essentially original principles, ideas or doctrines.
It was only a modern revivalist movement he succeeded in founding.
6.0 TUTOR MARKED ASSIGNMENTS 1) Trace the origin and development of the Sanūsiyyah Order 2.)
Narrate the major doctrines of the Sanūsiyyah and its attitude to ritual practices.
7.0 REFERENCES AND FURTHER READING Sharif, M. M. (1967), A History of Muslim Philosophy.
Germany.
Vol.
II.
Pp.
1457/1482 As-Sanūsī, Muhammab bn Ali (1388/1968); نيعبرلأا قئارطلا يف نيعـملا ليبسلسلا , Libya.
Sanusi, Ahmad Sharif ةيسونسلا ةقيرطلا ةمدقم : ةيسدقلا راونلأأ ghrib.net//vb/archive index.
Arnold, T.W (1913) The Spread of Islam among the people of Africa: part two, London: University Press.
67 UNIT 12: THE GENESIS, SPREAD, DOCTRINES, AND RITES OF THE SHĀDHILIYYAH ORDER CONTENT 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objective 3.0 Main contents 3.1 A short biography of Shaykh Abu I-Hassan Ali a`sh-Shādhilī 3.2 The mid-twetieth century Shādhiliyyah in Northern Nigeria.
3.2 The development, doctrines and rites of Shādhiliyyah order 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutor marked assignment 7.0 References and further reading.
1.0 INTRODUCTION The Shādhiliyyah is one of the numerous șūfī Orders around the Muslim world which developed out of the Qādiriyyah.
It was founded by Shaykh Abu `l-Hasan a`sh- Shādhilī with a large number of followers, in Alexandra, Tunisia and Syria.
This unit acquaints you with the genesis, development, doctrines and rites of the Order as one of the major sufi orders in Africa.
2.0 OBJECTIVE At the end of this unit you should be able to:  Provide a short biography of Shaykh Abu `l-Hasan a`sh- Shādhilī.
 Discuss the genesis and development of the Shādhiliyyah Order  Depict mid-twetieth century Shādhiliyyah in Northern Nigeria.
 Expound the doctrines and ritual practices of Shādhiliyyah Order.
3.0 Main Contents 3.1 Genesis and Prominent Personages Abu `l-Hasan a`sh-Shādhilī was the founder of the Shādhiliyyah.
His disciples and followers claim sherifdom for him and link his pedigree to al-Hasan bn Ali bn Abi Talib like followers of all other tariqahs.
Some biographers link him to al-Husayn while others link him to others.
Imam Dhahabi in his Kitāb al-‘Ibar calls him an ascetic from Maghrib who was resident in Alexandra.
Ambiguous expressions were made by him for which his adherents found 68 artificial excuses.
He died in the Aidhab desert (upper Egypt) in his way on pilgrimage to Mecca early dhu `l-Qa‘dah 656 A.H. Abu `l-Hasan ash-Shādhilī received training in his early childhood in the Maghrib from Abdu `s-Salam bn Mashish who had great impact on his educational and mystic life.
He thereafter travelled to Tunis, then Jabal Zaghwan where he undertook mystical retreats and ascended to higher mystical stage.
He thereafter travelled to Egypt and settled in Alexandra.
There he married and was blessed with three boys and a girl.
In Alexandra many people became his followers and aspirants; his Tariqah became widespread in Egypt while he became popular as a Qutb.
Sufi books ascribe a lot of miracles to him and many statements that are difficult to believe, contaradicting the Quran, the Sunnah and the Islamic creed.
One of the miracles reported about him was that when he visited the Prophet’s Mosque in Madina he stood by the door bare headed and bare-footed from morning till noon refusing to enter and seeking permission from the Prophet (S) and when he was asked about the reason for that he said: He would not enter until the Prophet granted him permission, because Almighy Allah says (Oh you who believe, do not enter the house of the Prophet unless you are given permission).
He thereafter heard voice from the Noble Rawdah: Oh Ali.
enter!
He is reported to have said about himself: But for the bridle of Sharī’ah tied to my tongue I would have informed you of what would happen to you tomorrow and day after until the Day of Resurrection).
This has been interpreted to mean he is claiming knowledge of the unseen; the claim is regarded as shirk by some.
A`sh-Shādhilī has some wirds and hizbs popular by his name.
These include the celebrated Hizbu `l-Barr and Hizbu `l-Bahr used by the Shādhilī and non-Shādhilī Muslims alike.He has a work on ethics of sufism adab tasawwuf arranged in chapters.
He also has another writing entitled A`s-Sirru `l-Jalil on the merits of hasbunallah wanima `l-wakīl criticised and refuted by Ibn Taymiyyah.
Shihābu `d-Din Abu `l-Abbās Ahmad bn Umar al-Mursī (d.686/1287) was the successor of A`sh-Shādhilī.
His parents came to settle in Alexandra from Murcia, Spain.
He became a qutb of immense reputation.
He has a magnificent mosque and tomb erected in his name in Alexandra.
He claimed to be permanently seing the Prophet.
”I would not regard myself a muslim if the Prophet is veiled from me any moment.” he is reported to have said.
He claimed to have been in the company of Khidr and met him several times.
Mystical interpretation of some Quanic verses have been reported from him.
He interpretes Ma nansakh min aaytin aw nunsiha nati bikhayrin minha aw mithliha as meaning: We donot take away a Saint without replacing him with a better or similar one.
Shaykh Yaqut al-Arshi, the Abyssinian, succeeded al-Mursi.
He was called al-Arshi because he claimed his heart was under the Arsh of Allah and its only his body that was 69 on the earth.
He was also reported to have claimed that he was permanently listening to the voice of bearers of al-Arsh among the Angels.
This are regarded by some as mystical fables or legends.
Ideologies and Doctrines All the Sufi Orders hold uniform ideologies and doctrines even though they may differ in their approach and training of the aspirants.
However the ideologies of the Shādhiliyyah Order may be summarized as follows bearing in mind that their interpretation by the Sufis may be quite different from the normal interpretation of the generality of other Muslim scholars and Jurists.
These doctrines are as follows: Tawbah: Repentance which is the take-off point of the murid/aspirant or traveller towards the Almighty Allah.
Niyyah : Intention which is the bases of all deeds, conducts, and devotions in Islam.
Dhikr : Remembrance of Allah, then the award, the reading of the various Ahzab day and night.
As earlier mentioned chanting the name (Allah) singularly or by the repetition of the pronoun Huwa Huwa are the most popular dhikr of the Shādhiliyyah Order.
It has been mentioned that the Muslim theologian IbnuTaymiyyah condemned this kind of dhikr as innovation, contrary to the Qur’ān and the Sunnah.
The commendable dhikr is the complete one like Lā ilāha illa llah, Allahu Akbar.
Zuhd: Asceticism which the Sufis interpreted to mean to love nothing other than Allah which is the rank of the Gnostics or to be ascetic in the lawful and abstain from the unlawful.
An-Nafs : The Soul: The Shādhiliyyah concentrate on the soul from the following perspectives .
1.
The Soul is the center of obedience if it is pure and pious 2.
Soul is the center of materialism in disobedience 3.
Soul is the center of idleness 4.
Soul is the center of laziness in performance of duties Therefore, the soul must be purified to become center for obedience alone.
Waraa.
Interpreted as working for Allah by Allah based on clear and inherent evidence.
Tawakkul: Depending on Allah.
Riđā: Earning the divine pleasure.
Love : which in their definition means :the journey of the heart in search of the beloved and unceasing passion of the tongue in his remembrance.
The Shādhiliyyah has various degrees of Love exemplified by Rabiah al-Adawiyyah’s verse : My love for you are in double manners, 70  One from my heart and the other because You deserve it.
Dhawq: defined as Spirit’s reception of pure secrets in charisma and the extra- ordinary and unaccustomed happenings.
They regard it as way of faith in Allah, proximity and servitude to Him.
As a result of this the Sufis prefer knowledge acquired through esoteric means over the Sharī ‘ah sciences such as jurisprudence, its principles etc.
The knowledge of al-Ahwal (States) are attained through dhawq.
Wajd, Ishq, and shawq are all branches of dhawq.
Ilmu ‘l-yaqin which connotes knowing Allah with certainty which occurs only through dhawq, intuitive knowledge or revelation etc… This notwithstanding, Ash-Shādhilī still maintains that holding fast to the Qur’ān and Sunnah are the basis of his Tarīqah.
He says: If what I revealed to you contradicts the Qur’ān and Sunnah drop the revelation and say in your mind: It is in the Qur’ān and Sunnah that Allah guaranteed safety for me not in in the Kashf (revelation) not inspiration, nor in the perception.
He further emphasizes the point by saying: Hold fast to the divine knowledge revealed to the messenger of Allah, emulate him, and emulate the caliphs, the Sahabis and the Successors after them.
Like all other Sufis the Shādhiliyyah hold that the knowledge of the Qur’ān and Sunnah can only be acquired through a Shaykh, Preceptor or Guide.
The Murid may never realize authentic knowledge except by blind following of his Preceptor.
‘The Murīd in the hands of his Shaykh is like the corpse in the hands of its wash- man.
The Shaykh should thus be seen with holiness above his humanistic rank.
Another sufi phenomenon is what they term ‘Samā‘u’ literally, listening or hearing.
This connotes hearing of verses and amorous sufi poems.
As reported from al-Muhasibi: One of the things enjoyed by the Faqirs (i.e.
the Sufis) is hearing the sonorous voices.
Verily it is one of the secrets of Allah in the creation.
Sufi authors have written on the details of hearing under different topics because of special importance attached to it by them.
Several poems considered as bordering on kufr and shirk are found in the sufi concept of Samā.
Raising the Prophet (S) to a rank above humanity not found in the reports from the great Sahabis nor found in the Qur’ān and Hadith.
71 The Ideological and Philosophical Roots: All the sufi systems are training schools aiming at soul purification, asceticism in mundane matters and righteousness.
But the various systems allow extraneous factors to creep into them.
Such influences include Greek, Indian, Christian, Jewish and other philosophies.
These found their ways into Islamic ideologies during the translation movement periods in the fourth hijrah centuries and impacted on Sufism.
Thus the deviation from the true path of Islam began.
The Sūfiyyah adopted travelling stages of soul development towards the stage of annihilation by self mortification, asceticism, and abstinence with the aim of experiencing everlasting bliss which derives from Indian philosophy.
Monasticism/celibacy (Rahbāniyyah) was adopted from deviated Christianity.
This means dissociating human society in isolation from men and practicing monasticism which are borrowed from Christianity by the Sufis.
The theory of divine revelation, union and incarnation were borrowed by some Sufis from Greek and Christian philosophy.
Sufism also contains some amazing terminologies and sciences which are very far from clear Islamic and Sharī‘ah tenets.
Self Assessment Exercises Examine the beginning and spread of the Shādhiliyyah order.
3.2 The Shādhiliyyah in Nigeria Egypt is the first main center of the Shādhiliyyah: It found adherents particularly in Alexandra, Tanta and Dasuq in the Kafru Shaykh district.
From there it spread to other Arab countries.
Its most important centres of activities are Syria and Maghrib.
It also has centres in Libya and Sudan to date.
As shown in their writings, Uthman bn Fudi, his brother Abdullah and his son Muhammad Bello received authority (Ijazah) in the Shadhiliyyah.
And the Order had some followership in Bornu during the second half of the nineteeth century.
It was also reintroduced into Kano during the reign of Emir Usman (1920-26) by Ali Musa (d.1937), a Tunisian Arab.
The Order had earlier had centres at Zinder in the State of Niger and Timbuktu and maintained headquarter in Tunis.
Shaykh Ali Musa lived in Dandalin Turawa ward of Kano and trained two deputies (khalifahs) for Garba Salwa ward and Sidi Muhammad, in Sanka ward.
They were both Tunisian Arabs born in Kano.
Ali Musa was a mystic who usually had seizures of ecstacy (jadhb) on hearing the haylalah.
He was using the Diwan of the Arusiyyah during wirdi sessions.
He died in 1937.
72 Shortly after the death of Ali Musa, his principal successor, Sidi Muhammad bought some houses adjacent to the Shadhiliyyah centre at Shatsari ward and acquired an abandoned Sanūsiyyah mosque which was vacated there due to preasure from the British Colonial administration for expansion purposes.
Until 1940, the leadership and congregation of the Shadhiliyyah in Kano was largely confined to Tunisian Arabs.
In 1940, however, Sidi Muhammad appointed two Hausa muqaddams, Shaykh Ahmad bn Ali and al-Hajj Bala.
In 1943, Ahmad bn Ali In turn appointed another Hausa muqaddam, Inuwa of Sokoto and Abdullah Bayero (d. 1950).
By the 1950s, Kano had become acknowledged centre for the Shadhiliyyah in Nigeria.
Ahmad bn.
Ali (c.1915-1970), the major Hausa muqaddam of Shadhiliyyah was also the chief muqaddam of Arusiyyah, which subsequently came to dominate the Shadhiliyyah.
His career closely paralleled that of Nasiru Kabara, of whom he was a disciple.
He was relatively young, was well travelled (mecca 1945, 1955) and was fluent in Arabic which allowed him direct contact with Arab world.
He wrote several books on Shadhiliyyahand has interpreted Arusiyyah through his Hausa poetry.
He has also been instrumental in Spreading Shadhiliyyah to other urban centres in Northern Nigeria for which there had been one muqaddam in Katsins, in Jos Daud opened a mosque, in Bornu al-Hajj Bala was appointed muqaddam, in Zaria, Shaykh Salim bn Abdullah opened a Shadhiliyyah mosque in 1965.
Self Assessment Exercise Depict the mid-twetieth century Shādhiliyyah in Northern Nigeria.
4.0.
CONCLUSION The Shādhiliyyah is a Sufi Order founded by Abu l-Hasan Shādhilī whose real name is Ali bn Abdullah bn Jabbār bn Yusuf.
The nomenclature Shādhilī derives from Shādhilah township in the North West Africa, Maghrib.
The Shādhiliyyah shares most doctrines and ideologies with other sufi Orders.
It however differs from them in its method of training the murīd (aspirant) or sālik (traveler in the path- tariqah) .
A summary of its doctrines are Tawbah (repentance), Ikhlāș (sincerity), Niyyah (intention) Khalwah (seclusion), Dhikr (recitation of remembrance formula), Zuhd (asceticism), Nafs (Soul), Wara (abstemiousness), Tawakkul (total reliance on God) Riđā (pleasure of God), Mahabbah (divine love), Dhawq (taste), Ilmu ‘l-yaqīn (knowledge with certainty), and Samā‘ (hearing).
All these are terminologies for sufi 73 states and stations (aħwāl and maqāmāt) signifying connotations which are at variance from their Sharī‘ah and literal understanding.
As for the knowledge of the Qur’ān and Sunnah, it could only be acquired from a Sufi Shaykh, Preceptor, or Guide which will involve blind imitation from the aspirant.
Shādhiliyyah may also be accused of the same accusations leveled against other sufi ways such as deviation from the Straight path of Islam according to critics of tasawwuf.
5.0 SUMMARY This Unit provides you with a brief life history of Shaykh Abu `l-Hasan Ali bn Abdullah a`sh-Shādhilī and his intention in founding the Shādhiliyyah șūfī Order named after him.
The Unit identifies Shaykh Shadhili’s disciple, Shaykh Abu Abbas al-Mursi (d. 686 A.H).
as the personage who was able to transform and achieve the aims of the founder of the Shādhiliyyah and highlights major activities of this order as engaging in serious recitation of awrād and adhkār aloud as well as the areas of the orders locations in the Muslim world.
6.0 TUTOR MARKED ASSESSMENTS (1) Examine the role of Shaykh Abu l-Hassan a`sh-Shādhilīy in the formation of Shādhiliyyah order.
(2) Discuss the doctrine and rituals/practices of Shādhiliyyah order.
7.0 REFERENCES AND FURTHER READING Paden, J.N.
(1973); Religion and political culture in Kano, London.
Ahmed, A. F. (1986) The Qādiriyyah Șūfī Order and Its Impact I Nigeria, PhD Thesis, University of Ibadan.
Ibadan.
Nigeria.
Jimoh, L.O.
(2006).
The contributions of Shaykh Nasiru Kabara to the development of Qādiriyyah Order in Nigeria, Ph.D thesis, University of Ilorin, Ilorin, Nigeria.
Nuh Hamim Keller (1417/1997); Awrād Tarīqah Shadhiliyyah/ Invocations of Shadhiliyyah Order, Amman Jordan.
Nuh Hamim Keller; The Shadhiliyyah Tariqah,www.shadhilitariqah.com retrieved October 2013.
74 UNIT 13: THE FORMATIVE PERIOD, AIMS AND OBJECTIVE AND EMERGENCE OF THE IZĀLAH MOVEMENT CONTENT: 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objectives 3.0 Main content 3.1 The beginning of the Yan Izālah movement.
3.2 The Aims and Objectives of the Yan Izālah Movement.
3.3 Assess the role of Shaykh Mahmud Gumi regarding Yan Izālah activities.
3.4 Relate some anti-Şufism activities of the Izālat Movement after its formation.
4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutor marked assignment 7.0 References and further reading 1.0 INTRODUCTION In this unit you will learn about an anti-șūfī movement known as Jamā‘atu izālati `l- bid‘ah waiqāmati `s-sunnah i.e.
Society for the elimination of innovations and promotion of orthodoxy.
Unlike the Qādiriyyah Șūfī Order which has its origin from a different continent or the Tijāniyyah which has its origin from the North Africa the Jamā ‘at Izālah has its origin in Nigeria and is introduced by a Nigerian.
The Unit imparts the profile of the Izālah to you.
2.0 OBJECTIVES At the end of this unit you should be able to:  Relate the beginning of the Izālatu `l- bid-‘ah wa iqāmatu `s-sunnah.
 Discuss the aims and objectives of the Izālatu `l-Bid’ah.
 Assess the role of Shaykh Mahmud Gumi regarding Yan Izālah activities.
 Relate some anti-Şufism activities of the Izālat Movement after its formation.
3.0 MAIN CONTENT 3.1 The Beginnng of the Jamā‘atu Izālati `l-bid‘ah waiqāmati `s-sunnah.
Mallam Aminu Liman Mustapha one of the founding fathers said that at a time some group of Muslims felt that some some objectionable innovations had crept into the practice of Islam in Nigeria and there was the need to establish a group to remove them and the orthodoxy of Islam be restored.
The group of Muslims felt the need to give a new orientation to Islam and the way it was been practiced by the Muslims in the area.
This led to the emergence of the Jamaat.
75  One of the leaders of the group who began the movement was Mallam Ismaila Idris.
Consequently, many other Islamic clerics who identified themselves with Mallam his view gathered together and the result was the formation of the group known as Jamā‘atu izālati `l-bid‘ah waiqāmati `s-sunnah: Society for the elimination of innovations and promotion of orthodoxy.
It was a quite historic occasion on 8th of February 1978 in Jos the Plateau state capital when the foundation of the movement was laid and Jos was chosen as the National headquarters of the Izālah.
The first national executive council of the association was selected.
It was based on a system of collective leadership.
A variety of committees were similarly appointed to oversee some specific functions, particularly the constitution of the association.
It should be noted that most of the view points of Izālah group were based on the teachings of Shaykh Abubakar Gumi, one time, Grand Qādī of the defunct Northern Nigeria and who was regarded as the precursor of the association.
Infact he was once appointed as the patron of the group.
Self Assessment Exercise Trace the origin and basis of the Jamā‘atu izālati `l-bid‘ah waiqāmati `s-sunnah (i.e.
Society for the Removal of Bid-‘ah and Institutionalization of Sunnah).
3.2 The aims and objectives of the Izālah.
The Jamā‘at Izālah which was founded on February 8, 1978 in Jos with the town as the headquarters becomes a group to be reckoned with in the history of Islam in Nigeria has the following as its aims and objectives: I.
To promote the fundamental teachings of Islam as laid down in Holy Qur’ān and the Sunnah of the Prophet Muhammad.
II.
To revive in the minds of the Muslims their actual true duties as required of them by Almighty Allah in the Qur’ān and the Hadith of the Prophet (S.A.W) III.
To dissociate members from any claims that anybody within the context of Islam received any further revelation from Almighty Allah after the Holy Prophet (S.A.W) secretly or openly or that he reappeared after centuries and made certain revelation of his blessing to a few selected people or that he has passed any directive to anyone after his death.
IV.
To establish that the Holy Prophet (S.A.W) has fully accomplished his mission to the world, as confirmed by Almighty Allah in the Holy Qur’ān and that only those teachings as contained in his mission should be followed.
V. To establish in the minds of all Muslim that anybody who claims or worships in the belief that he has any communications with the Holy Prophet (S.A.W) or that the Holy Prophet (S.A.W) can pay anyone a visit physically after the Prophet’s 76 death, that person has denounced the Holy Qur’ān and is therefore discarded by Islam unless he or she repents whole heartedly.
VI.
To re-affirm that anything new or additional to or against the five basic pillars of Islam should not be accepted by Muslims because it is on-Islamic VII.
To establish and promote a better and closer understanding among Muslims of all walks of life and in all parts of the country and to unite them as required by the Islamic divine faith.
VIII.
To re-affirm that the members are determined to guard these principles at all cost without any option for compromise.
Virtually, the aims and objectives of the organization as enumerated above are mainly in direct confrontation with the teachings of the Tariqāhs.
Although not written, it is implicitly an attack on the șūfī orders most especially if it is observed that before the formal launching of the organisation in February 1978, the nucleus members that finally formed the organisation were attacking the teachings of both Qādiriyyah and Tijāniyyah openly using the publication of Shaykh Abubakar Gumi known as al-Aqīdat as-Şaħīħah.
The publication condemned all the șūfī books, beliefs and ritual practices.
Self Assessment Exercise  Discuss the aims and objectives of the Izālatu `l-Bid’ah.
3.
3 Some activities of the Izālah Movement after its establishment As earlier mentioned it 8th Febuary, 1978 was quite an historic occasion in Jos, the capital of Plateau State where many far-reaching decisions were taken on the purification of Muslim practices by the Izālah group.
The Jamā‘ah was formally launched; the first National Executive Council of the organization was elected based on a system of collective leadership at the top.
Also the constitution was drawn and adopted.
Jos was also selected as the headquarters of the Jamaat.
Late Shaykh Abubakr Gumi, the Grand Qādī of the Northern Nigeria was the precursor as well as the patron of the Izālah group.
He wrote a publication known as al-‘Aqīdatu `ș- Şaħīħah bi-Muwāfaqati`sh-Sharī‘ah (The Right Belief in Accordance with Sharī‘ah).
which according to the Shaykh was not written for general reading.
It was specifically meant for the people who were familiar with most of the arguments presented in it.
In other words, it condemns all șūfī books, beliefs and all forms of innovative ways of worship.
According to his ideas in al-‘Aqīdah `ș-Şaħīħah and preachings, both the Qādiriyyah and the Tijāniyyah are basically non-compliant with true teachings of Islam as revealed in the Glorious Qur’ān and explained in the Sunnah of Muhammad (SAW); the book contains open condemnation of the overall objectives of șūfīsm.
The Shaykh is of the opinion that 77 șūfī tenets especially as regards the powers attributed to the șūfī shaykhs, the coinization of individuals as saints and the observance of wīrd and dhīkr determined by the Shaykh or Muqaddam are all innovations..
According to Shaykh Abubakar Gumi there is no esotericism (bāţiniyyah) in Islam.
Everything has been laid out clearly and no individual Muslim ever stands in need of intercession between him and God, no matter how learned or devoted he may be.
He also considers the organizational structure of the brotherhoods as very deceptive and exploitative.
He opposed the elaborate initiation ceremonies and prescription of special dhikrs, wirds and hizbs.
So also the oath of allegiance formally binding the murīd to all the senior members of the brotherhoods because they are considered to have power to save from difficulties.
Further, the late Shaykh Gumi was seriously against the reading of the books on Tasawwuf which deal with the karāmāt of awliyā or speak about the union with God or incarnation (ittihād wa ħulūl).
At this juncture, it is pertinent to note that for many centuries, the tașawwuf dominated the thoughts of almost all the early Nigerian Muslim scholars and gained widespread acceptance among Nigerian Muslim communities.
Infact, the Qādiriyyah and the Tijāniyyah were most prominent and dominant brotherhood movements in the country, particularly the elite Muslim scholars.
Not all the Muslim clerics accept the doctrines of mystics like the pantheists Ibn Arabi, al-Hallaj and other extremist mystics.
Among those who condemned Tasawuf in its entirely were Ibn Taymiyyah, the 13th century Hambali theologian.
Some of the aspects he condemned include, visitation to the tombs of the Prophet (S.A.W), invocations of saints and Prophets, as well as veneration of saints.
The teachings of this Hambalite theologian, Ibn Taymiyyah, had much influence on the founder of Wahabiyyah Shaykh Muhammad b. Abd al-Wahab who aimed at eradicating all innovations which were introduced into Islam after the 3rd century Hijrah.
He also disapproved the doctrine of intercession of saints.
Self Assessment Exercises Assess the role of Shaykh Mahmud Gumi regarding Yan Izālah activities.
The anti-Sufi activities of the Yan Izalah However, Shaykh Gumi’s publication constituted the basis for the activities of the Izālah group.
One of the founding fathers of the Izālah, Mallam Ismaila Idris, took a copy of the the Shaykh’s publication to a Tafsir session at Sultan Bello mosque in Kaduna in the absence of Shaykh Abubakar Gumi.
There he preached to the congregation quoting 78 liberally from the book condemning the Tariqāhs.
This sparked violent attack among the members of the organization against the members of Tariqāhs.
The Izālah thus condemns Tasawwuf in its totality on the basic that it is an innovation which started after the death of Prophet (SAW) and regarded that all the followers of șūfī orders are Kufar.
Therefore, nobody should pray behind them.
According to the Izālah an Imam should be given the choice between Imamship and membership of Tariqāh.
Consequently, some Imams were forcefully removed from office and this led to violent clashes in some Muslim communities between Ahl al-Tariqāh and the Yan Izālah.
The violent clashes started among the two groups in the early eighties and fatal incidents were reported every year, for many years running.
According to Ismail A. Tisiqa the first and perhaps the most controversial issue that Shaykh Abubakar Gumi confronted among his audience was in respect of the Tariqāhs.
Indeed, it had become the major subject of debate in many published writings.
Therefore, there were constant open confrontation between the followers of the brotherhood movements and the Izālah who were against any form of innovation in the practice of Islam.
The first victim of the organized violent between Izālah and the Tarīqah groups was that of Mallam Ali, a Nupe man, living in Kawo, a Kaduna suburb.
He preached the Quran and other religious rites to the public as it was custom of the country.
Unfortunately in one of his outings at Barnawa, another suburb area of Kaduna on his Dawah mission as usual.
He had hardly began when some followers of Tariqāh demanded that he should stop.
A scuffle ensued in which someone stabbed him to death.
This accounts for the beginning of the Izālah attacks.
It should be noted that in many towns and cities where the Izālah group were unsuccessful in removing the Imam who happened to be a member of șūfī orders, they tried to establish their own central mosques.
Some of the towns which experienced this situation are Sokoto, Kano, Zaria and Bauchi.
The growth of the Izālah as a group and its impact was not entirely peaceful.
Serious public disorders had occurred in many places as a result of its preaching method.
Self Assessment Exercises  Relate some anti-Şufism activities of the Izālat Movement after its formation.
4.0 CONCLUSION Jamaat Izalat wa Iqamat al-Sunnah was founded by a group of Muslim clerics in Jos on February 8th 1978.
Prior to this time some young Muslim elites were of the views that 79 some innovations have found their ways into the practices of Islam in Nigeria.
Therefore, it needed some reformation.
The group of clerics who formed the Movement met in Jos to chose its first national executive.
Unlike the Șūfī and other religious groups before it The Izālah Movement originated in Nigeria by Nigerians.
The man who facilitated the establishment of the organisation was Mallam Ismaila Idris.
On the occasion of selecting the national executive for the organisation, a variety of committees were put in place.
Mainly the aim and objectives of the organization were direct attack on the teachings of șūfī orders; Qādiriyyah and Tijāniyyah.
5.0 SUMMARY This unit traces the beginning of Jamā‘at Izālah, an organisation which aims at purifying Islam from Sufi practices in Nigeria.
The Unit also presents the aims and objectives of the organization which came into being by 8th February 1978 as a result of some activities of young Muslim elites.
The elites inspired by the writings of Shaykh Mahmud Gumi and led by Malam Ismaila Idris were of the opinions that the innovations which were introduced into Islam by the Tariqahs in Nigeria must be removed.
The Unit gives Mallam Ismaila Idris as facilitator of the launching of the Organization and choosing of Jos as its headquarters.
The Unit also highlights some of the activities of the Organization, composition of its executive members and variety of committees.
It gives the content of the aims of the Organization as spelt out in its constitution.
6.0 TUTOR MARKED ASSIGNMENT 1.
Jamā’at Izālat al-Bid-‘ah wa Iqāmat a`s-Sunnah is more a puritanical organisation than an association” Give your opinion on this statement.
2.
Write notes on role of al-‘Aqīdatu `ș-Şaħīħah in the anti-Tariqah activities of the Jamā’atu Izālah.
7.0 REFERENCES AND FURTHER READING Mahmud Gummi (1976).
al-‘Aqīdatu `ș-Şaħīħah bi-Muwāfaqati`sh-Sharī‘ah Abubakar Gumi and Ismaila A. Tsiga (1994) Where I stand; Ibadan: Spectrum Books Ltd. Jimoh, L.O.
(2006).
The contributions of Shaykh Nasiru Kabara to the development of Qadiriiyyah order in Nigeria unpublished Ph.D the of University of Ilorin, Ilorin Quadri, Y.A.
(1981) “The Tijāniyyah in Nigeria” an unpublished thesis in the department of Arabic and Islamic Studies, University of Ibadan, Nigeria.
Ahmed, A. F. (1986).
The Qādiriyyah Șūfī Order and its Impact in Nigeria.
Unpublished PhD.
Thesis, University of Ibadan.
80 UNIT 14: THE YAN IZĀLAH RELATION WITH QĀDIRIYYAH AND TIJĀNIYYAH CONTENT 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objectives 3.0 Main contents 3.1 The Izālah-Qādiriyyah Relation.
3.2 The Izālah – Tijāniyyah polemics on Ṣalātu ‘l- Fātiħ 3.3 The Izālah – Tijāniyyah polemics on Jawharatu ‘l- Kamal 3.4 Social and Educational Role of Izālah 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutor marked assignment 7.0 References and further reading 1.0 INTRODUCTION A close study of the activities of the Jamā’at Izālatul-bid-‘ah wa iqāmatu `s- Sunnah organization reveals that they are mainly attacks on the teachings of the Tariqāhs which they carry out both in letter and spirit.
A critical view of the activities of the organization as well as its perceptions of șūfīs and the Șūfī Orders is the focus of this Unit.
2.0 OBJECTIVES At the end of this unit you should be able to:  expatiate upon the Izālah - Qādiriyyah relation  relate the Izālah – Tijāniyyah polemics on Salatu `l-Fātiħ  Analyze the Izālah Tijāniyyah polemics on Jawharatu `l-Kamāl  Expound the social and educational role of the Izālah 3.0 MAIN CONTENTS 3.1 Qādiriyyah - Izālah Relation Shaykh Abu Bakr Gumi, d. 1413/1992, inspired the emergence of Jamā‘atu Izālah Organization in the early seventies with the objective of eradicating Șūfī Orders in Nigeria through his lectures and publications in which he vehemently condemned Șūfī doctrines and practices which he calls censurable innovations.
One such issues he called censurable is the concept of wilāyah (saintship) which is a significant aspect of the Qādiriyyah.
On who a walī is, the Izālah argues that the word is nothing more than a ‘friend’ and thus every faithful is a wali about whom God says in the Glorious Qur’ān “verily on the friend of God there is no fear nor shall they grieve.” (Q.10:62).
The Izālah thus goes further to condemn all books which describe the various ranks of ‘saints’ and 81 pledging of allegiance to Șūfī shaykhs such as Al-Fuyūdāt al-Rabbāniyyah (a celebrated Qadiriyyah prayer manual).
To the Qādirīs, on the other hand, the belief that cAbdu `l- Qādir holds the highest Șūfī rank of Qutbu `l-Aqtāb is axiomatic.
And in consonance with Șūfī doctrines, they argue that wilāyah (saintship) is of two categories.
The first one, which agrees with Izālah’s view, is general to every believer who expresses faith in God and accompanies it with good deeds.
The second, which constitutes the bone of contention, is that peculiar to special people whom God may have chosen such as cAbdu `l-Qādir and other Șūfī Saints.
The Izālah’s attitude, of course, has attracted reactions from Șūfī leaders such as Nāșir Kabara who took Gumi to task literarily.
The Izalah’s aggressive approach to the realization of its objective led to occasional violence in many areas of their operation.
Tment has however succeeded in detaching many Muslims from tarīqah associations.
One positive outcome of its activities has been the temporary coming together of the Qādiriyyah and Tijāniyyah followers to defend their faith against a common enemy.
Self Assessment Exercise Narrate the relationship between the Izālah and the Qādiriyyah briefly.
3.2 The Izālah – Tijāniyyah polemics on Ṣalātu ‘l- Fātiħ The Text and Translation.
ق ـ ب س ا م ـ ل م تاـ خ ل ا و ق لـغ أ ا م ـ ل ح تا فـ لا د م ـ ح م ا ن د ـّيـ س ى لـ ع ل ص م ه لل ا مي ق ت س م لا ك ط ا ر ـ ص ىـ ل إ ى د ا هـ ل ا و ق ح ـ ل ا ب ق ح ل ا ر ص اـ ن .
م يـ ظ ع ل ا ه ر ا د ـ ق م و ه ر د ق ق ـ ح ه لآ ى ل ع و ‘’O Allah bless our Master Muhammad the Opener for those to whom the way is shut and the Seal for those who have gone, the Helper of the Truth by the Truth and the Guide to your right path; and bless his household, in a manner commensurate to his and high measure’’.
The views of anti – Tijānīyyah Muslims represented by late Shaykh Mahmud Gumi, are hereby juxtaposed with the views of Sani Hasan Kafanga, a Kano Tijānīyyah Scholar (d. 1996) representing pro-Tijānīyyah trend.
Mahmud Gumi: ‘’ of the blame –worthy innovation is what some of the people in this country during the supplication in a gathering have been accustomed to saying: we read Al- Fātihah and Salātu’l- Fātih because this is believing in what is written in Jawāhiru’l- Ma’ānī wa Bulūghu’ l-Amānī Vol.l Chapter 2, when he says on page one –hundred and forty: and I asked him- may Allah be pleased with him-, ‘Is report of leader of man (S) of 82 the same veracity at death as it was when alive?
And the text of his reply, may Allah be pleased with him is as follow: the rules which were for the generality of the people ceases after his death (S), and there remained the special matters which were given by him to special people exclusively.
That continued uninterrupted during his life and after his death.
And Salātu ‘l –Fātiħ limā ughliqa is the best of all forms of generalization and possibility except those within the framework of Da’iratu’l-iħāţah only.
Its recitationis much be better than other action and prayer of peace.
He then comments further and says; he who presumed that the Prophet’s help to his community terminated by his death (S) like other dead people is ignorant of the rank of the Prophet (S) and is impolite to him and runs the risk of dying as an infidel if he does not turn back from (this) misconception.
Sani Hasan Kafanga’s reply: This is the statement of the one who accused the Muslims of infidelity without any legal proof but judgement of his own passion.
I say: ‘’it is required from a supplicant and every suppliant to begin with praise of Allah and invoke His blessing upon the Prophet (S) before starting his invocation and supplication.
Then he should end (it) with prayer of benediction to him (S).
For Allah the Most High surely accepts the act of requesting for blessing on His Prophet.
He (Allah) is Nobler than accepting the act of giving benediction to him and rejecting the prayer between it’’.
‘’With (the prayer of Benediction for the Prophet) all beautiful invocation ends and commences.’’ Allah the Almighty has taught us the method of prayer.
Of this is the beginning with praise to him.
He said : ‘’ Praise be to Allah, the Lord of the Worlds, The Beneficent, the Merciful,Owner of the Day of Judgement.
It is You we worship and from you we ask for Help.
Guide us to the Straight Path.
Thus He began with the praise.
He then said ‘’guide us to the right path’’.
Therefore what has become the habit of the people by saying let us read Fātiħah and Salātu ‘l –Fātiħ is a good and recommended affairs, which is applied by intelligent people.
It is not of the blame worthy innovation except with him whose brain is perverted and joined the group of insane people and who is dressed in the clothing of stupidity.
If the blame is directed to Salātu ‘l –Fātiħ what is the fault in it.?
It is composed of sound Arabic words with clear meanings; and it appeared in the world before Shaykh Ahmad al- Tijānī – may Allah be pleased with him.
For that it is the best of all forms of prayer of benediction upon the Prophet and has a lot of characteristics following what its author Shaykh Muhammad al- Bakri (R) said; ‘’that whoever reads it everyday one time, would attain the bliss of the two worlds…..It is so named because it opens the way for he who always reads it all that were closed against him of the good things of the world and the hereafter and close to him all evils of the world and the hereafter….
If you go through the book tiled Al-Ajwibatu ‘l-Muharrarah, you will find some of what I told you about the merits of this Salātu ‘l –Fātiħ which is lifted forth by our Shaykh ‘Uthman b. Fudi from ‘Fathu- ‘l- Mubīn’ to his book ‘Al- Ajwibah’ earlier mentioned.
The end.
83  It makes no sense to find that Shaykh Ibn Fudi lifted it into his book and does not say it.
Neither does it make sense that Shaykh ‘Abdullah Bayero derived blessings from it and concluded with it all his undertaking but did not recite it or request for Prophet’s benediction with it.
And he also mentioned it as the last after the two prayers of benediction with which he used to end his corrigendum because of their innumerable values and inclusiveness of the rest of prayers for benediction.
Therefore, how valuable and how blessed is it (Salātu ‘l –Fātiħ)!
All that he quoted of the Qur’ān’s verse were quite irrelevant to our own concern here.
The Șūfī s know; they even known better than this accuser of infidelity that the Prophet (S) delivered what he was commanded to deliver and did not hide anything from it and that the religion is completed and that they are more pious and more conscious of (their) Lord than him.
He (the Prophet) said (S) to him ho pray with: That I request from you for Thou art Allah, The One, on whom all things depends etc.
‘’You have called on Allah with his most magnificent name’’.
He said the same things to him who prayed with: ‘O you who is favourably disposed, O you Owner of the magnificent throne etc’’.
This shows that all that which has clear meaning are also approved and it is good to cling to it especially when a legal origin is ascribed to it like good dream or an inspiration of established merit like the devotions of Shādhilī and Al- Nasāī and their like.
The awrād of the supplications of the Shaykhs are neither innovations nor interpolation in the religion.
Innovation is what one does not have proof in the Qur’ān and Sunnah….
Salātu ‘l –Fātiħ is not an innovation and not a corruption (in religion) and one who always says it and practices it should not be driven away from the river of the Prophet (S).
Shaykh Mahmud Gumi: ‘’All those who thought the Prophet (S) concealed something in his life time which he disclosed to those coming behind’’ has indicted the Prophet (S) with concealment of (message); and that is a glaring blasphemy with all the community of Muhammad.
May Allah protect us from that lead to going against the Sunnah.’’ Sani Hasan Kafanga’s reply: I say: I do not know particularly who believe what this enemy accused Shaykh Ahmad al- Tijānī (R.) of saying that ‘’This (wird) devotional services is kept for me by the Prophet (S).’’ it is a lie on him and whoever calls his brother: Oh, Kāfir (infidel) has indeed become an unbeliever).
Mahmud Gumi: ‘’The type of this statement about Ṣalātu’l- Fātiħ and others is of what they invented and ascribed to the Prophet (Ṣ) in a lot of their books.
It is not permissible to practice them’’.
Sani Hasan Kafanga’s reply: I say: an assembly of perfect Saints and scholars who utilized their knowledge had put Salātu ‘l –Fātiħ practice before the emergence of Shaykh Ahmad al –Tijānī (r.) and they will continue to practice it till the day of 84 resurrection.
This statement of his then is like a mosquito that wants to pull down the biggest mountain in the world.
Meanwhile, that recitation of Salātu ‘l –Fātiħ is thousands of times more meritorious than reciting the Qurān has been considered by other Muslims as quite outrageous .
But members of the order have subsequently made still more inordinate assertions about the efficacy of the prayer.
In his al-Futūhāt al- Rabbāniyyah, (p.99), Ahmad b. Muhammad al-Shiqīti claims for example: ‘’As for Salātu ‘l –Fātiħ its merits are eight categories, and what has been made known of them is but a fragment of the first.
(i.e) of the lowest one); the rest remain concealed.
From the part of the merits which has been made known is the following: that he who reads it once is guaranteed the bliss of the two abodes; also reciting it ones atones for all sins and is equivalent to six thousand times all prayers of glorification to God, all dhikrs and du‘ās, long or short, which have occurred in the Universe.
He who recites it ten times acquires recompense greater than that which is due to a wali who lived ten thousand years but did not say it.
Saying it onecs is equivalent to the prayers of all angels, jinns from the beginning of their creation to the time when it as uttered; and saying it second is like it (i.e.
equivalent to the recompense of the first) plus the recompense of the first and seconds, and so on.
Among its merits also is that he who preserves in reciting it every day dies in good faith… and he who recites it a hundred times on Friday evening will be absolved in his sins (even if he lived) four hundred years.
Among its known merits are other things for which there is no space in this abbreviated book.
Self Assessment Exercise Highlight the views of Shaykh Mahmud Gumi on Şalātu `l-Fātiħ.
How did Sani Hasan Kafanga refute them ?
3.4 The Izālah – Tijāniyyah polemics on Jawharatu ‘l- Kamal Jawharatu ‘l- Kamāl is the second most extolled Ṣalāt in the Tijānīyyah.
Shaykh Ahmad Tijānī claimed he received it from the Prophet Muhammad directly in a waking state.
The Text and Translation of the Jawharatu `l-Kamāl is as follows: ة ط ئاـ ح ـ ل ا ة ق قـ ح ت م لا ة تو قا يلا ة ي نا ب ر لا ة م ح ر لا ن ي ع ى لـ ع م ّل س و ل ـ ص م ـ ه لل ا ق ح ـ ل ا ب ح اـ ص ى ـ م د ل ا ة ن و ك ت م ل ا ن ا و ك ل ا ر و ن ، ى نا ع م ـ ل ا و م و ه ف ل ا ز ك ر م ب ن ـ م ض ر ع ـ ت م ل ك ل ة ئ لا م ـ ل ا حا ب ر ل ا ن و ز م ـ ب ع ـ ط س ل ا ق ر بـ ل ا ، ىـ نا ب ر لا ة ن ك م أ ب ط ئاـ ح ل ا ك ن و ـ ك ه ـ ب ت لأ م ى ذ ـ لا عـ م لا ك ر و ن و ، ىـ نا و ل ا و ر و ح ب ل ا ، ىـ نا ك ـ م ل ا ق ئا ق ح ـ ل ا ش و ر ـ ع ا هـ ن م ىّل ج تـ ت ى تـلا ق ح ـ ل ا ن ي ع ى لـ ع م ّل س و ل ـ ص م ـ ه لل ا .
م ق س ل ا م ا تـلا ك ط ا ر ـ ص م و ق ل ا ف ر ا ع م ل ا ن ي ـ ع ك ن م ك ت ض اـ ف إ .
م ـ ظ ع ل ا ز ن ك لا ق ح ل ا ب ق ح ل ا ة ع ل ط ن ي ع ى لـ ع م ّل س و ل ـ ص م ـ ه لل ا ا ن ف ر ع ـ ت ةلاـ ص ، ه لآ ى ل ع و ه ي ل ع الل ى ل ص .
م س ل ط م ل ا ر و نلا ة طا ح إ ك ي ل إ .
هاـ ي إ ا هـ ب 85  Translation : O God, send Benediction upon and salute the Source of Divine Mercy, a true ruby which encompasses the center of comprehensions and meanings, the son of Adam, the possessor of Divine Truth; the most luminous lighting in the profitable rain-cloud which fill all the intervening seas and receptacles; Thy bright light with which Thou has filled Thy universe and which surrounds the places of existence.
O God, bless and salute the Source of Truth from which are manifested the Tabernacles of Realities; the Source of Knowledge, the most upright; Thy complete and most straight path.
O God, bless and salute the Advent of the Truth by the Truth; the greatest treasure, thy mysterious Light.
May God bless the Prophet and his household, a prayer that brings us to knowledge of Him.
This Şalāt is equally believed to possess great merits.
For example, it is said that the Prophet will love whoever persistently recites it at least seven times daily and that such a person will become a wali before he dies.
It is also said that wherever it is read at least seven times the Prophet and his four caliphs will be present at the venue at the seventh recitation.
On the basis of this belief it is a teaching of the Tijānīyyah that the wazifah should be done in a place where a space that can accommodate extra five people is available.
This space is covered with a white clean piece of cloth, called ‘’izaar’’.
On which the unseen quests, the Prophet and the caliphs, will sit.
It is noted that in some zāwiyahs in Nigeria voices are lowered at the seventh recitation of the Şalāt Jawharatu’l- Kamāl while the reciters lower their heads as mark of respect for the Prophet.
They remain in this posture until the end of eleventh recitation of the Ṣalāt when they believe the Prophet and his Companions will depart from the scene.
The belief of the Tijānīyyah about the Ṣalāt Jawharatu ‘l- Kamāl has attracted many criticisms to which the Tijānīyyah have replied.
For example, on the practice of lowering of the voice, a Muqaddam said that it was in conformity with the Quranic directive which requires that voices be lowered in the presence of the Prophet.
Many explantions have been given for he spreading of the izaar during the wazīfah.
According to one of them it was said that Shaykh Ahmad Tijānī used to cover the area on which he and his followers sat during the wazīfah with a clean piece of cloth because they used to hold it then on a wayside which was considered ritually unclean.
The izaar is said to be non-obligatory part of the wazīfah but a mandub (recommended practice).
The belief of the Tijānīs that the Prophet and the first four caliphs attend the wazifahs simultaneously throughout the world looks absurd because it is not natural.
Furthermore, this belief seems to have made the Prophet function in a new way which he did not do when he was alive in the sense that there is no report that the Prophet was ever present in two different places at the same time when he was alive.
Probably if the Tijānīs say that the Prophet is with them in spirit, they may not be critized since that may suggest that their deeds are blessed with the Prophet’s assent.
However,some Tijānīs seet the izār as a mark of dignifying their place of worship worship which also makes the place clean.
86 One may agree with this because cleaniless is part of Islam.
The izār by the way, has become a symbol of the Tijāniyyah by which they are easily identified in a mosque.
Another criticism against the Jawharatu ‘l-Kamāl centers upon its being recited only with water ablution.
This has been viewed as if the Tijānīs have placed it over and above the Qur’ān which can be recited with tayammam and obligatory Ṣalāt prayers which can also be said with tayammam.
The defense on this by a Tijāni is that there was nothing wrong in the action and did not mean that the Jawharatu ‘l- Kamāl is more important than the Qur’ān or any obligatory prayer.
More so, according to the Maliki school of Islamic Law, Ṣalātu ‘l- Jumu‘ah should not be said with tayammum, Ṣalātu `z- Zuhr should be said instead.
And this did not mean that Ṣalātu ‘l- Jumuah was superior or greater than the Jumu’ah which could be recited with tayammam and Ṣalātu `z-Zuhr which could be said with tayammam.
Critics of the Jawharatu’l-Kamāl have also claimed that it contains a linguistic fault which they considered as a misuse of word.
The word is al- Asqam.
According to the critics, this word should be al-Aqwam since it is the superlative form of the adjective mustaqim ( straight).
They consider al- asqam to mean ill or defective sacrilegious in describimg the Prophet’s path.
The Tijānīs do not see anything wrong in the word and blame their critics for lack futi, for example, the word al-asqam is derived from saqama, and not obscure word which is uncommon.
It is derived from saqama, yasqimu and has the equivalent meaning of adala ya‘dilu (to straighten) and it is not from saqima to be ill.
He explains further that this usage of saqama in the sense of ‘adala is in vogue in Morocco.
One may feel that the Tijānīs interpretation of the meaning and etymology of the word asqam shall be accepted as valid since they are the owner of the prayer and they conceive the idea of ‘straight path ‘ not ‘defective path’.
The Tijānīs are also criticized that the prophet will attend their wazīfah at the seventh recitation of the jawharatu’l-kamāl.
The critics see the idea as absurd and unrealistic because it is not possible for the prophet to be present everywhere in the different parts of the world where the jawharatu ‘l-kamāl is being recited simultaneously.
The Tijānī in their own view do not see anything wrong or absurd in this claim.
They explain it that the prophet has said that he would be present any where he was being remembered.
Muhammad al-Arabī wonders why this should be attacked if Angel Azrāil can be present in more than one thousand places at the same time to take the lives of people.
In addition to that Muhammad b. Abdullah argues that if the sun can be in its own planet and its rays are felt in different parts of the world at the same time, no one should criticize the idea that the prophet attends the wazifahs at the same time in different places.
Self Assessment Exercise Highlight the views of Shaykh Mahmud Gumi on Jawharatu `l-Kamal.
How did Sani Hasan Kafanga refute them?
3.5 Social and Educational Impacts of Yan Izālah In consonance with one of its objectives, the organization within few weeks of its inauguration had registered members virtually in every part of the country especially in Northern states.
As part of the social and educational impacts many members of Izālah 87 were untiring in going from place to place to preach to the people about their religious obligations.
The Yan Izālah has made attempts both peacefully and violently in preaching its objectives to the Muslims with the determination to remove all that it considers heretical innovations by all means.
As such the group violently attacked the Qadiriyyāh and Tijāniyyah groups trying to force them renounce tariqah affiliation.
This in one way or the other led to violent attacks on each other.
The result of this culminated in proliferation of mosques in the society.
Another social and educational impact of the organization is its membership drive and training.
The Izālah group had the advantage of training under the leadership of Mallam Ismaila Idris, a former student of Shaykh Gumi and at the end of their training was dispatched to various towns and villages to preach to Muslims in general and attack the Șūfī in particular.
Yan Izālah also implored the use of mass media both print and electronic in disseminating their objectives, such as in Gaskiyya ta fi kwabo a Hausa newspaper and Radio Nigeria, Kaduna, and Television House in Kaduna.
It is quite pertinent to observe that in almost all the Hausa settlements in the south-west of Nigeria, there are several or at least a mosque of Yan Izālah and schools for the training of the young ones.
Among the social impact of the Izālah is that the young Izālah followers were vigorous in their long distances to honour invitations for da‘wah.
What endeared the ordinary people in particular was the simplicity with which they approach social issues.
In fact, total rejection of ostentation came to be the hallmark of Izālah.
Yan Izālah preached against all forms of ostentation such as slaughtering on the seventh day of the birth of a newly born baby.
The group argues that there are no obligations on the parent and is not necessary.
The constant argument of Yan Izālah is that people were suffering because they had neglected what the religion said and taken on unnecessary weight upon them.
Self Assessment Exercise Discuss the social and educational impact of the Yan Izālah briefly.
4.0 CONCLUSION The Jamā‘at Izālat al-bid‘ah wa Iqāmat al-Sunnah Organization true to its name and its philosophy stands as a great anti-șūfī movement.
At first before open attacks, the group was using the publication of late Shaykh Abubakar Gumi, a onetime Grand Qadi of defuct Northern Nigeria.
The publication condemned all șūfī books, beliefs and the saint- worship.
Șūfī Scholars thereafter engaged Mahmud Gummi in polemics.
The next in the stage of the anti-șūfī activities of the Izālah was an organized violent attack against the members of Qādiriyyah and Tijāniyyah brotherhoods.
The confrontation came into limelight with open violent attack among the two groups, the Izālah on one hand and the Tariqāh one the other: 88 On the other hand, the group as one way or the other contributed immensely to the spread and development of Islam in Nigeria through their preaching and establishment of mosques and schools.
5.0 SUMMARY This unit opens by giving some information about the anti-șūfī activities of the Izālah.
The Unit then presents an account of the relationship between the Yan Izālah and the Qādiriyyah.
The polemics between the Organization and the Tijāniyyah on Salātu `l- Fatiħ and Jawharatu `l-Kamāl are also expatiated upon in the Unit.
The Unit also mentions something on the intellectual attacks which had to do with condemnation of all the books of șūfī sm, beliefs and rites of the șūfī s as contained in Shaykh Abubakar Gumi’s publication titled al-Aqidatul al-Sahihah bi muwafiqat al-shariah.
The Unit also contains report on physical attacks between mwmbers of the Izalah and the șūfī brotherhoods and separation of mosques on the basis of ideological differences.
6.0 TUTOR MARKED ASSIGNMENTS 1 Discuss the role of Shaykh Mahmud Gumi in the anti-șūfī activities in Nigeria 2.
Highlight Izālah – Qādiriyyah relationship 3.
Assess the polemics between the Izālah and Tijāniyyah on the Şalātu `l-Fātiħ and Jawharatu `l – Kamāl.
7.0 REFERENCE AND FURTHER READING Paden, J.N (1973), Religion and political culture in Kano, London.
Mahmud Gummi (n.d.), Al-Aqidatu `Şahīħah bimuwāfaqati sh-Sharī‘ah, Istambul.
Sani Hasan Kafanga Al-Minahu `l-Hamidah Qadri, Y.A.
(1981) “The Tijāniyyah in Nigeria”; a Ph.d Thesis, University of Ibadan, Ibadan.
Ahmed, A. F. (1986).
The Qādiriyyah Șūfī Order and its Impact in Nigeria, a PhD.
Thesis, University of Ibadan, Ibadan.
89
