GENERAL INTRODUCTION ISL 101 TO ISLAM Course GuideCOURSE GUIDE ISL101 COURSE GUIDE ISL101 GENERAL INTRODUCTION TO ISLAM Course Developer Mr. T.M.
Salisu Dept.
of Religions Lagos State University Ojo, Lagos.
Course Editor Dr. Asif Ahmad School of Arts and Social Science National Open University of Nigeria Victoria Island, Lagos.
Programme Leader Dr. O A Adewale School of Arts and Social Science National Open University of Nigeria Victoria Island, Lagos.
Course Coordinator Dr. Asif Ahmad School of Arts and Social Science National Open University of Nigeria Victoria Island, Lagos.
NATIONAL OPEN UNIVERSITY OF NIGERIA iiCOURSE GUIDE ISL101 National Open University of Nigeria Headquarters 14/16 Ahmadu Bello Way Victoria Island Lagos Abuja Office No.
5 Dar es Salaam Street Off Aminu Kano Crescent Wuse II, Abuja Nigeria e-mail: centralinfo@nou.edu.ng URL: www.nou.edu.ng Published by: National Open University of Nigeria 2008 First Printed 2008 ISBN: 978-058-197-9 All Rights Reserved iiiCOURSE GUIDE ISL101 CONTENTS PAGE Introduction…………………………………………… 1 What You Will Learn in this Course………………….
1 Course Aims………………………………………….. 1-2 Course Objectives…………………………………….
2 Working through this Course………………………… 3 Course Materials……………………………………… 3 Set Textbooks………………………………………… 3-4 Assignment File……………………………………….
5 Presentation Schedule………………………………… 5 Assessment…………………………………………… 5 Tutor-Marked Assignment…………………………… 5-6 Final Examination Grading…………………………... 6 Course Marking Scheme……………………………... 6 Course Overview……………………………………... 6-7 How to Get the Most From this Course……………… 7-8 Tutors and Tutorials………………………………….. 9 Summary……………………………………………... 9-10 ivCOURSE GUIDE ISL101 Introduction General Introduction to Islam is a one-semester fifteen-credit unit course.
It is a course for students undergoing Degree Programmes.
The course is also suitable for anybody who is interested in Islam.
The course consists of 15 units which include definition and meaning of Islam, the principles of Islam (Qawa‘idu ’l-Islam), the articles of faith in Islam (Qawa‘idu ’l-Iman), the significance, implication and importance of the words of testimony (kalimatu’sh-Shahadah).
Others are the primary sources of guidance in Islam, the secondary sources of guidance in Islam, Islam and Western Civilization, the contributions of Islam to science and finally, different science associated with Islam.
This course guide tells you briefly what the course is all about, what you are expected to know in each unit, what course materials you will be using and how you can work your way through these materials.
It also emphasizes the need for tutor-marked assignments.
Detailed information on your tutor-marked assignments is found in the separate file which will be sent to you later.
There are periodic tutorial classes that are linked to the course.
What You Will Learn In This Course The overall aim of this course is to introduce you to the fundamental tenets of Islam which all other activities in the religion rest upon.
In other words, your understanding of this course will pave way for you to practice other aspects of Islam.
You will also study the significant place of Qur’an and Sunnah, being the bases of information in Islam.
In addition to the above, the course will further lead you to the fact that Islam played a vital role in placing science in the right perspectives, especially its contributions towards acquisition of knowledge generally.
Course Aims The aim of this course amongst others is to make you understand the basic tenets of Islam i.e.
principles of Islam, articles of faith in Islam, significance, implication and importance of the words of testimony and appreciate the place of Qur’an and Sunnah in Islam.
This will be achieved by  Introducing you to the definition and meaning of Islam 1COURSE GUIDE ISL101  Explaining to you the five principles of Islam viz a viz: Iman, Salat, Zakat, Sawm and Hajj  Explaining to you the components of faith in Islam which include:Beliefs in Allah, Angels, Books, Messengers, Last Day and Destiny  Ex-ray the nature and importance of Qur’an and Sunnah as the primary sources of guidance in Islam  Exposing you to the other sources of guidance in Islam  Highlighting the relationship between Islam and science  Highlighting the sciences associated with Islam as well as discerning the impact of Muslim scholars on western scholars Course Objectives To achieve the aims set out above, there are set overall objectives.
In addition, each unit also has specific objectives.
Thus, the unit objectives are stated at the beginning of each unit.
You should read them before you start working through the unit.
You may want to refer to them during your study of the unit in order to ensure your progress.
You should always look at the unit objectives after completing a unit.
In this way, you can be sure that you have done what is required of you by the unit.
Stated below are the wider objectives of this course as a whole.
By meeting these objectives, you should have achieved the aims of the course as a whole.
On successful completion of the course, you should be able to:  Explain and apply the peaceful nature of Islam to adherents non- adherents of Islam  State the principles of Islam  List the articles of faith in Islam  Enunciate the relationship between belief in Allah and other articles of faith in Islam.
 Mention some of the angels of Allah ant their divine functions  Correctly analyze the words of testimony  Highlight the implication/significance of the words.
 Highlight the uniqueness / importance of Al-Qur’an to Muslims  Discuss the importance of Sunnah/Hadith as the second source of Islamic guidance and information.
 Enumerate the impact of the Muslim civilization on the Euro- Christian (West) civilization.
 Explain the scientific achievements of various scholars in Islam; 2COURSE GUIDE ISL101  Highlight the branches of science or culture enhanced by Muslim scientists.
Working Through this Course To complete this course, you are required to read the study units, read recommended books and read other materials provided by the National Open University of Nigeria (NOUN).
Each unit contains self-assessment exercise, and at points in the course, you are required to submit assignments for assessment purposes.
At the end of this course, there will be a final examination.
You will find below the list of all components of the course and what you have to do.
Course Materials Major components of the course are:  Course Guide  Study Units  Textbooks  Assignment File  Presentation Schedule In addition, you must obtain the materials.
They are provided by the National Open University of Nigeria (NOUN).
You may contact your tutor if you have problems in obtaining these text materials.
Each unit contains a number of self-tests.
In general, these self-tests examines you on the material you have just studied or require you to apply it in some ways and thereby helping you to gauge your progress and assignments.
In addition, these exercises will assist you in achieving the stated learning objectives of the individual units of the course.
Set Textbooks You are required to purchace any of these textbooks stated below.
You need them for this and some other Islamic Studies course.
Abdalati, H. (1975).
Islam In Focus, Indiana: Amen can Trust Publications.
Abdul, M.O.A.
(1983).
The Prophet of Islam, Life Sayings and Deeds: Lagos, Islamic Publications Bureau, 3COURSE GUIDE ISL101 Abdul-Wahhab, Muhammad Bn.
(1996).
Kitab At-Tauhid, Riyad-Saudi Arabia: Dar-us-Salam Publications Abubakre, R.D.
et.
al (eds) (1993).
Studies in Religious Understanding in Nigeria: Ilorin Nigerian Association For The Study Of Religion Abubakre, R.D.
(2003).
“Survival of Arabic Terms in Modern Science” in P.Ade Dopamu & E. Ade Odumuyiwa (eds.
); Religion, Science and Culture, Ikenne-Remo: Nigerian Association for the Study of Religions (NASR).
Ali, Mawlana Muhammad (nd).
The Religion of Islam: A Comprehensive Discussion of the Sources, Principles and Practices of Islam, U.A.R: National Publication and Printing House.
Avdich, K.Y.
(1979).
Survey of Islamic Doctrine, Cedar Rapids in Unit Publishing Co. Doi, A.R.I.
; (1981).
The Cardinal Principle of Islam, Lagos: Islamic Publication Bereau.
Doi, A.R.I.
(1984).
Shari‘ah: The Islamic Law, United Kingdom, Ta-Ha Publishers Elegba, S.B.
(1993).
“Science and Technology for Africa: The Nigerian Paradigm” in Nura alkali, Adamu Adamu, Awwal yadudu, Rashid Motem and Haruna Salihi (eds.
): Islam in Africa,: Proceedings of tha Islam in Africa Comference, Ibadan: Spectrum Books Limited.
Hallaq , Wael B.
(1997); A History of Islamic Theories: An Introduction to Sunni Kamali, M.H.
(1991), Principles of Islamic Jurisprudence, Cambridge: Islamic Texts Society.
Khaduri, Majid (1996).
“Nature and Sources of Islamic Law” in Ian Edge (ed.
); Islamic Law and Legal Theory, New York: New York University Press, Qadir A.A.(1984).
Islamic Jurisprudence in the Modern World, New Delhi: Taj Company 4COURSE GUIDE ISL101 Yusuf Ali, A (1948).
The Holy Qur’an: Translation and Commentary, South Africa: Islamic Propagation Centre International Assignment File In this file, you will find all details of the work you must submit to your tutor for marking.
The marks you obtain from these assignments will count toward the final mark you obtain for this course.
Further information on assignments will be found in the Assignment File itself and later in this Course Guide in the section on assessment.
Presentation Schedule The Presentation Schedule included in your course materials gives you the important dates for the completion of tutor-marked assignments and attending tutorials.
Remember, you are required to submit all your assignments at the right time.
You should guard against falling behind in your work.
Assessment There are two aspects of the assessment for the course.
The first aspects is the Tutor-Marked Assignments while the second aspect is the written examination.
In tackling the assignments, you are expected to apply information and knowledge acquired during this course.
The assignments must be submitted to your Tutor for formal assessment in accordance with the deadlines stated in the Assignment File.
The work you submit to your Tutor for assessment will count for 30% of your total course mark.
At the end of the course, you will sit for a final three-hour examination.
This will also count for 70% of your course mark.
Tutor-Marked Assignment There are fifteen (15) Tutor-Marked Assignments in this course.
You need to submit all the assignments while the best three (i.e.
the highest three of the fifteen marks) will be counted.
The total mark for the three (3) assignments is 30% of your course mark.
Assignment questions for the units in this course are contained in the Assignment File.
You should be able to complete your assignments 5COURSE GUIDE ISL101 from the information and materials contained in your set textbooks, reading and study units.
However, you are advised to use other references to broaden your view point and provide a deeper understanding of the subject.
When you have completed each assignment, send it together with Tutor- Marked Assignment (TMA) form to your Tutor.
Make sure that each assignment reaches your tutor on or before the deadline given in the Assignment File.
If, however, you cannot complete your work in time, contact your tutor before the assignment is due to discuss the possibility of an extension.
Final Examination and Grading The final examination of ISL101 will be of three hours duration and have 70% total value of the course grade.
The examination will consist of questions which reflect the type of self-testing, practice exercise and Tutor-Marked problems you have come across.
All areas of the course will be assessed.
You are advised to revise the entire course after studying the last unit before you sit for the examination.
You will find it useful to review your Tutor-Marked Assignments and the comments of your Tutor on them before the final examination.
Course Marking Scheme This table shows how the actual course marking is broken down.
Assignment Marks Assignment 1-15 Best three marks out of the fifteen count at 10% each = 30% of course mark Final Examination 70% of overall course marks Total 100% of course marks Table 1 Course Marking Scheme Course Overview Units Title of Work Week’s Assessment Activity (end of unit) 1.
Definition and Meaning of 1 Assignment 1 Islam 2.
Principles of Islam(Qawa‘idu’l- 2 Assignment 2 Islam) – Iman, Salat & Zakat 6COURSE GUIDE ISL101 3.
Principles of Islam |-- Sawm & 3 Assignment 3 Hajj 4.
Articles of Faith (Qawa‘idu’l- Assignment 4 4 Iman) in Islam – Beliefs in Allah, Angels & Scriptures 5.
Articles of Faith (Qawa‘idu’l- Assignment 5 Iman) in Islam – Beliefs in 5 Prophets, Last Day & Destiny 6 Significance, Importance and Assignment 6 6 Implication 7 The Primary Sources of Assignment 7 Guidance in Islam: Qur’an 7 8.
The Primary Sources of Assignment 8 Guidance in Islam: Sunnah 8 9.
The Secondary Sources of Assignment 9 Guidance in Islam: Ijma‘ & 9 Qiyas 10 The Secondary Sources of Assignment 10 Guidance in Islam: Ijtihad 10 11.
Islam and Western Civilization 1 Assignment 11 1 12.
Contributions of Islam to 1 Assignment 12 Science 2 13.
Various Sciences Associated to 1 Assignment 13 Islam 3 How to Get the Most From this Course In distance learning, the study units replace the University lecturer.
This is one of the great advantages of distant learning i.e you can read and work through specially designed study materials at your own pace, at a time as well as place that suits you best.
Think of it as reading the lecture instead of listening to the lecturer in the same way that a lecturer might give you some readings to do.
Your study units provide exercises for you to do at appropriate points.
Each of the study units follows a common format.
The first item is an introduction to the subject matter of the unit and how a particular unit is integrated into other units and the course as a whole.
Next is a set of learning objectives.
These objectives let you know what you should be able to do by the time you study.
When you have finished the units, you must go back and check whether you have achieved the objectives.
If you develop a habit of doing this, you will definitely improve your chances of passing the course.
7COURSE GUIDE ISL101 The main body of the unit guides you through the required reading from other sources.
This will usually be either from your setbooks or other relevant materials.
Reading Section Remember that your tutor’s job is to assist you when you need help, hence, don’t hesitate to call and ask your tutor to provide it.
Consider the following: 1.
Read this course guide thoroughly 2.
Organize a study schedule.
Refer to the ‘Course Overview’ for more details.
Note the time you are expected to spend on each unit and how the assignments relate to the units.
Whatever method you adopt, you should decide on and write in your own dates for working on each unit.
3.
Once you have created your own study schedule, do everything you can to stick to it.
The major reason for students’ failure is that they lag behind in their course work.
If you get into difficulties with your schedule, please let your tutor know before it is too late to help.
4.
Turn to Unit 1 and read the introduction and the objectives for the unit.
5.
Assemble the study materials.
Information about what you need for the unit is given in the “Overview” at the beginning of each unit.
You will always need both the study unit you are working on and one of your setbooks on your desk at the same time.
6.
Work through the unit itself has been arranged to provide a sequence for you to follow.
As you work through the unit, you will be instructed to read sections from your set books or other articles.
Use the unit to guide your reading.
7. Review the objectives for each study unit to confirm that you have achieved them.
If you don’t understand the objectives, review the study material or consult your tutor.
8.
When you are confident that you have achieved a unit’s objectives, you can then start on the next unit.
Proceed unit by unit through the course and try to pace your study so that you keep yourself on schedule.
9.
When you have submitted an assignment to your tutor for marking, do not wait for its return before starting on the next unit.
Keep to your schedule.
When the assignment is returned pay particular attention to your tutor’s comments, both on the tutor- marked assignment and also what is written on the assignment.
Consult your tutor as soon as possible if you have any question or problems.
8COURSE GUIDE ISL101 10.
After completing the last unit, review the course and prepare yourself for the final examination.
Check that you have achieved the unit objective (listed at the beginning of each unit) and the course objectives (listed in this course guide).
Tutor and Tutorials There are eight (8) hours of tutorials provided in support of this course.
You will be notified of the dates, times and locations of these tutorials, together with the name and phone number of your tutor as soon as you are allocated a tutorial group.
Your tutor will mark and comment on your assignments.
Keep a close watch on your progress and any difficulties you might encounter.
You must mail your tutor-marked assignment to your tutor well before the due date (at least two working days are required).
They will be marked by your tutors and return to you as soon as possible.
Do not hesitate to contact your tutor on telephone, or by e-mail or face to face if you need help.
The following are circumstances in which you will find help necessary.
Contact your tutor if  You do not understand any part of the study unit or the assigned readings.
 You have difficulty with the self-tests or exercises.
 You have a question or problems with the assignment, with your tutor’s comments on any assignment or with the gradings of an assignment.
You should try your best to attend the tutorials.
This is the only chance to have face to face contact with your tutor and to ask questions which are answered instantly.
You can raise any problem encountered in the course of your study.
To gain the maximum benefit from course tutorials, prepare a question list before attending them, you will learn a lot from participating in the discussions actively.
Summary ISL101 introduce you to the basic tenets of Islam and also unveil the contributions of early Muslims to science generally.
Therefore, upon completing this course, you will be able to respond to the following WHATS:  What is Islam?
9COURSE GUIDE ISL101  What is the disposition of Islam to both Muslims and non-Muslims?
 What are the principles of Islam?
 What is the relationship between al-Iman bi’l-Lah and other articles of faith?
 What is the implication of the Kalimatu’sh-Shahadah to a Muslim?
 What are the sources of information/guidance in Islam?
 What are the efforts of the early Muslims on the Euro-Christian (West) civilization?
 What are the various Arabic terms which still survive in the modern day science?
Of course, the above questions are not exhaustive; hence, you should be able to raise more relevant questions from what you have digested from the course.
Wishing you success on the course.
It is hoped that you will find it captivating at the end of the day 10
