AS- SĪRAH: BIOGRAPHY OF ISL 172 PROPHET MUHAMMAD Course GuideCOURSE CODE ISL172 COURSE National Open GUIDE ISL172 AS- SĪRAH: BIOGRAPHY OF PROPHET MUHAMMAD Course Developer/ Writer Dr. Shaykh Luqman Jimoh Department of Religions Lagos State University.
Ojo.
Course Editor/ Dr. A. F. Ahmed Programme Leader School of Arts and Social Sciences National Open University of Nigeria Victoria Island, Lagos NATIONAL OPEN UNIVERSITY OF NIGERIA iiCOURSE CODE ISL172 National Open University of Nigeria Headquarters 14/16 Ahmadu Bello Way Victoria Island Lagos.
Abuja Office No.
5 Dar es Salaam Street Off Aminu Kano Crescent Wuse II, Abuja Nigeria.
e-mail: centralinfo@nou.edu.ng URL: www.nou.edu.ng Published by: National Open University of Nigeria 2008 First Printed 2008 ISBN: 978-058-173-1 All Rights Reserved iiiCOURSE CODE ISL172 CONTENTS PAGE Introduction ………………………………………………….
1 What You will Learn in this Course………………………….
1 Course Aims ………………………………………………… 1 Course Objectives …………………………………………… 1 – 2 Working through this Course ………………………………... 2 Course Materials …………………………………………….. 2 Study Units ………………………………………………….. 2 – 3 References and Other Resources…………………………….. 3 Assignment File……………………………………………… 3 Assessment ………………………………………………….. 3 Tutor- Marked Assignments ………………………………….3 Final Examination and Grading ……………………………... 4 Course Marking Scheme …………………………………….. 4 Course Overview/Presentation Schedule…………………….. 4 – 6 How to Get the Most from this Course ………………………..6 – 7 Tutor and Tutorials ………………………………………….. 7 Summary …………………………………………………….
7 ivCOURSE CODE ISL172 Introduction ISL172: As-Sirah-Biography of the Prophet is a two units course available in the second semester of first year for B.A.
Islamic Studies programme.
The course gives you a clear picture of who the Arabs were before the advent of Islam.
It gives you insight into the religious, social, political and economic lives of the Arab prior to the coming of Prophet Muhammad with Islam and the various reforms he introduced via Islam.
The course also gives you insight into the life of Prophet Muhammad both before he became a Prophet and after his call to prophethood.
What You Will Learn in this Course The general aim of this course is to intimate you with the life history of the last Prophet of Allah, Muhammad.
In order that you might appreciate the tremendous efforts made by this noble Prophet, you shall be familiarized with the prevailing situations in Arabia before the Prophet brought the religion of Islam.
Since it is natural for people to initially resist changes, you will also learn in this course, the various persecutions suffered by the Prophet and his followers culminating in their migration from Mecca to Medinah and the series of wars waged against them by those opposed to their reform moves.
The eventual triumph of the Prophet over his pagan enemies and subsequent proselytization efforts as a result of which more souls were won for Islam shall also be touched.
Course Aims There are fourteen units in the course and each unit has its objectives.
You should read the objectives of each unit and bear them in mind as you go through the unit.
In addition to the objectives of each unit, the overall aims of this course include: (i) To familiarize you with the religious, social, political and economic situations of the Arabs before the advent of Islam; (ii) To introduce you to the various reforms brought by Islam; (iii) To familiarize you with the life history of the Prophet, from his birth to death.
Course Objectives Based on the general aims of this course, some objectives for the course as a whole are set out.
These are the things you should be able to do by the time you complete the course.
If you are able to meet the objectives, you would have achieved the aims of the course.
Therefore on your successful completion of this course, you should be able to: 1COURSE CODE ISL172 a) Give a vivid description of the religious, social, political and economic situation in Arabia before the advent of Islam; b) Narrate the life history of Prophet Muhammad; c) Mention the various persecution suffered by the Prophet and his followers in the hands of the Meccan pagans; d) Discuss the three major wars waged by the unbelievers against the Prophet and the Muslims in Medina; e) Highlight and discuss the contributions of the Prophet to the development of humanity.
Working Through This Course You have to work through the study units in the course.
There are fourteen units in all.
Course Materials Major components of the course are: 1.
Course Guide 2.
Study Units 3.
Textbooks 4.
Assignments File 5.
Presentation Schedule Study Units There are fourteen units (of four modules) in this course.
They are listed below: Module 1 The Early life of Prophet Muhammad Unit 1 Arabia before Islam.
Unit 2 The reforms Introduced by Islam.
Unit 3 Prophet Muhammad: His childhood, youth and first marriage.
Unit 4 The Holy Prophet’s Marriages and the Orientalists Criticism.
Module 2 The Prophet’s Mission in Makkah and Migration to Madinah Unit 1 Muhammad’s call to messengership and the Mecca Opposition.
Unit 2 The Hijrah/the Prophet’s arrival and settlement in Medina.
2COURSE CODE ISL172 Module 3 The Battles and Triumph of Islam Unit 1 Battles of Badr and Uhud.
Unit 2 Battle of Khandaq.
Unit 3 The holy Prophet and the Orientalist criticism.
Unit 4 The treaty of Hudaybiyyah and the Conquest of Mecca Unit 5 The Prophet’s Diplomatic Ingenuity Module 4 Prophet Muhammad – His teachings and qualities Unit 1 The farewell Message.
Unit 2 Prophet Muhammad – A role model.
Unit 3 Polemics on the celebration of the Prophet’s Birthday.
References and Other Resources Every unit contains a list of references and further reading.
Try to get as many as possible of those textbooks and materials listed.
The textbooks and materials are meant to deepen your knowledge of the course.
Assignment File In this file, you will find all the details of the work you must submit to your tutor for marking.
The marks you obtain from these assignments will count towards the final mark you obtain for this course.
Further information on assignments will be found in the Assignment File itself and later in this Course Guide in the section on assessment.
Assessment Your assessment will be based on tutor-marked assignments (TMAs) and a final examination which you will write at the end of the course.
Tutor-Marked Assignments (TMAs) Every unit contains at least one or two assignments.
You are advised to work through all the assignments and submit them for assessment.
Your tutor will assess the assignments and select four which will constitute the 30% of your final grade.
The tutor-marked assignments may be presented to you in a separate file.
Just know that for every unit there are some tutor-marked assignments for you.
It is important you do them and submit for assessment.
3COURSE CODE ISL172 Final Examination and Grading At the end of the course, you will write a final examination which will constitute 70% of your final grade.
In the examination which shall last for two hours, you will be requested to answer three questions out of at least five questions.
Course Marking Scheme This table shows how the actual course marking is broken down.
Assessment Marks Assignments Four assignments, best three marks of the four count at 30% of course marks Final Examination 70% of overall course marks Total 100% of course marks Presentation Schedule The Presentation Schedule included in your course materials gives you the important dates for the completion of tutor-marked assignments and attending tutorials.
Remember, you are required to submit all your assignments by the due date.
You should guard against falling behind in your work.
4COURSE CODE ISL172 Course Overview and Presentation Schedule Unit Title of Work Weeks Activity Course Guide Module 1 The early life of Prophet Muhammad Unit 1 Arabia before Week 1 Assignment 1 Islam.
Unit 2 The reforms Week 2 Assignment 2 brought by Islam.
Unit 3 Prophet Week 3 Assignment 3 Muhammad: His childhood, youth and first marriage.
Unit 4 The Holy Week 4 Assignment 4 Prophet’s Marriages and the Orientalists Criticism Module 2 The Prophet’s Mission in Mecca and Migration to Medina.
Unit 1 Muhammad’s Week 5 Assignment 1 call to messengership and the Mecca opposition.
Unit 2 The Hijrah/the Week 6 Assignment 2 Prophet’s arrival and settlement in Medina.
Module 3 The Battles and triumph of Islam Unit 1 Battles of Badr Week 7 Assignment 1 and Uhud.
Unit 2 Battle of Week 8 Assignment 2 Khandaq.
Unit 3 The holy Week 9 Assignment 3 Prophet and the Orientalist criticism.
5COURSE CODE ISL172 Unit 4 The treaty of Week 10 Assignment 4 Hudaybiyyah and the conquest of Mecca Unit 5 The Prophet’s Week 11 Assignment 5 Diplomatic ingenuity Module 4 Prophet Muhammad – His teachings and qualities.
Unit 1 The farewell Week 12 Assignment 1 Message.
Unit 2 Prophet Week 13 Assignment 2 Muhammad – A role model.
Unit 3 Polemics on the Week 14 Assignment 3 celebration of the Prophet’s Birthday.
Revision 1 Examination 1 Total 17 How to Get the Most from This Course In distance learning, the study units replace the university lecture.
This is one of the great advantages of distance learning; you can read and work through specially designed study materials at your own pace, and at a time and place that suits you best.
Think of it as reading the lecture instead of listening to the lecturer.
In the same way a lecturer might give you some reading to do, the study units tell you when to read, and which are your text materials or set books.
You are provided exercises to do at appropriate points, just as a lecturer might give you an in-class exercise.
Each of the study units follows a common format.
The first item is an introduction to the subject matter of the unit, and how a particular unit is integrated with the other units and the course as a whole.
Next of this is a set of learning objectives.
These objectives let you know what you should be able to do by the time you have completed the unit.
These learning objectives are meant to guide your study.
The moment a unit is finished, you must go back and check whether you have achieved the objectives.
If this is made a habit, then you will significantly improve your chances of passing the course.
The main body of the unit guides you through the required reading from other sources.
This will usually be either from your set books or from a Reading section.
The following is a practical strategy for working through the course.
If you run into any trouble, telephone you tutor.
6COURSE CODE ISL172 Remember that your tutor’s job is to help you.
When you need assistance, do not hesitate to call and ask your tutor to provide it.
1.
Read this Course Guide thoroughly, it is your first assignment.
2.
Organize a Study Schedule.
Design a ‘Course Overview’ to guide you through the Course.
Note the time you are expected to spend on each unit and how the assignments relate to the units.
Important information, e.g.
details of your tutorials, and the date of the first day of the Semester is available from the study centre.
You need to gather all the information into one place, such as your diary or a wall calendar.
Whatever method you choose to use, you should decide on and write in your own dates and schedule of work for each unit.
3.
Once you have created your own study schedule, do everything to stay faithful to it.
The major reason that students fail is that they get behind with their course work.
If you get into difficulties with your schedule, please, let your tutor know before it is too late for help.
4.
Turn to Unit 1, and read the introduction and the objectives for the unit.
5.
Assemble the study materials.
You will need your set books and the unit you are studying at any point in time.
6.
Work through the unit.
As you work through the unit, you will know what sources to consult for further information.
7.
Keep in touch with your study centre.
Up-to-date course information will be continuously available there.
8.
Well before the relevant due dates (about 4 weeks before the dates), keep in mind that you will learn a lot by doing the assignment carefully.
They have been designed to help you meet the objectives of the course and, therefore, will help you pass the examination.
Submit all assignments not later than the due date.
9. Review the objectives for each study unit to confirm that you have achieved them.
If you feel unsure about any of the objectives, review the study materials or consult your tutor.
10.
When you are confident that you have achieved a unit’s objectives, you can start on the next unit.
Proceed unit by unit through the course and try to pace your study so that you keep yourself on schedule.
11.
When you have submitted an assignment to your tutor for marking, do not wait for its return before starting on the next unit.
Keep to your schedule.
When the Assignment is returned, pay particular attention to your tutor’s comments, both on the tutor- marked assignment form and also the written comments on the ordinary assignments.
7COURSE CODE ISL172 12.
After completing the last unit, review the course and prepare yourself for the final examination.
Check that you have achieved the unit objectives (listed at the beginning of each unit) and the course objectives (listed in the Course Guide).
Tutors and Tutorials The dates, times and locations of these tutorials will be made available to you, together with the name, telephone number and address of your tutor.
Each assignment will be marked by your tutor.
Pay close attention to the comments your tutor might make on your assignments as these will help in your progress.
Make sure that assignments reach your tutor on or before the due date.
Your tutorials are important; therefore try not to skip any.
It is an opportunity to meet your tutor and your fellow students.
It is also an opportunity to get the help of your tutor and discuss any difficulties encountered on your reading.
Summary This course paints a clear picture of the religious, social, political and economic situation of Arabia before the advent of Islam and the various reforms introduced by Islam.
The course also narrates to you the life history of Prophet Muhammad from his birth to his death with emphasis on his mission both in Mecca and Medina.
We wish you success in the course.
8
