PRINCIPLES AND PRACTICE OF JLS 610 PUBLIC RELATIONSCOURSE GUIDE JLS 610 COURSE GUIDE JLS 610 PRINCIPLES AND PRACTICE OF PUBLICATION Course Developer Ojomo W. Olusegun Content Editor Dr. Adidi O. Uyo Programme Leader Christine I. Ofulue (Ph.D) National Open University of Nigeria Victoria Island Lagos.
Course Coordinator Chidinma Onwubere National Open University of Nigeria Victoria Island Lagos.
NATIONAL OPEN UNIVERSITY OF NIGERIA iiCOURSE GUIDE JLS 610 National Open University of Nigeria Headquarters 14/16 Ahmadu Bello Way Victoria Island Lagos Abuja Annex 245 Samuel Adesujo Ademulegun Street Central Business District Opposite Arewa Suites Abuja e-mail: centralinfo@nou.edu.ng URL: www.nou.edu.ng National Open University of Nigeria 2006 First Printed 2006 ISBN: 978-058-987-2 All Rights Reserved Printed by …………….. For National Open University of Nigeria iiiCOURSE GUIDE JLS 610 TABLE OF CONTENTS PAGE Introduction…………………………………………….
1 Objectives……………………………………………… 1 Course Guide…………………………………………... 1 What you will learn from this course………………….. 1-2 Course Aims…………………………………………… 2 Course Objectives……………………………………… 2-3 Working through the course…………………………… 3 Course materials……………………………………….. 3 How to get the most from the course…………………... 3 Assignment File………………………………………... 3-4 Tutor-Marked Assignments…………………………….
4 Course Marking Scheme……………………………….
4 References and Textbooks……………………………... 4-5 Conclusion …………………………………………….. 5 Summary……………………………………………….
5 ivCOURSE GUIDE JLS 610 Introduction JLS 610: Principles and Practice of Public Relations is a one semester, 3-unit postgraduate diploma course.
The course is directed principally at non-journalism or mass communication graduates, i.e., persons who do not have mass communication or journalism as their first degree.
The course would be equally useful to persons who wish to strengthen their foundation in public relations.
Except for an active interest in public relations, there are no other prerequisites for this course.
You need to develop an active interest in matters that concern public relations in various spheres of the society.
In this course, we would be looking at the meaning of public relations, as well as its relations to other professions of mass communication.
We shall also take a global and national view of the growth and development of public relations, its practice and applicability to everyday corporate life; skills required to practice PR will be examined.
As much as possible, the course will take examples from sources that are familiar and accessible.
This course guide is a how-to-do-it for the course.
It explains what the course is all about, what you will learn in the course, the course materials you will be using, and how you can get through the course easily.
Objectives At the end of this Course Guide, you should be able to: • Give a brief description of what public relations is all about • Explain the need for public relations • Organise yourself for an effective study of the course Course Guide What You Will Learn in this Course.
The broad aim of JLS 610: Principles and Practice of Public Relations is to introduce the theoretical and practical dimensions of public relations.
The course will introduce you to the basics of the broad field of public relations by examining various definitions and concepts that relate to public relations.
Also you will learn the process of public relations practice, the functions of a public relations person, the legal and ethical demands of the job, as well as the relevant codes common in the practice of public relations.
You will be exposed to the history and development of public relations in Nigeria.
1COURSE GUIDE JLS 610 The course will help you develop a theoretical and practical appreciation for public relations strategies aimed at shaping various publics' perceptions and opinions of a product, service, organisation, person, or issue.
It will also teach you how to analyse public relations problems towards formulating and implementing viable public relations programmes.
You will also learn how to write basic public relations messages and how to manage public relations events.
Public relations is a relatively new field, compared to other forms of mass communication.
More individuals, organisations and governments are realizing that they cannot take their public image and relationship with their ever-increasing and sophisticated publics for granted.
They are therefore allocating more time and resources to the management of their relationship with these publics.
You will learn the processes and dynamics of how an organisation or government relates with its publics and the outcomes of such efforts.
We shall also examine practical aspects of public relations such as research, campaign planning, and implementation and media relations.
Course Aims This course aims to introduce you to the principles and applications of public relations.
This will be achieved by: • Exposing you to the fundamentals of public relations • Explaining how PR principles can be applied to everyday problems of organisations • Enabling you to understand of ethical standards that regulate the practice of public relations, as stipulated in the codes of relevant public relations bodies.
• Outlining the procedures and processes for planning and implementing effective public relations campaigns.
Course Objectives To achieve the purpose of this course, you shall read the unit objectives before reading the unit content because they give you focus and direction.
You should also refer to them on completion of the units to assess your progress.
Below are the overall objectives of this course.
By following these objectives meticulously, you should be on your way to achieving the overall aims of the course.
Upon completion of this course, you should be able to achieve the following objectives: 1.
Define public relations 2.
Identify the various public of public relations.
2COURSE GUIDE JLS 610 3.
Explain the process of public relations 4.
Explain the role and functions of public relations.
5.
Relate the evolution and history of public relations at the global and national levels 6.
Plan public relations campaigns for individuals, issues or communities.
7.
Write basic public relations messages, especially press releases.
Working through the Course To complete this course, you are required to read the study units, and other helpful references mentioned in the module.
You should also get yourself acquainted with developments in the world of public relations both nationally and internationally.
This will expose you with important case studies and examples that drive home the points in the various exercises and the final examination.
Course Materials Major components of this course include: 1.
Course guide 2.
Study units 3.
Recommended texts (These texts are to complement and support the course module) 4.
Assignment file How to Get the Most from the Course Since you will have minimal contact with the lecturer of this course, you are expected to do a lot of independent studying.
As you study independently, take notes about points that you do not understand and endeavour to clear up such points at the various tutorials and discussions organised on the course.
Each unit is interspersed with self-tests which are meant to enable you to evaluate yourself against the set objectives in the units as you progress.
You are advised to take the unit objectives seriously since they will guide you in your reading of the unit contents.
Assignment file An assessment file will be made available to you from which you will find details of the work that you will submit to your Tutor for marking.
There are two aspects of assessment for this course: The Tutor-Marked assessment and the written examination.
The marks you obtain in these 3COURSE GUIDE JLS 610 two areas will make up your final scores.
The assignments must be submitted to your for formal assessment in accordance with the deadline stated in the presentation schedule and the assignment file.
Tutor-Marked Assignment You will have to submit a specific number of TMAS as every unit in the course has a tutor marked assignment.
Your are expected to at tempt all questions but only the best four performances from the TMAs will be used for your 30% grading.
When you have completed all assignments send them with a tutor-marked assignment form to your tutor for marking.
Make sure each assignment reaches your tutor on or before the deadline for submission.
If for any reason you cannot complete your work on time then contact your tutor for a discussion on the possible extension of time.
Extension will not be granted after the due dates unless under exceptional circumstances.
Course Marking Scheme The following table lays out the method of awarding marks for this course.
Assessment Marks Assignments 1-4 (the best four of all the Four assignments marked assignments submitted) out 10% totalling 30% Final examination 70% of overall course score.
Total 100% References and Textbooks Certain books have been recommended in this course you may wish to procure them for further reading.
Some of them include: Cutlip, S.M., Center, A.H. and Broom, G.M.
(1985), Effective Public Relations, 6th ed., Englewood Cliffs, NJ.
Grunig J.E and Hunt, T. (1984), Managing Public Relations, Harcourt Brace, London.
Schechter, W. (1994).
``The credentials of public relations'', Public Relations Quarterly, Summer.
Wylie, F.W.
(1994), ``Commentary: public relations is not yet a profession'', Public Relations Review, Vol.
20 No.
4COURSE GUIDE JLS 610 Cutlip, Scott (1999).
Public Relations History: From the Seventeenth to the Twentieth Century.
Lawrence Erlbaum & Associates, Mahwah, NJ.
Conclusion Much as I cannot promise you a too-easy ride on this course, I equally do not envisage much difficulty as long as you play the roles assigned to you in the whole exercise Summary In this unit, we provided a general overview of the course Principles and Practice of Public Relations.
We noted that the course is directed at non mass communication graduates or professionals who wish to hone their skills in public relations practice.
The prerequisite for this course is an active interest in the course and the world of public relations.
To do well in the course, you must get yourself organised and do your bit.
Assess yourself through the Self Assessment Exercises (SAEs).
You will equally be assessed for grading purposes through the Tutor-Marked Assignments (TMAs).
5
