NATIONAL OPEN UNIVERSITY OF NIGERIA COURSE CODE :JLS 745 COURSE TITLE: ISSUES IN COMMUNICATION TECHNOLOGY AND POLICY JLS 745 COURSE GUIDE COURSE GUIDE JLS 745 ISSUES IN COMMUNICATION TECHNOLOGY AND POLICY Course Developer/Writer Mr. Dele Kenneth Fashomi School of Communication Lagos State University Lagos Course Editor Dr. Victor Ayedun-Aluma Department of Mass Communication University of Lagos Akoka, Lagos Programme Leader Christine .I.
Ofulue, Ph.D National Open University of Nigeria Course Coordinator Chidinma H. Onwubere National Open University of Nigeria NATIONAL OPEN UNIVERSITY OF NIGERIA iiJLS 745 COURSE GUIDE National Open University of Nigeria Headquarters 14/16 Ahmadu Bello Way Victoria Island Lagos Abuja Office No.
5 Dar es Salaam Street Off Aminu Kano Crescent Wuse II, Abuja Nigeria e-mail: centralinfo@nou.edu.ng URL: www.nou.edu.ng Published by National Open University of Nigeria Printed 2009 ISBN: 978-058-151-0 All Rights Reserved iiiJLS 745 COURSE GUIDE CONTENTS PAGE Introduction…………………………………………….……....... 1 Course Aims ………………………………………………..…… 1 Course Objectives …………………………………………..…… 1 Working through this Course ………………………………..….. 2 Course Materials………………………………………………..... 2 Study Units…………………………………………………….… 3 Textbooks and References…………………………………..…… 4 Assessment File ……………………………………………..…… 4 Tutor-Marked Assignment ……………………………………….
4 Final Examination and Grading ……………………………..…… 4 Course Marking Scheme ………………………………………….
5 Course Overview/Presentation Schedule…………….…………... 5 What this Course Affords You…………………………………….
7 What You Need for this Course………………………………..….
7 Facilitators/Tutors and Tutorials …………………………….…... 8 Summary………………………………………………………….
8 ivIntroduction Welcome to JLS 745: Issues in Communication Technology and Policy This is a three-credit unit course for postgraduate students in Mass Communication.
The materials have been developed with a view to reflecting the Nigerian context.
The Course Guide gives you an overview of the course and provides information on the organization and requirements for the course.
Course Aims The aims of this course are to help understand how modern technology results in expansion and diffusion of communication, the inequalities in communication between developed and developing countries arising from the concentration of information technology in the former, and barriers to free and balanced flow of communication.
These broad aims will be achieved by: 1.
Introducing you to the basic concepts of communication, information policy and communication technology.
2.
Demonstrating the blurring of frontiers between different forms of communication with the diffusion of technology and identifying the problems arising there from.
3.
Acquainting you with growing inequalities and imbalance in communication within Nigeria as a developing country, and between the developed countries and the developing countries due to concentration of information technology in the developed countries, and efforts to redress same.
Course Objectives To achieve the aims set out above, JLS745 has overall objectives.
The specific unit objectives are also set out at the beginning of each unit.
I advise that you read them before you start working through the unit.
You can also refer to them during your study of the unit to check your progress.
Below are the wider objectives of the course as a whole.
By meeting these objectives, you should consider yourself as having met the aims of this course.
On successful completion of the course, you should be able to:JLS 745 ISSUES IN COMMUNICATION TECHNOLOGY AND POLICY a) Define issue, communication, technology and policy as basic concepts.
b) Discuss the basic concepts relating to information policy and communication technology.
c) Know the various means of communication.
d) Explain the roles of the main participants in global communication today.
e) Understand the integration between communication and technology.
f) Discuss the imbalances and inequalities in modern communication within Nigeria, regions of the world between developed and developing countries.
g) Understand efforts to redress the inequalities in the means and one way flow of communication as climaxed in the New World Information and Communication Order (NWICO) UNESCO Report and United States response against it.
h) Define the direction of the Nigerian Communication System.
Working through this Course To complete the course, you are required to read the study units and other related materials.
You will need to undertake practical exercises for which you need a pen, a note book, the 1999 Constitution of the Federal Republic of Nigeria, among other materials listed in this guide.
At the end of each unit, you will be required to submit written assignments for assessment purposes.
At the end of the course, you will write a final examination.
Course Materials The major materials you will need for this course are: i) Course Guide ii) Study units iii) Assignment file iv) A copy of the 1999 Constitution of the Federal Republic of Nigeria.
v) Relevant textbooks, including those listed under each unit.
vi) You also need to read newspapers and magazines, listen to radio and watch the television regularly.
iiJLS 745 ISSUES IN COMMUNICATION TECHNOLOGY AND POLICY Study Units There are 24 units of five modules in this course.
They are listed below: Module 1 Definitions of Operation Terms Unit 1 Issue Evolution Unit 2 Communication: Meaning, its Characteristics, Types, Functions and Means of Communication Unit 3 Technology: Meaning, Origin and Growth Unit 4 Policy: Meaning, Classes and Effects Module 2 Concepts of Information Policy, Communication Technology and Participants in Modern Communication Unit 1 Basic Concepts of Information Policy Unit 2 Communication Technology: Origin, Functions and Evolution of Forms Unit 3 The Individual’s Right to Communicate, Communities and Voluntary Organisations Unit 4 Professionals, National and Transnational Companies Unit 5 Roles of the State/International Bodies Module 3 Integration between Communication and Technology Unit 1 Combination of Traditional and Modern Communication Unit 2 The Links between Inter-personal and Mediated Communication Unit 3 Inventions and Extension of Visual Expression Unit 4 Cooperative Efforts for News Circulation Unit 5 Vast Possibilities of New Technologies and Informatics Module 4 Imbalances and Barriers in Modern Communication Unit 1 Within Countries: A Case Study of Nigeria Unit 2 Regional Disparities of Communication Unit 3 Divergence between Developed and Developing Countries Unit 4 Free Flow of Information Unit 5 Democratisation of Communication Module 5 Efforts to Redress North-South Communication Imbalance Unit 1 New World Information and Communication Order (NWICO) iiiJLS 745 ISSUES IN COMMUNICATION TECHNOLOGY AND POLICY Unit 2 Alternative Communication Unit 3 Democratic-Participant Communication and Democratic Media Theory Unit 4 Development Journalism Unit 5 Media Pluralism as the Direction of Nigerian Media Textbooks and References A number of books and other materials have been recommended for a good grasp and understanding of this course.
You will find them at the end of each unit.
Indeed, they were the books the course developer consulted in the preparation of the course.
You are advised to obtain them and other relevant materials for further reading.
Assessment File An Assessment File and a marking scheme will be made available to you.
In the assessment file, you will find details of the work you must submit to your tutor for marking.
There are two aspects of the assessment of this course: the tutor-marked and the written examination.
The marks you obtain in these two areas will make up your final marks.
The assignment must be submitted to your tutor for formal assessment according to the dead-line stipulated in the presentation schedule and Assignment File.
The work you submit to your tutor for assessment will account for 30% of your total score.
Tutor-Marked Assignment You will be required to submit a specified number of TMAs.
Each unit in this course has a TMA.
You will be assessed on four of them but the best three performances from the TMAs will be used for your 30% grading.
After you have completed each assignment, send it together with a Tutor Marked Assignment form to your tutor.
Ensure that each assignment gets to your tutor on or before the deadline for submission.
If you have a genuine reason for not completing your work on schedule, contact your tutor for a discussion on the possibility of an extension.
Extensions will only be granted after the deadline under exceptional circumstances.
ivJLS 745 ISSUES IN COMMUNICATION TECHNOLOGY AND POLICY Final Examination and Grading The final examination for JLS 745: Issues in Communication Technology and Policy is a three-hour test, which will attract 70% of the total course grade.
The examination will cover all the topics covered and reflect the self assessment exercises and tutor marked assignments you have practically encountered.
Thus, ensure that you have enough time to revise the entire course.
Course Marking Scheme Assessment Marks Assignments (Best three assignments out of four 30% marked) Final Examination 70% Total 100 Course Overview/Presentation Schedule Units Title of Work Week Assessment Activity (End of Unit) Module 1 Definitions of Operational Terms 1 Issue Evolution Week 1 Assignment 1 2 Communication: Meaning, its Week 1 Assignment 1 Characteristics, Types, Functions and Means of Communication 3 Technology: Meaning, Origin & Week 1 Assignment 1 Growth 4 Policy: Meaning, Classes and Week 1 Assignment 1 Effects Module 2 Concepts of Communication Policy, Communication Technology and Participants in Modern Communication 1 Basic Concepts of Week 1 Assignment 1 Communication Policy 2 Communication Technology: Week 2 Assignment 1 Origin, Functions and Evolution of Forms 3 Individual’s Right to Week 3 Assignment 1 Communicate, Communities and Voluntary Organisations 4 Professionals, National and Week 4 Assignment 1 Transnational Companies 5 Roles of the State/International Week 5 Assignment 1 Bodies vJLS 745 ISSUES IN COMMUNICATION TECHNOLOGY AND POLICY Module 3 Integration between Communication and Technology 1 Combination of Traditional and Week 6 Assignment 1 Modern Communication 2 The Link between Interpersonal Week 7 Assignment 1 and Mediated Communication 3 Invention and Extension of Week 8 Assignment 1 Visual Expression 4 Cooperative Efforts for News Week 9 Assignment 1 Circulation 5 Vast Possibilities of Technologies Week 10 Assignment 1 and Informatics Module 4 Imbalances and Inequalities in Modern Communication 1 Communication Imbalance within Week 11 Assignment 1 Countries: A Case Study of Nigeria 2 Regional Disparities in Week 12 Assignment 1 Communication 3 Characteristics of the Divergence Week 13 Assignment 1 between Developed and Developing 4 Barriers to Free Flow of Week 14 Assignment 1 Information 5 Democratisation of Week 15 Assignment 1 Communication Module 5 Efforts to Redress North – South Communication Imbalance 1 Principles of the New World Week 16 Information and Communication Order by UNESCO (NWICO) 2 Alternative Communication Week 17 Assignment 1 3 Democratic-Participant Week 18 Assignment 1 Communication and Democratic Media Theory 4 Development Journalism Week 19 Assignment 1 5 Media Pluralism as the Direction Week 20 Assignment 1 of Nigerian Media viJLS 745 ISSUES IN COMMUNICATION TECHNOLOGY AND POLICY What this Course Affords You One of the great advantages of distance learning is: you can read and work through the designed study materials at your own time, pace and place.
You are, therefore, advised to see the study units as a replacement for university lectures; here you read the lecture instead of listening to the lecturer.
The Course Guide is a compass for the course.
Thus, you should ensure you read its contents carefully.
Ensure you abide by the study schedule.
Also, ensure that you fulfill the objectives for each unit of the course and keep in touch with your study centre and tutor.
Do your assignments well and submit regularly on deadline.
The course, Issues in Communication Technology and Policy, thrusts you into the engaging global debate on the continuing integration between communication and modern technology, the practical problems that arise there from locally and globally.
In particular, the course hopes to make you part of the road map to redress the one way flow of information from the developed countries to the developing countries, which emanates from the concentration or communication technology in the developed countries.
What You Need for this Course They include, but not limited to: a.
A standard dictionary, such as Chambers or Oxford Advanced learners b.
A copy of the 1999 Constitution of the Federal Republic of Nigeria.
c. Final Report of the International Commission for the Study of Communication Problems (Published under the title: Many Voices, One World) d. All the recommended textbooks on communication theory e. Relevant scholarly journals on the subject of Communication Technology and Policy.
Also, you need an attitude required for the rigorous study the course demands.
These include: i.
At least four uninterrupted hours of study weekly ii.
Self-discipline and a commitment to excel; and iii.
Integrity and tenacity required of a scholar viiJLS 745 ISSUES IN COMMUNICATION TECHNOLOGY AND POLICY Facilitators/Tutors and Tutorials Information regarding dates, time and locations of tutorials, as well as the name and phone number of your tutor will be available to you appropriately.
Your tutor will work and comment on your assignments, monitor your progress and provide assistance during the course.
Therefore, ensure that you send your assignments on deadline.
You should contact your tutor by phone or e-mail if: a.
You do not understand any part of the study units or the assigned reading b.
You have difficulty with the exercises c. You have a question or a problem with an assignment or with your tutor's comments on grading of an assignment Ensure that you attend the tutorials.
This is the only chance to have a face-to-face contact with your tutor.
Also participate actively in the tutorials; ask questions about any problem encountered in the course of your study.
To gain maximum benefit in the tutorials, prepare a question list before attending them.
Summary This Course Guide gives you an overview of what to expect in the course of this study.
The course teaches you how the expansion in communication as a result of the integration and concentration of modern technology in the developed countries, leaving the developing countries as merely onlookers in global communication.
It also acquaints you with efforts of various bodies and countries, including the UNESCO, to redress this dominance and imbalance in communication and technology in the world.
viiiJLS 745 ISSUES IN COMMUNICATION TECHNOLOGY AND POLICY MAIN COURSE Course Code JLS 745 Course Title Issues in Communication Technology and Policy Course Developer/Writer Mr. Dele Kenneth Fashomi School of Communication Lagos State University Lagos Course Editor Dr. Victor Ayedun-Aluma Department of Mass Communication University of Lagos Akoka, Lagos Programme Leader Christine .I.
Ofulue, Ph.D National Open University of Nigeria Course Coordinator Chidinma H. Onwubere National Open University of Nigeria ixJLS 745 ISSUES IN COMMUNICATION TECHNOLOGY AND POLICY NATIONAL OPEN UNIVERSITY OF NIGERIA National Open University of Nigeria Headquarters 14/16 Ahmadu Bello Way Victoria Island Lagos Abuja Office No.
5 Dar es Salaam Street Off Aminu Kano Crescent Wuse II, Abuja Nigeria e-mail: centralinfo@nou.edu.ng URL: www.nou.edu.ng Published by National Open University of Nigeria Printed 2009 ISBN: 978-058-151-0 All Rights Reserved xJLS 745 ISSUES IN COMMUNICATION TECHNOLOGY AND POLICY CONTENTS PAGE Module 1 Definitions of Operational Terms ……………….. 1 Unit 1 Issue Evolution……………………………………….. 1 Unit 2 Communication: Meaning, its Characteristics, Types, Functions and Means of Communication …… 7 Unit 3 Technology: Meaning, Origin and Growth………… 13 Unit 4 Policy: Meaning, Classes and Effects……………… 18 Module 2 Concepts of Information Policy, Communication Technology and Participants in Modern Communication …………………………………….. 24 Unit 1 Concepts of Communication Technology ………….
24 Unit 2 Individual’s Right to Communicate, Roles of Communities and Voluntary Organizations in Communication …………………………………….
37 Unit 3 Roles of Professionals, National and Transnational Companies in Communication ………………….….
43 Unit 4 Roles of the State/International Bodies in Communication ……………………………….…… .
50 Module 3 Integration between Communication and Technology ………………………………………… 56 Unit 1 Combination of Traditional and Modern Communication.............................................................. 56 Unit 2 The Links between Interpersonal and Mediated Communication……………………………………….
63 Unit 3 Inventions and Extension of Visual Expression……… 69 Unit 4 Integration in News Circulation and External Assistance to Developing Countries ……….……….. 75 Unit 5 Vast Possibilities and Implications of New Technologies ……………………………………….
82 Module 4 Imbalances and Barriers in Modern Communication …………………………………….. 90 Unit 1 Disparities and Barriers within Countries: A Case Study of Nigeria …………………………… 90 Unit 2 Regional Communication Imbalances …………..….
100 Unit 3 Divergence between Developed and Developing Countries …………………………………………… 107 xiJLS 745 ISSUES IN COMMUNICATION TECHNOLOGY AND POLICY Module 5 Efforts to Redress North - South Communication Imbalance……………115 Unit 1 New World Information and Communication Order (NWICO)…………………………115 Unit 2 Alternative Communication………….… 124 Unit 3 Democratic-Participant Communication and Democratic Media Theory……….
130 Unit 4 Development Journalism……………… 136 xiiJLS 745 ISSUES IN COMMUNICATION TECHNOLOGY AND POLICY MODULE 1 DEFINITIONS OF OPERATION TERMS Unit 1 Issue Evolution Unit 2 Communication: Meaning, its Characteristics, Types, Functions and Means of Communication Unit 3 Technology: Meaning, Origin and Growth Unit 4 Policy: Meaning, Classes and Effects UNIT 1 ISSUE EVOLUTION CONTENTS 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objectives 3.0 Main Content 3.1 What an Issue is?
3.2 Issue Evolution: Sources, Development and Transformations 3.3 Major Issues in Modern Communication 3.4 Themes in Communication Today 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutor-Marked Assignment 7.0 References/Further Readings 1.0 INTRODUCTION Issues in Communication Technology and Policy concern unresolved discussions on the social origins, significance and effects of the media at the individual and society levels.
Thus, it is proper to start the course with What Issue Is; Issue Evolution: Development and Transformations; Major Issues and Themes in Modern Communication.
2.0 OBJECTIVES At the end of this unit, you should be able to: • define issue as a social concept • discuss Issue Evolution Theory • identify the various issues involved in modern communication • explain the major themes in mass media today.
3.0 MAIN CONTENT 1JLS 745 ISSUES IN COMMUNICATION TECHNOLOGY AND POLICY 3.1 What an Issue is?
A dictionary definition of issue is: “A point or a question under dispute or discussion.” In more specific terms, however, issue means a matter which has reached a point where a decision must be made or is desired.
Thus, issue is recognized as part of the social process of any group, community or society.
In Nigeria, which appears to be almost completely in a flux and faced with various development challenges, issues are not in short supply.
This is vividly demonstrated in the various agenda settings in our mass media every day.
Issues are generated in and around places, events and locations; in various sectors of the nation’s life, including health, agriculture, communication, banking, aviation, roads, ports, railways, among others.
Also, in the international arena, a similar situation exists as political actions between and among nations interplay, issues generate conflicts and disagreements among nations.
Indeed, questions arise when nations cross paths at such points as arms and armaments, boundaries, economy, politics, and development.
In particular, the unfair and unbalanced distribution of the world resources generate enormous conflicts and frictions at which points issues also crop up for both bilateral and global discussions and debate.
3.2 Issue Evolution: Sources, Development and Transformations Many scholars agree that the Theory and Model of Issue Evolution (Edward G. Carmines & James Stinson, (1990) which examined the evolution issue of racial desegregation in America holds for other times and other nations.
Therefore, this model, which we shall rely on here, concerns two central problems: • Structure of issue evolution – which relates to the causal process of issue evolution.
That is, policies emanate from professional politicians, and later, mass response generate there from; and • Sequence of changes in elite behaviour regarding mass perceptions on issues.
In clear terms, the theory of issue evolution is developed as a general statement to explain the connection between elite and mass behaviour as a model for politics across time, nations and issues.
The theory 2JLS 745 ISSUES IN COMMUNICATION TECHNOLOGY AND POLICY specifically identifies sources, development and transformations of issues.
A.
Sources of Issues • Issues generate from interactions in a complex environment and also from chance processes.
• Government environment superimposed upon a disparate social order produces issues.
• The regulation, distribution and redistribution of government acts, multiplied by the number of spheres of social and economic activities, in turn multiplied by time and interaction of government and the governed will produce fresh unresolved social questions in abundance.
B.
Issue Selection for Development In particular, the Issue Evolution Model identifies four mechanisms which sort out or filter the numerous issue conflicts that can command public attention for development.
These are: • Strategic politicians who promote issues as effective leverage in their struggle for power.
• Also, issues moved to the centre of public discourse when highlighted by external disruptions to established order.
• Old issues also transformed into a new context and bear different social consequences.
• Cybernetic issues are selected for importance due to internal contradictions and imbalances in a political system 3.3 Major Issues in Modern Communication Our discourse on various aspects of issue as a concept leads us to identifying the major issues that dominate debates in modern communication locally and globally.
We must emphasise that these major communication issues have national, regional and international dimensions.
They may sometimes be interdependent.
They also raise questions at the individual level as the individual is the smallest set of a communication entity.
• In particular, many of them relate to the growing interface between communication and technology, which has created an expansion in the means of communication.
• They also concern the inequalities between the developed countries and the developing countries due to concentration of communication technology in the former.
3JLS 745 ISSUES IN COMMUNICATION TECHNOLOGY AND POLICY • Also, issues of communication disparities within nations in matters of gender, class, rural-urban dichotomy, educational, ethnic and other cleavages abound.
• Disparities manifest among countries in the same region owing essentially to differences in the availability of means of production and economic resources.
• The linkage between the call for New World Economic Order and New World Information and Communication Order • A call for “free and balanced flow of communication” as a sine qua non for democratization of communication.
• The fear that the call for “free and balanced flow of communication” may lead to dominance of governments in the developing countries of their peoples.
Essentially, communication issues, which are not in anyway exhaustive above, relate to questions on which public opinion often forms.
They also concern questions on which governments are expected to have policies for prevention or improvement because they may not be altogether negative or positive.
McQuail (2005) divides communication issues according to the terrain they occupy as: Relations with Politics and the State • Political campaigns and propaganda • Citizen participation and democracy • War, peace and terrorism • The making of foreign policy • Oppression, liberation and revolution in states Cultural Issues • Cultural and economic globalization • The quality of cultural life and cultural production • Questions of identity Social Concerns • The definition and mediation of social experience • Crime, violence, pornography and deviance • Civil peace, order and disorder • The emerging information society • The problem of information inequality • Consumerism and commercialism • The use and quality of leisure time 4JLS 745 ISSUES IN COMMUNICATION TECHNOLOGY AND POLICY Normative Questions • Freedom of speech and expression • Social and cultural inequality: class, ethnicity, gender and sexuality relations • Media norms, ethics and professionalism • Media policy and regulation • Media concentration and diversity Power and Effects • Communicating effectively • The shaping of fashion and celebrity • The formation and change of public opinion 4.0 CONCLUSION Politics is about issues and social relations are their domain.
Communications is the instrument that promotes political and social relations.
Mankind has reached a communication age in which the world is reduced to “a global village.” Communication, because of its diffusion with technology, connects places, reduces the distance between individuals, countries and cultures.
Major trends in mass media are said to have both negative and positive effects.
Thus, issues about the relevance of the mass media to the society are continuously germane.
SELF ASSESSMENT EXERCISE What do you understand by the theory of issue evolution?
5.0 SUMMARY When we speak of issues in this course, we are referring to specific matters that are in dispute in the public domain.
They are concerned with questions which influence public opinion, on which some responsibilities weigh against the media, and on which nations should have policies for guidance.
This is the world of mass media today that is laced with enormous possibilities due to technology which has reduced the question of time and speed in communication.
It has also established a ‘global village,’ but ensured the dominance of the weak by empowering the strong.
Our ideas of social reality and meaning of message are also blurred today.
Mass media reinforces cultural identity by preserving culture, religion and lifestyles of different peoples, while at the same time galvanizing a mass culture because of their mass 5JLS 745 ISSUES IN COMMUNICATION TECHNOLOGY AND POLICY output.
These are issues which continue to dominate debate on mass media today.
6.0 TUTOR-MARKED ASSIGNMENT Discuss the various issues in communication today?
7.0 REFERENCES/FURTHER READINGS Carmins, Stimson (1990).
Issue Evolution: Race and the Transformation of American Politics.
Princeton University Press, p. 1-10 McQuail Denis (2005).
Mass Communication Theory.
London: Sage Publications Ltd. p.7-10.
6JLS 745 ISSUES IN COMMUNICATION TECHNOLOGY AND POLICY UNIT 2 COMMUNICATION: ITS MEANING, CHARACTERISTICS & FUNCTIONS CONTENTS 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objectives 3.0 Main Content 3.1 Meaning of Communication 3.2 Characteristics of Communication 3.3 Functions of Communication 3.4 Types of Communication 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutor-Marked Assignment 7.0 References/Further Readings 1.0 INTRODUCTION Communication has become an all-embracing phenomenon today.
It touches all spheres of life.
There is hardly anything that man does today that does not have relationship with communication.
This is why the modern world has been termed communication age where the world has become a ‘global village’ of a sort.
As we said earlier, communication connects places and cultures; reduces distances between individuals and countries.
Thus we must study its meaning, characteristics and functions.
2.0 OBJECTIVES At the end of this unit, you must be able to: • define communication • know the characteristics of communication • identify the main functions of communication • discuss the types of communication.
3.0 MAIN CONTENT 3.1 Meaning of Communication Communication is derived from the Latin word ‘communis’ or ‘communicare’ which means making common.
Its prefix co- shows 7JLS 745 ISSUES IN COMMUNICATION TECHNOLOGY AND POLICY there must be more than one person in the process of communication.
Thus, like other words in the family such as communion, commonwealth and community, communication involves exchange.
In particular, communication involves conversing, sharing, interacting, participating and exchanging some data, signal, ideas, facts, information and knowledge.
A simple definition of communication is: a process of exchange of signals, data, ideas, facts, information or knowledge between a source (originator) through a channel, to a receiver (destination).
However, to stress the interactive process in communication, Brown (1993) says information is intelligence imparted concerning some particular facts, subject or event; a piece of data; an item of news in a one-way or non-interactive means.
He identifies preaching in a Christian context as information, and non-interactive, insisting that communication is interactive.
3.2 Characteristics of Communication Communication has some basic characteristics or elements, viz: sources, message, channel and receiver; effects (homophily, selective perception, intention and recall).
a) Source: is the communication originator, encoder or foundation of the communication process.
The source could be an individual or group, human or non-human who sends the message.
b) Message: is what is sent, it could be stimuli, signals, cues; it could be verbal (words) or non-verbal; serious or non-serious.
c) Channel: is the means through which the message is sent and received.
This could be waves, touch, sight and hearing, which apply mainly in intrapersonal and interpersonal forms of communication.
In the mass mediated communication, channel could be newspapers, television, radio, satellites, books, magazines, etc.
d) Receiver: is the destination of message.
This could be human or non-human.
Receiver of message receives and processes message, retains some for recall and reacts to some of it immediately.
We stress the interactive nature of communication here because of the change of roles between the source and the receiver in order to strike effective understanding.
Thus, communication is a cyclical process of exchange of message between the source and the receiver in an inter- play of changing roles in source, receiver and originator and destination order.
8JLS 745 ISSUES IN COMMUNICATION TECHNOLOGY AND POLICY e) Homophily: is the degree of agreement between the source and the receiver.
Thus, there is likely to be a near perfect communication between two or more people who are close or share close field of experience.
For example, there is likely to be a greater degree of understanding or homophily between a father, mother and children than external people to a family.
The agreement between the field of experience of source and receiver of message is based on socio- political and economic factors which include class, culture, language, social status, level of education, religion, e.t.c.
f) Heterophily: Conversely, this refers to the degree of lack of understanding or dissonance between the source and receiver of message in a communication process.
This occurs especially where the source and the receiver have different backgrounds, attributes or field of experience, including level of education, culture, language, enlightenment, etc.
g) Selective Attention: is the ability of the receiver of message to appraise and select what to attend to or not.
Hearing and listening are not the same.
While hearing could be passive, listening is an active behaviour, thus there is a variation in the degree of understanding in the activities of communication.
h) Perception: is the deliberate intention by the source of message to get to the common ground of experience with the receiver.
Source wants to share a common experience or interaction with the receiver.
So the source consciously packages the message, using his value judgement and experience about the receiver and his environment, in order that the message can be received and understood appropriately.
i) Retention: is a logical follow-up of the selective process of communication.
What receiver retains in message relates to his degree of understanding and disposition to message.
Even if he understands the message, but it conflicts with his biases, the receiver will not likely retain or attend to the message.
j) Recall: It simply means retrieval of message stored in the process of communication.
It describes the selective process of recalling message stored in memory.
3.3 Functions of Communication 9JLS 745 ISSUES IN COMMUNICATION TECHNOLOGY AND POLICY As indicated in our definition of communication earlier, it is an interactive individual and collective activity involving all transmission and sharing of ideas, facts, and data.
Thus, we shall identify the functions of communication as: i) Information: It relates to collecting, storing, processing and disseminating news, data, pictures, opinions and comments in order to understand and react appropriately to the environment, personal, national and international conditions.
ii) Debate: Communication provides an effective and enduring means for discussions as public issues and classification of view points at local, national and international levels.
iii) Education: Communication fosters transmission of knowledge for acquisition of skills and intellectual growth at the individual and collective levels.
iv) Socialisation: Communication also provides a fountain of common experience and knowledge which allows a person to conform, relate and operate as a member of a community or a society.
v) Motivation: Personal aims and aspirations and goals and objectives of a society are achieved through effectively communication.
The individual motivations are streamlined and geared towards the pursuit of common objectives and goals of the society with the aid of communication.
vi) Culture and Entertainment Value: Communication not only preserves heritage and promotes cultural growth, it also serves as a means of entertainment through the diffusion of drama, dance, art, literature, music, comedy, sports, games for personal and collective recreation and enjoyment.
vii) Integration: It provides access to messages for all persons, nations and groups to understand and appreciate each other and live peaceful in their environment and in the world.
3.4 Types of Communication 10JLS 745 ISSUES IN COMMUNICATION TECHNOLOGY AND POLICY We must make a distinction between types of communication and means of communication; the latter relate to the channels through which communication takes place.
Thus, the main types of communication are: a) Intrapersonal Communication: is the basis of all human communication.
It means communication within an individual using the main senses of sight, hearing, touch, smell and touch to feel the environment, make decision to defend oneself, create entertainment and passions and provide food and take decisions on regeneration.
The five senses are senders of messages through the nervous system to the brain.
The brain receives the signals or impulses (message) which it reacts to or restricts attention from.
The brain is this receiver of message; it transmits the message (impulses) in form of feedback to the muscles, which produces activities in reaction to the message or impulses.
There could also be noise in the process in form of external or internal distractions from the environment or from within the person such as headache, fever or fatigue.
b) Interpersonal Communication: is communication in a face-to-face situation.
Thus, it takes place between two persons groups of persons.
It also has the feature of a sender, message, channel and receiver.
Noise is also an element in the process: environmental noise and semantic noise – environmental noise refers to distractions within the environment of the source, the receiver or the channel.
Feedback is another element in interpersonal communication as the receiver reacts to the message from the source.
Effect is a consequence of the impact of the message on the receiver.
The elements of both feedback and effect, according to a communication expert, Wilbur Schramm, is real in interpersonal communication as the receiver may also become the encoder or source of message as the source and receiver change roles.
Schramm believes communication is never ending; the source and receiver are involved in a process of shared experience.
c) Mass Communication: For mass communication, we need an intermediate transmitter of information.
This is mass medium such as newspapers, magazines, film, radio, television, books, or a combination of these.
Mass communication concerns messages transmitted through a mass medium to a large audience.
Thus, it reduces distances between persons, connects cultures, regions and nations.
The main characteristics of mass communication are: 11JLS 745 ISSUES IN COMMUNICATION TECHNOLOGY AND POLICY • mass medium, messages are impersonal • a large structure or complex organisation • delayed feedback • simultaneity of message • message source is at a distance from the receiver.
4.0 CONCLUSION We have dealt extensively on the meaning of communication to properly situate the themes in the course which we will later deal with.
Our definition of communication is all-encompassing, involving all the forms of communication.
We have also made a distinction between types of communication and means of communication to reinforce the diffusion in mass communication due to the impact of technology.
5.0 SUMMARY In this unit, we have treated the meaning of communication, characteristics and elements of communication, functions and types of communication.
6.0 TUTOR-MARKED ASSIGNMENT 1.
Define communication and discuss its main characteristics.
2.
List and explain the main functions of communication.
3.
Discuss the types of communication.
7.0 REFERENCES/FURTHER READINGS Brown, Ronald (1983).
Media Development – A Journal of the World Association of Christian Communication, Vol.
xxx p.3 Bitner, John (1989).
Mass Communication: An Introduction 5th Edition.
Reprinted by Prentice Inc. USA: New Jersey.
p. 1-19 UNESCO Report, (1981).
Many Voices, One World.
Nigerian Edition Ibadan: University Press p.14-15.
UNIT 3 TECHNOLOGY: ITS MEANING, CHARACTERISTICS, CLASSES AND GROWTH 12JLS 745 ISSUES IN COMMUNICATION TECHNOLOGY AND POLICY CONTENTS 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objectives 3.0 Main Content 3.1 Origin and Meaning of Technology 3.2 Characteristics of Technology 3.3 Classes of Technology 3.4 Growth of Technology 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutor-Marked Assignment 7.0 References/Further Readings 1.0 INTRODUCTION The diffusion of technology results in the ongoing communication revolution in the world.
In particular, the integration of telecommunications with modern technologies, such as computers and informatics has created an expansion in the means of communication.
Thus, this unit deals with meaning, characteristics and classes of technology.
It also deals with the expanse and growth of technology.
2.0 OBJECTIVES At the end of this unit, you should be able to: • define technology and discuss its characteristics and classes • explain the expanse and growth of technology through the ages.
3.0 MAIN CONTENT 3.1 Origin and Meaning of Technology Technology is not particularly a neutral world.
Its definition is affected by time especially.
Thus, different people will give it different meanings depending on their viewpoint and context.
Technology is said to have come from the Greek word ‘tekhnologia’ and its Latin version, is ‘technologia.’ Scholars say its root is the Greek word ‘tekhne’ which means an art or craft.
In spite of this specific and limited meaning in 17th century, however, technology has expanded rapidly in both its denotative and connotative meaning in the 20th century.
Today, it is now widely used to encompass a diverse collection of phenomena which include: tools, instruments, organizations and methods.
13JLS 745 ISSUES IN COMMUNICATION TECHNOLOGY AND POLICY Therefore, put simply, technology concerns itself with understanding how knowledge is creatively applied to organized tasks involving people and machines that meet sustainable goals (www.open2.net/scientechnology.nation).
Indeed, there are three elements that need to be explained in this definition: 1.
Technology concerns taking action to meet a human need rather than merely understanding the natural world, which is the goal of science.
For example, the invention of spacecraft was driven by the need to explore the world, but it has brought about other technologies, such as satellite communications.
2.
It employs much more than scientific knowledge.
Technology includes values as much as facts, practical craft, and knowledge as much as theoretical knowledge.
3.
It involves organized ways of achieving its ends.
It also covers both the intended and unintended interactions between products (machines, devices and artifacts) and the people and systems that make them, use them or are affected by them through various processes.
3.2 Characteristics of Technology Characteristics of technology also refer to its nature (www.law.com./jsp/ nl).
Therefore, we shall now discuss some distinctive characteristics of technology: i) It is Related to Science There is a relationship between technology and science, especially as very little of it could be classified as applied science.
But technology is distinct.
It is marked by different purposes, processes and relationship to establish knowledge.
The main concern of technology is change in the material environment, whereas, science is concerned with understanding nature.
Technological solutions are not whether right or wrong, verifiable or falsifiable, but effective from different points of view.
ii) It is Multi-Disciplinary Technology is multi-dimensional, drawing various specialists, including designer, production engineer and materials scientist in its production 14JLS 745 ISSUES IN COMMUNICATION TECHNOLOGY AND POLICY and design process.
It requires a technologist to perform many functions with others, in the areas of budgets, communicating with clients, operating on deadlines and applying pressure on decision makers.
iii) It Involves Design Design is at the centre of technology.
Design in technology is a process which starts with identifying a need, proceeds with a formulation of specification; generate ideas and gets to a solution, ending with evaluating the solution.
iv) It Involves Making This is a characteristic of technology that follows two logical design processes.
This is how the identified need will be met or realized.
It could be through building a prototype, batch or mass production or computer model.
Scholars say if the need will be met, the design process has to be properly evaluated and purposeful.
v) Technology is Concerned with Value Since technology fulfils a need, built into it is value appreciation.
Even from its design level, technology must be suitable for a purpose(s).
It must be the right solution to a need and must be desired for a purpose.
vi) It Shapes Society or it is Shaped by Society Technology is targeted at a social need.
This way, the society shapes it.
However, technology can also shape a society as the motor car has today conditioned the society to its use.
3.3 Classes of Technology By the turn of the 20th Century, the uses and expanse of technology is said to have grown to a point that it can be classified into at least five classes: a) Technology as objects: tools, machines, instruments, weapons, appliances – the physical devices of technical performance.
b) Technology as knowledge: the know-how behind technological innovation.
c) Technology as activities: skills, methods procedures and routines.
d) Technology as process: begins with a need and ends with a solution.
15JLS 745 ISSUES IN COMMUNICATION TECHNOLOGY AND POLICY e) Technology as a socio-technical system: the manufacture and use of objects involving people and other objects in combination.
3.4 Expanse and Growth of Technology Technology, as we said earlier, has been affected by time and context.
In particular, its nature, role and impact on our personal and working lives have changed dramatically in the last 100 years.
In the 17th Century, technology was conceived as simply a systematic study of arts or craft.
A characteristic reference to technology in 18th Century meant something mechanical.
It was mainly in 19th Century, however, that record showed technology to mean ‘practical arts’ – scholars said this was the period when technologists were seen as ‘one versed in technology; who studies or treats the two arts of manufactures.’ It was also identified as a ‘new specialised sense of science which opened the way to a more familiar modern distinction between knowledge (science) and its practical application (technology).’ Inherent in this distinction also was the term ‘technique’ in the manner of artistic execution or performance in relation to practical details.
During this period, scholars said many people spoke directly of machines, tools, factories, industry, crafts and engineering, while worrying about ‘technology’ as a distinct phenomenon.
However, all that changed in 20th century.
Technology expanded in all its ramifications.
Today, it now encompasses a diverse collection of phenomena – including tools, instruments, machines, organizations, methods, techniques, systems and the totality of all these and similar things in our daily lives.
To help us understand the shift in the meaning from something precise, limited, simple and specific, to its vague and expansive nature, definitions of technology in the Webster’s dictionary will do.
In Webster’s Second International (1909), the word was said to mean ‘industrial science’ – the science or systematic knowledge of the industrial arts, especially of manufactures.
However, in the edition of Webster’s third New International Dictionary, the definition of technologies blossomed to: ‘the totality of means of employed by a people to provide itself with the objects of material culture.’ Today, even this definition seems narrow if we consider the way the word is now employed.
Definitely, technology has come to represent more than ‘national objects of culture.’ Some of the modern technologies even involve alteration of both the psychological and spiritual conditions of man.
16JLS 745 ISSUES IN COMMUNICATION TECHNOLOGY AND POLICY The vagueness in the meaning of technology has been the concern of social scientists who insist that a precise, manageable definition be fashioned out.
For the purpose of this course, we restate our simple definition that: ‘technology concerns itself with understanding how knowledge is creatively applied to organized tasks involving people and machines that meet sustainable goals.’ 4.0 CONCLUSION The bandwidth of technology is still expanding.
Thus, the impact of technology on man is almost limitless, especially because of its expanding possibilities which could either have a negative or positive effect.
There is, therefore, the need for every country to have policies for its development and consumption.
5.0 SUMMARY The unit has dealt with: origin and meaning of technology, characteristics and classes of technology, and expanse and growth of technology.
In particular, the area of expanse and growth of technology is to further delimit the concept of modern technology and demonstrate its growth in ages.
6.0 TUTOR-MARKED ASSIGNMENT 1.
Discuss the main characteristics and classes of technology 2.
Define the meaning of technology today and show its growth in ages.
7.0 REFERENCES/FURTHER READINGS Ellul, Jacques (1964).
The Technological Society (Trans.
John Wilkinson).
New York: Vintage Oxford English Dictionary.
Webster’s Dictionary.
McLuhan, Marshall (1964).
Understanding Media, London: Routledge and Kegan Paul.
UNIT 4 POLICY: MEANING AND POLICY TYPOLOGY CONTENTS 1.0 Introduction 17JLS 745 ISSUES IN COMMUNICATION TECHNOLOGY AND POLICY 2.0 Objectives 3.0 Main Content 3.1 Classes of Policy 3.2 Policy Cycle and Contents 3.3 Effects of Policy 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutor-Marked Assignment 7.0 References/Further Readings 1.0 INTRODUCTION Policies are decisions or a set of programmed actions in a particular sphere of a society’s life to achieve its goals and aims.
Without such policies, a society will be without form, unable to control its members’ activities, assess its own progress and order its continued existence.
This unit focuses on meaning, classes, contents and effects of policy.
2.0 OBJECTIVES At the end of this unit, you should be able to: • explain what policy means and identify its major classes • discuss policy cycle, contents and effects of a policy.
3.0 MAIN CONTENT 3.1 Meaning and Classes of Policy Policy as a term is very elastic.
We can, however, explore the English dictionary conception of the word, even if we will arrive at a modified concept later, thus: • Policy concerns a set of decisions by a society or group which they implement for their corporate existence.
• Indeed, policy is not just an ordinary statement or a set of actions, but decisions with some measure of force of the executive, especially as the decisions have to be implemented.
• Also, by inference, a policy usually implies some long term projections and purpose on a particular subject matter; not a series of ad hoc judgments on unrelated fields or subjects.
• Similarly, we conceive of the term policy rather as a fairly cohesive set of responses to a problem that beset a society or group.
18JLS 745 ISSUES IN COMMUNICATION TECHNOLOGY AND POLICY • A policy is seen also more from an executive rather than legislative term; this is particularly so if one considers various government policies, plans and projects which may be short-term, but more specific in time and place to achieve a purpose or solve a problem.
Based on the considerations above, we can simply define a policy as a set of decisions which are targeted at achieving long term purpose or to solve a particular problem.
For a government of a country, such decisions are often embodied in legislations and apply to a country as a whole, rather than to a part of it Classes of Policy Policies are classified by many means such as by cause (reason), determinism (what it hopes to achieve), opportunity (opportunities it offers) and so on.
They could also be classified by their intrinsic character or effects they are supposed to achieve, such as distributive policies, regulatory policies, constituent policies and government or public policies.
We will classify them by their effects on people or their character: Government or Public Policies Thomas Birkland in An Introduction to the Policy Process (2001) identifies the definitions of public policy by many scholars: (a) ‘The term public policy always refers to the actions of government and the intentions that determine those actions’ – Clarke E. Cochran, et al.
(b) ‘Public policy is the outcome of the struggle in government over who gets what’ – Clarke E. Cochran, et al.
(c) Public policy is: ‘Whatever governments choose to do or not do’ – Thomas Dye (d) ‘Public policy consists of political decisions for implementing programmes to achieve societal goals – Charles L. Cochran and Eloise F. Malone.
(e) ‘Stated most simply, public policy is the sum of government activities, whether acting directly or through agents, as it has an influence on the life of the citizenry’ – B.
Guy Peters.
We have provided these definitions of public policy in order to show that they generally fall within our earlier provisional definition and also to stress the character of public policy which are also broadly applicable to other organizations, including private companies and non-profit oriented organizations.
19JLS 745 ISSUES IN COMMUNICATION TECHNOLOGY AND POLICY Birkland, on the history of policy, wrote: While the study of politics has a long history, the systematic study of public policy, on the other hand, can be said to be a twentieth century creation.
It dates, according to Daniel McCool, to 1922, when political scientist Charles Merrian sought to connect the theory and practices of politics to understanding the actual activities of government, that is public policy.
In general, examples of public policy are: Communications and Information Policy, Domestic Policy, Education Policy, Economic Policy, Energy Policy, Environmental Policy, Foreign Policy, Health Policy, Housing Policy, Human Resources Policy, Macro Economic Policy, Monetary Policy, Defence Policy, Population Policy, Public Policy in Law, Social Policy, Transportation policy, Urban and Regional Planning Policy, Water Policy, Agriculture Policy, etc.
• Distributive Policy: concerns extension of goods and services by an organization as well as distributing the costs of the goods and services.
• Regulatory Policy: limits the discretion of individuals and agencies or otherwise compels certain types of behaviour, this policy is generally applied in situations where good behaviour can be easily defined and bad behaviour can also be easily regulated and sanctioned.
An example of successful regulatory policy is fastening of seat-belt by drivers as compelled by the FRSC in Nigeria.
• Constituent Policy: creates executive powers and deals with laws.
It can also deal with fiscal policy in some situations.
• Miscellaneous Policy: it is usually dynamic in character and implementation.
It does not concern static goals or laws.
It deals with policy blueprints and their unexpected results.
Miscellaneous policy treats social problems on the ground of implementation as well as occurrences at the decision making stage.
3.2 Policy Cycle and Contents A.
Policy Cycle In political science, the policy cycle is said to be defined as a tool used for analyzing a policy item in its stages.
One identified standard version includes the underlisted order of stages: 20JLS 745 ISSUES IN COMMUNICATION TECHNOLOGY AND POLICY • Agenda setting (problem identification) • Policy formation • Decision making • Policy analysis and evaluation (policy may continue or terminate) There is, however, an eight-step policy cycle said to have been developed in the Australian Policy Handbook by Peter Bridgman and Glyn Davis thus: • Issue identification • Policy analysis • Policy instrument development • Consultation (this permeates the entire process) • Co-ordination • Decision • Implementation • Evaluation B.
Policy Contents Policies have standard forms typical to the organization issuing them.
They are also brought to life through official written documents.
Policy forms may vary, but policy documents usually contain certain items including: • A purpose statement: outlines the reason(s) why the policy has become necessary or needed and the effects desired there from.
• An applicability and scope statement: describes who the policy will affect and which actions are impacted by the policy.
If need be, it might state those the policy excluded, including organizations and groups.
• An effective date: indicates a particular date the policy comes into effect.
Experts say retroactive policies are rare, but can sometimes be found.
• A responsibilities section: details responsibilities to particular parties, organizations and groups.
These responsibilities may be oversight and or executive in nature.
• Policy statements: indicates the specific regulations, requirements or modifications to organizational or group behaviour that the policy seeks to create.
21JLS 745 ISSUES IN COMMUNICATION TECHNOLOGY AND POLICY • Policy background: gives the history that led to the creation of the policy, usually referred to as the motivating factors.
• Definitions: provides clear definitions of terms and concepts used in the policy document.
3.3 Effects of a Policy Policy has intended effects and unintended effects: • Intended Effects: these are positive benefits that a policy seeks to achieve or attract to the people.
Clearly, a policy is created in order to avoid some negative effects on a group or some people, and thus to the extent that it solves the problems (negative effects), such a policy has fulfilled its aims and also achieved the intended effects.
For example, the speed limit policy on Nigerian highways is to reinforce the essence of safe driving, reduce high death rate through dangerous driving on our highways.
To the extent that number of deaths is reduced drastically on Nigerian roads, the policy of speed limit will have achieved its intended effects.
• Unintended Effects: these relate to side effects or unintended or unforeseen consequences of a policy.
The unintended consequences occur because a policy is a subject of context, time and situations.
These elements are dynamic and do change.
The change(s) may affect a policy and bring about unintended consequences or effects.
For example, the Federal Government’s policy to limit imported ‘tokunbo’ vehicles to eight years recently had the unintended effect of reducing the number of imported vehicles in the Nigerian ports and boosting smuggling as well as imports of our neighbour, the Republic of Benin.
4.0 CONCLUSION Policy formulation process covers the entire aspects of a nation’s life.
Organizations and groups also draw their policies with regard to the national policies which concern them directly.
A policy process is an attempt to assess as many areas of potential impact, and lessen the chances that a policy will generate unintended consequences or effects.
While it may be practically impossible for a policy to assess all its impacts, the essence is to fashion out other policies that will treat the unintended consequences.
5.0 SUMMARY 22JLS 745 ISSUES IN COMMUNICATION TECHNOLOGY AND POLICY Policies are instruments that a nation and an organisation uses to tackle problems.
Without a policy on any particular aspect of a nation’s life, the nation becomes a junkyard of anything; just anything from anywhere will be found there because nature abhors void.
This is why Nigeria urgently needs an effective and efficient policy on communication technology to avoid the junk of computers and informatics which make the nation just a consumer of communication and technologies that kill its culture, language, economy and social life.
6.0 TUTOR-MARKED ASSIGNMENT A nation’s life is governed by a cycle of public policies; discuss the intended and unintended effects of a policy in the light of statement.
7.0 REFERENCES/FURTHER READINGS Birkland, Thomas (2001).
An Introduction to the Policy Process.
McCool, Daniel C. (1995).
Public Policy Theories, Models and Concepts: An Anthology.
Englewood Cliffs: NJ, Prentice Hall.
MODULE 2 CONCEPT OF COMMUNICATION POLICY, COMMUNICATION TECHNOLOGY, PARTICIPANTS IN MODERN COMMUNICATION Unit 1 Concepts of Communication Technology Unit 2 Individual’s Right to Communicate, Roles of Communities and Voluntary Organizations in Communication Unit 3 Roles of Professionals, National and Transnational Companies in Communication Unit 4 Roles of the State/International Bodies in Communication 23JLS 745 ISSUES IN COMMUNICATION TECHNOLOGY AND POLICY UNIT 1 CONCEPTS OF COMMUNICATION TECHNOLOGY CONTENTS 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objectives 3.0 Main Content 3.1 Origin and Meaning of Communication Technology 3.2 Varieties of Modern Communication Technology 3.3 Functions of Communication Technology 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutor-Marked Assignment 7.0 References/Further Readings 1.0 INTRODUCTION The world has reached a communication age where mankind is witnessing a communication revolution.
Communication technologies have created almost limitless possibilities in production, multiplication, storage and retrieval of messages.
While new communication technologies have not completely erased the use of traditional media technologies, modern communication technologies, including computers and satellites, have affected the communication greatly, especially as they reduce distances between nations, regions, zones and continents, connect cultures and peoples, and engender a semblance of mass global audience, while at the same time functioning as the awareness for expression of some local language and ways of preserving local cultures and heritage.
In this unit, we shall study the origin and meaning of communication technology, the varieties of modern communication technology and functions of communication technology.
2.0 OBJECTIVES At the end of this unit, you should be able to: • define what communication technology means and its varied forms • discuss the functions of communication technology.
3.0 MAIN CONTENT 3.1 Origin and Meaning of Communication Technology 24JLS 745 ISSUES IN COMMUNICATION TECHNOLOGY AND POLICY The foundations of modern communication technology are in the traditional communication devices, however crude and limited the latter might be.
The early humans in about 20,000BC carved symbols on walls of caves and used drums and signs to signal to one another.
Mankind later developed on this to invent writing, which increased the possibilities of making coded data both permanent and portable.
This pictographic writing in about 1,000BC gave way to the development of alphabets, some 600 characters were initially said to have been identified.
Subsequently, paper was invented around 100A.D, with the record showing the oldest-known printed piece as Sutra, printed in Korea in 750A.D.
However, modern printing began in Germany in mid-15th century even though the Koreans, Chinese and Japanese had developed printing much earlier.
History was made by 1,500 when Johan Gutenberg completed the printing of the Bible with a technology called movable type and a printing process he had developed.
Gutenberg’s achievement led to a revolution in communication process as it not only boost the rate of the production of the written words but also visual documents.
Others communication technologies created within this period included the ancient Greeks’ high walls which stretched across the country side through which message were relayed using fire and smoke.
Also, the Persians and Romans developed a postal system where official correspondence was carried on horseback between one station and another.
Indeed, great developments in printing between 1500s and 1600s led to the invention of newspaper as it is to day.
In this period also, the postal service was improved upon, leading to the linking of major cities in Europe with mail service.
This was extended into many countries subsequently in 1700s.
The telegraphic communication was invented in 1800s by Morse, thus introducing electronic technologies which boost the range and immediacy of communication.
The capability of rapid transmission of data was enhanced with the crossing of the Atlantic Ocean by cable.
This also helped Marconi’s development in 1895 as wireless telegraph or radio messages were now sent and received through the waves.
25JLS 745 ISSUES IN COMMUNICATION TECHNOLOGY AND POLICY Also, the typewriter and telephone proved great achievements in communication technologies about this time.
The mid-1950s saw the expansion of the use of television, while satellites communication was developed in 1960s, serving a similar function like the earlier Greeks’ ‘fire towers’, but more sophisticated.
Later, miniature radios, stereophonic audio equipment, home viewing system, photocopying appliances, among others, were manufactured.
Recent developments include video games, video disc, video text, viable television, home computers, world processors, wireless telephones and other telecommunications technologies.
We have discussed the developments of these varieties of communication technologies together this way in order to reinforce that they perform, though in different respects, and with different effects and impacts, their essential function being extending our communication abilities and senses.
The smoke signals, telephones, typewriters, television and computers all qualify as communication technologies as they expand our capacities to see (visual), hear (auditory), smell, taste and touch (tactile).
Therefore, we can define communication technology simply as any tool, device or medium which helps in the production, distribution, storage, reception and display of data.
3.2 Varieties of Modern Communication Technology At this juncture, we shall make a subtle distinction between traditional forms of communication technologies, including smoke signals, fire towers, cave wall drawings and drums, and the new communication technologies, including computers and telecommunications.
This distinction is necessary in order to observe adequately and appropriately the tremendous development in modern communication technologies.
According to McQuail (2005), while the ‘old media’ and ‘new media’ are linked by three associated social contexts the ‘new media’ differ essentially with their features of interconnectedness, accessibility to individual users as senders and/or receivers, interactivity, their multiplicity of use and open-ended and larger-than life character, and de-localisation.
The ubiquitous character of the internet (and World Wide Web: www:) as a new medium demonstrates the power of the new communication technologies.
The internet incorporates radio, film and television.
26JLS 745 ISSUES IN COMMUNICATION TECHNOLOGY AND POLICY In particular, the internet has extended the limits of the print and broadcast models by: • enabling many-to-many conversations; • enabling simultaneous reception, alteration and redistribution of cultural objects; • dislocating communication action from territorialized spatial relations of modernity; • providing instantaneous global contact; and • inserting the modern and late modern subjects into a networked machine apparatus.
In general, the new communication technologies produce, process, store and disseminate vocal, pictorial, textual and numerical information through a micro electronics-based combination of computers and telecommunications.
In a simple sense, this is the point of the interface between telecommunications which can send data and computers which can store and retrieve data.
Thus, new communication technology covers the ability to collect, store, and display, transmit and receive messages over long distances.
The range of new communication technologies include: Computers: At the heart of the ongoing information revolution is the computer which allows messages to be transmitted with great efficiency in any place and in different media.
It allows different media forms, including newspapers, radio and television messages, to be distributed across its channel, thus reducing their distinctive character.
For example, all major newspapers, magazines, radio and television in Nigeria have websites, and relay all their messages on the internet which can be assessed through the computer and satellites technologies.
Key to the operations of the computer is the process of digitalization which is simply defined as the process of identifying between two choices through a switch.
Experts say all complicated mathematical calculations in computing are possible because sums are based on either adding one or subtracting one.
Thus, a computer is based on binary 0 and 1.
The smallest piece of information in a computer is called a bit from Binary digit.
A computer is said to be capable of processing eight bit at once, called a byte as an industry term.
27JLS 745 ISSUES IN COMMUNICATION TECHNOLOGY AND POLICY In all, the ability of one to handle information is based on making a choice between true or false, right or wrong, or to go this way or the other way.
Indeed, the computer has remained powerful machine in communication because every switch, which is many, sometimes in millions, works instantaneously.
A mini-computer is said to contain thousands of circuits, while large computer with mainframe has many millions circuits.
To reinforce how speedily a computer works, it is said that each switch can turn itself on and off one billion times in a second.
For one to effectively use or achieve many tasks through the computer therefore, one needs to: a. be able to store data in these minute switches; b. link the stored data with instructions of what to do with the data; c. to display the results of the results.
These are the ways one can make the computer to achieve what one wants it to do as computer does not create anything itself; it must be fed with information.
This is an opening into the ubiquitous world of the computer which has covered all facets of human life.
We need to include here other computer based technologies which have affected mass communication, and which we shall discuss later.
They are: Cable, satellite, video recorder (VCR), CD-ROM, compact disc, DVD, cameras, camcorders, digital radio, digital television, cellular radio telephone, cellular radio telephone systems, etc.
• Satellites: satellite communication involves a sophisticated means of transmission of data through the outer space back to the earth to receiving antennas.
This is the interface between telecommunication and space-computer technology.
History was said to have been made on July 10, 1962, when NASA.
A.T.&T.
successfully launched television signals in its antennas in North America and retransmitted pictures, which had been amplified in ten million times back to the earth to receiving antennas in England and France.
The telecast said to have lasted for less than an hour started the union between broadcasting and satellite technology for efficient programming.
28JLS 745 ISSUES IN COMMUNICATION TECHNOLOGY AND POLICY Later experiments in this regard, after some initial failures, in July 1963 led to the launch at 22300 miles in space over the equator and the Atlantic Ocean, syncronised orbit.
The US Navy ship, Kingsport, sailing off the coast of Nigeria, received loud and clear a message relayed from New Jersey the United States.
In many ways the synchronized satellite communication signaled the second era especially as it advanced the Telsatar or payload satellite communication which had been launched earlier.
COMSAT and INTELSAT Known as communication satellite communication (COMSAT), it became the early planner and manager of international satellite consortium of a group of some 14 countries which later grew to 54.
In 1974, it was renamed international telecommunications satellite organization (INTELSAT) which had more than 80 countries as members under a Secretary General.
Its membership has grown to 100 countries and it covers 95per cent of the world’s communication traffic.
INTELSAT launched its first satellite into space on April 6, 1965, called Early Bird.
This was followed by other space crafts launched by INTELSAT which have continued to beam signals word-wide as the satellites orbit the earth.
The satellite operates through a system called beam separation, which allows signals to be transmitted to and from satellite at the same frequency.
The advantages of the beam separation are that it ensures improved and directed beam to earth and eliminates the need to beam signals over ocean areas.
• Domestic Satellite Systems: Besides the INTELSAT satellites, there are domestic satellites such as RCA American communication, Inc. (RCA American), Westar satellite by Western Union which carries different kinds of information like video, data and voice, cameral telephone and electronics (GTE) which also launched a domestic satellite in 1984.
It is interesting today that with the array of satellites that continue to roam the space, a system of building and maintaining the satellites has been evolved.
It involves using the space shuttle to construct space station where engineers will be able to provide maintenance for these communication facilities.
29JLS 745 ISSUES IN COMMUNICATION TECHNOLOGY AND POLICY The space station allows experts to work and live in space.
Experts in space technology hope that successful development of the space station, which will generate and distribute solar energy, will not only enhance space communication systems, but also change the satellite communication through which we receive signals on earth.
• Teletext: operates through a computer connected to a television transmission system which sends data to receivers equipped with a special decoder.
It was said to have been picketed in Britain by IBA’s ORACLE and BBC’s CEEFAX and later developed in the United States.
Teletext involves over-the-air broadcast of messages.
• Videotex: involves a wired connection between a computer and a home receiver.
Thus, videotext permits a two-way interactive relationship between the user and the transmission system via telephone or cable system.
Videotext differs from teletex in that a user gets the information immediately from the called up data bank, whereas, information is delayed, say for a minute also in teletext before messages requested for are sent.
• On-Line Newspapers and Magazines: All major newspapers and magazines in Nigeria and in the world today are on the web.
Through a home computer linked with a telephone, a subscriber can access a data base which provides a “menu” of available information, including a list of electronic newspapers and magazines.
A subscriber can select given pages and full stories from a newspaper or magazine, such as latest front page, sports, weather, leisure and entertainment.
The story selected appears in full on the home computer screen.
The subscriber can electronically write letters to the editor using the same process, which guarantees a two-way communication.
• VCRs and Video Discs: VCR covers the range of recording and reproduction of TV images on magnetic tape.
It includes video tape recorder, video cassettes, video tape players.
VCRs are used in television, libraries and instructional centres, and in homes.
Video disc is an improvement on VCRs.
It guarantees smoother operation than VCRs.
It can be used for almost the same purposes as VCRs.
It is gaining more extensive usage in homes in Nigeria.
• Low-Power TV (LPTV): rebroadcasts signals of other stations.
LPTV station can, however, originate its own programmes.
They are 30JLS 745 ISSUES IN COMMUNICATION TECHNOLOGY AND POLICY said to be common in the United States, where their licensing procedure is less cumbersome than a full-service television station.
Technological changes in TV reception and transmission: i.
Stereo TV: is an improvement on the sound quality of television.
The manufacturers of television sets enhance the television with stereo capabilities.
Television stations too now broadcast some programmes in stereo.
This is to cash in on the advantage of the radio over television in the area of sound quality.
ii.
Cable-Ready Television: is a television set with built in cable capacity to connect to Cable Company linked with more than 13 channels.
This is an improvement by television manufacturers which eliminates purchase of a separate home converter from a cable company to link TV channels in its package.
Its popularity depends on the willingness of consumers to pay extra cost for the TV set and for the cable company to agree for its use, rather than its own home converter.
iii.
Component TV: is a sophisticated television set which enhances interactive video and stereo system.
It appeals to those who values sound and stereo VCR on compact disc player.
iv.
Large Screen TV: is an attempt to get a large clear picture on a TV screen.
Achievements in this regard are said to have made possible a large-screen to produce clear pictures and good sound quality like small screen sets.
v. High-definition TV: is technology to further improve the pictures of large screen TV sets.
High definition TV set is said to allow pictures to be scanned in 1000 times per second in order to get clear pictures without the appearance of unwanted “lines”.
vi.
Digital TV: is a technology aimed at eliminating interference such as shadows, guests and other distractions in television.
The TV set is designed with many digital circuits to eliminate these interferences.
Experts believe this will also enhance teletext and videotext systems.
• Teleconferencing: combines the telephone and television facilities for a meeting simultaneously among business leaders and executives who are separated by thousands of kilometres away.
The system, otherwise called picture-phone meeting service, consists of full- colour television facilities installed in meeting rooms in major cities with cameras and monitors placed in strategic position.
Business 31JLS 745 ISSUES IN COMMUNICATION TECHNOLOGY AND POLICY executives in different parts of a country can carry out discussions in full view of one another.
Teleconferencing eliminates the risk and cost of travel, but loses the naturalness in face-to-face communication.
• Cellular radio telephone systems: mobile phone operates through a series of radio transmitters with limited coverage.
Thus, a subscriber’s call on mobile phone connects with the closest transmitter that is connected to land lines.
A computer switching device transfers calls from one transmitter to another.
This was why in Nigeria, with the launch of mobile phone system in 2001 with initial three providers, transmitters otherwise added “cells” had to be built quickly throughout the country.
The providers insist that the cost of constructing and maintaining the transmitters has made phone tariffs very high in Nigeria.
In any case, mobile phone has been a fad among Nigerians irrespective of class and status in society.
Mobile phones provide a range of services, including calls, text messages, radio electronics, etc.
• Cable Television: is otherwise called community antenna television which receives signals of other far flung television station and through its cable and antenna links these signals from these far away television stations directly into home television receivers.
Subscribers pay a fee for this service as cable television ensures clear reception of television images, eliminating interference.
A basic cable television has three components: the head end which includes the receiving antenna and a combination of human and hardware technology; the distribution system, which carries the signals along the trunk and feeder cables, and the home - connections the drop cable that connects to the home terminals.
Although they are many various Cable TVS, examples in Nigeria are: HiTV and DSTV.
• Two Way Cable: is a two-way interactive television, which permits the subscriber the chance for a feedback from the head-end.
It allows the subscriber to engage in banking services, including deposit and fund transfer, or shop service; subscriber makes purchases through the terminal end and receives the goods via direct supply.
• Pay Cable: is where subscribers enjoy viewing of programmes, especially sports and movies, and pay bi-annually or annually.
There is also the need for a two-way communication so that subscribers can demand for desired programmes from the head-end.
32JLS 745 ISSUES IN COMMUNICATION TECHNOLOGY AND POLICY • Cable Radio: like in television, distant stations’ programmes are cabled into local community.
Cable radio is not yet available in Nigeria.
In itself, radio, as a medium, as can observed in Nigeria is the most mass-medium.
Radio can be found in many areas and signals of many stations can also be received in many far-flung rural areas where electricity is unavailable.
This may have made the growth of cable radio unnecessary.
Indeed, some commercial radio broadcasters are not disposed to existence of cable radio, because they believe radio as a medium is a local one.
They believe that when a community imports signals of one or two stations from outside the locale, the local radio stations’ business is hindered.
In particular, they are faced with reduced audience, and consequently, reduced advertisement, and may be put out of business.
This problem is not serious for television as pay cable way, in fact, strengthens their business and operations.
• Fiber Optics: is an improvement on cable technology which could not hitherto transmit or receive heavy current of data directly into homes.
Fiber optics concerns tiny glass fibers through which waves pass, thus increasing the capacity of the cable to receive and transmit large information with required speed.
Since fiber optics is now available to even telephone companies, it is envisaged that these companies would also operate radio and television stations with the technology.
Thus, this communication technology would remove the frontiers between the telephone and television as media of communication.
• Microwave Technology: is very short electromagnetic wave which transmits at high frequencies than cable.
Expert say microwaves travel in direct line-of-sight path between the transmitters and receivers.
Microwaves carry signals over long distances through relay antennas which are set in some 30 miles apart to the transmitting stations.
A television station needs not directly own a microwave; it can rent or lease it.
Signals are received by the television station first from the microwaves and then retransmitted to the home receivers through the station’s antennas.
It is noteworthy that signals from microwaves relay network are relatively free from interference; they can be received over long distances with clear reception.
Besides the ground-based microwaves relay network discussed above, television stations can also receive signals through satellite transmission in space.
Thus, Cable News Network (CNN) International television station based in the United States can broadcast its signals (programmes) through a microwave to a satellite thousands of miles in space, which relays the signals back to earth- receiving station in Nigeria for example.
33JLS 745 ISSUES IN COMMUNICATION TECHNOLOGY AND POLICY • Electronic Newsgathering: otherwise called ENG, this technology guarantees the television the flexibility capability of outside live broadcasting.
Indeed, through a mobile van (OB Van) and portable camera, a television station can broadcast live programming of football, exhibition and trade fairs in a community to its wide audience.
In Nigeria, the NTA Network and African Independent Television continually broadcast conventions of major political parties and their campaigns since the return of the country to democratic dispensation in 1999.
3.3 Functions of Communication Technology Essentially, their functions are derived from the benefits/roles they perform in the society and for man.
These can be classified as: • Production, Transmission and Display: these are perhaps the most identifiable functions of communication technology from the early conception.
These functions relate to the capacity of communication technology to extend human ability to create, transmit and display auditory and visual data at a distance in space and time.
From the development of the spoken word, man extended their ability to hear (auditory) to the use of drums, other musical instruments, telegraph, telephone, AM and FM radios.
For the sight, the extension of the human capacity started with cave drawings and the 600-character of the early alphabets.
This steadily developed into use of hand and arm signals, other non-verbal cues or signs, flags, billboards, lanterns, printing, photographs, and a range of photocopying equipment.
Television, films, video disc and video cassettes have extended both the capacity of man to hear and see.
Other communication tools such as pencils, pens, typewriters and art designs also boost our capacity to produce, transmit and display images and signals, just as the computers, video games and calculators extend our ability to do all these functions.
• Multiplication, Duplication and Amplification: Communication technologies in this respect multiply, duplicate and amplify communication messages beyond the face-to-face or one-on-one process discussed above.
These functions concern our ability to use communication technology beyond the interpersonal level to a level of one-for-many or mass-medicated communication.
In this regard, we are concerned with a range of communication technologies including radio, television, movies, satellites, computers, etc, which make it possible for a message to be multiplied, duplicated and amplified or enlarged as in mass communication.
These technologies, because of its mass nature, draw immense attention to 34JLS 745 ISSUES IN COMMUNICATION TECHNOLOGY AND POLICY messages.
They function in such a way that the communicator is unknown to and separated from the receiver of message.
• Reception, Storage and Retrieval: The computers are today the most invaluable communication technologies which aid our ability to record, store and retrieve images.
These functions are also enhanced by capacity of the computer to multiply, duplicated and amplify messages.
However, there are other communication technologies which extend our capacity to receive, store and recall messages.
They include, even as ordinary as they might seem today because of the great developments in technology, eye glasses, mirrors, contact lenses, x-rays microscopes, magnifying glasses, binoculars, radar, periscopes, telescopes, air phones and stethoscopes.
Even diaries, files, wills and appointment calendars, tape recorders, dictating and copying machines, phonograph records and microfilm fit the bill of our storing and recall functions.
SELF ASSESSMENT EXERCISE List a range of traditional and new communication technologies that you know.
4.0 CONCLUSION Communication technologies have become an octopus in the modern world as they offer us almost limitless functions depending on the ability to manipulate them or needs of them.
However, the new communication technologies are sometimes an extension of the traditional ones.
While the traditional tools, such as smoke signals, gongs and drums, are still largely in use in many developing countries, including Nigeria, their relevance in the developed countries, like the United States and Britain, is nil and almost unavailable, except perhaps as museum pieces or artifacts.
The fact remains that there is great advantage in the developing countries to design policies for a mix of the traditional forms with the new communication technologies.
5.0 SUMMARY This unit has explored the origins of communication technologies, attempted a definition of the concept and identified their functions even in their varied and diffused forms.
6.0 TUTOR-MARKED ASSIGNMENT Discuss the notion that new communication technologies are extensions of traditional communication tools in both forms and functions.
7.0 REFERENCES/FURTHER READINGS 35JLS 745 ISSUES IN COMMUNICATION TECHNOLOGY AND POLICY World Book Encyclopedia (Chicago) World Book, 1981), VoL.
4 pp.
711 – 723.
Communication Technology (1989).
The Tool-Making Animal, a Journal on Communication pp.
119 – 204.
Bitter John R. (2003).
Mass Communication: An introduction: 5th Edition.
pp.
262 – 282.
Englewood Cliffs, New Jersey.
Prentice – Hall Inc. UNIT 2 INDIVIDUAL’S RIGHT TO COMMUNICATE, ROLES OF COMMUNITIES AND VOLUNTARY ORGANIZATIONS IN COMMUNICATION CONTENTS 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objectives 3.0 Main Content 3.1 Individual’s Right to Communicate 3.2 Roles of the Communities in Communication 3.3 Roles of Voluntary Organizations in Communications 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutor-Marked Assignment 7.0 References/Further Readings 1.0 INTRODUCTION Communication originates from the level of the individual.
But the individual operates in a community, society or even social groups.
The individual is governed by both his private and public interests, and even other business, political and international interests, some of which he has little or no control over.
Communication has moved from the plane of the personal and is linked with all these interests.
Thus, we shall be concerned now with the roles played or should be played by the 36JLS 745 ISSUES IN COMMUNICATION TECHNOLOGY AND POLICY individual, communities, social groups, public authorities, transnational companies, the state and international bodies.
In particular, this unit will deal with the roles of the individual, communities and voluntary organizations in that order.
2.0 OBJECTIVES At the end of this unit, you should be able to: • identify the basic communication rights of the individual and how far these rights are and can be guaranteed in modern communication today • discuss the role of the community and how it has helped or hindered communication and development • explain the roles played by voluntary organisations in broadening the spectrum of communication.
3.0 MAIN CONTENT 3.1 Individual’s Right to Communicate Communication is a basic right of the individual.
Indeed, the individual originated communication at a personal level, and developed it as a functional instrument in a society in an organized process.
According to UNESCO, the individual right in the field of communication is predicated on three basic principles: (i) The right to speak (expression and discussion): sees communication as an exchange between two or more people or groups in an open process of response, reflections and debate.
(ii) The right to know: to seek and be given information desired, especially in relation to the individual’s work, life and in order to comport himself with the norms and traditions and functions as a reasonable member of a community.
(iii) The right to impart: to give information to others about the society, his living condition, aspirations, grievances, needs, etc.
The UNESCO says that the right to discuss or right of expression guarantees “genuine agreement as collective actions and enables the individual to influence decisions” made by different levels of authority.
If this right is denied by any means, a divine right of an individual is infringed as God made man as a higher animal to communicate and tend this world in order to ensure regeneration of the world.
37JLS 745 ISSUES IN COMMUNICATION TECHNOLOGY AND POLICY In the same vein, whenever information is deliberately withheld or false or distorted information is disseminated for whatever ends, the right of an individual to know the truth has been infringed upon.
Also, the right of an individual to impart knowledge on others can be infringed upon by intimidation, denial of access to means or channels of communication, etc.
It is noteworthy that a cursory look at the situations in many developing authorities, including Nigeria, shows different levels and degrees of infringement of the right of the individual to communicate.
These infringements relate to statutes, regulations, punishment and denials to access various forms of the communication and even channels of communication.
The individual is both an originator of communication and a receiver of communication.
The infringement of his right to communicate is said to be more observed as a receiver of information, where he is treated as a passive entity and a mere consumer of information which is most of the time not relevant to his needs, aspirations and development.
Based on the observed situation, the individual’s right to express his thoughts is sometimes completely ignored.
Unfortunately, demographic factors such as level of income, level of literacy or education, enlightenment and class, reinforce the existing imbalance in communication between the lower rung of the society and the upper strata, making them the information have-nots and the information-haves respectively, or information dependent and information independent.
Apart from the three characteristics of the individual’s right to communicate as discussed above, UNESCO has added a fourth right – the right of privacy.
This is identified has a necessary right in the face of the effects of modern communication technologies on the individual life.
With the diffusion in modern communication technologies, the individual cannot be said to have a right to his privacy.
The increased use of telecommunications, satellites and computers has not only opened the individual to an un-requested stream of information, but also as defenceless object of information.
For example, development of data banks, which contain such demographic facts as an individual’s date of birth, sex, number of children, religion, income, educational level, etc, is an intrusion on the individual’s privacy.
Added to this is that these data may be got without the individual’s personal knowledge, especially in a largely rural and illiterate society, and also the data may be used for reasons other than the reasons the individual is aware of, as the information is transferred from one data bank to the other; for 38JLS 745 ISSUES IN COMMUNICATION TECHNOLOGY AND POLICY example, from census to immigration, police and economic data banks.
Ordinary information may be held against an individual beyond its relevance since it is in data banks.
Similarly, the management and ownership of the media, whether the private or public, is such that reinforces the information gap between the educated and uneducated, urban and rural, the rich and poor, etc.
The ownership structure also makes the media to serve the authority, especially in the developing countries.
There are, however, options being evolved to strengthen the individual’s right to communicate.
These include the phone-in programmes on radio and television stations, letters to the editor in newspapers and efforts by media organizations to fashion programmes based on researches they conduct to identify the public’s preferences.
3.2 Role of Communities in Communication A community is a group or groups of people driven by certain objectives, aims and goals for their corporate existence.
Communities may also be identified by common language, culture, sometimes by geographical location, religion and political structure and organization.
A community may also vary greatly in respect of religion, political organization, language, culture and social class.
A small unit of community is a village, neighbourhood, centre of employment, etc.
Communication network holds any social community together.
Indeed, communication or exchange of information supports and develops the social and political structures of the community, helps the community to achieve its goals and objectives, supports its defence and guarantees peace of the community.
But in practical terms, communication is usually used to repress and silence the minorities.
This situation is made possible by the intrinsic characteristics of the community with a varied social class, income level, education level, etc.
In developing countries, the rural-urban dichotomy creates another character of imbalance in communication contents and channels of communication.
What all these do is to weaken the national cohesion of the national community, detract from the democratization of communication, especially by expanding the base and frontiers of communication, and limit the full expression of opinions and interests of the people.
39JLS 745 ISSUES IN COMMUNICATION TECHNOLOGY AND POLICY Therefore, there is the need to increase the communities and individuals’ capacity and rights to communicate.
Policies must be designed in such a way as to ensure that mass media contents reach all classes of people, rural and urban, low and high- income, educated and less educated, etc.
Everybody in the society should be galvanized for development through relevant media of communication and communication contents.
3.3 Role of Voluntary Organisations Voluntary organizations are pressure or interest groups.
They are groups of people guided by clearly identifiable aims and objectives and exert pressure on the authorities in order to achieve these aims and objectives.
There are, however, different categories of these groups.
Some pressure groups have permanent structure and existence such as political parties, trade unions, churches, women and youth groups and professional organizations.
Others operate on local scale such as thrift societies, tenants or landlords’ associations, youth clubs and age grades.
Still others are less permanent because they are set up to fight a particular legislation, protect the environment, or to campaign against some phenomena in the society.
They, therefore, cease to exist when such issues or objectives are fulfilled.
In all, pressure or interest groups promote alternative ideas for the authorities; provide a forum for debate on current issues that concern them and the public.
They are also concerned with issues which will be ignored by the authorities or to which the authorities may pay little attention.
Their main instruments of pressure are channels of communications.
They usually create avenues for minority opinions and views and mobilize the people for action against the authorities.
As a result of the lopsided management and ownership of mass media, especially in developing countries, their messages may not be given adequate space and attention in the newspapers, radio and television stations.
Thus, the pressure groups also create their own avenues of communication.
These include publishing books, journals, leaflets, holding rallies and street-corner meetings.
In certain heated political situations in Nigeria, pressure groups have embarked on “underground press” similar to Western idea of the concept.
The idea is to give a voice to the voiceless in the society, especially with their shade of journalism imbued with fresh tone, frankness and fearlessness.
40JLS 745 ISSUES IN COMMUNICATION TECHNOLOGY AND POLICY Communication scholars have agreed that the existence of voluntary organizations with their varied avenues of communication engenders efforts at democratization of communication, mass participation, enriches the society and promotes social progress.
4.0 CONCLUSION The individuals, communities and voluntary organizations play different roles in communication in the society.
Their relevance varies in line with the characteristics of each country, but policy makers must design policy frameworks that strengthen these realities in line with overall developmental goals, objectives and needs.
5.0 SUMMARY In this unit, we have exhaustively treated the individual’s right to communicate, the roles of the communities and voluntary organisations in communication.
We have identified areas of shortcomings and suggested how these can be redressed for the achievement of the overall national objectives and development.
6.0 TUTOR-MARKED ASSIGNMENT 1.
Explain how the individual’s right to communicate can be infringed upon.
2.
Discuss the idea that voluntary organizations are no evils in the society; they are instruments for the democratization of communication in the society.
7.0 REFERENCES/FURTHER READINGS Many Voices, One World (1981).
Ibadan University Press and the UNESCO Press, Paris.
Articles of United Nations Universal Declaration of Human and Peoples Rights.
41JLS 745 ISSUES IN COMMUNICATION TECHNOLOGY AND POLICY UNIT 3 ROLES OF PROFESSIONALS, NATIONAL AND TRANSNATIONAL COMPANIES IN COMMUNICATION CONTENTS 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objectives 3.0 Main Content 3.1 Roles of National and Transnational Companies 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutor-Marked Assignment 7.0 References/Further Readings 1.0 INTRODUCTION A media practitioner can be called a professional in many senses if one considers the roles he performs in a society.
Indeed a media practitioner can be examined in terms of the demand of the aptitudes and conditions required of a professional.
These aptitude and conditions include the ability to perform a skilled trade or occupation expertly based on specialized training.
To be sure, a professional is described as one who professes an open declaration or an avowal of a disposition to a professional craft that requires some degree of learning; a calling to a collective body of persons; a means of subsistence as opposed to an amateur; an 42JLS 745 ISSUES IN COMMUNICATION TECHNOLOGY AND POLICY undertaking which reflects skill, artistry or standard of conduct appropriate to a member of a profession.
Specifically, the International Labour Organisation (ILO) gives the following criteria for defining a professional or a profession: (a) A profession must possess certain body of knowledge or skill which is learnt through the guidance of senior members.
This is where the term “sitting by Nelly” applies to the media.
Nelly is said to be a legendary figure in the news room and around who the learners cluster to draw from his residue of knowledge, experience and skill.
In the media practice in Nigeria today, training institutions such as Nigerian Institute of Journalism, departments of mass communication in polytechnics and universities perform this legendary role.
(b)A professional must observe certain ethical codes so that he can draw a line between what is proper and improper in the discharge of these duties.
In this regard, global and national bodies of communication have drawn ethical principles that govern media practice.
These principles which are applicable in Nigeria, approved by the Nigeria Union of Journalists (NUJ), the Nigeria Guild of Editors (NGE)and Newspaper Proprietors Association of Nigeria (NPAN), are: sacredness of truth/facts (facts are sacred; comments are free); fairness and impartiality (non-bias); objectivity –to rise above emotional, sentimental, ethnic, political class, caste or religious attachments or any such private, partisan or vested interest; confidentiality of source, especially when sources are in danger; respect for privacy, correction of errors or retraction of mistakes.
(c) A professional should have a concept of service and social interest, whereby he subordinates his private or self interest for the wider public interest.
This is a disposition for social service or social responsibility by media practitioners.
(d)Community salvation and enforcement: this is with regard to the respect given to social roles, ethical and behavioural norms of a particular profession.
In some cases, however, mere convention or morality governs these norms, whereas in others, they are codified as in legal and medical professions.
There have been attempts in Nigeria to codify these norms and ethics guiding media practice.
Such attempts include the Media Council Decree 59 of 1988 under the Babangida administration.
43JLS 745 ISSUES IN COMMUNICATION TECHNOLOGY AND POLICY (e) A professional must subscribe to self discipline and control.
This professional norm becomes even more necessary in media practice which influence is so pervasive on the society today, especially since it is realized that in the absence of self-discipline and control, the society may be driven out of existence.
Ordinarily, media practitioners include journalists working for press, radio and television, producers and directors who work behind camera, consoles and monitors in television and radio stations.
These are the people who decide the form and content of information disseminated to the public.
But with the growing technological development, there is a radical transformation of those involved in mass communication and information dissemination processes.
The ranks of professionals who collect, formulate, store, retrieve and disseminate messages have swelled to include others who do not operate within the press, radio and television, which are fast being turned into traditional media.
In almost all areas of the economy, the number of professionals who store, process and utilize information is enormous.
Also, just as communication has become more pervasive, the communication technologies continue to expanding.
The sophistication of the technologies demands specialized skills, qualification and training.
The media and their environment today present a paradox: pervasive communication which extends to all aspects of human life, economy, social, and development; multiplied and amplified communication technologies demanding specialized skills and training.
And there is still the “Sitting by Nelly” tradition of learning on the job, especially in television which requires team work among editors, camera men, sound technicians, light men and so on.
Special attention also needs to be paid to foreign journalists who need a lot of background information regarding knowledge of language, culture, traditions and the people on which their stories are based.
Communication scholars, however, say this challenge extends to journalists in developing countries like Nigeria with almost 70% rural population.
The typical Nigerian journalist is urban trained and thus greatly limited in reporting rural areas.
Many Nigerian journalists can barely speak any local language, nor are they attuned to local cultures and traditions.
This also calls for training and continuous education on the part of media practitioners.
There is no doubt that increased frontiers of communication has opened up the society.
Also, the sophistication of technologies has brought more specialization in media practice, more skill and training.
There is also increased democratisation of communication as new media such as 44JLS 745 ISSUES IN COMMUNICATION TECHNOLOGY AND POLICY computers, video disc and video cassettes have strengthened the “do-it-yourself” approach.
Nowadays professional politicians, sports men, doctors, lawyers, and creative writers write articles and stories on their fields.
This has enriched debate and exchange of information.
There is, however, a disadvantage: it is increasing difficult to apply ethical codes and discipline as media practitioners can no longer be clearly defined.
2.0 OBJECTIVES At the end of this unit, you should be able to: • discuss the role of professionals in Communication • discuss the influence of National and Trans-national companies • and the roles they play in communication generally • compare both roles and evaluate their values.
3.0 MAIN CONTENT 3.1 Roles of National and Transnational Companies An observed defining character of modern communication is the dominance of private capital, financing and investment.
In many countries, privately owned organizations control patterns, influence policies, attitudes and behaviour.
They are apparently most visible than government.
Indeed, privately owned companies are visible, perhaps, in the newspaper publishing than other media in Nigeria, more than 90% of newspapers and magazines are owned by privately owned media organizations.
They include: This day, The Nation, Nigerian Tribune, The Guardian, Vanguard, Daily Independent, New Age, Daily Trust, Daily Champion, and Daily Sun.
These newspaper organizations, which publish both the daily and weekend editions, are followed by other privately owned ones which though may pretend to some national appeal, harbour regional sentiments.
These include Niger Delta Standard, among others.
They are also magazines such as Tell, Newswatch, Insider, Source and other specialized ones like Business Eye, Business World, and the daily business newspaper, Business Day.
45JLS 745 ISSUES IN COMMUNICATION TECHNOLOGY AND POLICY There are still others which appeal to the rural populace with restricted circulation in some states, as well as religious magazines and professional ones.
It is noted that not that there had never been government newspaper organisations in Nigeria.
But they have all died, especially because of their unrestrained partisanship to the government of the day.
Among these were Daily Times, Sketch, The Chronicles, The Nigerian Herald, The Nigerian Tide, The Voice, Nigerian Standard, Nigerian Triumph and New Nigerian.
For the television, however, there is a quasi-ownership pattern in Nigeria.
Until the 1980s, only the Nigerian Television Authority (NTA), owned by government, operated as a monopoly.
Today, however, there are many privately owned television companies in Nigeria, including African Independent Television operated by Daar Communications, Channels Television, Minaj Broadcast International (MBI) television, Silver Bird Television (STV), Murhi Television, Superscreen, DBN Television, G65and others.
There are also television stations owned by state governments, which operate within limited areas of adjoining states, almost purely for disseminating government programmes to the public.
Indeed, what applies to television applies to radio.
Radio organizations are both privately and government owned in Nigeria.
And as a popular medium, the number is exceedingly very high in the country.
The cinema, even from its embryonic beginning, has been privately operated.
Whether imported movies or the initial efforts of Pa Herbert Ogunde, Ade Love and Baba Sala, the production, marketing and distribution are by privately owned organizations.
The advent of Nollywood has however remained a watershed in the Nigerian cinema.
Nollywood, patterned after America’s Hollywood and Indian’s Bollywood, is a private initiative of cinema practitioners, including script writers, directors, producers, camera man, make-up artistes and others, to redefine Nigerian movies as a viable economic enterprise and effective communication channel and purveyor of Nigerian traditions and culture.
These efforts, it is gladdening to note, have resulted in Nigerian films being exported to other countries, including Europe and America.
Like the cinema, telephoning which is dominated by mobile system of communication (GSM), is in private hands.
Besides, the MTN, GLO, CELTEL, there are others such as Starcomms, Multilinks, MTS, etc, which operate land lines telephoning.
It is noteworthy that MTN, GLO and CELTEL are transnational communication organizations as they 46JLS 745 ISSUES IN COMMUNICATION TECHNOLOGY AND POLICY operate beyond the Nigerian borders in other Africa countries and the Middle East.
Besides all these, it is particularly recognized that the whole gamut of the information communication technology (ICT) is dominated by privately owned national and transnational companies worldwide, Nigeria inclusive.
We have gone this far in order to establish the fact of the immense power of privately owned organizations in the control of communication content and production, distribution and marketing of communication technologies in particular.
The UNESCO classifies the exercise of this power thus: 1.
Ownership of media and other communication channels, or investment in telecommunication channels.
2.
Production and distribution of software programmes.
3.
Advertising and marketing; and 4. various indirect ways of influencing the production of messages.
The UNESCO also notes that in many countries, the ownership in structure in communication field takes the following forms: ordinary business enterprise, enterprise enjoying special status, public corporations, co-operative mode, trust or mixed public/private companies.
A strong disposition is, however, held for private ownership of mass media, especially because of the advantages there from.
These advantages include the capacity for great expansion, symbiotic relationship between the manufacturers of communication technologies and media organizations, existence of large and multipurpose corporations, concentration of distribution and steady integration of forms and operators.
For the latter advantage, in Nigeria, many IPO operators can now delve into GSM operations besides their land lines.
Also, AIT owned by Daar Communications has reportedly secured a license to operate telephoning services.
The media organization may just need to buy some few components to add to its broadcast equipment to embark on provision of telephone services in the country.
However, despite these advantages and contributions of private capital in the field of communication, there is the danger of extreme capitalism.
Therefore, governments, including the Nigerian government, have found it necessary to control these private communication organizations.
This is essentially in form of licensing and regulation of their operations.
For example, the Nigerian Communication Commission (NCC) issues licenses to radio, television, telephone, computer and other 47JLS 745 ISSUES IN COMMUNICATION TECHNOLOGY AND POLICY telecommunications companies.
It also regulates their operations through certain guidelines and intervenes when there is need.
But the activities of the NCC, like other such organization in many developing countries, have been feeble or of no effect on transnational companies.
While the transnational companies might have receded from direct ownership or investment in media organizations in Nigeria, they control our communication through programme sales, forced technology and professional models, and marketing of entertainment materials.
Today, the control and dominance of these transnational companies and the effects of their activities have dominated debate on global communication.
The contentious issues are around the growing joint ventures between international capital and local capital in the private and public business of a developing country and the dominant influence of foreign culture, language, education, social, economic and political lives of a developing country like Nigeria 4.0 CONCLUSION There is clearly the dominance of private capital in the field of communication.
While it has its advantages, especially of growing the communication industry in all frontiers, communication should not be treated as a fast moving consumer good.
Journalism has its ethics and norms, also cultural values and language should not be sacrificed on the altar of pluralism in communication.
This is why policies must be designed to curb extreme capitalism and imperialism.
5.0 SUMMARY We have focused on the roles of professional, national and transnational companies in the fields of communication.
We have identified that a profession as communication should be guided by certain ethics as socially responsible practitioner.
We have seen that with the plurality that the fields of communication have witnessed with the diffusion of technology, it is difficult for journalist code or ethics to guide or cover all those who are specialists, especially those in the specialized or new media.
Also, the super structure of transnational corporations operates with little or no control of local legislations as they influence local mass media in programming, technology, professional practice and flow of entertainment materials.
6.0 TUTOR-MARKED ASSIGNMENT 48JLS 745 ISSUES IN COMMUNICATION TECHNOLOGY AND POLICY 1.
Discuss the fact that private capital is a factor in global communication today in relation to the roles of national and transnational communication companies.
2.
Do you agree that the growing pluralism in communication contents and channels has rendered ineffective professional ethics of a journalist?
7.0 REFERENCES/FURTHER READINGS Articles of the International Labour Organisation on Professionalism.
Many Voices, One World – UNESCO Report on New World Information and Communication Order pp.
117-119.
UNIT 4 ROLES OF THE STATE / INTERNATIONAL BODIES IN COMMUNICATION CONTENTS 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objectives 3.0 Main Content 3.1 Role of the State in Communication 3.2 Role of International Bodies 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutor-Marked Assignment 7.0 References/Further Readings 1.0 INTRODUCTION The State and International Bodies, such as United Nations and its agencies, play important roles in communication generally.
Nations control communication activities within their confines of their territories through legislations and sometimes own communication organizations themselves.
Nations also relate with other nations through bilateral and multilateral agreements, and also play a role in the United Nations and its agencies in matters that concern communications.
This extensive framework of relations by nations, among nations and within the United Nations and its agencies demonstrate the significance of communication in the world today, especially as it is linked to all 49JLS 745 ISSUES IN COMMUNICATION TECHNOLOGY AND POLICY facets of the people’s lives and existence, including economy, entertainment and culture, religion, education, development, and social and health issues.
In this unit, we shall examine the different roles of the state and how these have further hinder the growth and practice of communication.
We shall also look at the efforts and instruments of the United Nations and its agencies with the regard to their effects on democratization of global communication.
2.0 OBJECTIVES At the end of this unit, you should be able to: • explain the roles/responsibilities of the government in communication and effects of these roles on the development of communication • discuss the role of the United Nations and its agencies, such as UNESCO, FAO, ILO, WIPO, UNIDO, WMO, ITU, UPU, etc, regarding global communication.
3.0 MAIN CONTENT 3.1 Roles of the State/Nation in Communication The state or government of a country through its agencies plays a pre-eminent role in communication activities within its national borders and across its borders in respect of its citizens.
Thus, a nation has to control these communication activities.
Indeed, there are many reasons why nations have to control, regulate or participate in these communication activities.
(a) A nation is a sovereign entity.
What is done by companies, agencies and its people in the area of communication activities has impacts on its honour and essence as a sovereign political entity.
This way, for sundry political reasons, a nation must control and regulate communication activities within its borders and concerning it.
(b)Also for ideological reasons, a nation should be conscious of its roles in communication activities of its citizens.
A nation enters into several agreements with other nations based on ideological compatibility.
Such ideological pacts could be endangered when citizens of a nation engage in communication activities, which may not necessarily be political but economic, deemed to be at variance with the spirit of such national agreements and ideology.
It is noteworthy that the question of ideology has been down played in the world today, especially with the collapse of the Warsaw Pact, consisting of many Eastern European countries, which hitherto had practised socialism.
However, there are still other cleavages and 50JLS 745 ISSUES IN COMMUNICATION TECHNOLOGY AND POLICY technological packages which may not fit into some nations’ communication activities wholesale.
(c) Another reason is economic and financial.
We must not forget that communication activities are economic and financial in nature.
Both the technology and contents of communication are attracting financial and economic costs to the nation and often require public investments.
Importation of communication tools gulps huge foreign exchange and operations of communication organizations involve heavy spending.
Even in many developing countries like Nigeria, governments engage in direct ownership of publicly-owned mass media.
These are cost centres and operations which the government must be concerned about.
(d)Also, the effects of communication activities on the people need to be controlled and regulated by government.
These effects are easily impactful in the areas of education, culture, entertainment, language, etc.
(e) Especially in some developing countries, there are areas of communication which may not be so attractive to investors in communication activities.
These areas may not be quick in bringing quick returns on investments, such areas may, however, be relevant to the overall development objectives of the nation.
Thus government may need to pool resources into such less attractive communication activities.
For example, in the 1960s and 70s, many Nigerians were not attracted to investing in broadcasting, and even today, they are still wary of setting up radio and television stations in rural areas.
This explains why our broadcast stations are limited largely to Lagos, the commercial nerve-centre and state capitals where they are funded by state governments.
How Government Control Communication Activities: There are two broad ways.
Government may engage in control and regulation of communication activities by evolving policies and setting up agencies to oversee identified functions.
It may also involve itself directly in public-owned mass media; a function that continues to generate controversies in global communication discourse because some scholars feel it usually restricts delivery of communications contents and messages to the public as we shall later explain.
However, These Broad Government Aims are discharged through: (i) regulation of conditions governing ownership and operations of media; (ii) distribution of frequencies for telecommunications (this is done in Nigeria by the National Communication Commission (NCC); 51JLS 745 ISSUES IN COMMUNICATION TECHNOLOGY AND POLICY (iii) direct ownership of media and means of communication (the Nigerian Television Authority (NTA) is owned by the Federal Government); (iv) direct involvement in communication activities through the operation of public agencies as in the Nigerian Telecommunication (NITEL) before its controversial sale; (v) control of communication channels and carriers; (vi) fashioning measures which may stem importation of unwanted messages; (vii) creating strategies which will prevent spread of distorted messages and abuse of communication activities; (viii) granting resources for communication and putting same in overall national planning; and (ix) putting in place necessary legislations and regulations that will guide the communication industry.
The question whether nations should have roles in communication activities is already resolved.
It is the duty and prerogative of governments to control, regulate, invent and organize its own communication industry.
The area of controversy, however, has been in direct government control of the mass media.
Its proponents in developing countries have argued that it is an attempt to broaden and democratize communications especially its spread into the rural areas and beyond national commercial nerve centres which are ordinarily unattractive to private investors.
However, demonstrable activities of publicly-owned media in the developing countries including Nigeria, appear to present a different position.
Publicly-owned media, like the NTA and its counterparts in the states in Nigeria show little concern for public satisfaction in terms of their programmes.
The state television stations, like their radio and newspapers, are structured to favour the government-of-the-day and rarely represent the popular will of the people.
They seem to stifle diverse opinions, restrict information and infringe on the individual right to know and be heard.
The publicly- owned media tend to officialise news flow and disallow spread of information.
Also, they tend to monopolise government source of news and hinder feedback from the people to government.
In such countries where the publicly-owned media operate, there is usually a tendency for rigid rules censorship and discrimination to limit the scope of media messages and communicators.
3.2 Role of International Bodies in Communication As we have said earlier, the United Nations and its various agencies, and various intergovernmental and non-governmental organizations play pre-eminent roles in global communication activities.
52JLS 745 ISSUES IN COMMUNICATION TECHNOLOGY AND POLICY Since inception, the United Nations and United Nations Educational, Scientific and Cultural Organisation (UNESCO) have raised the discourse on global communication issues.
Today, communication is seen as inalienable fundamental human right of an individual.
They have also come up with instruments which promote a New World Information and Communication Order (NWICO).
The UNESCO, initially saddled with the task of providing a forum for highlighting issues on mass communication, delved into all the issues of communication and development in all ramifications.
The aim is not to restrict the growth of communication, but to expand its base by democratizing it and sustaining its value as an exchange between and among people and nations.
Also, UNESCO has linked communication activities with development issues, such as health, agriculture, marine, etc.
In the same vein, UNESCO tries to stem the dominance of the developed nations over developing ones in the content and channels of communication, and especially by protecting the poor peoples and weak nations from the powerful nations.
The more technical communication issues are given to two UN agencies – the International Telecommunications Union (ITU) handles the regulation of global communication activities, including agreements on regulations of frequencies allocation; the Universal Postal Union (UPU) deals with agreements and protocols on international mail services.
Other UN organizations deal with their individual areas of competence regarding global communication activities.
• Food and Agricultural Organisation – deals with communication issues relating to production, processing, marketing and distribution of foods and food products in the world, including areas of agricultural extension services.
• International Labour Organisation (ILO) – is concerned with defining the rights of the worker in all ramifications and ensuring that the human essence is maintained by the employer and the employee in a free and unfettered relationship.
• United Nations Industrial Development Organisation (UNIDO) – is concerned with aspects about raising the standard and quality of lives of peoples of the world.
• World Intellectual Property Organisation (WIPO) – is concerned with control and regulation of intellectual properties globally, including literary, music, art, cinematographic, films sound 53JLS 745 ISSUES IN COMMUNICATION TECHNOLOGY AND POLICY recordings and broadcasts so that the owners of rights enjoy the fruits of their labour.
It also protects these intellectual properties as a heritage of man.
• World Meteorological Organisation – is involved with production and dissemination of information on weather and marine activities.
It also provides information on global changes in space through censor activities, climate changes and gives adequate and timely warning of natural disasters, such as tremor, earthquakes, droughts and depletion of ozone layer.
Also, the United Nations Development Programme, the World Bank and other regional bodies are said to provide enormous assistance for communication activities and their development.
Apart from all these, the United Nations Organisations maintain extensive information activities in its member-nations.
This information network is targeted at achieving the objectives and goals of the UN among its member-nations.
4.0 CONCLUSION Both the United Nations and nations control communication activities in the world in different ways.
Both levels of control and regulation should be synergized in a way to promote the growth of communication among peoples, remove the dominance at every level; within countries, regions and between the developed and developing countries.
Efforts of nations and the UN should continue in this regard.
5.0 SUMMARY This unit dealt with the roles of nations and the United Nations in communication.
It started with the roles of the individual nations, which are broadly divided into two: control and regulation of communication activities; direct ownership of media.
These were later expanded.
The unit also dwelt on how government discharges its roles in communication.
The advantages and disadvantages of government direct involvement in media ownership were highlighted.
Also, the roles of the UN and its agencies were highlighted.
The continued UN efforts in promoting the right to communicate as inalienable right of the individual was discussed.
6.0 TUTOR-MARKED ASSIGNMENT 54JLS 745 ISSUES IN COMMUNICATION TECHNOLOGY AND POLICY Explain the position that communication is linked to the overall development of man in relation to roles of government and UN and its agencies.
7.0 REFERENCES/FURTHER READINGS Many Voices, One World (1981).
Ibadan University Press and the UNESCO Press, Paris.
The 1999 Constitution of the Federal Republic of Nigeria.
MODULE 3 INTEGRATION BETWEEN COMMUNICATION AND TECHNOLOGY Unit 1 Combination of Traditional and Modern Communication Unit 2 The Links between Interpersonal and Mediated Communication Unit 3 Inventions and Extension of Visual Expression Unit 4 Integration in News Circulation and External Assistance to Developing Countries Unit 5 Vast Possibilities and Implications of New Technologies UNIT 1 COMBINATION OF TRADITIONAL AND MODERN COMMUNICATION CONTENTS 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objectives 3.0 Main Content 3.1 Combination of Traditional and Modern Communication 3.2 Case Studies on Traditional and Modern Communication Mix 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutor-Marked Assignment 7.0 References/Further Readings 1.0 INTRODUCTION 55JLS 745 ISSUES IN COMMUNICATION TECHNOLOGY AND POLICY The modern and sophisticated means of communication are rooted in the traditional means of communication.
Communication develops in such a way that the traditional channels are not completely discarded with, though their insignificance may be limited.
Indeed, at inception of communication development, the means of communication were slightly detached and functioned almost independently.
Today, however, in spite of the new media, traditional forms are available and are used, especially in developing countries.
Similarly, traditional forms of communication are carried into the new media, such as paintings and drawings, local music recorded in video discs, video cassettes and cinema.
There is hardly isolation between the traditional forms of communication and the new media, including newspapers, radio and television.
This unit highlights the traditional channels of communication and their benefits.
We shall also stress the need to combine these traditional forms with modern communication in order to gain from their advantages.
2.0 OBJECTIVES At the end of this unit, you should be able to: • identify the main traditional media of communication and their significance • explain the relationship of traditional forms of communication with modern communication through case studies in your community.
3.0 MAIN CONTENT 3.1 Combination of Traditional and Modern Communication As stated in an earlier module under origin of communication technology, the origin of modern communication is generally found in traditional channels of communication however crude and rudimentary they might be.
Communication evolved from man’s innate will to exchange ideas, understand one another and relate better in their environment.
Based on this early conception of communication, mankind has never completely discarded the various forms and channels of traditional communication.
One discovered means of communication foreshadows greater developments of other more improved ones.
These better and more sophisticated means of communication did not usually lead to a jettisoning of the earlier forms; they only expanded 56JLS 745 ISSUES IN COMMUNICATION TECHNOLOGY AND POLICY their capacity to produce, multiply, amplify, store and retrieve messages.
This has been the system today, ever as modern communication establishes our enduring relationship with the past.
The ancient cave drawings and paintings are modeled as artifacts and pictographic writing which gave birth to modern system of writing on paper, books, newspaper and telegraphic writing.
The ancient Greeks’ series of fire tower which stretched across the country side, which relayed messages through smoke and fire, served as a precursor of today’s satellite communication.
Similarly, the carriage of message through horseback between regular stations on a regular basis also foreshadowed the modern courier services and postal systems.
This relationship has, however, not removed the idea of traditional means of communication.
The ranges are: cave drawings, smoke, music and dance, theatre, drums, signal fires, pictogram, ideogram, fire towers, artifacts, traditional non-verbal cues and signs, etc.
The defining characteristic of these traditional means of communication are: i.
They are usually based on interpersonal and interpersonal levels of communication, thus limited in range and amplification of massages, and are culture-based.
ii.
They are many traditional signs and symbols which have meanings only in a particular culture and among a people or community.
Even among many developing countries with a multiplicity of languages, it might be difficult, if not altogether impossible, to deduce meanings from traditional signs and symbols.
Indeed, many traditional Yoruba signs and symbols are limited to the people, thus a typical Hausa, Igbo, Nupe, TIV or Ijaw may not know the meanings of these signs and symbols.
It is interesting to note also that not all Yoruba communities will draw meanings from the some of such signs and symbols.
This position does not, however, remove the fact that some gestures are today becoming more universal.
For example, such signs as handshake while greeting, kissing, nodding for acceptance or rejection, etc, are more universal in the world today.
iii.
The main parts of traditional channels of communication are composed largely of non-verbal signals.
Indeed, this might be because of their pristine origin.
Many of the sound forms were developed when man originated the power of the spoken word.
However, a large body of non-verbal cues had developed before this time.
57JLS 745 ISSUES IN COMMUNICATION TECHNOLOGY AND POLICY But the significance of the traditional means of communication is not in dispute even in the modern world.
This significance can be seen in: a.
Since they are largely interpersonal and interpersonal communication, they are freely disposed to use and are effective where attitude and behaviour changes are desired.
For example, traditional channels of communication have been used by Information Ministries in states in Nigeria and at the Federal level in changing the attitude of farmers to accept use of fertilizer and insecticides; for communities to accept modern family planning methods, breast feeding, etc.
Recently, traditional communication channels were combined with the service of opinion leaders, among them the Sultan of Sokoto, in making Northern communities to embrace vaccination against major childhood killer diseases like polio and measles.
b.
In the same vein, traditional channels of communication are effective for cultural and social integration purposes as during introduction of youths into age-grades in African societies.
c. They are relevant for instigating political action.
In this circumstance, many political organizations and parties use traditional means of communication for mass mobilization of the people.
d. They are also important in dispelling superstitions, archaic and unscientific attitudes.
e. In the developing countries such as Nigeria where some 70 percent of the people live in the rural areas, traditional channels of communication remain instruments of developments.
f. Traditional channels of communication are aligned to performing arts, so they preserve the songs, stories, music and culture of the people.
g. They survive as components of education activities as they can be effectively used in schools and other media of learning.
The significant of traditional means of communication highlighted above is not exhaustive, but the discussions have indicated or reinforced the relationship between these forms and the modern communication, especially in the developing countries, like Nigeria, where majority of the people live in the rural areas.
Even those who live in the cities today 58JLS 745 ISSUES IN COMMUNICATION TECHNOLOGY AND POLICY are only first or second generations of urban settlers who are still fond of the sweet memories of their traditions and culture in music, dance, drama, songs and traditional stories.
The essence for policy maker is to fashion policies that will mix the traditional channels of communication with modern contents and means of communication.
In Nigeria, many traditional dances, songs and drama are recorded in video discs and video cassettes, as documentaries for public preview, etc.
The range of these movies shown on television and sold for personal preview demonstrates the mix of traditional channels of communication and modern communication.
Similarly, the themes of the Nigerian artists are based on our traditional forms of communication essentially.
All these expand the frontiers of our culture and communication.
3.2 Case Studies in Traditional and Modern Communication i. Aroko: the traditional means of communication among the Yoruba.
This study was conducted by Babatunde Olabode ( ) on the Aroko leaves as a tradition channel of communication among the Yoruba in the western part of Nigeria.
Olabode says Aroko is the use of material objects packaged together in specific ways to send messages to people among the Yoruba people in the past.
One dare say the Aroko is still present in rural Yoruba communities.
His study of Aroko system is based on the principle that an event has its place in a system, and that the value or functions of such an event can be deduced from its relations with other events in the system.
The researcher justifies the significance of Aroko in the disposition of the Yoruba people’s choice of certain vegetation, animal and other natural resources for identification.
He says man can only use the resources available to his ecological background for this purpose.
Three elements of Aroko are identified: the sender, the Aroko (materials/objects) and the receiver has to operate within an encompassing element, the context to make an Aroko meaningful.
The researcher also identifies three types of Aroko as a traditional means of communication: casual, the formal and the classified/highly coded Aroko.
59JLS 745 ISSUES IN COMMUNICATION TECHNOLOGY AND POLICY He concludes that there are still problems in the use of Aroko as a traditional channel of communication, suggesting that Aroko could be modernized as it is still in use in spite of the sophistication and pervasiveness of modern media of communication and increased level of literacy among the people.
ii.
Evaluation and Utilisation of Traditional Method of Communication in Cameroon’s central, southern, eastern and extreme northern regions.
The study was tagged case study 20 by the Communication for Development Group; Extension, Education and Communities Service and Food ad Agricultural Organisation (FAO) Research, Extension and Training Division in collaboration with: PROJECT FPA/CMR/903/FPA Community information, education and communication in the area of reproductive health in Cameroon.
This study covers 18 Cameroonian villages: five in the provinces in the centre; five in provinces in the extreme north; four in the southern provinces; and four in provinces in the eastern part.
The objectives of the study: to evaluate traditional means of communications, identify their constraints, select the traditional methods best suited for dissemination of the message and devise strategies for implementing the methods of traditional communication so selected.
Methodology: based on the active method of participative research.
According to the study, the main methods of traditional communication in Cameroonian: the gong and songs accompanied by dances in the surveyed provinces; xylophone in the centre and south provinces, griot (traveling poet) and balafon in the eastern province; colleagues and messengers of traditional chiefs in the extreme north provinces.
The study identifies a number of constraints in devising communication strategies.
These include: lack of trained musicians, lack of initiative from the village elders, lack of interest by the youth, conflict among the different generations, proliferation of modern communication technologies, complexity of training in various methods, possible alteration of messages, lack of motivation and the slow speed of transmission.
60JLS 745 ISSUES IN COMMUNICATION TECHNOLOGY AND POLICY According to the study, the best method for dissemination of messages in the provinces surveyed in Cameroon: the gong, the colleagues and messengers of traditional chiefs who organize village meetings for promotion of reproductive health issues as well as signing and dancing, traveling poets and xylophones.
However, the study suggests that for effective strategies for dissemination of messages about reproductive health through traditional channels, traditional authorities should be engaged early enough.
Qualified individuals relevant to the process must be identified and trained and a training of trainers must also be conducted.
4.0 CONCLUSION Traditional means of communication are still very relevant in the developing countries, like Nigeria.
The essence is for policy makers to devise strategies to identify the relevant means of traditional communication that can be effectively used in particular communities and for which purpose and effects.
There is no need repeating that these traditional means of communication should be combined effectively with relevant modern communication to achieve identified objectives in the communities.
5.0 SUMMARY We have shown the linkage between traditional communication and modern communication.
We have identified the peculiar characteristics and significance of traditional means of communication.
We have also demonstrated how traditional means of communications should be intermixed in rural communities in the developing countries through two case studies: one in Nigeria and the other in Cameroon.
6.0 TUTOR-MARKED ASSIGNMENT 1.
Explain the strategies and methods used in a particular case of use of traditional means of communication and modern communication in your community.
2.
Discuss the success of the traditional methods to demonstrate their significance and characteristics in the modern world.
7.0 REFERENCES/FURTHER READINGS Many Voices, One World – UNESCO Report on New World Information and Communication Order pp.
82-83.
Harnem and McDwan: Communication and Behaviour.
61JLS 745 ISSUES IN COMMUNICATION TECHNOLOGY AND POLICY McQuail Dennis (2005).
Communication Theory 5th Edition.
London: Sage Publications Limited pp.455-478.
Bittner John R. (2003).
Mass Communication: An Introduction 5th Edition.
Nigeria Ibadan: Heinemann Educational Books.
UNIT 2 THE LINKS BETWEEN INTERPERSONAL AND MEDIATED COMMUNICATION CONTENTS 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objectives 3.0 Main Content 3.1 The Links between Interpersonal and Mediated Communication 3.2 Opinion Leadership and its Relations with Interpersonal and Mediated Communication 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutor-Marked Assignment 7.0 References/Further Readings 1.0 INTRODUCTION Interpersonal communication, which is a face-to-face communication, is basic to the origin of communication.
It encompasses the intrapersonal communication which exists largely in the realm of internal thought process, action and reactions.
Interpersonal communication, enabled with interpersonal communication, a large, body of herbal and non-herbal cues, words, language etc, is an amplified when combined with mediated communication.
In this unit, we shall highlight the significance of interpersonal communication and emphasis how the disadvantage of its limited scope can be removed when amplified newspaper, radio, television, cinema 62JLS 745 ISSUES IN COMMUNICATION TECHNOLOGY AND POLICY and satellite communication.
We shall discuss the phenomenon of leadership as the interface between interpersonal communication and mediated communication, as well as the theory of media effects with regard to interpersonal communication and mediated communication.
2.0 OBJECTIVES At the end of this unit, you should be able to: • identify the significance of interpersonal communication and situations where its use is more effective • explain the phenomenon of opinion leadership as an interface between interpersonal communication and mediated communication • briefly discuss the theory of media effects in relation to interpersonal communication and mediated communication.
3.0 MAIN CONTENT 3.1 The Links between Interpersonal and Mediated Communication The significance and impact of interpersonal communication can be seen when there is need for political, social and cultural changes, electioneering, agrarians campaigns involving modern planting and harvesting procedures, religious purposes, national emergencies, including wars, etc.
These are features which define the political, social-economic relations in the world today.
In particular, these features have dominated the lives and histories of developing countries like Nigeria.
Also, interpersonal communication has been an effective tool in cultural integration of peoples as in the case of the discovered Koma people in North-East Nigeria.
The integration of Koma people into modern life, including wearing of clothes, modern housing, food, etc, was an all- inclusive action of government, Christian religions bodies and non- governmental organizations, based initially and essentially on interpersonal communication.
However, in such situations as the Koma in Nigeria, interpersonal communication is usually mixed with mediated communication later in the process.
Two important factors ensure the effectiveness of interpersonal communication.
One is the mutual exchange that exists between the originator (sender) of message and the receiver of message.
The other is the opportunity for immediate feedback between the sender and receiver 63JLS 745 ISSUES IN COMMUNICATION TECHNOLOGY AND POLICY of message in interpersonal communication.
Thus, meanings of messages can be ascertained and cross-checked for effective communication.
However, communication scholars have observed that interpersonal communication is more likely to be more effective than mediated communication when the issue is behavioral change.
But the scholars have also stressed the need to combine interpersonal communication with the mass media to benefit from the advantages of multiplication, amplification, storage and retrieval functions of the mediated communication.
3.2 Opinion Leadership and its Relations with Interpersonal and Mediated Communication The term public opinion leader is often applied to individuals who lead in influencing other people’s opinion in an informal way.
In a simple sense, opinion leadership is the degree to which an individual can influence other people’s attitudes and behaviour in a desired way and for a particular objective.
The influence is usually subtle and informal, but with relative frequency.
The concept of opinion leadership was first developed by Paul Lazerfeld (1944) in a study of political behaviour in 1940 United States Presidential Election.
Coming as variants of the term are fashion leaders, influencers, gate- keepers, information leaders, key communicators, spark plugs, style setters and taste makers.
These variants emerged as it has been realized that opinion leaders are present not only in politics which was the core of the study by Lazarfeld, but are available in all sectors and areas of human existence.
Lazarfeld identified the two-step flow of mass media effects to reinforce the importance of interpersonal communication over the mass media.
This is based on the role opinion leaders play in mass communication.
At the individual level of communication, we identify the following models of information flow which we shall discuss here: • Hypodermic Needle Model • Two-step flow Model • One-step flow Model 64JLS 745 ISSUES IN COMMUNICATION TECHNOLOGY AND POLICY • Multi-step flow Model • The Hypodermic Needle Model: postulates that the mass media had direct, immediate and powerful effect on a mass audience.
This was based on the stimulus-response principle of communication.
But its approach has been criticized as being too simple, too mechanistic and too general to adequately and accurately account for media effects on the audience.
We should realize that Hypodermic Needle Model is a precursor of other effect models in communication, thus when it was evolved, it was ground-breaking.
• Two-Step Flow Model: because of the inadequacies of the Hypodermic Needle Model, further research was conducted on media effects.
The two-step flow model is the Lazerfeld media theory.
According to him, there was ample evidence to show that the mass media were not the most influential factor in political behaviour.
He postulates that interpersonal relationship to a large extent influenced voting pattern.
With in Lazarfeld’s two-step flow model emerged the concepts of opinion leadership which we have earlier discussed.
The model insists that certain individuals, because of their exposure, status, accessibility to the media and innovativeness, obtain information from the mass media and pass the information to the less active members of the society.
This position stresses the significance of interpersonal communication because of its face-to-face feature and the immediate possibility of feedback in the communication process.
In particular, we need to stress also that the two-step flow model has helped to focus attention upon the interface between interpersonal communication and the mass media.
This interface or relationship, especially at the opinion leadership function, is important for policy makers so that they can organize and plan communication strategies and methodologies based on this consciousness.
Characteristics of Opinion Leaders i) For external communication purposes, opinion leaders have greater exposure to mass media; they are more cosmopolitan than their followers and have greater change agent contacts than their followers.
65JLS 745 ISSUES IN COMMUNICATION TECHNOLOGY AND POLICY ii) Opinion leaders have greater social participation than their followers.
iii) Opinion leaders have higher social status than their followers iv) They are more innovative when the system favours change.
But they are less innovative when the norms are tradition.
According to Rogers and Schumacher, opinion leaders can be categorized into two: • Monomorphic Opinion Leader: is the tendency for a single individual to act as opinion leader on one topic only.
• Polymorphic Opinion Leader: is the degree or tendency for an individual to act as opinion leader for a variety of topics.
However, other different types of opinion leaders such as stimulators, legitimizers, implementers, etc, are identified by other scholars.
The stimulators have idea and motivate people for innovation.
The legitimisers have high status with which they can confer credibility on the issue of innovation.
The implementor-opinion leaders have organizational ability to manage resources to achieve their ends.
However, communication scholars have identified some limitations in the two step flow model: (a) The model indicates that individuals who are active information seekers are opinion leaders and that the remainders of the public or mass audience are passive.
(b)The basis of the theory which suggests that communication consists of two steps essentially is faulty.
It tends to limit analysis of communication process.
(c) The two-step flow demonstrates a reliance of opinion leaders on mass media.
Whereas, in practice, they are many sources of information open to individuals, whether they are opinion leaders or not.
(d)The dichotomy of the audience into opinion leaders and followers is too simplistic.
There are variants of audience who seek different kinds of messages for different purposes.
• One-Step Flow Model: is largely a refinement of the hypodermic meddle model.
It, however, recognizes that the media are not all powerful.
That mediating process of selective exposure, perception and retention affects message impact.
And that the different effects of mass media occur on receiving audience.
• Multi-Step Flow Model: this model incorporates all of the other models we have previously mentioned.
The model is based on 66JLS 745 ISSUES IN COMMUNICATION TECHNOLOGY AND POLICY sequential relaying function that exists in most communication situations.
The model postulates that communication flow is not basically one way or two-step, but multi-step, and that the exact number of steps depends on the intent of the source, availability of the media, extent of the audience exposure, nature of the message, and salient of message to the receiving audience.
4.0 CONCLUSION We have dwelt extensively on the relationship between interpersonal communication and the mass media to show that interpersonal communication is at the core of every human communication.
Also, we hope to stress that policy makers should combine interpersonal communication with mediated communication to achieve effective results.
They should define a method and strategies of this combination for specific goals and objectives, and for specific effects on the audience.
The need for feedback is important in communication situations if success is to be recorded in social, political and economic development of a country.
Thus, decisions must be taken by policy makers to organize communication in such a way as to guarantee feedback by strengthening the links between interpersonal communication and the mass media as well as the new media.
The mass media are not all-powerful; they should be combined with the attractions in interpersonal communication to achieve effective social objectives.
5.0 SUMMARY This unit has looked at the relationship between interpersonal communication and the mass media.
We have identified opinion leadership as the crucial interface between interpersonal communication and the mass media and demonstrated that the two types of media should be mixed so as to achieve adequate social, political and economic objectives.
From our discourse on models of information flow, we are able to deduce that policy makers can organize the interpersonal communication with other forms of media to achieve particular effects on the receiving audience.
6.0 TUTOR-MARKED ASSIGNMENT Discuss the concept of opinion leadership as the interface between interpersonal communication and the mass media.
67JLS 745 ISSUES IN COMMUNICATION TECHNOLOGY AND POLICY 7.0 REFERENCES/FURTHER READINGS Many Voices, One World – UNESCO Report on New World Information and Communication Order pp.
82-83.
Harnem and McDwan: Communication and Behaviour.
McQuail Dennis (2005).
Communication Theory 5th Edition.
London: Sage Publications Limited pp.455-478.
Bittner John R. (2003).
Mass Communication: An Introduction 5th Edition.
Nigeria Ibadan: Heinemann Educational Books.
UNIT 3 INVENTIONS AND EXTENSION OF VISUAL EXPRESSION CONTENTS 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objectives 3.0 Main Content 3.1 Inventions and Extension of Visual Expression 3.2 Non-verbal Communication as Visual Expression 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutor-Marked Assignment 7.0 References/Further Readings 1.0 INTRODUCTION The messages communicated through the eyes of sight are perhaps more than are communicated through words.
Indeed, visual expressions were first developed by man before words or the alphabets of 600 crude characters were evolved.
Man had expressed self through drawings on walls, smoke signals, fire towers and before he evolved the spoken word (auditory).
And even at that, the gestures, signs and symbols were and are still used today to reinforce the spoken words, not to talk of books which are words essentially addressed to the eyes.
In this unit, therefore, we shall be concerned with the range of the inventions and extension of visual expression.
We shall look at the spectrum of non-verbal cues as part of visual expression.
2.0 OBJECTIVES At the end of this unit, you should be able to: 68JLS 745 ISSUES IN COMMUNICATION TECHNOLOGY AND POLICY • identify the range of inventions and extension of visual expression • discuss the wide spectrum of non-verbal communication as visual expression • explain the mediatory codes as media within media.
3.0 MAIN CONTENT 3.1 Inventions and Extension of Visual Expression Visual expression refers to all communication which is addressed to the eyes or sight.
It includes all the contents and means of communication which are visual in nature.
They also include devices for production distribution, storage, reception and display of visual images and data.
Indeed, our devices to extend our capacity or ability to produce and disseminate images started with drawings on cave.
It steadily moved to early forms of alphabets and later extended to use of hand and arm signals, signs, billboards, flags, lanterns, printing, photography and copying equipment.
The introduction of television, film, video disc and video cassettes at different stages marked great milestones in the history of amplification of the images.
It also demonstrated greater effectiveness of communication with images as they are now used with auditory modalities at the same time.
The possibility of synchronization of sound with the visuals remains a great improvement in the effect of visual communication.
It has also shown the great benefit of the combination and display of visual images with auditory modalities.
In the same vein, the computer continues to create great possibilities in visual and auditory expression, storage and retrieval of images.
Other visual devices such as video games, calculators and many other electronic gadgets serve similar purposes of extension of our visual expression.
There are still many others which extend our tactile (touch) capacities.
We can also identify other more specialized devices which extend our ability to express visual images.
They include mirror, eye glasses, contact lenses, microscopes, magnifying glasses, binoculars, radar, telescopes etc.
Similarly, and although may be little considered today, diaries, wills, files and calendars are record by visual signals for man’s capacity to recall information.
There is no doubt that the image of visual communication is wide.
In particular, it is a basic form of expression which the 20th century has contributed to communication, especially regarding the cinema, television, video disc, video cassettes and moving images.
69JLS 745 ISSUES IN COMMUNICATION TECHNOLOGY AND POLICY Beginning with the cinema, it encompasses the major technologies for mass entertainment and dissemination of information.
The cinema is the grandeur of aesthetic cultural and social phenomenon.
It encompasses pictures, stories, words and music.
Thus, with these mixed contents, the cinema portrays culture, language, social, political and economic lives of a people.
Its history began with the ‘silent films’ of the Charley Chapping era.
It moved from the newsreels and documentaries to full feature-length films, synchronizing audio with films, synchronizing audio with images to inform, entertain, promote the people’s heritage and educate the public.
Today, according to UNESCO records, global output of feature-length films was 3,000 per year.
In 1977, India, leading other countries of the world was said to have produced 557, followed by Japan (337), France (222) and Italy (165).
The record of feature length films based on regional outputs showed Asia producing more than half the world’s total output, with only 11 countries responsible for this growth.
Twenty-one European countries and the collapsed Soviet Union produced about a third of the world’s output.
The rest were said to have been produced by some other 20 countries, including the United States, Mexico, Egypt and Brazil.
Within the review period, it was established that North America and Europe did not dominate global film production.
Also, the record which showed the regional patterns of number of cinemas and cinema attendant is informative.
The number of cinemas in Asia was said to be on the increase up to 1973.
In Asia, the increased output in India made up for any decline which resulted from the drop in Japan’s cinemas.
In cinema attendance, India recorded 23 percent between 1966 and 1975.
The drop in Japan was from 373 million in 1965 to 165 million in 1977.
Except for Africa with poor records, the number of cinema attendance has stabilized.
It is interesting that the drift in cinema halls has shown a remarkable increase in the use of films in television, an older medium.
A clear link has been established between films and television as more and more movies are now made for television viewing.
Similarly, the increase in video discs and video cassettes produced for television and 70JLS 745 ISSUES IN COMMUNICATION TECHNOLOGY AND POLICY home use has more than quadruped the significance of films as an medium.
The great beneficiary of the relationship between the cinema and television has been the entertainment and leisure industry.
With the increased enduring links between the cinema and television and the video recordings for home viewing, the time-span for entertainment and leisure for the public has increased tremendously.
Three Characteristics of this Development are Identified a. immense growth of entertainment facilities globally, involving all the media of communication; b. technologies based on ‘do-it-yourself communications’ –video discs, video cassettes and video players which are produced for home use; and c. emergence of a huge industry which centres around cultural and artistic productions and performances.
The entertainment and leisure industry has grown today that it now covers production and use of such equipment as television and radio sets, hi-fi and record players, tape recorders camera, musical instruments, seawares, books, magazines, organization of concerts, festivals, sporting events, travel and tourism.
In the same vein, enterprises have developed around all these to organize and manage the growing industry.
There is now involvement of large finance capital which invests and employs new technologies such as computers and satellite communication to guarantee the future of the industry.
3.2 Non-verbal Communication as Visual Expression A large body of non-verbal cues, signals and symbols are addressed to the eyes as visual expression.
Most of these are at the level of human communication sometimes used to strengthen verbal communication.
They are part of a vast domain of non-verbal communication which includes gestures, illustrations, facial expression, use of time and space, etc.
71JLS 745 ISSUES IN COMMUNICATION TECHNOLOGY AND POLICY Indeed, non-verbal communication can be classified according to origin, usage, interpersonal significance and encoding.
Sometimes, such communication cues show different types and levels of relationship between one person and the other.
Generally, non-verbal communication can be classified into four: 1.
Performance Codes: this is communication with parts of the body.
The study of performance codes is called kinetics, which involves the study of body movements which carry meaning to achieve effective communication.
The Major Types of Performance Codes are: • Emblems - these concern words and or phrases which are translated directly into non-verbal cues.
These emblems, which vary from culture to culture, reinforce verbal messages and can also be used in place of verbal language or words.
Emblems are used with awareness of intention to communicate.
• Illustrators - these are gestures that accompany verbal streams of communication.
Thus, they are not too independent of the speech act.
Atimes they are used with the intention to communicate.
At other times, they are used unconsciously.
Examples of these are gesticulations with nose, leg, hands, etc.
• Adaptors - these are movements to manipulate others.
They usually serve the personal needs of the communicator and have a practical purpose.
A times too, they show the background of the communicator.
Examples are kiss, hug, a pat, caress, etc.
• Regulator - these are movements to control or influence the behaviour of others.
Examples are: a stare, a mod, a walk-away or walk-out, hip-movement, etc.
• Affect Displays - these are facial expressions which communicate emotions which reflect what is in the mind.
A time they are used with certain intentions.
Such displays might indicate joy, annoyance, fear, randy, etc.
2.
Artefactural Codes - involve communicating with objects.
Examples are painting, caring, furniture, clothing, architecture, hair-do or hair-cut.
3.
Spatio-Temporal Cues - is communication with time and space.
Here, we have intimate space, personal space, social space and 72JLS 745 ISSUES IN COMMUNICATION TECHNOLOGY AND POLICY public space.
These are variations in levels of interaction.
For communication with time temporal, we have good or bad use of time.
This assessment is based on culture to culture, thus it is conditioned by culture.
4.
Mediatory Codes - these are non-verbal cues in modern mediated communication as the meanings of colours in each culture.
For example, red colour to Chinese is love, whereas to an African, it might mean danger.
White is universally perceived as symbol of peace and black as sign of grief or mourning.
Thus, colours of materials are mediated communication with the physical materials serving as a medium of expressing the colour communication.
Mediated codes are expressed in form of level of quality production of a programme on television or radio, variations of shots in television such as close-up, long shot, medium shot and extensive shot which give different information on their own.
4.0 CONCLUSION The import of this discussion is to see how the different media of communication relate, strengthening one another, reinforcing the effects and impact of the other.
The visual expressions are synchronized with the audio medium; the newer medium of cinema strengthens the older medium of television to make films remain an astounding resource for information, education, culture and entertainment.
Indeed, both films and television can have a comprehensive development in different countries.
At the same time, global communication will benefit tremendously if more films from the developing world are viewed in the developed countries.
This will to a great extent help in the democratization of communication and engender a safer world built on improved understanding among the peoples.
5.0 SUMMARY In this unit, we have discussed inventions and extension of visual expression.
We have identified how visual expression and auditory modalities are synchronized in television, cinema, video discs and video cassettes, giving birth to the entertainment and leisure industry with immense communication possibilities.
We also discussed the range of non-verbal communication as part of visual expression and communication 6.0 TUTOR-MARKED ASSIGNMENT 73JLS 745 ISSUES IN COMMUNICATION TECHNOLOGY AND POLICY Discuss the fact that more than any other, television and cinema created and expanded the growing entertainment and leisure industry.
7.0 REFERENCES/FURTHER READINGS McQuail Denis (2005).
Mass Communication Theory.
London: Sage Publications Ltd.
Many Voices, One World – A UNESCO Report on Global Communication Problems.
Pp 74-77, 88-89.
The Process of Human Communication.
A Journal Communication Technology: A Tool Making Animal pp.119-121 Communication and Behaviour by Hannem and McEwan.
UNIT 4 INTEGRATION IN NEWS CIRCULATION AND EXTERNAL ASSISTANCE TO DEVELOPING COUNTRIES CONTENTS 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objectives 3.0 Main Content 3.1 Integration in News Circulation 3.2 External Assistance Developing Countries 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutor-Marked Assignment 7.0 References/Further Readings 1.0 INTRODUCTION Since many developing countries have become independent, there have been conscious efforts to redefine their ties with their former colonial masters.
They have realized that relations between and among themselves, not as master-servant have been more beneficial to their overall development and attainment of their individual national goals and objectives.
Thus, under the Non-Aligned countries Movement in the 1970s, they were able to drum support, essentially through the instruments of the UNESCO, for a free and balanced flow of information and communication in the world as against the dominance of the developed nations in contents and means of communication.
This unit will focus on the cooperative efforts in news circulation between nation, regions and internationally.
It will also assess financial 74JLS 745 ISSUES IN COMMUNICATION TECHNOLOGY AND POLICY assistance that has come the way of development of communication in the developing countries.
2.0 OBJECTIVES At the end of the unit, you should be able to: • identify the level of cooperation in news circulation by news agencies, especially among the developing countries and the benefits there from • assess the level of development assistance that has gone into communication development in the developing countries from international bodies and developed nations as recorded by UNESCO.
3.0 MAIN CONTENT 3.1 Integration in News Circulation An important area of integration is the cooperation of countries in news circulation in the world.
Efforts in this area have been ferocious since many developing countries gained independence in the last half of the 20th century.
With their independence, they tried to break the old colonial barrier in news flow essentially between and among countries with mutual political affinity, common cultural and linguistic links.
In particular, the break in colonial barriers in news flow is just one of the many ways that the developing nations have taken to redress their dependence on a few developed ones in terms of contents and flow of communication and dominance in means of communication as we shall later discuss.
However, regarding our preoccupation here which is integration in news circulation, we note that in particular, in 1975, the Non-Aligned countries, including Cuba, India, Tunisia, Nigeria, Morocco, Ghana, among others, organized a pool of national news agencies.
The number of this pool was said to have hit 26 members within a year of its formation.
Some three years later, in 1978, the number had climbed to 50 members.
The developing countries saw this regional cooperation in news circulation as a means not only to promoting cooperation, but also mutual understanding and knowledge among themselves.
Also, it was seen as a vehicle to de-emphasis their dependence on major international news agencies which are controlled and owned by a few developed nations of the world.
75JLS 745 ISSUES IN COMMUNICATION TECHNOLOGY AND POLICY It was also to ensure the inner balance of many of the developing countries hinged on philosophy of development journalism which defines news as development and a process.
We note here that the developing countries believe that definition of news as crisis, chaos, contrast, catastrophe, war, disaster, is Euro-American, especially for then who were just free from the shackles of colonialism.
This pool of news agencies, said to operate through Tunisian News Agency (TAP), Moroccan News Agency (MAP), Iraq’s INA, Cuba’s Prensa Latina and Press Trust of India, disseminates and facilitates exchange of news among developing countries.
The pool of news agencies also has links with Inter Press Service which was created in 1964 for the main purpose of boosting news flow between developing countries and Latin American region.
According to UNESCO record, the cooperative efforts of the developing countries increased news flow into the regions five-folds.
The pool’s impact was also registered in improvement of telecommunication facilities, lowered satellite transmission rates, increased training of journalists and assistance towards establishing news agencies in countries where the service was yet to be found.
Today, these efforts towards integration in news circulation by the developing countries have been enlarged.
The initiative seen largely as a means to redress the low level of news circulation between and among smaller and bigger news agencies within the developing region has given birth to several regional and sub- regional news agencies.
For example, 13 English-speaking Caribbean countries, with the assistance of the United Nations Development Programme (UNDP) and UNESCO, set up the Caribbean News Agencies (CANA) in 1975.
(CANA) which operates in conjunction with Reuters, was said to have increased its membership to 17 in 1976, consisting of both private and public bodies.
In Africa, we have the Pan African News Agency (PANA) as a regional news agency in existence over two decades.
PANA, based in Dakar Senegal, was organized by the Organisation of African Unity (OAU) now transformed to African Union (AU).
There are other regional news agencies such as in Asia, Latin America and the one for the oil producing countries, the OPEC News Agency, concerned with 76JLS 745 ISSUES IN COMMUNICATION TECHNOLOGY AND POLICY circulation of news with regard to global energy problems, development and prospects.
Specifically, identifiable features of the development of these regional news agencies are greater collaboration among news agencies, increased pooling of the limited technical facilities, finance and training, common use of carriers and appointment of joint correspondents.
Reasons for Integration of News Circulation • To break the old colonial barriers which limit news flow and exchanges.
• Developing countries with over two billion liberated populations want to be heard.
• More countries demand for greater roles in world affairs.
• Development and progress in developing countries are occurring at great speed, these developments need to be communicated to the world at large.
• There are limited technical facilities and training in the developing countries, these can only be impactful if there is collaboration among these countries.
• Cooperation in news circulation is self-defence mechanism for developing countries against the overbearing position and dominance of a few developed countries.
• It is also to enrich and diversity news and interpretation of events.
However, we must emphasis here that the collaboration of developing nations in news circulation does not mean that they have ignored the services of major news agencies.
Indeed, they have also benefited from the technical depth, spread and variety of services offered by the major news agencies, including Reuters and AFP.
The truth is that professionals and operators in the communication industry in the developing countries have become more discrete in the handling of news items from the major news agencies.
In the same way, the developing countries stand to gain from the exchanges between regional broadcast unions like Eurovision and Intervision which have large structures for collection, processing and dissemination of news for radio and television.
In particular, such regional body in Africa, the Arab States, Asia and Latin America will benefit immensely from international exchanges with the American and European broadcast unions in the areas of technical and training, satellite transmission and programme exchange.
The impact of this relationship is demonstrated in sports, where the Olympic Games and World Cup tournaments are transmitted to billions of peoples in the 77JLS 745 ISSUES IN COMMUNICATION TECHNOLOGY AND POLICY world live through hook-ups with the satellites of these intercontinental broadcast organizations.
3.2 External Financial Assistance to Developing Countries The developing countries have benefited from aid grants and technical assistance from the industrialized nations since their independence.
These financial assistance and support usually come on the basis of bilateral and multilateral relations.
But a distinctive feature is that they are mostly in favour of the givers, the developed nations.
UNESCO notes, in particular, that “international assistance in general is ad hoc in nature, sporadic and poorly integrated into overall development plans”.
Worse still, the receiving nations are usually uncommitted to development plans, lack political will and are corrupt and poor in ideas and execution of policies and programmes.
It is even painful that much of the financial assistance is said to have been directed to funding social, political and economic programmes of developing countries, with very little devolved into communication development.
UNESCO’s brief review of the agencies responsible for the financial assistance is informative.
The World Bank Group, which is responsible for global telecommunications development, concentrated some 85 per cent of its lending allocated to telecommunications in a 10-year period.
The volume of lending peaked to 235.6 million dollars in 1978 from 2.9 million dollars in 1962.
The Bank Group, in collaboration with International Development Association (IDA), devolved 75 loans totaling 1,685million dollars in 35 countries for telecommunication purposes.
This amounted was approximated to a paltry three percent of the Bank’s lending since 1960.
The average size of lending to telecommunication has been put at 22.5 million dollars, with the largest loan to date granted to India at 120million dollars and the smallest to Burkina Faso in West Africa at 0.8million dollars.
The UNESCO said the regional distribution of the loans during the review period (1962-1978) was uneven.
Also, the UNESCO report said Inter-American Development Bank (IDB) devolved $196.8million for telecommunications projects in 1977, representing 1.6 percent of it total loans outlay.
This percentage placed the telecommunications sector second to the last in the IDB loan portfolio.
However, IDB granted $29million to Colombia for the development of public telephones in 2200 78JLS 745 ISSUES IN COMMUNICATION TECHNOLOGY AND POLICY communities in 1976.
It also granted $12.2million loan to Costa Rica for building of 56 telephone exchanges and 1,300 public telephones.
Ecuador also got $9.6million for building 128 telephone exchanges and 254 public telephones.
The developing countries benefited technical assistance totaling $108million from the International Telephone Union ITU between 1965 and 1976; of this amount, $93million came from the United Nations Development Programme (UNDP).
The ITU, however, increased its financing to developing countries to $20.2million in 1976 from $3.36million in 1965.
Also, between 1979 and 1980, UNESCO spent $1.17million on communication projects in developing countries.
A total of $1.67million was also devoted to UNDP projects in the area of development of policies, infrastructure, training, and research and news exchanges.
UNESCO notes that what it called funds-in-trust projects was $5.89million, with another $9million.
The contributors to the programme were Nordic countries, Germany, Netherlands and Switzerland.
These projects included training of press and broadcast personnel in Africa.
In general, the level of financial assistance, including funding, aid, grants to development of communication in the developing countries is still very low and paltry.
Many factors are responsible for this.
They are: • Many developing countries are yet to draw up communication policies so that donor countries can identify where to come in for financial assistance and also be able to assess progress.
• The few developing countries who have communication policies do not integrate these with the overall development plans and policies in other areas, and so policies are incompatible.
• Worst still, developing countries with communication policies rarely follow them.
This discourages donor-countries in terms of assistance.
• Developing countries’ media are structured to favour mainly the elite who are in urban areas against the rural populations.
• The contributions of communication to development are difficult to measure or sometimes not measured at all • Since many developing countries do not formulate communication policies, they are not able to identify needs and establish priorities, thus discussions at bilateral and multilateral for a concerning communication assistance are difficult.
79JLS 745 ISSUES IN COMMUNICATION TECHNOLOGY AND POLICY • The imported communication technologies are more beneficial to the providers, thus, some developing countries are wary of some foreign assistance.
• There is apparent lack of data and experience to draw from in these fields by the international donor agencies.
• Since policies for different media are haphazard and not integrated with other areas of development, it is difficult to draw targets, objectives and goals.
• Other considerations, such as military, elite and political and religions blocs, affect communication issues negatively.
4.0 CONCLUSION The two issues of integration of news circulation and external assistance to developing countries are in the area of expanding and democratizing communication within nations and between developing and developed countries.
The growth in news agencies, inter-agency cooperation and regional collaborations are part of efforts to bridge the gap in communication flow in the world.
In the same way, it is hoped that new thinking should evolve whereby developing countries not only draw up communication policies, but will be committed to them.
Also, they should steadily increase funding to communication.
Already, there is some level of funding to communication projects and development by multilateral agencies in developing countries.
This should be increased in order to stem the imbalances between the developing and developed ones.
Developing countries should strengthen their cooperation and pool resources together in the area of technical training and capacity building in communication fields.
5.0 SUMMARY This unit has identified the growing bilateral and regional cooperation in news circulation among developing countries toward expanding their news exchanges.
We have also seen that developing countries can not completely ignore international news agencies, but have to use their news items with discretion.
We discussed the low level of international funding for communication development in developing countries, and the reasons for this and how this can be solved.
6.0 TUTOR-MARKED ASSIGNMENT 80JLS 745 ISSUES IN COMMUNICATION TECHNOLOGY AND POLICY 1.
Do you agree that integration of news circulation is one of the ways to democratize global communication?
2.
What is responsible for the low level of foreign assistance to development of communication in developing countries and how can this be redressed?
7.0 REFERENCES/FURTHER READINGS McQuail Denis (2005).
Mass Communication Theory.
London: Sage Publications Ltd.
Many Voices, One World – A UNESCO Report on Global Communication Problems.
UNIT 5 VAST POSSIBILITIES AND IMPLICATIONS OF NEW TECHNOLOGIES CONTENTS 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objectives 3.0 Main Content 3.1 Vast Possibilities and Implications of New Technologies 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutor-Marked Assignment 7.0 References/Further Readings 1.0 INTRODUCTION There is hardly any doubt that we are in an information age.
The arrays of communication devices and the volume of data and messages disseminated across and within the globe are enormous.
The technological inventions each promise greater impact in communication fields and on human lives.
This unit will identify the vast possibilities and implications of these new technologies on all facets of our personal, occupational and social lives.
2.0 OBJECTIVES At the end of this unit, you should be able to: • identify the areas of human lives which new technologies of communication have impacted upon • discuss how the new technologies have resulted in increased volume of data and messages and redefined concepts of home, office and work 81JLS 745 ISSUES IN COMMUNICATION TECHNOLOGY AND POLICY • explain the relationship between transportation and communication technologies and the changing uses of media • the economics and whether new communication technologies have affected quality of lives.
3.0 MAIN CONTENT 3.1 Vast Possibilities and Implications of New Technologies Huge Volume of Data: the basic characteristics of the new communication technologies are their capacities to multiply, amplify and store data and messages than the traditional and older communication devices.
These characteristics have led to increased processed data and messages worldwide.
The volume of recordings of songs, television programmes, movies, newspapers, magazines, books and articles processed and stored daily can only be imagined.
This is due essentially to the immense storage of new communication technologies.
For example, a side of a video disc is said to be able to store 108,000 colour television images including the audio.
Also, whole series of an encyclopedia are stored, viewed for use when needed.
Indeed, required parts of books and encyclopedia can be printed through video publishing connecting a printer with a computer.
Today, there is a steadily build-up to information glut where the public is given more than the messages they actually need, some of them relevant and most irrelevant.
There is, therefore, a growing need for communication technologies which will help the public to organize and categorise information in a form that they can be efficiently used and stored.
i. Redefinition of Concepts of Home, Office and Work The concepts of home, office and work have been redefined by communication technologies.
There is less distinction between the home and office regarding work.
Many official activities are done within the precinct of the home, including sending, treatment and use of vital data, messages and documents.
Similarly, the idea of office as a place where people gather and relate in a face-to-face relationship is gradually changing due to the impact of communication technologies.
An individual can stay alone within the confines of his home and transact business with offices many thousands of kilometres away, separated by regions and zones through computer, facsimile machines and phones.
Steadily, the idea of work as a place has been altered.
Work is seen more and more as an activity rather than a place.
Work can be done any where as long as there are 82JLS 745 ISSUES IN COMMUNICATION TECHNOLOGY AND POLICY relevant communication technologies that perform operations which were hitherto done only in an office.
ii.
Great Boost of Economic and Social Activities Due to increased data, information and messages, businesses and social activities are better run.
Businesses are run as more accurate forecasts and results are more predictable.
A cocoa merchant in Nigeria can easily get the market prices of the commodity based on the grades of commodity via the internet.
He can also more efficiently plan his business and project his revenue base and profits.
Similarly, a farmer in a remote village can plan his planting and harvest more properly based on weather forecasts which remain crucial to his activities.
In the same vein, a business man in a commercial centre like Lagos can tap from the global economic indicators which are readily available on different channels of information in the world just with a press of the button on a computer linked with telephone device for the purpose.
iii.
Strengthening Transportation and Communication Technologies Links The age-long relationship between transportation and communication technologies has become strengthened today.
In time past, even delivering a message personally was replaced by messages sent on horse back.
This is transportation of messages, which vividly demonstrates the relationship with communication technology.
Message are transported or sent on its own, rather than being carried personally or hand-delivered.
Today, this has been improved upon as business conferences are held across continents and different regions of the world among individuals separated by thousands of kilometres and seas to discuss and arrive at decision freely and mutually while watching and reacting to each individual’s mechanism on the screen.
Also, with the use of a telephone device, doctors can monitor the heartbeat of a patient several kilometres away from the hospital.
They also have unrestricted access to data, research and information to diagnose patients and treat ailments through similar communication technologies.
Lawyers too can access relevant data bases to cite cases and seek legal opinions through communication technologies.
83JLS 745 ISSUES IN COMMUNICATION TECHNOLOGY AND POLICY Indeed, the availability of communication technologies, including newspapers, magazines, television, radio, libraries etc, has reduced the need to travel for almost every data or information and removed the attendant risks there from.
iv.
Merging of Media Functions There is now no clear distinction between media and among media functions.
The situation is currently such that several media channels can be made to perform similar functions.
For example, far from the traditional function of a newspaper as dissemination of news or a summary of events and happenings of the day, a newspaper provides well-researched features on a broad spectrum of social, political and economic lives of the people.
The contents of a newspaper is today provided on the internet, reviewed on television and radio and supplied on mobile phones through a communication device.
Communication technology has affected other media in the same way as the newspaper.
The traditional roles of film, radio and television as purely entertainment media has also changed greatly.
Similarly, the role of telephones for connecting people for business and social relations and as a replacement for a face-to-face communication has been altered.
Even museums and libraries provide more than reference and archival functions.
They now serve as other communication functions through automation by communication technologies.
Indeed, different types of cable television provide users with local bulletin of newspapers, rock music as on the radio, films, information on stock and commodity markets.
Television can also be used for video games and as a book screen for instructional purposes.
In a similar way, telephone not only sends and receives calls, it can become a radio, receiving signals from several stations just with the use of a cable device.
When one connects a television set to a video player, with a video disc or video, it can also be used to view a family’s social occasion recorded through a mobile phone downloaded into a video disc or video cassette.
With the use of certain communication devices, the computer, television and phone can become a newspaper, magazine, computer game, catalogue, index, stock market watch and sundry other things regarding dissemination of data and messages.
Even as basic as it might seem, a computer can be used as a typewriter with a keyboard, and with its 84JLS 745 ISSUES IN COMMUNICATION TECHNOLOGY AND POLICY paper, one can type a letter and print it out when the computer is connected with a printer.
The traditional distinctions of these communication technologies have become blurred.
Their functions and uses are being merged and alternated.
The consumer is benefiting greatly as he is opened to increased uses and functions of the communication devices.
The narrow view of modern communication as simply mass communication is changing involving more interpersonal or do-it-yourself media linked with radio, television and newspaper.
The future holds a great deal of hope in the merging of functions of communication technologies.
The beneficiaries will be the fields of communication and the consumers and users of information and data.
v. Increasing Cost of New Communication Technologies The costs of acquiring new communication technologies are high.
These costs are even excessively high in the developing countries like Nigeria.
Besides the high costs of new computers, for example, in the United States or France, due essentially to their technology, the transport of the computer and the role of middlemen and marketer make them less affordable to users in the developing countries.
A random market survey in Nigeria shows a laptop going for between N120,000 and N200,000 depending on the package, programmes, location and other indices which affect its price.
Added to this is the cost of acquiring a telephone with can go with computer in the home, or a cable television antenna which ranges between N100,000 and N150,000 besides the monthly subscription which range between N10,000 and N5,000.
There is no doubt that the cost outlay of these vital communication devices is exorbitant, especially in a developing country with a depressed economy.
This, however, does not remove the fact that the unit cost of other communication technologies such as video games, calculators, video disc, and video cassettes are within the reach of the people even in the developing countries.
Also, the cost of attending a film house, purchase a radio or television set can easily be shouldered by the consumers in the these countries.
But the cost of satellite antennas, large screen television and a new home theatre remains astronomical at both the individual and corporate levels.
85JLS 745 ISSUES IN COMMUNICATION TECHNOLOGY AND POLICY Nigeria’s acquisition of satellite communication recently –NICOMSAT- remains a costly venture which the Federal Government said can only be profitable if other African countries subscribe to the satellite.
Unfortunately many of these African countries are still linked to the apron string of their past colonial masters.
Thus, it is doubtful if they will subscribe to NICOMSAT rather than the ones of their erstwhile colonial masters.
In clear terms, the high costs of some of these communication technologies have created the “haves” and “have-nots” in our society and in the regions of the world.
It is only those who have financial resources who can acquire some of these obviously costly communication technologies.
The reverse side of the coin is also true as those who lack the financial wherewithal are denied access to certain information just because they can not afford the relevant communication tools.
The new communication technologies are neither available to the majority within a country, nor to all nations, especially countries which lack the technical know-how of how to make the communication tools.
Communication technologies are indeed, controlled by a few countries and by few traditional companies.
vi.
A Boost and Threat to Culture The United Nations Educational, Scientific and Cultural Organisation (UNESCO) has identified that in the last two centuries, there has been a movement towards mass culture in the world.
UNESCO attributed this to the impact of new communication technologies and industrial revolution.
The two phenomena brought about mass production and distribution of messages and data in the world.
And since majority of the global populations are exposed to fairly similar information, messages and data, they tend to react the same way, behave the same way.
New communication technologies also bring another danger of cultural domination as they impose imported cultures, lifestyles and foreign models on populations and nations with distinct cultures.
The new communication technologies are culture carriers, including the language, management and maintenance styles, training systems of their originating countries.
They serve as sources of cultural imperialism of the economically advanced and developed nations when they impose these cultures on the developing countries who are mainly consumers of these technologies.
86JLS 745 ISSUES IN COMMUNICATION TECHNOLOGY AND POLICY For example, a video cassette, cable or computer made in Britain, the United States or Germany, is based on the technological and scientific traditions in those countries.
A Nigerian computer engineer using the communication tools is exposed to the cultures of those countries.
Seen on a large scale, the engineers and users of the communication devices are indoctrinated into the Western culture with their mastery and continual exposure to the new technologies.
Thus, the foreign culture becomes stronger and dominates the weak cultures of the developing countries.
This way, African culture may become extinct without any conscious policy to protect and promote them by governments and the people.
The process of cultural assimilation and dominance is hastened as the global communication industry is controlled by a few multi- nationals from the developed countries.
They ensure that the secret of both the software and hardware of these communication technologies are protected and kept away from the knowledge of African engineers and people.
A clear example of cultural dominance in Nigeria is youths’ growing preference for hip hop, rap and soul music, which are western, rather than African traditional music, such as Juju and Apala, or modernization of these types of music.
However, the argument on the impact of communication technologies on global populations, especially the developing nations, is diametrical.
The UNESCO believes that protection of obsolete and superstitious parts of the traditional cultures may not be good in itself.
Some superstitious parts of the African cultures need to be jettisoned.
Also, stagnation of cultures is bad as a culture does not develop by retreating into its shell.
The new communication technologies, such as video disc, video cassettes, video cassettes, video cassette recorders, satellite transmission, video text and teletex, can be used to preserve minority cultures, cultural pluralism and growth.
Through them, minority cultures can connect with human progress.
The world will benefit more in a free exchange of the best of all cultures of the world.
vii.
Communication Technologies and Improvement of Quality of Life There is little doubt that new communication technologies have been very beneficial to mankind.
We have identified increased information and data, multiple functions and uses of the new communication 87JLS 745 ISSUES IN COMMUNICATION TECHNOLOGY AND POLICY technologies, redefined concepts of home, office and work, and strengthening of links with transportation as their intrinsic benefits.
But there is yet need to quantify the impact on overall development and quality of life.
Scholars believe that the new communication technologies are what they are, extensions of our communication capabilities.
Unfortunately, they have created some fears, including cultural domination, infusion of mass culture, a rat race for more inventions, etc.
This brings us to the fact that communication technologies are only means to an end.
They depend on the uses we put them in order to improve the overall quality of life of an on this planet.
4.0 CONCLUSION The new communication devices have both positive and negative implications on man.
They are all controlled by a minority within a nation and among nations through a few transnational companies.
It is necessary for each country to make policies to protect its citizen because of the rapid of changes in the inventions of communication technologies, infusion of a mass culture and cultural dominance.
These policies should also avoid cultural stagnation, and ensure growth and pluralism which can only be got in a free exchange of cultures of the world.
5.0 SUMMARY This unit has focused on possibilities and implications of new communication technologies on human lives.
We have identified these as: increased availability of information and data, merging of the concepts of office and home and a redefinition of the concept of work, the relationship between new communication technologies and transportation, less distinction in functions and uses of the communication technologies, the economies of the new of the new communication technologies, the diametrical views of their boost and threat to culture and whether new communication technologies have improved the qualify of human lives.
These items can be classified as functional and dysfunctional; some of them are beneficial, while some have negative implications on human lives and existence.
All in all, the point is made that the impact of the 88JLS 745 ISSUES IN COMMUNICATION TECHNOLOGY AND POLICY new communication technologies on man depends on the uses to which the contents and means of communication are put.
6.0 TUTOR-MARKED ASSIGNMENT Defend the view that the new communication technologies are both functional and dysfunctional.
Their impact on human existence depends on the use to which they are put.
7.0 REFERENCES/FURTHER READINGS Colin Chery (1971).
World Communication Threat or Promise?
A Socio-Technical Approach.New York: Willey Pp.29-56 Many Voices, One World – A UNESCO Report on Global Communication Problems.
Pp.
30-31, 156-162.
The New Encyclopedia Britannica Vol.
3, 15th Ed.
(Chicago) Encyclopedia Britannia Inc. (1987).
MODULE 4 IMBALANCES AND BARRIERS IN MODERN COMMUNICATION Unit 1 Disparities and Barriers within Countries: A Case Study of Nigeria Unit 2 Regional Communication Imbalances Unit 3 Divergence between Developed and Developing Countries UNIT 1 DISPARITIES AND BARRIERS WITHIN COUNTRIES: A CASE STUDY OF NIGERIA CONTENTS 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objectives 3.0 Main Content 3.1 Disparities and Barriers within Countries: A case study of Nigeria 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutor-Marked Assignment 7.0 References/Further Readings 1.0 INTRODUCTION From a cursory observation, there is hardly any doubt that communication channels and media are growing in many countries, 89JLS 745 ISSUES IN COMMUNICATION TECHNOLOGY AND POLICY even in the developing region.
Even the volume of messages data and information has increased exceedingly in many countries.
But the rate of this increase in volume of contents and channels of communicate is disproportionate to the growth in populations of the developing countries especially.
The channels of communication and contents of messages, information and data are available to different segments of both the developed and developing countries disproportionately.
This is even worse in the developing countries where there is denial to information, free expression and means of information is characterized by rural-urban dichotomy, disparities based on class, income, sex, minorities, etc.
In this unit, we shall take the Nigerian situation as a case study to assessing these disparities regarding communication.
We shall see how some provisions of the Nigerian Constitution guarantee and promote freedom of expression and of the Press.
2.0 OBJECTIVES At the end of the unit, you should be able to: • discuss how the Nigerian Constitution guarantees and promotes the freedom of expression and of the Pres • explain the disparities in communication on the basis of characteristics of rural-urban dichotomy, class, income, sex, minorities, etc.
3.0 MAIN CONTENT 3.1 Disparities within Countries: A Case Study of Nigeria We have said earlier in this course that the right to communicate is a divine and inalienable right of the individual.
However, this right is at the level of policy and, thus, is guaranteed by the peculiar provisions of the constitution of the individual countries of the world.
In Nigeria, Section 39 of the 1999 Constitution of the Federal Republic guarantees what we call freedom of expression.
The main section that does is sub-sec one (Section 39, sub-sec.
one).
It reads: “Every person shall be entitled to freedom of expression, including freedom to hold opinions and to receive and impart ideas and information without interference.” 90JLS 745 ISSUES IN COMMUNICATION TECHNOLOGY AND POLICY This is a fundamental right of the individual citizen.
It is also seen as part of Chapter 4 of the Constitution, the Fundamental Principles which guarantee liberties of the people.
Weighed against the demand of freedom of the press, which is all-encompassing and strengthens the right of the individual to communicate, the Nigerian constitutional provisions fall short as there are provisions for derogation.
Clearly, since independence, the Constitution has guaranteed freedom of expression as different from freedom of the press.
To buttress this point, we recall that subsequent to the fears of the minorities, the Nigerian Minority Commission of 1958 supported the entrenchment of protection of minorities.
The commission said: “Government determines to abandon democratic causes, would find ways of avoiding them.
But they are of great value in preventing a steady deteriorating in the standard of freedom and the unobtrusive in protecting the rights of the individual.” Today, evidence abounds that the individual rights have been thoroughly trampled upon by growing repression of the minorities in Nigeria.
The case of the Niger Delta remains an open sore which has become very difficult to heal by lack of will of subsequent governments in Nigeria and corruption in high places.
Article 19 of the United Nations Declaration of Human and Peoples’ Rights says that everyone has the right to freedom of opinion and expression; the right includes the right to hold opinion and to seek any information through any means without interference.
Indeed, the Declaration was to inform all the laws of nations as regards freedom of the individual after the UN took over from the League of Nations.
It has been argued that Nigeria’s laws fall short of freedom of the press based on the UN Declaration.
This has been evident by many official repressions of the press and the people in Nigeria since the colonial period.
In 1917, Lord Lugard was said to have passed a law which gave him authority as the Governor-General to seize or impose a fine on any newspapers which carried publications considered inimical to the government.
And at the time too, government disclosed that the Zik’s chain of newspapers were like plagues.
Thus, the colonial government declined the renewal of Zik to publish the newspapers.
In the same period, Anthony Enahoro was sent to a term of imprisonment for publishing a newspaper considered dangerous by the colonial governments.
91JLS 745 ISSUES IN COMMUNICATION TECHNOLOGY AND POLICY This character of repression was inherited after independence by the Nigerian ruling elite and this has continued largely with some degrees of variations, especially during military regimes and democratic rule.
Official hard-handedness has been seen in imprisonment of journalists, such as Nduka Irabor and Tunde Thompson of The Guardian under Decree 2 by the Babangida military regime; killing of Newswatch Editor-in-Chief, Mr. Dele Giwa, by a parcel bomb, closure of newspapers and private broadcast stations, etc.
The fight by journalists and other stakeholders in the communication fields is to see how the constitutional provisions can be improved to guarantee freedom of the press, and therefore the inalienable fight of individual citizens to communicate.
In talking of press freedom, there are certain requirements: • The Right to Publish This concerns whether there is an absence of restraints to communicate or you have to satisfy certain conditions before you can publish.
In Nigeria, Section 39, sub-sec One guarantees this right adequately.
It says everyone has the right to receive and impart information.
This is the right to communicate.
This is also interpreted to mean an individual has right to establish any medium, for example, a school as a medium of instruction.
But the fundamental right to publish is not absolute as the same Sec.
39 allows for derogation or curtailment of the right to publish.
Such curtailments include Sec.
39, sub-sec.
2, which says no individual may establish a broadcast media except with the authority of the president.
It is, however, gratifying that since granting of license to African Independent Television (AIT), operated by Daar Communications as the first private broadcast television medium in Nigeria, many others have received licenses, including Channels, MITV, MBI, DBN, Galaxy, G65, Super Screen, all based in Lagos, and some others based in some state capitals and private radio stations.
For cinematography, each state has its own laws, apart from the Federal Government.
The laws generally provide that a film must be approved by a board of film censor before it can be exhibited.
Many people have criticized the composition of this board or the criteria for this approval.
92JLS 745 ISSUES IN COMMUNICATION TECHNOLOGY AND POLICY There is, therefore, a call for the review of the regulations to take care of the growing craze of the youths for pornography which runs counter to our cultural and moral values.
Also book publication, which is part of right of expression, is guaranteed by Section 39 to the extent that sub-section 3 and Section 41 allow for derogation or curtailment.
• Right Not to Disclose Source of Information Legal opinions were initially divided whether Sec.
39 guarantees the journalists the right not to disclose source of information.
The case of Tony Momoh vs. the Senate of the National Assembly is usually cited here.
The case was Tony Momoh as then Editor of Daily Times published an article which imputed that Senators (in the Second Republic) were going around for contracts.
The Senate summoned him to appear and defend his allegation.
Tony Momoh went to court.
The lower court ruled in his favour, but on appeal he lost.
At the Court of Appeal, Justice Kassim, one of the judges, was quoted to have said that journalists cannot claim the right not to disclose the source of information.
Also, both Justices Nnemeka and Agwu, who were said to have expressed sympathy with journalists in the performance of their duty, said Sec.
39 does not guarantee journalists’ right not to disclose source of information.
However, another judge, Justice Balogun J. in a case between one Adikwu v. Federal House of Assembly, interpreted Sec.
39 as the right of journalists not to disclose their sources of information.
He was quoted as saying that “newspapers are the agents of the public to know, to inform the public” and so, cannot be asked to disclose their source of information either by trial, etc.
He said if a newspaper was asked to disclose its source of information, it would tantamount to probing, which would be against free press.
The Nigerian Press Organisation’s Code of Conduct Clause 6 provides that “Once information has been collected and published, a journalist shall observe the universally accepted principle of secrecy, and shall not disclose his source of information obtained in confidence.” The import of the contradictions in the Nigerian constitution and the position of the Journalists’ Code of Conduct has been the problem that confronts many democratic societies in the world today.
• A Right to Information or Right to know or Access Information 93JLS 745 ISSUES IN COMMUNICATION TECHNOLOGY AND POLICY The right and obligations of the mass media are provided for in Sec.
21 of 1979 Constitution and Sec.
22 of 1989 Constitution, and also relevant Section of the 1999 Constitution.
In general, the obligations say “The press, radio and other agencies of mass media shall have the right to know…” But legal opinions said this is not justiciable in the Nigerian courts.
That is, no one can go to court to challenge that he is not given information.
Indeed, no one has gone to court to challenge this provision, it may be difficult to say whether journalists can claim the right that someone must give him information or access to information.
This does not remove the fact that this is part of the essential ingredients of freedom of the press – the right to know.
In the United States, however, the first amendment to the over 200-year-old constitution guarantees five freedoms.
It says: “Congress shall make no law respecting an establishment of religion, or prohibiting the exercise thereof; or abridging the freedom of speech, or of the press, or the right of the people, peaceably to assemble, and to petition the government for redress of grievances.” Here, freedom of expression is clearly separated from the freedom of the press.
In practical terms, legal opinions said there is no curtailment in the first part of the freedoms in the U.S. Constitution.
In the case of freedom of the press, it is said that American Constitution allows for curtailment in very rare cases as proved by the rejection of the call for curtailment in the Watergate Scandal.
Justice Black was quoted to have held that derogation would have been a flagrant violation of the intentions of the founding fathers of the constitution regarding the need for a free press.
However, there appears to be a move to redress some of these legal barriers to right of the people to communicate in Nigeria as the National Assembly is favourably disposed to passing the Freedom of Information Bill which has been conceived since 1999.
• Official Secrets Act 1962 This is one of the laws in Nigeria which lovers of democracy believe are barriers to the right of the citizen to communicate freely.
Both states and the Federal Government provide for these laws.
There are four main offences created by this Act.
They relate to: protection of official information which is dealt with in Section One of the Act.
It provides that “any person who: transmits any official or classified matters to a person who is not authorized to transmit it, or, obtains or reproduces, or retains any classified matter which is not on behalf of the government to obtain or retain is guilty of an offence.
94JLS 745 ISSUES IN COMMUNICATION TECHNOLOGY AND POLICY This offence is concerned with both the giver and the receiver.
Also, classified matter is any information or anything which under any system of security classification from time to time in use by government or any branch of the government is not to be disclosed to the public, and of which the disclosure to the public would be prejudicial to the security of Nigeria.
Besides the provision of the Act said to be archaic, it is only government who knows what is classified matter.
Based on this, it is a barrier to the press regarding access to information.
Punishment for this offence on conviction is not more than 14 years.
It is, however, a defence to prove that when the accused person transmitted, reproduced or give transmitted matter, he did not know or could not reasonably have been expected to believe that it was a classified matter; and when he knew or could reasonably have been expected to believe that the matter was a classified matter that he forthwith placed his knowledge of the case at the disposal of the Nigeria Police Force.
Thus, simply put, the defence says that the offender did not know that it was a classified matter.
b.
Protection of Defence Establishment Any one who for any purpose prejudicial to the security of Nigeria: • enters or he is in the vicinity of or inspects a protected place; or • photographs, sketches or in any other manners whatsoever makes a record of the description of, or anything situated in a protected place; or • obstructs, misleads or otherwise interferes with a person engaged in guarding a protected place; or • obtains, reproduces or retains any photograph, sketch, plan, model or document relating to, or to anything situated in a protected place, is guilty of an offence.
The Act Defines Protected Place as • any Naval, Military or Air Force establishments in Nigeria, any other place in Nigeria used for or in connection with the production; storage or testing, by or on behalf of the government, of equipment designed or adapted for use for defence purposes and any other building, structure or work in Nigeria used by the government for defence purpose; and 95JLS 745 ISSUES IN COMMUNICATION TECHNOLOGY AND POLICY • any area in Nigeria or elsewhere for the time being designated by an order made by the minister as being an area from which the public should be excluded in the interest of the security of Nigeria (Minister is one of those responsible for security and public safety).
Offence – a person charged with the offence is deemed unless the contrary is proved to have acted for a purpose prejudicial to the security of Nigeria, if from his character or general conduct and from all the circumstances of the case it appeared he acted for such a purpose.
• Offences of Sedition Offences of sedition refer directly to unlawful publication.
These aspects of Nigerian laws have been condemned by legal opinions as they hinder the right of the individual to communicate.
It has been argued that offences of sedition are not justiciable in a democratic society.
In the case of DPP v. Chike Obi, Chike Obi was said to have published an article entitled – “The People: Facts That You Must Know,” in which he stated that “Down with the oppressors of the people.
The days of the oppressors were numbered…” Chike Obi was convicted by the Supreme Court which sat as Court of Appeal as Nigeria was still under the Privy Council as the highest court then.
Justice Ademola was said to have convicted Chike Obi, ruling that the need for establishing “intention” on the part of the accused was unnecessary.
However, for Arthur Nwankwo against Jim Nwobodo, it was different.
Nwankwo published an article which Nwobodo said was against his government in the Second Republic.
The trial was rushed in the state and Nwankwo was convicted before his lawyer could come from Onitsha.
But the Court of Appeal upturned the judgment and ruled in favour of Nwankwo.
Even though, provisions for offences of sedition in the Nigerian laws are contentious, they have been left in the books.
The laws in the Nigerian Constitution which are barriers to unfettered communication are inexhaustive here.
Some others include the recently exited Public Order Act which ordinarily granted the Nigerian Police the powers to issue permits for assembly, meetings and rallies before they can be held.
The court ruled against it that it was antithetical to the civil and democratic societies.
In general, many provisions of the Nigerian laws which are still begging to be expunged are made to serve the elite and the ruling class.
They are barriers to the press, to the underprivileged groups, the rural areas, 96JLS 745 ISSUES IN COMMUNICATION TECHNOLOGY AND POLICY women and the poor who are largely unheard or could not speak up or express themselves.
A look at the distribution of the mass media in Nigeria further demonstrates that they are available to different segments of the society differently.
From a general observation, almost all the national newspapers and magazines are located in Lagos, the country’s commercial nerve-centre.
These include: The Punch, The Guardian, Champion, Daily Independent, Business Day, Vanguard, Daily Sun, The Nation, etc.
A few others are located in Abuja.
Even the ones that appear to ponder to minority interests such as The Westerner and Niger Delta Standard are located in Lagos.
The same situation is with magazines with Tell, Newswatch, Source, Insider and others operating from Lagos.
Indeed, it is said that nearly 70 per cent of the production of these newspapers and magazines are sold within Lagos.
For the more sophisticated media of radio and television, while their number has increased astronomically, they are largely based in state capitals, Lagos and Abuja.
Their reception usually excludes the rural populations.
Even in some rural areas, where reception can be got, supply of electricity is either non-existent today or has broken down completely because of its depressed output nationwide.
It is unfortunate that radio, which communication scholars said is perhaps the only mass medium in the true sense of the word, is affected by weak economics of the rural poor in Nigeria.
As in many other developing countries, Nigeria is multi-lingua.
There are about 250 languages in Nigeria, with many of them unwritten, less patronized and, therefore, dying off.
For example, until recently, only the languages of the three majority tribes – Yoruba, Igbo and Hausa – were used to sign-off on the national television, the Nigerian Television Authority.
Also, the three major languages are officially studied in secondary schools besides the English Language.
In few cases, where community newspapers exist, the three major languages are used as they are perhaps, the only ones that are commercially viable.
They are the ones mostly used as media of instructional materials and books.
In particular, the new media, including computer, video disc and video recorder, internet, etc, can be said to be non-existent in the rural areas in Nigeria.
They have remained largely status symbols even in urban areas.
However, there are some rays of hope.
Government’s policies in the area of global system of mobile phone are yielding impressive results.
As more and more companies are licensed to operate GSM, mobile phones usage is not only spreading in urban centres, but also among the rural populations.
Many state governments have also created television viewing centres in many rural communities, especially in the northern parts of the country.
This will not only make the rural populations to 97JLS 745 ISSUES IN COMMUNICATION TECHNOLOGY AND POLICY know about government activities, but also other social and economic information that directly affect their existence.
There are also moves to boost adult literacy with the setting up of adult education centres in some states.
The situation in Nigeria is not peculiar.
It reflects the general conditions in many developing countries, with Nigeria even better than many of them.
And it is noteworthy that disparities in communication are not limited to the developing countries alone.
According to UNESCO report, in Brazil, of the 991 newspapers in the country, only 440 are published in only two out of 22 states – Rio Janeiro and Sao Paulo.
The two states also have 512 of the 700 periodicals published in the country.
Of the 944 radio stations in Brazil, 750 are in South and South-East regions of the country.
Also 83.2 per cent of the television sets in the country are found in these two regions.
This imbalance reflects even within the developed nations.
Again the UNESCO report states that there are five European countries that only have 10 or less telephones per 100 people.
The imbalance is also demonstrated in Australia where 180 aboriginal communities are not served by telephone service and 105 lack radio service.
In the United States, some 13 per cent of the population or less than three per cent of the cities have more than one daily newspaper.
4.0 CONCLUSION The disparities and barriers to communication within national boundaries are pervasive.
They relate to attitudes, policies and constitution.
Thus, changes will only come in this regard if individual government of countries consciously formulate policies and take steps to redress the identified disparities and imbalances in communication and availability of channels of communication.
5.0 SUMMARY This unit has situated the disparities and imbalances in communication in developing countries with a case study of the Nigerian situation.
We have identified aspects of the Nigerian Constitution which are barriers to individual’s right to communicate and the limitations of the constitutional provisions regarding freedom of expression and freedom of the press.
We have also shown disparities in relation to rural-urban dichotomy, class, income, sex, and language.
We identified that there are disparities too within middle-level and developed nations.
6.0 TUTOR-MARKED ASSIGNMENT 98JLS 745 ISSUES IN COMMUNICATION TECHNOLOGY AND POLICY Show the shape of disparities and imbalances in communication in Nigeria, indicating that the situation is not peculiar to Nigeria.
7.0 REFERENCES/FURTHER READINGS Elias, Teslim O.
(1969).
Nigerian Press Law.
Lagos: University of Lagos and London: Evans Brothers Limited.
McQuail Denis (2005).
Mass Communication Theory.
London: Sage Publications Ltd.
Many Voices, One World – A UNESCO Report on Global Communication Problems.
UNIT 2 REGIONAL COMMUNICATION IMBALANCES CONTENTS 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objectives 3.0 Main Content 3.1 Communication Inequalities by Regional Distribution 3.2 Communication Inequalities Based on Old East-West Ideological Divide 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutor-Marked Assignment 7.0 References/Further Readings 1.0 INTRODUCTION Regional inequalities in communication are directly related to varying statistics in the flow of communication and channels of information disseminations in the different regions of the world.
It also concerns inequalities in the production and distribution of information and messages within given regions which have remained painfully disproportionate.
This unit will assess the levels of these regional inequalities in communication in all ramifications.
99JLS 745 ISSUES IN COMMUNICATION TECHNOLOGY AND POLICY 2.0 OBJECTIVES At the end of this unit, you should be able to: • explain inequalities in global communication based on regions or continents of the world • discuss the imbalances which result from the old East-West Divide in relation to global peace and development.
3.0 MAIN CONTENT 3.1 Communication Inequalities by Regional Distribution For the purpose of our discourse, it is proper and convenient to divide communication into two broad areas: production of information, messages, opinion and entertainment, and distribution of these items.
Although these divisions are not watertight as they more often than not overlap, it is painful that many countries of the world exist within the distribution of communication only.
Very few others produce the infrastructure of communication and also dominate the distribution of communication.
Thus, these few countries make the larger number of countries dependent on them for finance and development of their communication, news and entertainment.
This pattern of relations has characterized varied regional inequalities in the distribution and production of communication in the world today.
Figures provided by the UNESCO with regard to these regional inequalities of the distribution and production of communication are informative.
The figures show great contrasts in population distribution in the regions of the world.
A continent by continent record of circulation of dailies per 1000 inhabitants put African, excluding the Arab countries, at 13, against Europe’s 243; Northern American’s 281; Oceania (305); Russia (396); Latin America (70); Asia (excluding the Arab countries) 65; and the Arab States (20).
Put together, Africa, Asia and Latin America have three quarters of global population, but harbour only half of the number of the world’s newspapers and only a quarter of their total circulation.
Whereas, daily circulation in North America is one copy of a newspaper to three persons, a copy is for 99 people in Africa, and one for 15 people in Asia.
In India, 16 copies of the 835 newspapers largely based in urban centres, are for 1000 people.
In particular, eight African countries and three Arab states had no newspaper at all, while 13 other African countries had only one newspaper each.
100JLS 745 ISSUES IN COMMUNICATION TECHNOLOGY AND POLICY Of the consumption of printing and writing paper per 1000 inhabitants yearly, Africa (excluding the Arab countries) had 900, against 66,900 for Northern America; Europe (23,200); Oceania (11,000); Russia (4,900); Latin America (4,300); Asia (excluding the Arab countries) 2,600; and 1,500 for Arab States.
As for the cinema, the seating capacity per 1000 inhabitants for Africa was 4.0; compared to Northern America’s 52.0; Europe (39.0); Oceania (30.0); Russia (98.0); Latin America (22.0); Asia (excluding the Arab States) 8.6; and 7.4 for Arab States.
Based on these figures, it is apparent that there are wide inequalities in the different regions of the world in the distribution and production of books and newspapers.
Also, it is clear that growth in production of books and newspapers have not kept pace with regional expansion in literary levels.
On percentage basis, UNESCO puts the regional distribution of sound broadcasting transmitters as at 1974 with North America having the highest with 39 per cent; Europe 36 per cent; South America 11 per cent, Asia 10 per cent; and Africa and Oceania with three and one per cent respectively.
For the regional distribution of radio receivers as at 1976, North America had the highest with 46 per cent; followed by Europe’s 30 per cent; Asia 12 per cent; South America 12 per cent; Africa and Oceania had he lowest with three and one per cent respectively.
Also, regional distribution of television of broadcast transmitters as at 1974 put Europe with 53 per cent as the highest, followed by Asia with 25 per cent; North America 18 per cent; and the lowest two per cent each for Africa and Oceania.
In the same vein, regional distribution of television receivers was Europe 45 per cent, followed by 37 per cent for North America; Asia 10 per cent; South America five per cent; two per cent for Oceania and one per cent for Africa.
UNESCO, however, identifies another form of region inequalities.
These concern inequalities within the regions themselves.
On a country by country basis, Argentina in relation to Latin American and Japan in relation to Asia aptly demonstrate this form of regional inequalities in communication.
101JLS 745 ISSUES IN COMMUNICATION TECHNOLOGY AND POLICY Japan, which has only five per cent of Asia’s population, has 66 per cent of the newspaper circulation.
It also has 46 per cent of the radio receivers, 63 per cent of the television sets and 89 per cent of the telephones.
However, all in all, while the rate of increases in the developed countries are said to be relatively stable, those of the developing countries have been astounding in the last two decades, according to the UNESCO.
For example, the number of radio receivers in Africa is said to have increased more than seven folds and that of television more than 20 times.
The respective figures for Asia are also said to be more than five times higher than 16 years ago.
In Latin America, radio receivers increased more than four times and 10 times for television sets.
In all, the ratio shows one radio receiver for every 18 Africans; and radio receiver for every 18 Asians; saturation was recorded in developed countries with more than one radio receiver for every person.
For television receivers, regional data shows that Africa had one receiver for every 500 people; one for every 40 Arabs and Asians; one for every 12 Latin Americans; one for every four Europeans and for every two Americans, one television receiver.
The essence of the above analysis is to draw an inference for the purpose of this discourse.
It remains an undisputable fact that the mass media, especially television and newspapers have remained elitist, urban based and for a tiny minority in many developing countries.
In Nigeria, for example, the television and radio stations are based in towns, largely in Lagos, Abuja and the state capitals.
The same is true of newspapers which are only established in Lagos, the nation’s commercial nerve centre, with marketing surveys confirming that 70 per cent of newspaper distribution is in Lagos.
For many developing countries, the programme contents of television and radio weigh largely in favour of the elite and expatriates, available only to a very limited extent to some rural populations.
UNESCO has insisted that 10 per cent of the households in some 40 developing countries receive television signals, while less than half of the households in more than half of the developing nations have television receivers.
It is reasoned that the average cost of the television set is beyond many households.
This is in contrast with the radio receivers which are more popular, less costly and more available.
This feature is also reflected in the area of television programming.
Many hours of programming on television in the developing countries are devoted to foreign programmes as can be observed.
This is because 102JLS 745 ISSUES IN COMMUNICATION TECHNOLOGY AND POLICY expenditure on television progrmames is costlier than radio and that stations’ revenues are tiny, poor and most of the times, overstretched.
They, therefore, fill many hours of programming with foreign films and documentaries which were primarily produced for audiences of the developed countries.
UNESCO has inferred that it is in the area of television programming that anxieties over cultural dominance by the developed countries and threat to cultures of the developing countries are highest.
3.2 Communication Inequalities Based on Old East-West Divide Confrontations are generated among the developed countries.
It could be between the small and big nations or between two small nations fuelled and supported by the bigger ones.
However, a discerning character of these confrontations among the developed nations was attributable largely to different ideologies of communism and capitalism.
The collapse of the communism towards the end of the last century with the dismantle of the Berlin Wall, the reunification of West and East Germany, the fall of the Soviet regime in Russia, and the dispersal of the Eastern Warsaw Pact nations reordered relations in Europe and among the many developed nations.
But the situation has not entirely prevented recurring disputes between the United States and Russia, which hitherto led the dispersed Warsaw countries.
According to former American President Richard Nixon in his book, Beyond Peace, “Those who suggest that its massive problems disqualify Russia from being treated as a great power ignores an unpleasant but undeniable fact.
Russia is the only nation in the world with the capability of destroying the United States.
For that reason alone, it remains our highest foreign policy priority.” Indeed, there have been a series of antagonism recently in the United States-Russia relations in the Gulf Region, especially in Iraq and Iran and also in Afghanistan.
These crises, both on the bilateral and multilateral fronts between the two countries have been handled on the overall need for peace, security and mutual understanding.
Communication has been identified as, perhaps, the greatest instrument in the exchanges between the United States and Russia, and among the developed nations.
In this regard, communications is in two ways: one concerns the contents of messages, news, ideas, images and data; the other relates to exchanges and cooperatives between media institutions, 103JLS 745 ISSUES IN COMMUNICATION TECHNOLOGY AND POLICY professional associations and cultural industries in the developed countries.
On both levels of communications, UNESCO identifies imbalance in relations between developed nations in the old East-West blocs in some variations.
The imbalance is seen in inadequate reporting caused by restrictions in news coverage, access to information as well as restrictions on facilities for news gathering, movement of professionals and distorted contents of news.
Before the collapse of the Soviet Union, UNESCO observed that the dissolved Eastern bloc disseminated more news to the West bloc.
A similar imbalance in favour of Eastern bloc was also seen in exchanges in films and television programmes.
But all that has changed with the onslaught of communications revolution.
Richard Nixon insists that communications revolution, which thrives as the new media, has helped to win the Cold War, breaking down the ideological wall between East and West.
One can not but agree with Nixon if one considers the impact of the activities of supra national television stations like Cable Network News (CNN), Sky News, BBC, among other which operate in western countries.
This concerns specifically the playing up of the internal contradictions and problems in these hitherto communist enclaves by these media which eventually contributed to the dismantling of the Soviet Union.
However, Nixon also says the East-West relations must be moved beyond peace, through communication toward greater openness which will lessen the chances of war and ultimately enrich more mutual understanding among the developed nations to the benefit of the whole world.
It is believed that a crucial problem is imbalance in communication among nations.
A co-relation is therefore established in which if the imbalance recedes, mutual understanding and international communication will improve and the result will be enhanced peace and security in Europe and the rest of the world.
In particular, the imbalance in exchange of information can be redressed through: • Accurate reporting of news about countries • Coverage of agreements on multilateral and bilateral levels • Improved quality and quantity of news to provide more knowledge for the people.
104JLS 745 ISSUES IN COMMUNICATION TECHNOLOGY AND POLICY • Promotion of more tolerance and mutual understanding through communication • Wider awareness through access to more information in different countries.
• Increased contracts between media and journalists’ associations of different countries • More cultural exchanges among countries • Exchange of newspapers, periodicals, books and other publications among countries.
The above-mentioned points are said to be the focus of the Final Act of the conference on security and cooperation in Europe, which was signed in 1975 in Helsinki.
The Final Act gives force to: • the improvement of the dissemination on their territory, of newspapers and printed publications from participating states; • improvement of access to the imported publications by the public; • increase in the number of places where the publications are displayed or sold; • increased cooperation among mass media as well as press agencies; • exchange of both live and recorded radio and television programmes; and • increased contacts and meetings between journalists and their association among the countries.
4.0 CONCLUSION There is little doubt that world peace and security can only be guaranteed with increase in mutual understanding between nations, regions, developing and developed countries and among the developed countries.
This can be achieved through improved and balanced communication flow between and among these countries.
5.0 SUMMARY This unit has discussed the communication inequalities between continents of the world.
It has also dealt with inequalities within regions based on the disparities flow of information and dominance in media facilities and know-how in different countries.
Efforts have been made to support the argument with relevant statistics.
Some suggestions on how to redress the imbalances have been given.
6.0 TUTOR-MARKED ASSIGNMENT 105JLS 745 ISSUES IN COMMUNICATION TECHNOLOGY AND POLICY 1.
Explain regional inequalities in global communication.
Support your answer with relevant data.
2.
How does the spirit of Helsinki Act promote improved communication, peace, security and mutual understanding in Europe and outside it?
7.0 REFERENCES/FURTHER READINGS Nixon Richard (1994).
Richard Nixon.
Beyond Peace.
New York: Random House, Inc. Pp.3 – 25, 40 – 103.
Many Voices, One World (1981).
–UNESCO Report on Global Communication.
UNIT 3 DIVERGENCE BETWEEN DEVELOPED AND DEVELOPING COUNTRIES CONTENTS 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objectives 3.0 Main Content 3.1 Divergence between Developed and Developing Countries 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutor-Marked Assignment 7.0 References/Further Readings 1.0 INTRODUCTION The growth of communication in the world is astounding.
But it is a development that has been and characterized by dominance inequalities as we have seen in the earlier units.
Perhaps, the worst stage of that dominance is demonstrated by relations between the developed and developing countries as it will be seen in this unit.
2.0 OBJECTIVES At the end of the unit, you should be able to: 106JLS 745 ISSUES IN COMMUNICATION TECHNOLOGY AND POLICY • discuss the factors that are responsible for the communication dominance by the developed countries over the developing • show the level of this dominance using figures and data from the UNESCO in the relations between the developed and developing countries.
3.0 MAIN CONTENT 3.1 Divergence of Communication between Developed and Developing Countries Global advances in communication have been marked by inequalities between ethnic groups, rich and poor classes and regions.
No where has the imbalance been more pronounced than between rich and poor nations which are grouped as developed and developing nations respectively.
A comparison of the data between the developed and developing nations in terms of communication technologies, contents of information and other communication activities has been worrisome.
This picture continues to demonstrate a relationship defined by inequalities caused mainly by many factors, including concentration of communication resources and technologies, incidence of finance capital and transnational companies.
The relationship also shows that the level of economic dominance is reflected in the communication inequalities between the developed and developing nations.
Thus, it is safe to say that the organization of communication on an industrial scale is reflective of these inequalities between developed and developing nations.
In other words, the economic level of the two groups of countries and the commercialization and industrialization of communication have combined to make these imbalances in communication somewhat permanent and increasing.
In greater or lesser details, the components of communication in different countries are identified as: newspapers, radio and public relations firms and advertising agencies, syndicates and independent companies producing materials for print and broadcast companies, public and private information organizations, software producers, offices handling data banks on social, economic and political issues, makers of communication technology equipment and tools, etc.
Regarding these identified components of communication, the developed and developing countries have found themselves at different sides of the divide, with the developing countries dependent on investments and manufacture of infrastructure from developed nations, 107JLS 745 ISSUES IN COMMUNICATION TECHNOLOGY AND POLICY as well as production of news compiled by agencies and entertainment materials from the developed nations.
In Nigeria, even though there is the government-owned News Agency of Nigeria (NAN), the nation’s media of communication, including newspaper organizations, television and radio stations depend on news, entertainment materials and documentaries from large agencies from the developed countries.
The materials from NAN are usually small and far between and sometimes untimely because the news agency lacks adequate technical facilities and staff to cope with not only the communication needs of a large country like Nigeria, but also the fast-changing events of the modern world.
Thus, with this picture, developing countries, including Nigeria, become distribution markets to which transnational companies based in a few developed countries including the United States, Britain Germany, France and Japan, address their communication products.
These products include news, films, documentaries and communication equipment, and also investments.
In particular, the cinema has developed a global character since its inception, even with the silent films.
With its current modernization, there is an evolution of international language of the film with different scenes shot in many countries of the world and similar images which subsist in the growing global culture and modernization, including shipwreck, battles, wars, burnt cities, etc.
These images have been registered in consciousness of the modern elite in both the developed and developing countries.
In the Mexican soap -Lost- there is a Nigerian character called ‘Eko’ and scenes which are shot in Nigeria, besides other international actors and actresses who feature in the long running episodes which have remain the toast of many members of the Nigerian elite.
This is just one example of the countless other foreign films, situation comedies and cartoons, which enjoy lavish showing on Nigerian television stations besides the ones bought and watched by Nigerians in their homes.
The steady rise in the number of television stations in Nigeria, especially since the late 1980s when the first private television was licensed, has meant an evolution in the use and exposure of Nigerians to foreign films and cultures.
The ground which would have been lost in the leisure and entertainment time by Nigerians with the dying cinema culture, has been filled with the increase in television hours and variety of programmes due to increase in the number of private television and the increase use of video recorders/players.
108JLS 745 ISSUES IN COMMUNICATION TECHNOLOGY AND POLICY In the same vein, like many other developing countries, Nigeria as a former British colony is a distribution market for book publishers from the United Kingdom.
British publishers export directly into Nigeria and other former colonies through their subsidiaries such as Longman and Macmillan.
And with English language and French assuming more international character, the expansion and flow of books and printed materials from the developed countries into the developing countries, including African and Asian nations, has quadrupled.
As at 1980s when UNESCO International Commission on Communication completed its work, American book exports was put at $360million and British book exports, which represented 40 per cent sales was $250million.
Besides the use of English and French as international languages of communication, the growing need for education, scientific, technical and professional books in the developing countries has ensured the growth and expansion of this export trade.
Added to this is the factor of concentration of ownership by the few developed countries of the transnational publishing houses.
For example, while Longman and Macmillan dominate the book industries in English speaking Africa and Asia with their subsidiaries, the French publishing group, Hachette, has deepened investments in French speaking African countries.
Also, American publishing giants such as Penguin Books and Viking Books are leading paperback firms of the world.
The international book trade has witnessed not only vertical growth, but horizontal growth as transnational publishers, especially those involved in educational publications, have delved into production of video cassettes and films using the new technologies which make their production easy.
It is however, identified that all these activities are possible through the pooling and supply of international finance by such corporation as ITT, CBS, RCA, etc.
For example, an Italian publishing group said to be owned by FIAT, a car producing company, while the United States’ company, Paramount Pictures, has 20 percent share in a publishing firm.
Also, joint ventures, such as the one said to be between six leading European publishing companies, have ensured the dominance of a few developed countries in publishing and book trades.
Similarly, as with television stations in developing countries which depend largely on imported films, documentaries and comedies, radios in many of these countries have developed transnational outlook as they are being fed by the transnational recording industry.
Also, like television stations, radio station in the developing countries look up to international radio stations such as BBC and VOA continually.
The volume of foreign materials in both radio and television stations in the developing countries is so high and disturbing that many countries now 109JLS 745 ISSUES IN COMMUNICATION TECHNOLOGY AND POLICY worry about cultural dominance and even distortion of materials which were recorded in their countries and presented to European and American audiences.
Perhaps, a vivid picture of the dominance of developing countries can be seen more appropriately in the electronic industry.
Only about fifteen transnational corporations control the production of communication equipment and are based in only five countries.
According to UNESCO, the companies and the countries are; IBM, General Electric, ITT, Western Electric, GTE, Westinghouse, North American Rockwell, RCA, LTV and Xerox, all based in the United States; Siemens and AEG Telefunken based in Germany; Philips located in Netherlands; Matsushita in Japan and CGE located in France.
These transnational corporations have widened their dominance of developed countries over developing ones through efficiency of production, high capacity technologies, increased research, improved design and high profits consequent upon high volume of investments Also, there is overwhelming dominance of the developed nations in global advertising sector of the communication industry.
The UNESCO records as at 1980s showed the United States having more than half of the total $64billion a year advertising expenditure, with Britain, France, Germany, Japan and Canada each accounting for a billion dollar of the expenditure bill.
Of the $64billion total expenditure, newspapers got more revenue than radio and television, even though the latter two depend almost solely an advert revenue.
But other significant features of the global advertising activities were identified by UNESCO International Commission on Communication.
Advertising was recognized as having a double-edged sword.
It promotes socially desirable aims, including savings and investment, good family planning habits and activities to boost huge agriculture output and yields.
Advertising also ensures that consumers make rational choices and purchases, educates them on product use, and gives information about global employment market and stock markets.
However, global advertising could be a vice as its persuasive power tends to change life styles and influence attitudes towards acquisition and consumption.
Many products of transnational corporations, including high resolution television sets, home theatre appliances, video disc players/recorders and cam coders, easily become vogue among the elite in developing countries.
110JLS 745 ISSUES IN COMMUNICATION TECHNOLOGY AND POLICY Also, many multinational tobacco companies driven out of European and American markets due to health consideration have established in many developing countries.
The advertising expenditure is so high that it renders ineffective the anti-tobacco controls, for example, in Nigeria such as the restrictions at tobacco advertisement on television and radio and the inscription that “tobacco is dangerous to your health”.
Similarly, contents of some advertisement are exports of foreign culture to the developing countries.
The foreign advertisements not only hinder the growth of culture of developing countries, they tend to supplant them by persuading the people to embrace foreign habits, life style and attitudes.
From the foregoing discussions, the UN Commission was said to have made some important conclusions based on comparisons of data from three groups of countries.
Group A consists of countries with gross national product (GNP) of less than $400; Group B of GNP between $400 and $2,500; including the oil exporting countries with high GNP; and Group C consisting of developed countries, except Portugal and former socialist countries.
UN commission of communication observed that while the gap between Groups A and B could be said to be considerable in the areas of television and telephone communications, the real difference is in the gap in these two areas between Group C (developed countries) and Groups A and B combined.
The UN commission said “poorer countries either have no television or a television audience confined to urban countries, generally to higher socio-economic classes of the population.” While almost half of the developing countries have only one TV studio, all Latin American countries, except two, have television, three quarters of Asian countries also have television; only 60 per cent of African countries have television.
However, the UN commission reports observed that radio frequencies are fairly evenly distributed in the three groups of countries under consideration.
It observed that financial consideration is not the only hindrance to establishing radio stations by some of these countries, but also choice of priority and competing needs.
111JLS 745 ISSUES IN COMMUNICATION TECHNOLOGY AND POLICY On use of telephone, the UN commission said USA has 744 telephones per 1000 people; with once the million cads per 1000 inhabitants; Japan 424 telephones per 1000 people; and 401 241 calls per 1000 people; Germany 373 phones/1000 people and 264, 944/1000 people, and 264944/1000 people; Brazil 35 phones/1000 people, and 2731 calls/1000; China 4.5 phones/1000 and 565 cads/1000 people; and 14 calls/1000 people.
The commission also noted that neither size nor economic capacities govern expansion of telephones in these countries.
Also, available data showed that the developed countries have 95 percent of the total global computer capacity with regard to value of equipment.
It was observed that the dominance of the developed countries over the developing countries is increasing as each new technology is developed.
The higher technologies push the frontiers of disparities more in new technologies more than in television and radio.
On computer installation, the UN commission said the US leads with 45.4 percent of the world monetary total; followed by Japan with 10.1 percent; Germany 7.9 per cent; UK and France 5.8 per cent each; Italy 2.6 percent, and others 5.O percent.
The former USSR and East Europe had 6.7 percent.
Also, the developed countries had 82 billion computers operating as at 1977, representing 95 percent of the world total, while developing countries had 4.4 billion worth of computers, representing five percent of the global total.
While it was recognized that there had been some improvement in the developing nations, especially regarding investments in communication technologies, the figures showed that the developed countries still expanded their dominance with $16,60 per head in 1968 and $6,70 in 1977 by the developing countries.
A similar damning picture is presented in telecommunications with investments rising accordingly with the growth and wide disparities in the GNP between the developed and developing countries.
The leading countries in global telecommunications development are: United States, Canada, Germany, United Kingdom, France, Italy, Japan, Australia, Switzerland, Sweden, Belgium and Spain.
In concrete terms also, the UN commission said in the USA, buying a newspaper for a year costs 22 labour-hours; 45 in France; China 43; and in Brazil, it costs 150 labour-hours.
112JLS 745 ISSUES IN COMMUNICATION TECHNOLOGY AND POLICY A colour television set is said to have attracted 87 labour-hours in the US; 300 in France, 1520 in Brazil; while the cost of a black and white television set is 750 labour-hours in China.
To acquire a radio set, one needs 5 to 12 labour-hours in the US; 30 in France, 207 in Brazil and 357 in China.
The UN commission concludes that developed countries are far better than the developing ones in cost of acquisition of communication facilities based on their lower working hours.
These disparities are identified in all spheres of communication with the continued dominance of the developed countries over their developing counterparts.
Since developments in all fields are reflective of the level of gross national income, research and high technological know-how, this cannot be different.
The developing countries have continued to struggle under heavy pains to improve on their communication development, but this depends largely on level of investments.
This is where developing countries are particularly at a great disadvantage.
4.0 CONCLUSION It is clearly evident that the disparities in communication fields between the developed countries and developing ones continue to widen.
These disparities can be reduced if developing countries consciously draw up pragmatic communication policies.
They should not only aim to increase their investment in these areas, but re-orientate their people to change their acquisitive attitude and lifestyles which ape foreign cultures.
They should develop alternative communication channels which are available in their countries and cheaply too, and emphasis self reliance in building their communication capacities in order to enhance democratic participation in their various countries.
5.0 SUMMARY In this unit, we have identified the disparities that exist between developed and developing countries in various aspects of communication.
We have also shown that these disparities have led to dominance of the developing countries by the few developed ones as well as identified the causative factors of this dominance to include activities of transnational corporations in the world through sophisticated technologies, improved research, finance capital and great investments in all the sectors of communication fields.
We also 113JLS 745 ISSUES IN COMMUNICATION TECHNOLOGY AND POLICY observed that the level of economic development reflects in the dominance and imbalance in communication activities between the developed countries and their developing counterparts.
6.0 TUTOR-MARKED ASSIGNMENT Discuss vividly the dichotomy in communication between the developed countries and their developing counterparts.
Support your discussions with comparisons of available data between the two divide to demonstrate the dominance of the developing countries by the developed ones and identify factors responsible for this situation.
7.0 REFERENCES/FURTHER READINGS McQuail Denis (2005).
Mass Communication Theory.
London: Sage Publications Ltd.
Many Voices, One World – A UNESCO Report on Global Communication Problems.
MODULE 5 EFFORTS TO REDRESS NORTH-SOUTH COMMUNICATION IMBALANCE Unit 1 New World Information and Communication Order (NWICO) Unit 2 Alternative Communication Unit 3 Democratic Participant Media Theory and Development Media Theory Unit 4 Development Journalism UNIT 1 NEW WORLD INFORMATION AND COMMUNICATION ORDER (NWICO) CONTENTS 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objectives 3.0 Main Content 3.1 Background to New World Information and Communication Order 3.2 The issues in NWICO 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutor-Marked Assignment 7.0 References/Further Readings 1.0 INTRODUCTION 114JLS 745 ISSUES IN COMMUNICATION TECHNOLOGY AND POLICY Communication is at the centre of any social relations, whether between individuals, communities, nations and of the world.
In the same vein, the impact of communication is wide and pervasive, especially considered on such human activities as politics, culture, economy, education ad other aspects of man’s existence.
However, it has been realized that communication, especially since the last half of the twentieth century with the increasing importance of the mass media and evolution of the new communication technologies, has been defined by imbalance and inequalities within countries, regions and particularly between the developed and developing countries.
The relationship is such that nations can be divided clearly as information rich and information poor, which is easily interpreted as dominance of the a few developed nations over the majority developing nations.
The New World Information and Communication Order (NWICO), which is the subject of this unit, is a look at the debate which has revolved around global communication issues within the forum of the UNESCO and the United Nations.
2.0 OBJECTIVES At the end of this unit, you should be able to: • know the background that led to the call for a New World Information and Communication Order • discuss the main issues identified in NWICO and the suggestions to solving the communication problems.
3.0 MAIN CONTENT 3.1 Background to NWICO Fundamental problems of imbalances in communication had occupied global discourse for some time.
However, a turning point was reached on the issues of inequalities in communication with the independence from colonial rule of over eighty nations from the last half of the twentieth century.
Scholars reckoned that with the liberation of these countries, some two billion people were set free from colonial domination.
But political freedom has failed largely to guarantee economic independence.
Also, a nation’s existence is determined by unfair relationship in the international division of labour which has ensured that the newly independent nations are economical dependent and dominated by a few developed ones.
The few developed nations, not 115JLS 745 ISSUES IN COMMUNICATION TECHNOLOGY AND POLICY only determine how much they sell their own products in the international market, but also fix the prices of goods and services of the newly politically independent countries, now grouped as developing nations.
This unfair relationship is reflected in intellectual, cultural and other aspects of human existence.
The discrepancy in power and wealth between developed and developing nations is, perhaps, worse in the fields of communication where the more powerful and richer are better equipped, and they dominate the contents and flow of global communication.
The developed nations even dictate or influence to a great extent the contents of communication in the developing countries.
Similarly, the inherent problems of survival which have particularly defined existence in many developing countries, including famine, poverty, illiteracy, unemployment, over population, destruction of the environment others, receive little attention of global media controlled by developed nations; whereas, these problems can only receive the needed attention when they are raised to the level of international discourse and global public opinion.
Against this backdrop, the developing countries, under the aegis of the Non-Aligned Movement, raised media concerns around all the issues of imbalance in communication.
Their first meeting was held in Algiers in 1973, this was followed with another in Tunis in 1976 and a ministerial conference in Delhi later in 1976.
Thus, the call for a “new order”, as different from the “old order” of imbalance in news flows and global communication patterns, distortion to culture and media dependence, was made by the Non-Aligned countries.
Termed “New Order” plan, it was texturally formulated by Tunisia’s then Minister of Information, Mustapha Masmoudi.
The “New Order” plan was actually submitted to the 16-member Mac Bride Commission as working paper No.
31.
A clarification must however be made of the call for a “New Order” as district from some American scholars “new order”.
The American centric notion conceives a “new world order” as: “…the global hegemony of capitalism and the absence of any competing non- capitalist or socialist bloc and the unchallenged status of the United States as the only global superpower”.
116JLS 745 ISSUES IN COMMUNICATION TECHNOLOGY AND POLICY Clearly, the call for “new order” by the developing nations is based on the notion that communication is an essential factor of human and international relations.
Therefore, the feeling is that it should be based on the principle of equality and independence of choice of all nations and peoples.
Thus the term “New Order” is said to be founded on the same principles and conceptual frame work of the New International Economic Order.
Thus, the New World Information and Communication Order is seen by scholars as a pre-condition for the success of the New World Economic Order in the same way that communication supports and enhances all economic activities.
But unfortunately, this is unequally available to all peoples, groups and nations.
The concerns on the inequalities in communication by governments, non-governmental organizations, professional communications, researchers, journalist, politicians and others made UNESCO and the United Nations to create the International Commission to carry out studies on all communication problems in the world today.
In particularly, renowned American Scholar Wilbur Shramm was said to have earlier noted in 1964 the unfair dominance in news from the developed countries and the developing ones; that news from the latter was distorted and far-between.
Another communication scholar, Herbert Schiller, also observed in 1969 that developing countries had little input in allocation of radio frequencies for satellites in a crucial meeting held in Geneva.
He explained that this side-step in decision making on the issue as crucial as allocation of radio frequency allowed for dominance of the United States and a few other developed countries.
For example, Intelsat set up for international cooperation in satellite communication, areas said to be dominated by the United States, especially used for military purposes.
The issues above and others eventually formed the main prong of the Non-Aligned Movement’s call for New World Information and Communication Order within the forum of the UNESCO and UN.
3.2 Issues in New World Information and Communication Order As we have indicated earlier, issues raised in NWICO broadly concerned unbalanced flow of communication between developed and developing countries, distortions to cultures of developing countries, 117JLS 745 ISSUES IN COMMUNICATION TECHNOLOGY AND POLICY marginalization of developing countries in application and use of satellites, and computer technologies.
The issues can be itemized as: • News reports on developing countries by news agencies such as AP and Reuters reflect the position of developed countries.
These news reports were said to be based on disasters, crimes and military coups; not realities of survival regarding children, women, farming and population growth in the developing countries.
Also, it is noted that only four major news agencies, including Reuters and AP, control 80 percent of news flow in the world.
• Advertising agencies in the developed countries control advertisement in the developing countries in form of affiliates or branches.
Thus, it is noted that many advertisements distort the culture of the developing countries and also introduce the populations to foreign culture and habits.
Altogether these material have influence negatively the media in the developing countries.
• Unbalanced and unrestricted flow of cultural materials in respect of dominance of American films and television documentaries, video cassettes into developing countries.
• Unfair allocation of parking spots in space (geo-stationary orbit) against developing countries.
Satellite communication is costly, thus, developing countries with thin resources over wide demands are left at a disadvantage.
• Also, there is unfair distribution of radio spectrum.
Records say a few developed countries control almost 90 percent of the radio spectrum, much of which is for military use.
• Unrestricted satellite broadcasting of television signals in developing countries by developed countries without their permission.
The United Nations was said to have voted against this in 1970.
• Collection of information and data on agriculture and weather in developing countries through satellites without permission.
• Restriction on use of data bases in computers by developed countries and their denial of the spread of computer knowledge to developing countries.
• Protection of journalists was also raised for discussion because many journalists suffered political incarceration suffered political incarceration and violence from military regimes in the developing countries at the time.
118JLS 745 ISSUES IN COMMUNICATION TECHNOLOGY AND POLICY The Mac Bride International Commission on communication came out with a 312-page report published as Many Voices, One World.
The UNESCO, which earlier distanced itself from the report of the commission, because of the pressure from the United States, later adopted resolution 4/19 in its 21st session in Belgrade, in 1980, as follows: a. the New World Information and Communication Order could be based among other considerations on: i. elimination of the imbalances and inequalities which characterize the present situation; ii.
elimination of the negative effects of certain monopolies, public or private, and excessive concentrations; iii.
removal of the internal and external obstacles to a free flow and wider and better balanced dissemination of information and ideas; iv.
plurality of sources and channels of information; v. freedom of the press and information; vi.
the freedom of journalists and all professionals in the communication media, a freedom inseparable from responsibility; vii.
the capacity of developing countries to achieve improvement of their own situations, notably by providing their own equipment by training their personnel, by improving their infrastructure and by making their information and communication media suitable to their needs and aspirations; viii.
the sincere will of developed countries to help them attain these objectives; ix.
respect for each people’s cultural identity and for the right of each nation to inform the world public about its interests, its aspirations and its social and cultural values; x. respect for the right of all peoples to participate in international exchanges of information on the basis of equality, justice and mutual benefit; respect for the right of the public; of ethnic and social groups and of individuals to have access to information sources and to participate actively in the communication process.
b. this New World Information and Communication Order should be based on the fundamental principles of international law, as laid down in the charter of the United Nations; c. diverse solutions to information and communication problems are required because social, political, cultural and economic 119JLS 745 ISSUES IN COMMUNICATION TECHNOLOGY AND POLICY problems differ from one country to another, from one group to another.
The history and success on NWICO have been complicated.
The exchanges and debates on the issues raised are diffused and agreements are still far from being reached on some of the issues globally.
However, NWICO has succeeded in raising global consciousness and concern on the effects of unbalanced communication flow in the developing countries.
Many developing countries have, therefore, realized the need to reassess their communication needs and programmes and work within the realities in their countries.
They are also continually assessing their links with the transnational information companies and media monopolies, UNESCO must but commended for its efforts to keep the debate in global communication problems and issues on focus despite the virulent opposition of the United States to smear it.
The United States was said to have held that the UNESCO was against free flow of communication and attempting to license journalists and thus restricting the movement of international journalists, especially in the developing countries.
The efforts of Mustapha Masmoudi of Tunisia, who provided the African perspective to the debate must be recognized as well as Juan Somavia, also a member of the Latin American Institute for the study of transnational.
The only woman member of the commission, Betty Zimmerman from Canada, was said to have taken the place of communication scholar, Marshall McLuhan, who died in 1980.
Opposition of the United States The United States was against some of the issues raised in NWICO.
This could be understable.
The United States believed the issues raised in NWICO were against American transnational media corporations.
It particularly condemned the issues in NWICO and efforts to redress them as barriers to free flow of communication in the world.
It not only attacked UNESCO under which auspices the communication came about.
The United States actually withdraw its membership of UNESCO in 1984.
The issues in NWICO were pressed and the activities of the Mac Bride commission were kept alive through a series of meetings in the 1980s, even as UNESCO was forced to distance itself from the ideas of the commission.
120JLS 745 ISSUES IN COMMUNICATION TECHNOLOGY AND POLICY The United States’ allegation that UNESCO wanted to push for licensing journalists in the world was particularly discussed.
However, the United States remained unmoved as it insisted that journalists were targeted for raw deal in Latin American countries, many of them which were under military dictatorship in 1970s and ’80s.
It eventually hinged its withdrawal of funding to UNESCO on the position of the organization on Israel’s archeological work in Jerusalem.
Similarly, the issue of apartheid regime in South Africa complicated debates on NWICO.
However, the Mac Bride commission came out with an all-embracing voluminous report, published as Many Voices, One World, on the issues raised in NWICO.
The United States fears’ on licensing of foreign journalists were clarified.
There were, indeed, suggestions for a study on how to protect journalists and discipline those who broke general “ethical standards” in NWICO.
The Mac Bride commission was said to have particularly come against the idea of licensing journalists.
In 2005, however, the UNESO convention on cultural diversity effected some objectives of NWICO regarding need for “balanced flow of global mass media contents.” The United States again did not support it, opting for the Word Trade Organisation agreements on global trade in mass media and information.
This was in spite of the fact that the United States had rejoined UNESCO in 2003.
It must, however, be recognized that during the period that the United States withdrew its funding in UNESCO, some OPEC countries and a few socialist countries filled the financial gap in organization by making up the difficulty in its budget due to the United States’ action.
Today, the debates on NWICO or the need to replace the unbalanced flow in global communication with a “free, but balanced flow of communication” has continued.
Official UNESCO policy with respect to NWICO does not support state control or censorship and licensing of journalists.
4.0 CONCLUSION The increased potentials and impact of communication in respect relations in a country and among nations are not in doubt.
Similarly, the effects of communication in social, political and economic relations are high, just as its repercussions on technological growth.
But it has been realized by developing countries that the growth in communication and global technological progress are available to and controlled solely by the a few developed countries, thus rendering not only their independence non-existent, but dislocating the settings and internal 121JLS 745 ISSUES IN COMMUNICATION TECHNOLOGY AND POLICY balance regarding politics, culture, economy and development of their countries.
This is the crux of the call for a New World Information and Communication Order hinged on “free, but balanced flow of global communication”.
5.0 SUMMARY It is fitting to summarise the import of NWICO, which has been the subject of this unit, in Nordenstreng’s concept of Four D’s, an idea said to have been espoused in the tiny island of Grenada’s response to the global debates.
The Four D’s captures the main issues and themes in the New World Information and Communication Order: a. Democratization: this relates to measures to reverse the “one-way flow” of news from the developed countries to the developing countries.
The efforts are aimed at ensuring equitable and balance news flows between and among countries, and thus expand the news base and frontiers.
b. Decolonization: this is in respect of efforts, especially by the Non-Aligned Movement (developing countries) to reduce the negative impact of the “one–way flow” as the developing countries’ cultures and their misrepresentations in the world.
c. Demonopolisation: the transnational corporations which control communication technologies in production, distribution and application are seen as threat to developing countries.
Efforts to reduce their impact are seen as demonopolisation of the global technological space.
d. Development: is in respect of the recognition by the developing counties that mass media are important instruments of development for a just redistribution of communication resources in the world, especially between the developed in a way that one group is not considered as active participants and the other as passive onlookers.
6.0 TUTOR-MARKED ASSIGNMENT What are the main issues involved in NWICO and how did UNESCO manage US’ intransigence against the organization?
7.0 REFERENCES/FURTHER READINGS 122JLS 745 ISSUES IN COMMUNICATION TECHNOLOGY AND POLICY Many Voices, One World, UNESCO Report on Global Communication Ps.
34-43, 336. www.wikipedia, the encyclopedia.
www.grenada Voice: The Grenada Revolution Online NWICO (New World Information and Communication Order).
“Hope and Folly: the United States and UNESCO, 1945-1985,” William Preston, Edward S. Harman, and Herbert Schiller (1989).
University of Minnesota Press, ISBN 0-8166-1788.
UNIT 2 ALTERNATIVE COMMUNICAION CONTENTS 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objectives 3.0 Main Content 3.1 Alternative Communication 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutor-Marked Assignment 7.0 References/Further Readings 1.0 INTRODUCTION From the last half of the 20th century with more fee peoples of the world, some scholars have described the ‘main stream’ media models as inadequate having failed to keep pace with the communication’ needs of the majority of developing nations.
The freed billions of people from colonial dominance demand particularistic means of communication to meet their peculiar social and communal needs and their fight against hunger, squalid environments, drought, poor harvest, cultural domination, unemployment and under employment, low-priced commodities, etc.
The strand that defines these means of communication is called Alternative Model of Communication or Alternative Media.
This will be subject of this unit.
2.0 OBJECTIVES 123JLS 745 ISSUES IN COMMUNICATION TECHNOLOGY AND POLICY At the end of this unit, you should be able to: • discuss the main features of Alternative Media • explain the reasons for and the different strands of Alternative Communication 3.0 MAIN CONTENT 3.1 Alternative Communication Called Alternative Communication or Alternative Media, the model describes a range of media reactions to the main stream media.
It emphasizes the social and community function of media, rather than technological functions.
At its base, alternative communication model expresses dissatisfaction with established media, which tend to promote vertical and one-way flow of communication.
As a result of the pluralistic nature of the cultures which it proposes, alternative communication model has a wide variety of expressions.
McQuail (2005) identifies two types of alternative media as: 1.
Emancipatory Media Model: espouses small scale and grassroots media, completely separated from the dominant influence and operations of the mass media of radio, television and newspaper.
The whole idea is to emphasis the community as the fulcrum of effective communication rather than the market-based and elite-government and commercial communication.
According to McQuail, the feature of community and the evolution of new technologies which promote interaction and ‘do-it-yourself’ approach support the growth of the emancipatory media model.
He insists that the communication technologies of video recording, cable and internet have put communication in the “hands of the people and out of the hands of the publishing monopolies” while the individual is allowed to determine contents of communication, the model emphasized the progress channels of messages.
The main principles of emancipatory media model are: • Participation • Interaction • Cultural autonomy and variety 124JLS 745 ISSUES IN COMMUNICATION TECHNOLOGY AND POLICY • Small scale • Emancipation and self-help Because the emanciapatory model sides with the struggle for basic rights, it is grouped under the generic term of ‘rebellious communication’, which also refers to media in the vanguard for social and political changes against oppression and domination.
Such oppressive tendencies could be political, social or class as in the case of women in a male-dominated environment, authorization rule, etc.
In such situations as identified above, emancipatory media break the top-down, one-way communication by directing communication to the power centres.
They also build a resistance by way of solidarity and networking against oppressive policies.
It is observed that this process sometimes lead to organized social movements which protests and resists oppression by the elite.
2.
Communitarian Media: Like the emancipatory media, communitarian communication espouses the essence of the community and the people as all-important in any communication process.
Essentially, it contrasts with the libertarian theory of communication in that it emphasizes that much as the society demands some duties from the people, the people themselves have rights, social, political and economic, which they should claim from the society.
This way, the relationship between the society and the people becomes more mutual and is cemented by the media of communication which serve the people and engage them in mutual dialogue.
With the communication model, the media are expected to play more integrative and social organic roles which guarantee the people equal right to express themselves and articulate their opinions in a free and unhindered atmosphere.
The public and the media relate as partners for social good.
In essence, the media exist for the community; thus, promote all the features for the community’s well-being and co- existence, including its norms social values, goals and objectives.
Although, communication model is still limited in its operations or its identifications in countries, scholars say its characteristics are more atuned to the environments in the developing countries.
Its radical tradition makes it difficult to be applied in European countries.
As we have, however, indicated earlier, there are other varieties of media, especially in the developing countries, expressing various forms 125JLS 745 ISSUES IN COMMUNICATION TECHNOLOGY AND POLICY of alternative media.
It must be re-emphasised that their common features of small scale, grassroots organization, participation, community essence, shared goals between media practitioners and audiences and opposition to the powers of the state and media monopolies.
Alternative media are non-mainstream media.
The model rejects libertarians’ universal rationality and the ideals of bureaucratic professionalism.
It promotes the rights of cultures and sub-cultures to exist based on their peculiar and inherent nature, norms and values, while strengthening the bond and social ties of the community.
Some reasons are said to have necessitated the evolution of alternative media: • The peculiar environment of many developing countries lacking basic infrastructure such as electricity and roads, makes establishment and operation of mass media difficult, especially in the vast rural areas.
• The mass media have been assigned roles for which they are not fitted such as messages which are more effectively delivered as interpersonal communication.
Messages about hygienic and health campaigns, religious, local political activities and harvest, drought and planting issues are effective through such channels as theatre, local fairs, experimentation, itinerant loud speakers and opinion leaders.
• In many countries, the gap is clearly defined between the rich and poor in resources translated directly and respectively into information rich and information poor because of the one-way flow, top-down and vertical communication.
Thus, the alternative media only evolve as tools for the poor and the rural populations to express themselves.
• Closely related to the above is that alternative media come up as a way to redress the waste of resources in using the big and ineffective media in service diverse audiences, including the poor, rich, rural, urban, low, middle and upper class, illiterate and educated.
• The alternative media provide the needed balance and serve identified audiences for which they are more effective.
• If neglected, alternative media will be overshadowed and forgotten.
126JLS 745 ISSUES IN COMMUNICATION TECHNOLOGY AND POLICY • Alternative media expand and broaden communication more horizontally, rather than vertically as the mass media.
• Alternative media defeat the all-powerful or hypodermic syringe theory of mass media and confirm the place of Lazerfeld’s opinion leadership model of communication which says mass media messages do not have direct effect on the audience, but work in a two-step flow; received first by opinion leaders and later transmitted to the public through interpersonal communication.
In Nigeria, government seems to have realized the need for alternative media.
Government now reinforces the mass media messages with alternative media such as theatre, puppet shows, experimentation, cultural shows, films shows, pamphlets and exhibitions.
The range of these alternative media also include: local fairs, music festivals, wall papers itinerant information vans which travel to rural areas, and other means and devices to attend to the information needs of especially the rural and urban poor, illiterates and woman, children and the hitherto neglected in the country.
Also, public authorities development officers, professionals such as teachers, rural doctors, local politicians and agriculturist use and create other channels of alternative media.
In this way, the communities themselves and individuals continually evolve alternative media relevant to their needs and purposes.
At this point, we need to state, however, that alternative media in their varied forms should not be seen just as a reaction to the main-stream media which tend to favour or reinforce a one-way flow of information.
Their evolution is based on the need for a more complete and holistic view of communication.
They should, therefore, complement mainstream media as well as serve as their alternative considered on a case by case, and their relevance to place and situations.
4.0 CONCLUSION The expanse and variety of alternative media are almost inexhaustible.
Alternative media depend on each culture and a lot of value and effect can be extracted from a deep study of cultures and sub-cultures in individual developing countries.
Alternative media can be used along with mass media for more effect of messages, especially in matters scholars usually refer to as “little communication”.
127JLS 745 ISSUES IN COMMUNICATION TECHNOLOGY AND POLICY 5.0 SUMMARY Alternative media are not just reaction to the defects in mainstream media, especially in developing countries.
They can be used as both alternative and complementarily to mass media.
Their use should be based on evaluation of effect, the peculiar audience need and character, and environment, etc.
In particular, alternative media are part of the larger option to democratize global communication and break barriers which hinder the free and balanced flow of information in communities, within a country, between the developed and developing countries.
6.0 TUTOR-MARKED ASSGINMENT Discuss alternative communication as one of the ways to redress imbalance in communication flow.
Support your arguments with copious examples of situations where alternative media have been effective in your country.
7.0 REFERENCES/FURTHER READINGS McQuail Denis (2005).
Mass Communication Theory.
London: Sage Publications Ltd.
Many Voices, One World – A UNESCO Report on Global Communication Problems.
128JLS 745 ISSUES IN COMMUNICATION TECHNOLOGY AND POLICY UNIT 3 DEMOCRATIC - PARTICIPANT MEDIA THEORY AND DEVELOPMENT MEDIA THEORY CONTENTS 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objectives 3.0 Main Content 3.1 Democratic-Participant Media Theory 3.2 Development Media Theory 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutor-Marked Assignment 7.0 References/Further Readings 1.0 INTRODUCTION Democratic-Participant Media Theory and Development Media Theory are two evolving options to also redress the vertical flow of communication in the world.
Although they may not have yet crystallized in any particular political system or nation, but movements and approaches towards their operations can be observed in many countries, both within the developed and developing countries.
Their main tenets are specifically to ensure a more horizontal communication hinged on free, but balanced flow of communication in communities, within nations and among nations.
2.0 OBJECTIVES At the end of this unit, you should be able to: • explain the main tenets of Democratic-Participant Media Theory • discuss also the basis of the Development Media Theory • highlight how the two theories promote horizontal, rather than vertical flow of communication • identify their observation in some countries.
129JLS 745 ISSUES IN COMMUNICATION TECHNOLOGY AND POLICY 3.0 MAIN CONTENT 3.1 Democratic-Participant Media Theory As we have indicated earlier, Democratic participant media theory is one of the evolving theories aimed at horizontal, rather than the current vertical communication which has denied access of the media to all potential consumers and patrons.
Democratic-participant media theory is usually described by scholars as a twin theory of the development media theory which we shall also discuss later in this unit.
The main thrust of democratic-participant media theory is that the current structure of the communication which ensures vertical or top- bottom flow of messages has denied expected benefits to the society.
This is especially so as it has created a situation of information rich and information poor in societies.
The quantum of the society’s resources in an individual’s hands defines his relations and access to information to the extent that we now have a structure of the have’s as information rich, while the have-not’s are the information poor.
Scholars have observed that this structure limits access and free flow of information to sections of the society based on such characteristics as differences in income, class, sex and the vulnerable groups in the society or nations; the vulnerable groups in societies, including women, children, and the physically-challenged.
It is the notion of democratic-participant media theorists that access to the media by the individuals or groups is concentrated in the hands of government and big business, which include advertisers and media monopolies.
Similarly, bureaucracy and professional leadership and hierarchy hinder access to the media by certain sections of the society.
They advocate that all these barriers should be broken down so as to allow better access to all potential media consumers.
They insist that the media are too sensitive and important to be left alone to professionals, government and big monopolies.
In particular, democratic-participant media theory brings the spirit of democracy into the concept of communication.
It says that it is the public in a broad sense that has an interest in a wider and freer communication.
Succinctly, democracy as defined by Abraham Lincoln is “government of the people by the people for the people.” Key in this all-time definition is people in partnership as centre of all activities of a society, a nation and the world.
Thus, taken the spirit of democracy into 130JLS 745 ISSUES IN COMMUNICATION TECHNOLOGY AND POLICY communication as the democratic-participant media theory espouses, the individuals become active partners and not objects or passive receivers of communicated messages.
This way, not only the volume of messages increases, but there is increase in the spectrum of social representations and participation.
Also, communication is enriched with increase in the variety of messages.
Democratic-participant media theory hinges effective communication with democratic relationship.
Like democracy, democratic-participant media theory is based on the “popular will” of the people to use communication to serve their individual and corporate needs and desires.
Today, as more and more countries are graphitating towards democratic ideal and are trying to implement the popular will of the people, it is hoped that communication will become more democratic and responsive to the needs of broader and wider spectrum of the people.
Indeed, that communication will open the democratic space and attend to the needs and aspirations of all potential consumers, the popular will of the people and break down the inequalities in wealth which lead to imbalance in communication, especially regarding those who are served and those who are not denied communication in the society.
Evidence of democratic-participant media theory is said to be found in developed liberal democracies and in some developing countries.
Although, it is yet to be incorporated in any specific media institutions in the world, some of its tenets are part of the popular demand from horizontal communication, rather than the vertical flow of communication.
SELF ASSESSMENT EXERCISE How is the ongoing democratic movement linked with democratic-participant media theory and improvements in global communication?
3.2 Development Media Theory Like democratic-participant media theory, the development media theory is yet not easy to locate in any particular media institutions.
However, the theory seeks to explain the normative behaviour of the press in countries that are today classified as developing nations.
Thus, the difficulty in locating observance of development media theory is linked to the diverse varieties and dynamic political and economic situations in the developing countries.
These concern diverse conditions 131JLS 745 ISSUES IN COMMUNICATION TECHNOLOGY AND POLICY in such countries as Nigeria, Kenya, Banglash, Congo, Zimbabwe, Columbia, etc, on the one hand, and on the other hand, conditions in middle-level countries such as India, Korea, Cuba and Brazil.
However, the main tenet of development media theory is that there are identified conditions in the developing countries that subtract from the application of the mainstream media theories.
These are: • poor or absence of communication infrastructure • inadequate number of professionals and limited professional skills • more than 70 percent of some developing countries live in the rural areas removed from the sophistication of the modern world • development is occurring in developing countries that should be disseminated to the world at large, but neglected by the powerful media.
In the opinion of development media theorists, these issues and conditions which characterize the developing countries, especially the need for economic development, tend to push issues such as press freedom and human rights to the background.
In other words, the issues of human rights and press freedom could be sacrificed on the altar of economic and social development in these developing countries.
Dennis McQuail sums up the basic tenets of development media thus: • media must accept and carry out positive development tasks in line with nationally established policy.
• freedom of the press should be open to economic priorities and development needs of the society.
• media should give priority in their treatment of news content to national culture and language(s).
• media should stress links with countries which are close geographically, culturally and politically.
• the state can interfere or restrict media operations in the overall interest of development.
This can be through the instruments of censorship, subsidy and direct control.
• journalists and other media practitioners should exercise their rights and duties in the dissemination of news in the interest of development needs.
Demonstrable signs of shifts in the developing countries towards using media for development ends and needs are observable in the last three or four decades.
The aim is to further the horizontal flow of communication, especially by concentrating on the participation of communities in communication for stretching the frontiers of 132JLS 745 ISSUES IN COMMUNICATION TECHNOLOGY AND POLICY development of their societies.
The main thrust is to evolve relevant local media such as theatre, music, experimentation, puppet shows and others to meet their development ends, including planting and harvesting, hygienic and sanitation, literacy and local politics and representations.
This way, communication becomes an important component of development activities.
The UNESCO has recognized the essence and importance of this approach in the effect and expansion of communications, especially in developing countries.
Thus, UNESCO gives examples of countries where the initiatives of using local media for development purposes have brought impressive results and success.
They include: Tanzania, Senegal, Philippines, India, Botswana, Thailand, Mali among others.
However, UNESCO has stressed that the initiative of using media for development ends would be all-inclusive, local media can be used with mass media.
But efforts should be made that such media promote self-expression, dialogue, persuasion and discussions in group situations.
It is also identified that development media model is relevant to address the challenge of the minorities, disadvantaged groups and communities in the developed countries.
Similarly, media are used by communities in developed countries particularly to address issues of pollution, ecological problems, energy crises, unemployment and technological changes.
4.0 CONCLUSION Development media model has further the debate and approaches to redress the imbalance in communication.
Its effectiveness is hinged on media which facilitate self-expression, dialogue and group discussions.
Thus, media should be planned, financed and used in specific combinations consciously in line with these communication values to promote development ends or needs.
5.0 SUMMARY Democratic-participant media theory and development media theory are in many respects linked.
They are both relevant to the peculiar situations and conditions in the developing countries.
They also provide approaches to redress certain imbalances in communication by attending to development, economic and political needs of hitherto neglected areas of the society.
Both theories ensure that the local media in developing countries are not completely forgotten or pushed into the background.
For effect, they should be planned and properly financed and, if need be, combined with the mass media.
6.0 TUTOR-MARKED ASSIGNMENT 133JLS 745 ISSUES IN COMMUNICATION TECHNOLOGY AND POLICY Democratic-Participant Media and development media theories are two sides of the same coin.
Explain this and how the theories can be used to address the imbalance in communications in societies.
7.0 REFERENCES/FURTHER READINGS Nerone, JC (ed) (1995).
Last Rights: Revisiting Four Theories of the Press Urbana, IL.
McQuail Denis (2005).
Mass Communication Theory.
London: Sage Publications Ltd.
Many Voices, One World (1981).
A UNESCO Report on Global Communication Problems.
134JLS 745 ISSUES IN COMMUNICATION TECHNOLOGY AND POLICY UNIT 4 DEVELOPMENT JOURNALISM CONTENTS 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objectives 3.0 Main Content 3.1 Development of Journalism Theory 3.2 Types of Development Journalism 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutor-Marked Assignment 7.0 References/Further Readings 1.0 INTRODUCTION Development Journalism is one of the ways by the developing countries to redress the gap that exists between them and the developed countries regarding the flow of information and means or channels of communications.
Thus, in this unit, we shall explain the development journalism as a media theory which focuses on constructive reporting of conditions and events in developing nations so as to galvanize the people towards development.
Two types of development journalism shall be identified and examined: Investigative development journalism and authoritarian-benevolent development journalism.
2.0 OBJECTIVES At the end of this unit, you should be able to: • discuss the meaning of development journalism and its contribution to redressing global communication imbalance • identify the characteristics of the two types of development journalism.
3.0 MAIN CONTENT 3.1 Development Journalism Theory 135JLS 745 ISSUES IN COMMUNICATION TECHNOLOGY AND POLICY The term development journalism, according to communication theorists, cropped up around 1960s.
The term encompasses a mode of journalism which reports national and international events in a way that promotes development among the people of a country, a region or a community.
It may not be based on the day-to-day news, but it assesses reportage of events on the basis that it promotes the social progress and overall development of the country.
Development journalism is defined within the social and political worldview of the developing countries.
Indeed, the concept is said to have emanated from efforts by scholars from the developing countries who believe that their regions should cut the apron string from the developed countries which they assessed had not worked in their favour.
They discovered that western models of communication, including the libertarian and social responsibility models, have failed to appropriately address the peculiar socio-political and economic conditions in the developing countries and regions.
The scholars also held that western communication scholarship has not provided programmatic approach and solutions to the communication challenge in the developing countries.
They summarized that, while it is true that the world is witnessing a communication revolution, it is also ironic that the talk of development journalism is germane.
This is the case because the means of communication has widened the gap between media and information that concerns the common people.
The modern communication and its practitioners tend to be sensitive to the feelings of indigenous populations and vulnerable groups in the society, including women, the physically-challenged, children and the rural populace, in their news gathering, processing and disseminating functions.
It is also held that because the media have focused essentially on the coverage of the legislative, and executive, as well as decision makers, activities that directly impact on the well-being of the people and development of the society are largely neglected by the media.
The media have steadily become mouth-pieces of the government and the rich who use them for propaganda and image laundering.
Thus, the media, especially in the developing countries neglect news of corruption and crimes, social and moral failures of the legislature and executive, and the rich people.
Development journalism theorists believe that besides the construction of physical structures, growth also encompasses building of institutions such as replacing a feudal system with a democratic system and making the rural people and the poor to participate in decision making.
Also 136JLS 745 ISSUES IN COMMUNICATION TECHNOLOGY AND POLICY social development includes processes that celebrate human dignity, equality and social justice.
So, development journalism should help to galvanise the society towards these laudable ends.
It is also the position of development journalism theorists that media should be used for building the democratic structures so as to open the democratic space in the developing countries.
On this note, it is held that more people will be brought up to participate in decision making processes.
At the end, the legislature and executive will be more accountable to the people and the media will also adequately and more effectively perform their role as a watchdog and the ‘Fourth Estate of the Realm.’ In summary, the scholars agreed that the communication processes that involve building social institutions in developing countries, expanding the democratic base, constructively holds the leaders accountable for their actions, activities and development choices, cater to the interests and feelings of the indigenous populations and the vulnerable groups, including women and children, etc can be encapsulated within the ambit of development journalism.
However, the fact that within its areas of application there are varying political leanings and cultural appeals, development journalism has many variants.
For example, within the framework of development journalism, there have been attempts to evolve ‘Islamic Journalism’ to cater to the cultural characteristics of the Arab world; we also have Asian communication and Alternative Journalism – this explains the African approach to the theory of development journalism.
We also have an evolving concept of the Nigerian media, which we shall later explain in the next unit as “media pluralism.” Attempts to translate the inherent approaches in development journalism into actual practice are continuing in the developing countries.
But some scholars have grouped all these approaches to explain the cultural and racial-oriented journalism within the tenets of McQuail’s Development Media Theory which we have discussed earlier.
The interface between development journalism and development media theory is underscored by the operative word – “development”.
Both development journalism and development media theory subscribe to use of media for constructive development purposes and ends.
Also, they both explain the conditions within the developing countries and their application in the regions grouped and referred to as same.
They are also yet to be properly identified in any particular media institutions, but appeals to their tenets are clearly seen in the developing countries.
Both media theories believe that journalists and other media practitioners in the 137JLS 745 ISSUES IN COMMUNICATION TECHNOLOGY AND POLICY developing countries should perform their duties and exercise their rights for development ends.
3.2 Types of Development Journalism Two main types are identified.
They are: a.
Investigative Development Journalism It focuses on the critical evaluation of development projects and their impact on the people in the developing countries.
It also assesses the effectiveness of the built-in control mechanism in the government process and procedures in the developing countries so as to expose financial scams which are rampant in government and official circles.
It also attempts to document conditions in a developing country and explain same to the larger world.
It not only criticize governments, but should proffer better and more effective options to achieve overall development goals.
It operates on the fact that governance is a cooperative effort among the government, the citizens and the outside world.
The idea behind investigative development journalism is similar to investigative reporting, only that it focuses on the peculiar, social, apolitical and economic conditions in the developing countries by assessing government activities in terms of their impact and benefits to greatest number of the citizens.
A defining character of investigative development journalism is reasonable freedom of the press.
This condition will guarantee the press to investigate the inner recesses of government and activities of its officials.
b. Authoritarian-Benevolent Journalism This can be seen as another extreme as it promotes heavy influence of the government of a developing country in the development of nation and its media activities.
It can be said that while the model of development journalism can galvanise development activities of a developing country, in terms of improved infrastructure, empowerment, health and education, it can however restrict information to the people and hinder a journalist from performing his sacred responsibilities to the people.
138JLS 745 ISSUES IN COMMUNICATION TECHNOLOGY AND POLICY Indeed, its proponents are said to have held that democracy is a “dysfunctional luxury” in developing countries.
They believed that the slow processes to reaching decisions in a democracy are antithetical to governance in developing countries that are indeed in a hurry to develop their poor infrastructure, education, health and empowerment.
They insisted that media in developing countries will be promoting the overall interest of the people and the society when they selectively handle information, while keeping the public welfare in mind at all times.
Operators of authoritarian-benevolent development journalism can be said to be walking a tight rope.
There is no doubt that on the one hand, government participation in media, including ownership in some developing countries is necessary for media development and can help in spread of information in the country.
Such government media and communication activities can also help educate the people and enlist their support for development purposes.
But government can easily overreach itself and bear its heavy hands on the media and restrict the citizens’ freedom of expression.
Such a government can make legislations which will, in fact, restrict the rights of the journalists in performing their roles on behalf of the society as was the case during the military rule in Nigeria.
In all, both types of development journalism are present in Nigeria.
These are laws and activities of government in Nigeria which restrict freedom of speech and access of the media to information.
Also, such activities by the Ministry of Information in dissemination of news and public relating activities are classified as part of authoritarian- benevolent development journalism.
Similarly, the pluralism and vibrancy of the Nigerian media which had been demonstrated as during the military era when the media became the unofficial opposition to military dictatorship can be seen as evidence of investigative development journalism.
All the activities of Nigerian media in exposing financial scams are part of the processes of investigative development journalism.
4.0 CONCLUSION Development journalism can be used to promote social justice and also as propaganda tool.
As machinery for social justice, development journalism can give voice to the voiceless, keep government on its toes by effectively monitoring its activities and projects.
It can also endow the international community with the knowledge of conditions in a developing country.
It can also become a tool to deepen the democratic processes.
But as a propaganda tool, media become a disservice to the citizens and allow repressive government in a developing country to continue to perpetrate itself in power against the people’s will.
Freedom 139JLS 745 ISSUES IN COMMUNICATION TECHNOLOGY AND POLICY of the press is infringed upon and the people are not given the total picture of development in the country.
5.0 SUMMARY In this unit, we have discussed development journalism theory as one by theorists, politicians and professional communicators in the developing countries to address their peculiar social circumstances.
The theory sees media as essential tools for social, political, cultural and economic development of the society.
Two types of development journalism were identified: investigative and authoritarian-benevolent development journalism.
While investigative development journalism is used to monitor development and government activities for the overall benefits and interest of the people, authoritarian-benevolent development journalism is capable of being used for propaganda purposes for the government of the day.
This has been one of the areas of disagreement of western scholars and professionals with development journalism as they believe the people can easily be enslaved by a dictatorial ruler.
6.0 TUTOR-MARKED ASSIGNMENT Explain vividly the theory of development journalism and identify the differences of the two types of the media theory.
7.0 REFERENCES/FURTHER READINGS Ogunsuji: Introduction to Journalism www.countercurrents.org ama@charkha.org, amannamira@rediffmail.com McQuail Denis (2005).
Mass Communication Theory.
London: Sage Publications Ltd. 140
