MEDIA LAW JLS 612 AND ETHICS Course GuideCOURSE GUIDE JLS612 COURSE GUIDE JLS612 MEDIA LAW AND ETHICS Course Developer/ Writer Innocent Okoye, Ph.D. Dept.
of Mass Communication University of Lagos.
Course Editor Dr John Edemode Department of Mass Communication, Auchi Polytechnic, Auchi Edo state.
Programme Leader Christine I. Ofulue, Ph.D. National Open University of Nigeria, Victoria Island, Lagos Course Coordinator Chidinma H. Onwubere National Open University of Nigeria, Victoria Island, Lagos.
NATIONAL OPEN UNIVERSITY OF NIGERIA iiCOURSE GUIDE JLS612 National Open University of Nigeria Headquarters 14/16 Ahmadu Bello Way Victoria Island Lagos Abuja Office National Open University of Nigeria 5, Dar Es Salaam Street, Off Aminu Kano Crescent Wuse 11 Abuja, Nigeria.
e-mail: centralinfo@nou.edu.ng URL : www.nou.edu.ng National open university of Nigeria 2008 First Printed 2008 ISBN: 978-058-712-8 All Rights Reserved Printed by……….. For National Open University of Nigeria.
iiiCOURSE GUIDE JLS612 CONTENTS PAGE Introduction………………………………………………….
1 Course Aims………………………………………………… 1 Course Objectives…………………………………………… 1 – 2 Working through this Course……………………………….. 2 Course Materials…………………………………………….. 2 Study Units………………………………………………….. 2 – 3 Textbooks and References…………………………………... 3 Assessment File……………………………………………... 4 Tutor – Marked Assignments (TMAs)………………………..4 Final Examination and Grading…………………………….. 4 Course Marking Scheme…………………………………….
4 – 5 Course Overview/Presentation Schedule…………………….
5 – 6 What You will Learn in this Course…………….………... 6 – 7 What You will Need for this Course………………………... 7 Tutors and Tutorials………………………………………… 7 Conclusion…………………………………………………... 8 Summary…………………………………………………….
8 ivCOURSE GUIDE JLS612 Introduction Welcome to JLS612: Media Law and Ethics.
This course is a three-credit unit course for postgraduate students in journalism.
The materials have been developed with the Nigerian context in mind.
This course guide gives you an overview of the course and also provides you with information on the organization and requirements of the course.
Course Aims The aims of this course are to help you understand the legal and ethical principles which should guide a journalist in the performance of his professional duties in Nigeria.
These broad aims will be achieved by: 1.
Introducing you to the essence and purpose of law and ethics in any society 2.
Introducing you to the philosophical foundations of media law and ethics 3.
Acquainting you with the essential legal and ethical provisions to guide the Nigerian journalist’s conduct as a professional.
Course Objectives To achieve the aims set out above, JLS 604 also has specific objectives.
The unit objectives are at the beginning of each unit.
I advise that you read them before you start working through the unit.
You can also refer to them during your study of the unit to check your progress.
Below are the broader objectives for the course as a whole.
By meeting these objectives, you should consider yourself as having met the aims of the course.
On successful completion of the course, you should be able to do the following: • Define law and ethics and understand their purpose in society • Understand the important theories of ethics • Understand why the media of every country are regulated • Know the essential media laws in Nigeria • Know the code of ethics of the Nigerian Press Organization (NPO) • Know the defences open to a journalist in the event of litigation • Know the cardinal journalistic principles or canons of journalism • Know the ethical mechanisms in Nigerian journalism and how they operate • Be acquainted with some ethical case studies in Nigerian journalism.
1COURSE GUIDE JLS612 Working Through This Course To complete the course, you are required to read the study units and other related materials.
You will also need to undertake practical exercises for which you need a pen, a note book, a copy of the 1999 Constitution of the Federal Republic of Nigeria, among other materials listed in this guide.
At the end of each unit, you will be required to submit assignments for assessment.
At the end of the course, you will write a final examination.
Course Materials The major materials you will need for this course are: • Course guide • Study units • Assignment file • A copy of the 199 Constitution of the Federal Republic of Nigeria • Code of Ethics of the Nigerian Press Organisation (NPO) • The National Broadcasting Code • Code of Ethics of the Nigerian Institute of Public Relations • Code of Ethics of the Advertising Practitioners Council of Nigeria (APCON) • Relevant text books, including those listed under each unit • You also need to read newspapers and magazines, listen to radio and watch television regularly.
Study Units There are 21 units of six modules in this course.
They are listed below.
Module 1 The Purpose Of Law And Ethics In The Society Unit 1 The Meaning and Purpose of Law Unit 2 The Essence and Purpose of Ethics Unit 3 Theories of Ethics Unit 4 The Regulation of the Mass Media 2COURSE GUIDE JLS612 Module 2 Press Freedom And The Constitutional Obligations Of The Nigerian Media Unit 1 Press Freedom: History, Definitions, Legal bases and Constraints Unit 2 Public Officers, Public Figures, National Interest and The Public Interest Unit 3 Constitutional Provisions on the Obligations and Ownership of the Media in Nigeria Module 3 The Universal Press Laws Unit 1 Defamation and its Essentials Unit 2 Classes of Defamation Unit 3 Defences to Defamation Unit 4 Sedition Module 4 Copyright, Contempt, National Security and the Official Secrets Act Unit 1 Copyright Unit 2 Contempt of Court and Parliament Unit 3 National Security Unit 4 The Official Secrets Act Module 5 The Canons Of Journalism Unit 1 Truth and Fairness Unit 2 Objectivity and Integrity Unit 3 Other Canons: Independence, Responsibility and Accuracy Module 6 Ethical Problems, Ethical Mechanisms And Ethical Case Studies In Nigerian Journalism Unit 1 Ethical Problems in Nigerian Journalism Unit 2 Purpose and Kinds of Ethical mechanisms Unit 3 Regulatory Mechanisms and Ethical Case Studies Textbooks and References A number of books and other materials have been recommended for a good understanding of this course.
You will see them at the end of each unit.
Indeed, they were the books the course developer consulted while the course text was being prepared.
You are advised to obtain them and other relevant ones for further reading.
3COURSE GUIDE JLS612 Assessment File Two kinds of assessment are involved in this course: Tutor-Marked Assignments and a written examination.
Although the answers to the Self-Assessment Exercises (SAEs) are not meant to be submitted, yet they are as important as the Tutor-Marked Questions.
The SAEs give you an opportunity to assess yourself and know to what extent you understand each topic.
But the Tutor-Marked Assignments are to be answered and submitted for marking.
The work you will submit to your tutor for assessment will weigh 30% of your total score.
Tutor-Marked Assignments You will be required to submit a specified number of TMAs.
Each unit in this course has a TMA.
You should attempt all the questions, and you will be assessed on all of them but the best four performances will be used for your 30% weighting.
After you have completed each assignment, send it together with a Tutor-Marked Assignment form, to your tutor.
Please ensure that each assignment reaches your tutor before the deadline for submission.
If you have a genuine reason for not completing your work on time, contact your tutor to see if he or she can give you an extension.
Normally, extensions may not be granted after the deadline.
Since a commitment to deadline is the soul of the journalistic enterprise, journalism students are trained to meet deadlines.
Final Examination and Grading The final examination for JLS 604: Media Law and Ethics will be a test of three hours, which will carry a score of 70%.
The examination will be set from all the topics covered, and will reflect the kind of self- assessment exercises and tutor-marked questions you encountered.
You should revise the entire course and review all your self-assessment questions and tutor-marked assignments before the examination.
Course Marking Scheme The following table lays out how the actual course marking is broken down.
4COURSE GUIDE JLS612 ASSESSMENT MARKS Assignment 1-4 (the best four of all Four assignments, best three the assignments submitted) marked out of 10% Totalling 30% Final Examination 70% of overall course score Total 100% of course score Course Overview / Presentation Scheme UNITS TITLE OF WORK WEEK ASSESSMENT ACTIVITY (END OF UNIT) Module 1 The Purpose Of Law And Ethics In The Society Unit 1 The meaning and Week 1 Assignment 1 purpose of law Unit 2 Essence and purpose Week 2 Assignment 1 of ethics Unit 3 Theories of Ethics Week 3 Assignment 1 Unit 4 The Regulation of Week 4 Assignment 1 the Mass Media Module 2 Press Freedom And The Constitutional Obligations Of The Nigerian Media Unit 1 Press Freedom: Week 5 Assignment 1 History, Definitions, Legal bases and Constraints Unit 2 Public officers, Week 6 Assignment 1 public figures and the public interest Unit 3 The Constitutional Week 7 Assignment 1 Provisions on the Obligations and Ownership of the Nigerian mass media Module 3 The Universal Press Laws Unit 1 Defamation and its Week 8 Assignment 1 Essentials Unit 2 Classes of Week 9 Assignment 1 Defamation Unit 3 Defences to Week 10 Assignment 1 Defamation Unit 4 Sedition Week 11 Assignment 1 Module 4 Copyright, Contempt National Security And The Official Secrets Act Unit 1 Copyright Week 12 Assignment 1 5COURSE GUIDE JLS612 Unit 2 Contempt of Court Week 13 Assignment 1 and Parliament Unit 3 National Security Week 14 Assignment 1 and the Media Unit 4 The Official Secrets Week 15 Assignment 1 Act Module 5 The Canons Of Journalism Unit 1 Canons of Week 16 Assignment 1 Journalism: Truth and Fairness Unit 2 Objectivity and Week 17 Assignment 1 Integrity Unit 3 Other canons: Week 18 Assignment 1 Independence, Responsibility and Accuracy Module 6 Ethical Problems, Ethical Mechanisms And Ethical Case Studies In Nigerian Journalism Unit 1 Ethical problems in Week 19 Assignment 1 the Nigerian Journalism Unit 2 Purpose and kinds Week 20 Assignment 1 of Ethical Mechanisms Unit 3 Self-regulatory Week 21 Assignment 1 Mechanisms and Ethical Case Studies Revision Week 22 Examination Week 23 TOTAL WEEKS What You Will Learn In This Course This course guide is designed to show you what you will be doing in this course and to prepare you adequately for the task ahead.
It is essential that you read the course guide carefully and be familiar with its contents.
This will enable you to get your work properly done and get the best out of the course.
Media Law and Ethics equips the prospective journalism professional with the basic legal and ethical safeguards to perform his or her job within the acceptable legal and ethical boundaries.
Ignorance of the law is not a defence for breaking the law.
Nor can ignorance be a defence for the violation of the code of ethics of any profession.
It is for this 6COURSE GUIDE JLS612 reason that the professional must be conversant with what is legally and ethically expected of him.
What You Will Need For The Course You need material and non-material things for this course.
The material things you need include but are not limited to the following: i) A standard dictionary, such as the Oxford Advanced Learners.
ii) A copy of the 1999 Constitution of the Federal Republic of Nigeria iii) A copy of the United Nations Declaration of Human Rights.
iv) A copy of the African Charter on Human and People’s Rights v) All the recommended text books on media law and ethics.
The non-material things you need for the course include but are not limited to the following: A) At least four continuous, uninterrupted hours of study weekly.
B) Self-discipline and commitment to excellence.
C) Integrity required of a scholar.
Tutor and Tutorials Fifteen hours of tutorials are provided in support of this course.
You will be informed of the dates, times and location of the tutorials, together with the name and phone number of your tutor, as soon as you are allocated a tutorial group.
Your tutor will grade, comment on your assignment, and monitor your progress.
Don’t forget to send your tutor- marked assignments well ahead of the deadline.
They will be graded and returned to you as soon as possible.
Do not hesitate to contact your tutor by phone or email if you need help.
You should contact your tutor if: a) You do not understand any part of the assigned readings b) You have difficulty with the self-assessment exercises c) You have a question or a problem with an assignment, with your tutor’s comment or with the grading of an assignment.
Try your best to attend the tutorials.
This is the only way to have face to face contact with your tutor and ask questions.
You can raise any problem you encountered in the course of your study.
To gain maximum benefit from the course tutorials, prepare a question list before attending the tutorials.
Also, it will be in your best interest to participate actively in the tutorials.
7COURSE GUIDE JLS612 Conclusion This is a particularly interesting course that opens your eyes to many things about law and ethics which you must have been seeking answers to.
It also gives you a great insight into the secrets of success in life, how to be law abiding and observe all the ethical principles which you require to excel not only in your chosen profession but also in life generally.
From what you may have noticed from the news media and from films, you can see that lack of self-discipline and/or ignorance of the law has led to the wrecking of many promising careers.
If you take to heart and apply all that you have learnt in this course, you will not only excel in journalism but also succeed in life.
Summary This course guide gives you an overview of what to expect in the course of this study.
The course teaches you the fundamental principles of law and ethics relevant to the practice of journalism in Nigeria.
We wish you success with the course and hope that you will find it both interesting and useful.
8
