 NATIONAL OPEN UNIVERSITY OF NIGERIA SCHOOL OF ARTS AND SOCIAL SCIENCES COURSE CODE: JLS616 COURSE TITLE: PROFESSIONAL PROJECT 1 COURSE GUIDE JLS616 PROFESSIONAL PROJECT Course Team: ONWUBERE, Chidinma (Course Developer and Writer) NOUN.
Dr. Victor A Ayedun-Aluma (Content Editor) University of Lagos, Akoka.
ONWUBERE, Chidinma (Course Coordinator)-NOUN.
Christine .I.
Ofulue, Ph.D (Programme Leader)-NOUN.
NATIONAL OPEN UNIVERSITY OF NIGERIA 2 National Open University of Nigeria Headquarters 14/16 Ahmadu Bello Way Victoria Island Lagos Abuja Annex 245 Samuel Adesujo Ademulegun Street Central Business District Opposite Arewa Suites Abuja e-mail: centralinfo@nou.edu.ng URL: www.nou.edu.ng National Open University of Nigeria 2006 First Printed 2006 ISBN: All Rights Reserved Printed by …………….. For National Open University of Nigeria 3TABLE OF CONTENTS PAGE Introduction …………………………………………….
4 What you will Learn in this Course?…………………….
5 Course Aims …………………………………………… 5 Course Objectives ……………………………………….
5 Working Through This Course ………………………….
6 Course Materials ………………………………………... 6 Study Units ……………………………………………… 6 Textbooks and References ……………………………… 7 Assignment /Assessment …………………………… 7 Final Examination and Grading ………………………… 7 Course Marking Scheme ………………………………... 8 Project Assessment form………………………………… 9 Presentation schedule and Course Overview 10 How to Get the Most from this Course…..……………….
10 Tutors and Tutorials ……………………………………… 12 Summary ………………………………………………….
12 4INTRODUCTION Welcome to JLS 616: PROFESSIONAL PROJECT.
At the end of the second semester, every student in the PGD programme is required to present a Professional Project to the department.
This type of project is quite different from the general(B.Sc or M.Sc) research project.
It is a 6 credit unit project meant to assess every PGD student of either Mass Communication or Journalism on the practical experience gained during the theoretical aspect of the programme.
Hence it should be regarded as a REAL LIFE project.
Each student is thus required to prepare for presentation: any of the following programmes - a PR campaign programme, an advert campaign, a Radio/TV news broadcast or entertainment programme, a documentary, a news story or feature story for publication.
Often times, students have confused this type of project with the normal research project.
For this reason, it has become expedient to prepare this course material which will serve as practical guide for students in the PGD programme.
This course, therefore, gives you a practical experience in whatever field you wish to carry out your professional project.
It has to be noted that a professional project is a little different from the normal empirical or scientific research, which literarily seeks to find a solution to an identified problem.
The professional Project, on the other hand, seeks to put to test the professional skills acquired by a student crossing from one field of study to another through the PGD programme.
Hence, it is different, both in thought and in format.
Rather than theoretically stating how to go about solving a problem, PGD programme problem solving involves physically carrying out a project that reflects any of the three major sequences of Mass Communication (Print, PRAD, and Broadcast).
It is rather demonstrative in nature.
This course guide is meant to give you basic information about this course.
Hence, it specifies the format required for this type of project, time frame and the key aspects of the project.
It equally directs you on how to go about it and advises you on how to physically conduct the work, having presented a particular case study for you.
Please note that the case study is not to be copied by any student but should rather serves as a practical example or sample for everyone to make reference to in times of need.
What you will learn in this Course This course is meant to expose you to the basic practical aspect of JLS 616.
By personally identifying a communication related problem, preparing a proposal for its resolution, physically carrying out certain activities that lead to the resolution of the problem and eventually evaluating the project to confirm its validity and workability, you would have experienced what you have been taught theoretically.
The course examines the practical perspectives of qualitative methods relevant to professional and academic needs in Mass communication.
Hence it effectively takes you through the theoretical and practical (demonstrative) aspects of the course.
The thorough understanding of this course will help you appreciate the differences between Research project and Professional project.
It will equally empower you to face the challenges you are likely to encounter on the field as a journalist.
In studying this course, you stand a good chance of evaluating any field project.
This course guide is meant to help you accomplish the aims and objectives of this course.
Hence you are advised to read it carefully so as to get the best out of your course.
Course Aims The primary aim of this course is to inculcate in you the appropriate skills for: conducting a professional project in any of the sequences in Mass Communication .
Course Objectives Certain objectives must be achieved from the study of this course.
So, at the end of this course, you should be able to: (i) Explain what a professional project entails (ii) Discuss the nature of a professional project.
.
(iii) Identify the different parts of professional project.
(iv) Physically conduct a professional project.
Working through this Course 6To maximally benefit from this course, you should read the study units provided through your course material.
You equally should do the self assessment exercises which you will find under every unit of this course.
Try as much as you can to locate the texts recommended for further readings.
Please read some of them to complement what you already have in your course materials.
The Tutor Marked Assignments in this course are merely for your further practice to complement you SAEs as the research and professional projects usually carry the full 100%.
However, the Self Assessment exercises are quite important as they will help you monitor your progress on the course.
Remember, all the components of this course are very important as they all contribute to your eventual success on this project.
Also remember that you have a time frame for the completion of your project.
The duration of the course is, one academic semester, within which period you are equally doing some other academic works related to your other regular courses.
Course Materials The major materials you will need for this course are: (i) Course guide.
(ii) Study units.
(iii) Self Assessment Assignments file.
(iv) Relevant textbooks including the ones listed under each unit.
.
Study Units This course is a two-module course with 7 units Topic Module 1 Unit 1: Steps to follow and the format for Professional Project.
Unit 2: Parts of the Professional Project Unit 3: Grading and The Assessment Form.
Module 2: The Case Studies Unit 1: Professional Project for a Public Relations Campaign.
Unit 1B: Professional Project for a an Advert Campaign Unit 2: Professional Project for a Broadcast Medium Unit 3: Professional Project for a Print Medium Unit4: Citation of Reference Materials 7Textbooks and References Certain books have been recommended in the course.
You may wish to purchase them for further reading.
Assessment File An assessment file and a marking scheme will be made available to you.
This assessment file is meant for filing your self assessment exercises so that you can always go back and monitor your progress.
There is only one aspect of assessment for this course.
That is the final grading of the physical project you have carried out.
So you really have to put in a lot of efforts so as score well in it, since this is a 6-credit course and it is a practical test of what you have learnt on the programme.
Project Supervision File In place of the other TMAs which you normally submit as your continuous assessment, you will be required to open a file for yourself with which you can enclose the different chapters of your project as you intend to send them to your supervisor for reading, vetting and for his/her supervisory comments.
This will be returned to you for corrections as soon as your supervisor goes through the chapters.
You continue this process until you have finished the entire work.
In due course, you will be given the specific guidelines regarding the binding of the project and the number of copies you are required to submit.
Make sure that your project supervision file reaches your supervisor regularly so that he/she may not have to wait for too long before reading the subsequent chapters.
Please try as much as you can to keep to your supervisor’s schedule so as to help him supervise you well.
Final Examination and Grading There will be no written examination on this course.
Hence, your final examination scores will be solely that awarded you by your supervisor based on the work you have done on your project.
Usually, a score sheet is used for scoring the different aspects of the project, and the total score thus becomes your final examination score.
The total score is 100%.
Depending on the University’s decision, you may be required to defend your project at the end of your programme.
The dates for submission of your project will be communicated to you by your study center personnel.
You will also be told the date for your defence of project if the need arises.
Course Marking Scheme 8 The following table lays out how the actual course mark allocation is broken down.
This will help you appreciate the fact that every bit of your input on your project counts and goes a long way to giving you a good grade.
Below is a sample of the Scoring Sheet.
NATIONAL OPEN UNIVERSITY OF NIGERIA.
914/16 Ahmadu Bello Way, Victoria Island Lagos.
PROFESSIONAL PROJECT ASSESSMENT FORM Name of student…… ………………………………………................. Subject Area………………………………………………………………………… Matriculation No…………………………………………………………………….
Project Topic……………………………………………………………………....... ……………………………………………………………………............................ S/N ITEMS MAXIMUM SCORE SCORE OBTAINED 1.
Abstract: Precise & understandable, Aptness of title 10 Well written Preliminary Pages.
2.
Introduction: Clearly written background of study, 15 statement of problem, hypotheses, significance, limitations etc.
3.
Profile of Target Audience: Good treatment of topic sub- 15 headings, refs, summaries grammar etc.
4.
Project Execution: Design, appropriateness of audience, 30 appropriateness of programs, means of com, etc.
5.
Evaluation: Caliber of evaluators, evaluatory comments, 10 6.
Summary: Conclusion and Recommendations.
10 7.
Bibliography: Well-written in APA Style( for the social 5 Sciences), Appendices.
8.
Project Organisation: Good typing, correct binding 5 procedures as specified by the school.
TOTAL 100% General Comments if any……………………………………………………….. …………………………………………………………………………………….. ……………………………………………………………………………………… Total Marks Obtained………………………Grade………………………………… …………………....................................................................................................... NAME OF SUPERVISOR Chief Examiner Signature and Date………… Signature and Date……………… Course Overview and Presentation Schedule 10 Modul Title of work Weeks Number of e/Unit Activity Assignment Course Guide Module 1 Unit 1 Steps to follow/Format for Week 1 Assignment 1 carrying out a professional Project Unit 2 Parts of the Professional Project: Week 2 Assignment 1 The Prelim pages, Main Text and Bibliography/appendices 3 Grading and Assessment of The Week 3 Assignment 1 project.
Binding specifications 4 The Case Study.
Week 4 Assignment 1 How to Get the Most from This Course In distance learning, the study units replace the university lecture.
This is one of the great advantages of distance learning; you can read and work through specially designed study materials at your own pace, and at a time and place that suits you best.
Think of it as reading the lecture instead of listening to the lecturer.
In the same way a lecturer might give you some reading to do, the study units tell you where to read, and which are your text materials or set books.
You are provided exercises to do at appropriate points, just as a lecturer might give you an in-class exercise.
Each of the study units follows a common format.
The first item is an introduction to the subject matter of the unit, and how a particular unit is integrated with the other units and the course as a whole.
Next to this is a set of learning objectives.
These objectives let you know what you should be able to do by the time you have completed the unit.
These learning objectives are meant to guide your study.
The moment a unit is finished, you must go back and check whether you have achieved the objectives.
If you make this a habit, then you will significantly improve your chances of passing the course.
The main body of the unit guides you through the required reading from other sources.
This will usually be either from your set books or from a Reading section.
The following is a practical strategy for working through the course.
If you run into any trouble, try and see your supervisor.
Remember that your supervisor’s job is to help you.
When you need assistance, do not hesitate to call and ask him/her to provide it.
1.
Read this Course Guide thoroughly, it is your first assignment.
112.
Organize a Personal work Schedule for this course so as to give it the desired attention.
Note the time you are expected to spend on each chapter of your work and how each chapter relates to the previous ones so that subsequent chapters can follow the same pattern .Also ensure that the different subheadings in each chapter are neatly and logically linked to one another.
3.
Once you have created your own study schedule, do everything to stay faithful to it.
The major reason why students fail is that they get behind with their course work if you get into difficulties with your schedule, please, let your tutor know before it is too late to help.
4.
Turn to Unit I, and read the introduction and the objectives for the unit.
5.
Assemble the study materials.
You will need your set books and the unit you are studying at any point in time.
As you work through the unit, you will know what sources to consult for further information.
6.
Keep in touch with your study centre.
Up-to-date course information will be continuously available there.
7.
Well before the relevant due dates (about 4 weeks before due dates), keep in mind that you will learn a lot by doing the assessment exercises carefully.
They have been designed to help you meet the objectives of the course and, therefore, will help you do a good job both in the selection of your project title and in physically carrying out the project.
Submit your project file promptly to your supervisor according to your agreed schedule with him.
8. Review the objectives for each study unit to confirm that you have achieved them.
If you feel unsure about any of the objectives, review the study materials or consult your tutor.
9.
When you are confident that you have achieved a unit’s objectives, you can start on the next unit.
Proceed unit by unit through the course and try to pace your study so that you keep yourself on schedule.
10.
When you have submitted any chapter to your supervisor to read, do not wait for its return before starting on the next one.
Keep to your schedule.
When the project file is returned, pay particular attention to your supervisor’s comments, and effect the necessary corrections in readiness to return the file to him/her.
11.
After completing the whole work, review the course and prepare yourself for the final submission and defence if indicated by the university..
Check that you have achieved the unit objectives (listed at the beginning of each unit) and the course objectives (listed in the Course Guide).
Tutors and Tutorials In addition to your project supervisor, you are free to contact your tutor on this course so as get further clarifications regarding other details you may require pending the 12assignment of supervisor to you.
Information relating to the tutorials will be provided at the appropriate time.
Your supervisor will read and comment on your submissions.
He /she will keep a close watch on your progress and if you encounter any difficulties he/she might provide additional assistance to you during the course.
You must submit your completed and well-bound project to your study center on or before the deadline for the submission of projects.
They will be scored by your supervisor and returned to the study center as soon as possible.
Do not hesitate to contact your tutor if you need help.
Contact your tutor if: • you do not understand any part of the study units or the assigned readings • you have difficulty with any part of the project • you have a question or problem with any part the project which has not been discussed in this Course Guide.
You should try your best to attend the tutorials.
This is the only chance to have face-to- face contact with your tutor and ask questions which are answered instantly.
You can raise any problem encountered in the course of your study.
To gain the maximum benefit from course tutorials, prepare a question list before attending them.
You will learn a lot from participating in discussion actively.
SUMMARY The course guide gives you an overview of what to expect in the course of this study.
The course teaches you the basic steps to follow in conducting a Professional Project.
It also provides you with the basic skills required for physically carrying out the project.
We wish you success with the course and hope that you will find it captivating, interesting and useful.
END OF GUIDE MON: 11AM 01-03-10 13 MAIN WORK JLS616 PROFESSIONAL PROJECT Course Team: ONWUBERE, Chidinma (Course Developer and Writer) – NOUN.
Dr. Victor A Ayedun-Aluma (Content Editor) University of Lagos, Akoka.
ONWUBERE, Chidinma (Course Coordinator) - NOUN, Christine .I.
Ofulue, Ph.D (Programme Leader) NOUN, NATIONAL OPEN UNIVERSITY OF NIGERIA 14National Open University of Nigeria Headquarters 14/16 Ahmadu Bello Way Victoria Island Lagos Abuja Annex 245 Samuel Adesujo Ademulegun Street Central Business District Opposite Arewa Suites Abuja e-mail: centralinfo@nou.edu.ng URL: www.nou.edu.ng National Open University of Nigeria 2006 First Printed 2006 ISBN: All Rights Reserved Printed by …………….. For National Open University of Nigeria 15TABLE OF CONTENTS PAGE Module 1 Unit 1: Steps to follow and the format for professional Project.
Unit 2: Format of the Professional Project/ The Scientific Research Unit 3: Project Supervision, Grading and The Assessment Form.
Module 2: The Case Samples Unit 1a: Professional Project for a Public Relations Campaign.
Unit 1b : Professional Project for a an Advert Campaign Unit 2: Professional Project for a Broadcast Medium Unit 3: Professional Project for a Print Medium Unit 4: Citation of reference Materials used 16MODULE 1 Unit 1: Introduction and the steps to follow in writing a professional project Unit 2: The format for writing a professional project.
Unit 3: Project Supervision, Grading and the Assessment form UNIT 1: INTRODUCTION , THE STEPS TO FOLLOW CONTENTS 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objectives 3.0 Main Content 3.1 The meaning of Research and Professional Project 3.2 The Essence, Nature and scope of Professional Project.
3.3 Steps to follow in writing a Professional Project 3.4 The format for a professional Project 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutor Marked Assignment 7.0 References/Further Readings 171.0 INTRODUCTION Research is a very important aspect of our academic training.
Not only does it widen the student’s horizons of knowledge it equally helps the teacher to assess the extent to which he or she has learnt what.
This is because any student who is capable of successfully conducting a research in his field of study can be said to be quite knowledgeable in that field given the amount of academic work involved in researches, especially the empirical research.
The professional project is even more demanding in terms of actualizing what one has studied during a given period of academic endeavour.
The professional project is equally a little bit different from the empirical research in terms of its demands.
Unlike the normal scientific investigation, it drags you into physically practicing what you have trained for even though it is on a very small scale.
Hence, it is like a mini practice on the job of one’s field of study.
This of course, appears to be a better way of assessing one’s achievements on a professional training programme than the theoretical demands of a pure scientific investigation.
In as much as both the empirical research and professional project are projects that involve the identification of problems and require suggestive ways of solving these problems, each has its own specific method of carrying out the project.
So, what is most important is for you to understand the rules of the game and follow them strictly.
Since the rules are there for you to follow, it is the level of competence you as a mass communication student demonstrates that will determine the quality of research or project you conduct.
This unit will therefore enhance your understanding of empirical research, professional project and the difference between the two of them.
2.0 OBJECTIVES On successful completion of this unit, you should be able to: • Define Scientific Research • Define professional project • Differentiate between both of them.
• Give an account of the nature and scope of professional project • Identify the procedure for carrying out a professional project 3.0 MAIN CONTENT 3.1 The Meaning of Research and Professional Project A.
Research The etymology of research can be traced to the French word, recherché, , which simply means “to investigate thoroughly”.
18Generally speaking, research is fact finding.
It is enquiry into some problems or phenomena in a society or situation, using the scientific method.
Research can be said to be a step-by-step process that involves collecting and examining information.
“To research is to search again, to take another, more careful look, to find out more.” Sellhz, Wrightsman and Cook (1976) in Ajala (1996:1) It leads to the acquisition of professional knowledge through the verification and explanation of certain phenomena within the society.
For one to engage in any research, the expected outcome of the research must be important otherwise there will be no need for the research.
Consequently, all research activities start from “Problems that require solutions.
This may sometime originate from an idea, a puzzle or simply the wish to explore our knowledge about simple issues, phenomena, situations or societies”.
Esiri, (2008) in Wilson et-al (2008:3) Scholars have observed that most research endeavours started with problems which were puzzles.
A puzzle is not just a lack of understanding but a gap in our understanding.
Hence, feeling this gap is some serious business not just a child’s play.
This is achieved by the researcher’s own contribution to knowledge based on the outcome of his research findings.
The thoroughness of research procedures can be vividly captured in some of the definitions of research: Only a few of them will be cited below.
A comprehensive look at other definitions from your course material on Communication Research is advised.
The New Oxford Dictionary defines research as “careful, systematic, patient study and investigation in some field of knowledge undertaken to discover or establish facts and principles”.
The Webster’s Nineth New Collegiate Dictionary defines research as “investigation or experimentation aimed at the discovery and interpretation of facts, revision of accepted theories or laws in the light of new facts or practical application of such new or revised theories or law”.
Kerlinger (1973:11), sees scientific research as the systematic, controlled and critical investigation of hypothetical propositions about the presumed relations among natural phenomena.
According to Esiri, (2007: 8) There are two points to note in Kerlinger’s definition: i) Systematic and controlled means that scientific investigation is so ordered that investigators (researchers) can have critical confidence in research outcomes.
It also means that research observations are tightly discipline.
19ii) Scientific investigation is empirical.
This means that if a scientist believes something is so, he must somehow put his belief to a test outside himself.
In other words, subjective belief must be checked against objective reality.
Osuala (2005:1) defines research as “the process of arriving at dependable solutions to problems through the planned and systematic collection, analysis and interpretation of data”.
He further adds that research is oriented towards the discovery of the relationship that exist among the phenomena of the world in which we live.
In all these one thing we must realize is that, as Esiri (2007: 9) again rightly pointed out, we do research to improve our knowledge and understanding of the world we live in.
Most times, research involves finding out something new.
Research allows us to accumulate knowledge and make improvements without discarding old wisdom in favour of new facts.
Being a very important tool for advancing knowledge, research is considered a very vital tool for promoting progress, for enabling man to relate more effectively to his environment, and for accomplishing man’s purposes and resolving his conflicts.
.
Research helps in the decision making process as it provides the decision maker with information to objectively evaluate situations and problems.
The professional project is one such aspect of research which helps decision-making through the identification of situational problems and which it eventually tries to provide answers to.
The major difference is that it does this by physically conducting a real life project to suit the demands of the problem identified, unlike the scientific inquiry which may merely formulate hypotheses, theories rules and principles which can be applied for solving similar problems in future.
B.
Professional Project.
Every graduating student of the post graduate diploma is required to present a Professional Project to the department.
This type of project is quite different from the general research project.
Rather, it is, a 6 credit unit project meant to assess every PGD student of either Mass Communication or Journalism on the practical experience gained during the theoretical aspect of the programme.
Each student is thus required to prepare for presentation: a PR campaign programme, an Advert Campaign, a Radio/TV News Broadcast or entertainment programme, a Documentary, a News story or Feature Story for Publication.
Often times, students have confused this type of project with the normal research project.
For this reason I has became expedient to prepare an outline for this Professional Project which could guide you and help give you a clear knowledge of what is required of you for this project.
Equally, samples of the different types of professional projects which coincide with the different sequences of Mass communication have been provided as dummies or models upon which to base your own project.
20 The type of professional project carried out by a student solely depends on the demands of the school or programme being run.
On the other hand, the topic for the project depends solely on your interest as a student.
This of course will be a factor of your curiosity on certain aspects of your professional training which has given you concern over the time and for which you want some clarifications.
This clarification can be acluered by you achieved by you when you physically take certain steps to unravel a problem and proffer solution to it.
In this type of project, you do not merely suggest how to remedy the problematic situation but rather physically carry out activities that is aimed at or that will most probably, resolve the problem.
For instance, -one could conduct a PR campaign for a Political aspirant who has contested in three occasions and in each case has lost to the opponent.
- an Advert campaign could be conducted for a product whose sales dropped drastically due to one organizational problem or the other, or a new product facing an imminent competition with other contemporary products.
- a Documentary of an interesting topical issue could be written and formatted for a radio or TV broadcast where documentaries have been poorly presented in the past.
- a Feature article could be written for publication in A Print medium (Newspaper/Magazine) to show the effective use of stylistics and the entertaining aspect of feature stories which may be lacking in most feature articles.
A fact that has affected the subscription of these papers or magazines.
So, the professional project is like a do-it-yourself thing whereby you can carry out an activity, apply it, and see the effect, whether negative or positive.
This is the great difference between the professional project and the ordinary scientific investigation.
It is unlike the scientific investigation where someone conducts a research, makes suggestions and recommendations as to how to solve the problem.
Or at other times, where hypotheses and theories are formulated waiting for some other persons to come and apply or implement them.
It is important to note that the professional project may not always totally resolve or solve the problem for which it has been conducted.
However, it a very good step in the right direction.
More often than not, it does solve the problem, especially where the project has been properly conducted.
Where the problem remains after the application of the project, then the feedback got at the evaluation stage of the project’s implementation will be matched against the objectives of the project so as to see to what extent the project achieved its set objectives.
Thereafter, feedback got is used to reset the objective probably for a second run-off of the project in order to achieve better results.
This process of using feedback to reset objectives is called cybernetics.
21Self Assessment Exercise (SAE) Why do Professionals conduct professional projects instead of scientific researches?
3.2 The Essence, Nature and Scope of Professional Project.
Essence The essence of conducting a professional is to test your ability on the professional training you have undergone.
Socially, the essence is to identify a situational problem and physically provide solution to such a problem by carrying out activities that lead to the solution of the problem.
Nature From our discussions above you now know what a professional project is as distinct form a general scientific investigation into different fields of study.
As the various fields of study (Arts, Physical and Applied Sciences, Vocational Studies, Education, Environmental sciences, Engineering, Architecture to mention only these few) have their own specific ways of doing research, so does the professional training courses.
So the nature of a particular study depends on that particular field of study.
The nature of a professional project depends on the Modus Operandi of the profession.
A project on a PR campaign for a corporate organization will follow strictly the methods and steps for conducting research in Public Relations.
Scope Scope refers to the extent to which any project or research goes.
That is, the area it intends to cover.
The scope of any professional project could just be a unit of project to be carried out.
For instance, in the case of carrying out an Advert campaign for a product whose popularity of demand is falling, you may wish to do an advert copy for publication in a print medium only without going into preparing ad copies for the electronic media.
This of course, depends on the extent of the problem for which the campaign is being conducted.
If the problem is serious then, a massive campaign may need be undertaken thereby involving all the different arms of the media.
In a nutshell, scope means the limit of your work.
Hence, in a normal research, scope is synonymous with limits.
Something like, should I say, boundaries of work.
Please note that limit is quite different from limitations.
Limitations refer to the problems or obstacles you will or you encountered during of your work.
Again the limitations in this case refers mainly to the problems encountered in trying to collect data from your respondents; then followed by other extraneous problems of finance time constraint, power failure etc.
Self Assessment Exercise (SAE) What do you think is the difference between the empirical research and the professional project?
22 3.3 Steps to follow in writing a Professional Project The following steps are necessary for effectively carrying out a professional project.
These steps tend to guide you as you plan towards and eventually conduct your professional project.
1.
Choose a topic for your Professional Project 2.
Present this to your facilitator who, with the aid of the study centre personnel, will then assign you a supervisor 3.
Get approval of the topic from your supervisor 4.
Prepare a project outline and present to your supervisor as soon as your outline is approved, then: 5.
Do a proposal for your topic and as soon as this is approved by your supervisor, go ahead and carry out your project following the guidelines given below for a professional project.
6.
On completion of your project, submit it to your supervisor who will then grade you and submit the work to the study center.
7.
You will be informed in due course about the colour and the specifications for binding your project.
NB.
Please note that he professional project is a little different from the normal empirical or scientific research which literarily seeks to find solutions to an identified problem.
The professional Project on the other hand, seeks to put to test the professional skills acquired by a student crossing from one field of study to another through the PGD programme.
Hence, it is different, both in thought and in format.
Though it is equally meant to solve problems, its own problem solving involves physically carrying out a project that reflects any of the three major sequences of Mass Communication (Print, PRAD, Broadcast), rather than stating how to go about solving the problem.
.
It is rather demonstrative in nature.
23Self Assessment Exercise Outline the steps for undertaking a professional project.
Why is it necessary to follow these steps for writing a Professional Project?
4.0 CONCLUSION The professional project is an aspect of Research.
Though quite different from the scientific method, it is an important instrument for solving identified problems in the media industry and thus generating media knowledge.
It is highly reliable because it is physically conducted and the result quickly evaluated, a process that could lead to exposure to other areas requiring media research.
5.0 SUMMARY In this unit you have been taught: • The concept of Professional Project • The concept of Research • The essence, nature, and scope of Professional Project • Steps of the Professional Project as well as that of the scientific method • The format for both of them.
6.0 TUTOR MARKED ASSIGNMENT a) Distinguish between Professional Project and the Scientific research.
b) Which do you prefer?
7.0 REFERENCES/FURTHER READINGS Ajala, V. O.
(1996) Scholarly Writing Guide For Researchers.
Ibadan: May Best Publishers.
Kerlinger, F. N. (1973) Foundations of Behavioural Research Second Edition.
New York: Holt, Rinehart and Winston, Inc. Osuala, E. C. (1982) Introduction to Research Methodology.
Onitsha, Nigeria: African- First Publishers.
Stempel, G. H. and Westley (1989) Research Methods in Mass Communication.
Prentice Hall: Englewood Cliff, New Jersey.
24 Uyo, A.
(2002).
"Communication Research: An Africa Discourse".
In Festus Eribo and Enoh Tanjong (eds).
Journalism and Mass Communication in Africa.
New York: Oxford Press.
25UNIT 2: THE FORMAT FOR WRITING A PROFESSIONAL PROJECT.
CONTENTS 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objectives 3.0 Main Content 3.1 The format for a Professional Project 3.2 Steps to follow in conducting a Scientific Research Project 3.3 The format for a Research Project 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutor Marked Assignment 7.0 References/Further Readings 1.0 INTRODUCTION Every type of research has its own method or procedure for conducting it.
The empirical research has a very standard format which every discipline or field of study follows except for some specifications peculiar to each field.
Similarly, the professional project has its own format which is different from that of the normal empirical research.
Apart from the Prelim Pages,(Authentication, Dedication, Acknowledgements, Table of contents) the professional project has its own chapter formation and characteristics.
You will understand this better when you study the two different outlines presented below.
By the time you finish studying them you will then appreciate how practical the professional outline is.
2.0 OBJECTIVES On successful completion of this unit, you should be able to: • Outline the format for a professional project.
• Discuss the Steps of the Scientific Method/Research Process • Differentiate between both of them 263.0 MAIN CONTENT 3.1 The Format for a Professional Project The format for a professional project has been outlined below in accordance with the basic Chapter formation of the Professional project.
Slight differences or changes may however, be experienced here and there based on some specifications by various departments or due to the demands of the topic being treated.
1.
An Outline for Professional Project A.
Preliminary Pages (i) Authentication/Approval (ii) Dedication (iii) Acknowledgements (iv) Table of Contents B.
Main Contents (i) Chapter One: Introduction & Situation Analysis a.
Introduction b.
The need for your desired project e.g.
PR Campaign, Feature Article TV, Broadcast Documentary or Programme choice.
c. Historical background or Profiles of persons, product or institutions d. Situational Analysis and Statement of the Problem Notes (ii) Chapeter Two: The Project Proper e.g.
a.
- A PR Campaign - An Advert Campaign - A Print (Newspaper/Magazine) Feature Story - A Broadcast Programme e.g.
Documentary, Entertainment, or News Broadcast.
b.
Goal / aim of Project c. Target audience (Public) d. Means of Communication e. Campaign message (PR/AD) or selection of topic (Print/Broadcast) f. Timing for the Slot (Print) Program (Broadcast) or Campaign(PR/AD) g. Budget for the Campaign h. Evaluation of the Campaign 27 Notes (iii) Chapter Three: Summary & Evaluation - Summary of the entire work - Assessors’ Comments - Conclusion - Notes - Bibliography - Appendixes Self Assessment Exercise Is there anything that strikes you about the nature of this outline?
Discuss it.
3.2 Steps of the Scientific Method/Research Process Scholars have agreed that, scientific method and research are used interchangeably.
“A process, is a series of activities working together ahead over time towards achieving a common purpose” The research process one of such processes.
An analysis of these activities shows that they derive essentially from the steps of the scientific method.
These steps are essential as they guide us faithfully towards accomplishing our desired goal.
Before these steps are even undertaken, the very first thing is to look around and identify some of the perturbing phenomena within the environment which require scientific investigation.
This process is called observation.
The steps of the scientific method differ from author to author, however, generally speaking ,a synthesis of the various activities that go on during the research process can be outlined under the following steps.
1.
Observation 2.
Selection of the problem.
3.
Formulation of the problem.
4. Review of the literature.
5.
Design of the study 6.
Collection of the data 7.
Analysis of the data 28 8.
Interpretation and qualification 9.
Writing and publication of the research report.
1.
Observation This the very first step of the scientific method.
Scientists agree that anything that cannot be observed cannot be investigated by science.
Observation can be either Spontaneous (active) or induced (passive).
It could be direct (through the use of our natural sense organs) or indirect (through the use of instruments).
It could equally be participatory or non-participatory.
2.
Problem identification and definition: Here, there is need to state the research problem in clear, simple, concise and complete way.
This done is by asking questions about the observation made which could give a clear cut insight into what the problems might be.
3.
Formulation of Hypothesis: This involves the “seemingly unscientific procedure of guessing” (Akaneme 2004:11) Of course hypotheses are probabilistic assumptions which may or may not be true when empirically tested.
They are guesses as to what the answer to the identified problem could be.
4. Review of literature: Having selected the problem and formulated it, the next step is to focus on the past works done in the area so as to compare them to your own findings at the end of the research.
In doing so there is need for you to be clear, simple and concise.
5.
Design of the study: A research design is a plan which a study uses for collecting, collating and analyzing a set of data.
Here, the methods that will be used in eliciting knowledge of the research problem are stated in the study design which is just like an architectural design that will be used for inquiry into the research problem.Simply put,it is, research method that will be used.
Examples are: content analysis, survey, experimental, Historical etc.
29 6.
Collection of data: The research method states the process of data collection and the data collection instrument required.
It could be a questionnaire, an interview or a laboratory test etc.
The data collection procedure will determine the type of instrument required.
At this stage, depending on the nature of the research, the information needed to answer the research questions are collected.
7.
Analysis of data: This the conversion of observations made and records taken into categories that can be analysed.
Data itself cannot answer the research questions unless it is analysed.
At this stage the research data is analysed to generate evidence.
8.
Interpretation and qualification: After the data have been analysed they have to be explained.
Here the data is explained in simple terms devoid of statistical or qualitative statements that may be too complex for understanding.
9.
Writing and publication of the research report: Here, you present your research findings to the entire community.
The research task is not completed until its findings are reported and the report communicated to the stakeholders.
The activities involved in the research process are many but we have summarised them in these steps outlined above.
Everything we do in research falls within these steps.
Remember, generally, what is true of the research process is equally true of the media research process.
However, this is quite different from what happens in Professional Project as you may have seen from above.
In other to save themselves the problem of stating these steps theoretically, some authors prefer to present the scientific process diagrammatically.
Hence when these steps are diagrammatically represented, it gives the following chart.
30 Diagrammatic Representation of the Scientific Process OBSERVATIONS About an unexplained Phenomenon ABDUCTION Process of devising explanations CAUSAL QUESTIONS for observations.
It involves: E.g what caused the pale 1. creativity Yellow colour of the leave 2. use of previous experience 3. use of related research, etc If ALTERNATE HYPOTHESIS Tentative ideas to explain a Phenomenon Hypotheses 1, H2, H3 ----etc And… DEDUCTION Process of forming EXPERIMENTS specific conclusions using Test conditions assumed explanations and Experimental designs Then….. EXPECTED RESULT OBSERVATION RESULT What should happen What actually happened?
(The predicted result) (The observed result) Therefore… CONCLUSION The hypotheses Supported or contradicted Figure 1.2 The process of the scientific method (Source : Moore et al, 1995) Self Assessment Exercise Juxtapose the scientific research process with the steps for carrying out a professional project.
31 3.
3 Research Project Outline The Outline Of A Research Project Titled: “Public Attitude To Finance Houses” A.
Preliminary Pages (i) Title page (ii) Abstract (iii) Authentication/Approval (iv) Dedication (v) Acknowledgement (vi) Table of Contents (vi) List of tables B.
Main Contents (i) Chapter One: Introduction & Background to the study a.
Introduction b.
Statement of the Problem d. Hypothesis e. Rationale for the study f. Scope of the study g. Significance of the study h. Definition of terms i. References (ii) Chapter Two: Literature Review a.
Definition of attitude b.
Attributes of attitude c. Components of attitude d. Determinants of attitude e. Formation of attitude f. Measurement of attitude g. Theoretical Framework References 32 (iii) Chapter Three: Research Method a.
Research design b.
Population of the study c. Sampling Technique d. Data collection instrument e. Method of data analysis f. Limitations References (iv) Chapter Four: Data Analysis a.
Introduction b.
Background of respondents c. Data analysis and interpretation d. Hypothesis testing e. Findings on study’s hypothesis References (v) Chapter Five: Summary Conclusion & Recommendations a.
Summary b.
Conclusion c. Suggestions or Recommendation Bibliography Appendixes NOTE The writer had to take the pains to present both the Professional Project Outline and the outline for a Scientific Research project for you to see so that you can actually look at both of them side by side and physically identify the major differences between them.
In this way, it becomes very easy for you to commit both of them to memory and find them easy to recall whenever the need arises.
4.0 CONCLUSION Every student of Mass Communication must have a very good knowledge of the differences between the steps for scientific process and that of professional outline.
It is equally important to note that each of these steps is exclusive and so, cannot be interchangeably used.
33 5.0 SUMMARY So far we have discussed the following concepts in this unit: • The format for professional project • The steps for scientific research or the scientific process • The format for scientific research • The outline for both the professional and the Researcher project.
6.0 TUTOR MARKED ASSIGNMENT Generate any topic of your choice and prepare two separate outlines for: a.
A professional Project b.
A scientific Research 7.0 REFERENCES/FURTHER READINGS Akaneme, F.I.
(2004) History And Philosophy 0f Science.
Course Material of National Open University of Nigeria, Lagos.
Beveridge, W .I .B.
(1970) The Art of Scientific Investigation.
London: Heinemann Educational Books Ltd. Esiri, M. J.
(2008).
In Wilson, D. et al.
Communication Research.
Nigeria, Lagos:Course Material Published for National open university of Nigeria Kerlinger, F. N. (1973) Foundations of Behavioural Research Second Edition.
New York: Holt, Rinehart and Winston, Inc. Moore, W.E.
H., McCann, and McCann, J.
(1974) Creative and critical Thinking.
Boston; Houghton Mifflin Co. Uyo, A.
(2002).
"Communication Research: An Africa Discourse".
In Festus Eribo and Enoh Tanjong (eds).
Journalism and Mass Communication in Africa.
New York: Oxford Press.
34UNIT 3: PROJECT SUPERVISION, GRADING AND THE ASSESSMENT FORM.
CONTENTS 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objectives 3.0 Main Content 3.1 Project Supervision 3.2 Selection of Project Title and the Assignment of Project Supervisor 3.2 Grading the Project and the Assessment Form 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutor Marked Assignment 7.0 References/Further Readings 1.0 INTRODUCTION The Supervision of professional project is just like that of the scientific research.
The actual procedure to follow depends on you supervisor.
But your own duty is to solely keep to his/her instructions and comments.
However, please feel free to explain to him why you have taken a particular angle on an issue he disagrees with.
If he insists please take to his own point because he may have a reason for his/her own views.
Please try as much as you can to work with you supervisor as it is easier for you to learn how to cope with a difficult supervisor than to have a change of supervisor.
The selection of project title solely depends entirely on the student.
This is because your project topic should be a reflection of your interest in a particular aspect of your field of study.
This will then be well encapsulated into a catchy project title.
Grading the professional project depends on the format agreed by a particular University, School or Faculty.
However, Since every type of research has its own method or procedure, the grading pattern equally depends on the type of project written.
352.0 OBJECTIVES On the completion of this unit, you should be able to: Discuss the procedure for project supervision • Outline the determining factors for grading a professional project.
• Discuss the grading system of a professional project • State the different parts of the Assessment Form 3.0 MAIN CONTENT 3.1 Project Supervision In place of the other TMAs which you normally submit as your continuous assessment, you will be required to open a file for yourself with which you can enclose the different chapters of your project as you intend to send them to your supervisor for reading, vetting and for his/her supervisory comments.
This will be returned to you for corrections as soon as your supervisor goes through the chapters.
You continue this process until you have finished the entire work.
Make sure that your project supervision file reaches your supervisor regularly so that he/she may not have to wait for too long before reading the subsequent chapters.
If not, he may likely forget what he read in the previous chapters and thus become compelled to reverse your previous submissions.
Of course you will be certain that no supervisor has that kind of time to spend, since he or she has several other supervisees and other academic works as well as his/her own personal affairs to contend with.
So, please you must help your supervisor to help you.
Please try as much as you can to keep to your supervisor’s schedule so as to help him supervise you well.
.
The whole essence of opening a supervision file is to ensure that you file in all your documents properly so as to safeguard them.
This is because every document in your file is of vital importance to the accomplishment of this professional project.
Please note that your documents or submissions are to be filed sequentially as they are written.
Once a document has been read and commented on by the supervisor, the document must not be removed from the file.
This helps us to make reference to our previous errors, the supervisor’s comments and requests.
The filing system is such that subsequent documents are filed on top of the previous ones for ease of reading.
36 The method you follow depends entirely on your supervisor.
Some supervisors like reading their supervisee’s work chapter by chapter whereas, others prefer to read the first three chapters together and then the subsequent ones.
So you must abide by your supervisor’s request.
IMPORTANT 1.
Please be informed that any document for submission to the Project Supervisor must be typed with the Computer, using font 14 and double spacing.
There should be no submission in long hand at, all, and under any circumstance.
This is the best way we can ensure that we save time and thus accomplish this work in record time.
2.
Please endeavour to read through your work thoroughly before submitting them.
It is not the Supervisor’s duty to proofread your work for you, but to guide you on the technical aspects of the work which may not be too clear to you.
The easiest way to turn off your supervisor is to present him/her with any material or document that is error-ladden.
Self Assessment Exercise 1 In not more than one typed page, discuss the rules of the game for Project Supervision.
3.2 Selection of Project Title and Assignment of Supervisors The selection of project title is not an easy business at all.
Oftentimes, you observe that your project topic emanates from something that has been exciting your heart since you started studying under your programme.
Perhaps, a problem that you have been thinking about proffering a solution to.
So, your title depends entirely on what you can make out from your topic.
Please note that the topic is a little wider than the title.
A topic is actually the general idea you are interested in, while the title is a particular element of that general idea.
For, instance, a PR student may be interested in carrying out his/her professional project on a PR campaign.
But then, his/her project title will be delimited to a particular person or organization for whom/which this PR campaign is meant.
Examples of typical PR Campaign titles are: a.
A Public Relations Campaign Plan For the Nigerian Police, Lagos Command 37b.
A Public relations Campaign For The Revival Of Punch Newspapers c. A Blueprint For A Public Relations Campaign For Nigeria National Shipping Line (NNSL) Similarly, a student interested in carrying out his/her project in the area of Advertising Campaign may decide to delimit his/her title to read: a.
Advertising Production for a New Body Perfume: GOLD b.
Advertising Campaign For Trade Bank( Nigeria) Limited c. Advertising Talents Music School: A Promotional Plan In the broadcast area, we can have titles such as: a.
The Making of A Conflict resolution Television Programme: b.
A Television Documentary of Film Nollywood c. A Drama Production (Nko Mbe) For A Community Radio: CHIOCE FM 103.5 Lagos In the area of print, the following titles can be generated from Print topics: a. Widowhood and the Society b. Begging: A Necessity or a Vice?
c. Campus Robbers, The Police and The System Because your project is a reflection of your interest in a particular aspect of your field of study, it should be well encapsulated into a catchy project title.
You can now agree with me that you are the only person who can select a topic for your project by yourself.
Many of us hold the erroneous view that it is the duty of our supervisors to select research or professional project titles for us.
This is not so, otherwise, it will equally mean that our supervisors will have to write the projects for us.
Self Assessment Exercise 2 Identify four other topics in the different sequences of Mass Communication PR, AD, Print, Bbroadcastas exemplified above and write out two professional project titles for each of the sequences.
383.3 Grading the Project and the Assessment Form Of course, the whole process of grading actually starts with supervisor’s comments when he reads through the supervisee’s works and makes his corrections or suggestion on the writings.
His comments will actually tell whether or not you are on the right track.
So, you must take very seriously all his comments whether they are hard facts or jokes or innuendos cast at you in the process of supervision.
Besides, you must attend to all these comments one by one.
Do not overlook any of them please or regard it as inconsequential.
Your willingness and ability to attend to all these comments appropriately go a very long way in determining what your project will turn out to be and consequently, the final outcome epitomized in your final score.
Please be informed that other key determinants of your score include: The physical presentation of the materials you submit to your project supervisor, the content, the timeliness of your submissions and the willingness to keep to your supervisor’s instructions.
More importantly, your ability to keep to the deadline for the submission of your project.
This is a very key factor because of the way the Media profession regards the issue of deadline.
Remember that anything that does not meet up with the deadline in the Journalist Profession dies by the deadline.
The assessment of the Professional project like any other project is usually done through an assessment form which has been divided into different sections.
The three basic aspects of this form are: a.
Students personal data showing the student's Name, Subject Area, Matriculation Number and Project Topic b.
Items to be graded by the Supervisor and column for scores to be awarded.
c. General Comments, Total Marks Obtained, the names of the Project Supervisor, the External Examiner as well as the dates.
39 Below is a copy of the Assessment Form.
NATIONAL OPEN UNIVERSITY OF NIGERIA.
14/16 Ahmadu Bello Way, Victoria Island Lagos.
PROFESSIONAL PROJECT ASSESSMENT FORM Name of student…… ………………………………………................. Subject Area………………………………………………………………………… Matriculation No…………………………………………………………………….
Project Topic……………………………………………………………………....... ……………………………………………………………………............................ S/N ITEMS MAXIMUM SCORE SCORE OBTAINED 1.
Abstract: Precise & understandable, Aptness of title Well 10 written Preliminary Pages.
2.
Introduction: Clearly written background of study, statement 15 of problem, hypotheses, significance, limitations etc.
3.
Profile of Target Audience: Good treatment of topic sub- 15 headings, refs, summaries grammar etc.
4.
Project Execution: Design, appropriateness of audience, 30 appropriateness of programs, means of com, etc.
5.
Evaluation: Caliber of evaluators, evaluatory comments, 10 6.
Summary: Conclusion and Recommendations.
10 7.
Bibliography: Well-written in APA Style( for the social 5 Sciences), Appendices.
8.
Project Organisation: Good typing, correct binding 5 procedures as specified by the school.
TOTAL 100% General Comments if any……………………………………………………….. …………………………………………………………………………………….. ……………………………………………………………………………………… Total Marks Obtained………………………Grade………………………………… …………………....................................................................................................... NAME OF SUPERVISOR Chief Examiner Signature and Date………… Signature and Date……………… 40In due course, you will be given the specific guidelines regarding the binding of the project and the number of copies you are required to submit.
Self Assessment Exercise 3 Why do you think that it is necessary to grade the project under different sections?
4.0 CONCLUSION Project supervision and assessment are two key areas of this course which we must not neglect.
It is therefore important that you appreciate what is required in each case as well as what is involved.
These will very much help you in doing a good job on your professional project.
5.0 SUMMARY In this unit you have been exposed to: The procedures for supervision The concept of selection of project topic and titles and: The grading system of projects 6.0 TUTOR MARKED ASSIGNMENT What do you consider the key considerations in grading a student’s professional project?
7.0 REFERENCES/FURTHER READINGS Ajala, V. O.
(1996) Scholarly Writing Guide For Researchers.
Ibadan: May Best Publishers.
Osuala, E. C. (1982) Introduction to Research Methodology.
Onitsha, Nigeria: African-First Publishers.
Uyo, A.
(2002).
"Communication Research: An Africa Discourse".
In Festus Eribo and Enoh Tanjong (eds).
Journalism and Mass Communication in Africa.
New York: Oxford Press.
41 MODULE 2: THE CASE SAMPLES Unit 1: Professional Project for a Public Relations Campaign.
Unit 2: Professional Project for a Broadcast Medium Unit 3: Professional Project for a Print Medium Unit 4: Citation of reference Materials used for academic papers.
UNIT 1: PROFESSIONAL PROJECT FOR A PUBLIC RELATIONS /ADVERTISING CAMPAIGN.
CONTENTS 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objectives 3.0 Main Content 3.1 Sample of Professional Project for PR Campaign Plan 3.2 Sample of Professional Project for AD Campaign Production 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutor Marked Assignment 7.0 References/Further Readings 1.0 INTRODUCTION The whole of module 2 is actually the Presentation of case studies.
A case study will be presented in each of the three sequences (field of specialisation) of Mass Communication.
However, two samples will be presented for the PRAD sequence - one for PR and one for AD since both of them constitute a pair.
42 This unit 1 is the presentation of samples of Professional Projects in the Public Relations and Advertisement (PRAD) Sequence.
The samples will show the key areas or parts of a PRAD Campaign Plan such as the Prelim pages, the main work/chapters and the appendices.
Then very brief summaries of each subheading will be given to widen the horizons of your knowledge on these projects.
2.0 OBJECTIVES At the end of this unit you should be able to: i) Identify a PR Professional Project when you see one ii) Identify an AD Professional Project when you see one iii) List the different parts of the PRAD Professional Project MAIN CONTENT 3.0 CASE SAMPLE 1 1a.
Professional Project for a Public Relations Campaign Plan A.
Preliminary Pages (i) Authentication/Approval (ii) Dedicaton (v) Acknowledgement (vi) Table of Contents B.
Main Contents (i) Chapter One: Introduction & Situation Analysis a.
Introduction b.
The need for your project desire e.g.
PR Campaign, c. Historical background or Profiles of persons or institutions d. Situational Analysis and Statement of the Problem Notes 43 (ii) Chapeter Two: a.
The Project Proper e.g.
A PR Campaign - .
b.
Goal / aim of Project c. Target audience (Public) d. Means of Communication e. Campaign message (PR) f. Timing for the Slot (Print) Program (Broadcast) g. Budget for the Campaign h. Evaluation of the Campaign Notes (iii) Chapter Three: Summary & Evaluation - Summary of the entire work - Comments of assessors of Project - Conclusion - Notes - Bibliography - Appendixes Self Assessment Exercise 1 Sketch an outline for a PR campaign for a prospective candidate for the next Local Government Elections in your Constituency.
1b.
Professional Project for a an Advert Campaign Production A.
Preliminary Pages (i) Authentication/Approval (ii) Dedication (vii) Acknowledgement (viii) Table of Contents B.
Main Content (i) Chapter One: Introduction & Situation Analysis a.
Introduction b.
The need for your project desire e.g.
AD Campaign c. Historical background of institutions 44d.
Situational Analysis and Statement of the Problem Notes (ii) Chapter Two: The Project Proper e.g.
a.
An Advert Campaign .
b.
Goal / aim of Project c. Target audience (Public) d. Means of Communication e. Campaign message (AD Messages) these messages must focus directly on the product being advertised and efforts must be made to ensure that it addresses the right audience.
f. Timing for the Slot (Print) Program (Broadcast) or Campaign (Adv) g. Budget for the AD Campaign h. Evaluation of the AD Campaign Notes (iii) Chapter Three: Summary & Evaluation - Summary of the entire work - Comments of assessors of Project - Conclusion - Notes - Bibliography - Appendixes Self Assessment Exercise 2 Present an outline for an AD campaign for a new product of a local pharmaceutical company in your community.
4.0 CONCLUSION Case studies are like samples of what has already been done.
They are good examples of what is expected of your professional projects.
The two samples presented here are the actual “architectural design to your work.” In any PR or AD campaign what you need do is to “fleshen up” this outline.
Then send in your work to an assessor to appraise the job you have done to convince you that you are on the correct part and that you have actually done a good work.
455.0 SUMMARY In this unit you have been taught how to draw outlines for PR and AD campaigns.
This will help you immensely in physically carrying out the professional Project when the need arises.
6.0 TUTOR MARKED ASSIGNMENT A.
Generate a good Professional Project topic for a PR Campaign to launder the image of a financial organization which is waning because of her involvement in money laundering and unprocedural credit facilities granted to its customers.
Then draw an outline for conducting this Professional Project.
OR B.
Generate a good Professional Project topic for an AD Campaign to Reposition a product of a beverage industry.
This product was one time very popular but has now lost value in the estimation of its consumers; hence, patronage has become very low recently.
Then draw an outline for conducting this Professional Project.
7.0 REFERENCES/FURTHER READINGS Ajala, V. O.
(1996) Scholarly Writing Guide For Researchers.
Ibadan: May Best Publishers.
Esiri, M. J.
(2008).
In Wilson, D. et al.
Communication Research.
Nigeria, Lagos:Course Material Published for National open university of Nigeria Osuala, E. C. (1982) Introduction to Research Methodology.
Onitsha, Nigeria: African-First Publishers.
Uyo, A.
(2002).
"Communication Research: An Africa Discourse".
In Festus Eribo and Enoh Tanjong (eds).
Journalism and Mass Communication in Africa.
New York: Oxford Press.
46UNIT 2: PROFESSIONAL PROJECT FOR A BROADCAST MEDIUM CONTENTS 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objectives 3.0 Main Content 3.1 Sample of a Professional Project for a Broadcast Medium 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutor Marked Assignment 7.0 References/Further Readings 1.0 INTRODUCTION This unit 2 is the presentation of samples of Professional Projects in the Broadcast Sequence.
The sample will show the key areas or parts of a broadcast production such as the Prelim pages, the main work/chapters and the appendices.
Then very brief summaries of each subheading will be given to widen the horizons of your knowledge on this type of project.
2.0 OBJECTIVES At the end of this unit you should be able to: i) Identify a Broadcast Professional Project when you see one ii) List the different parts of the Broadcast Professional Project iii) State how it differs from the PRAD projects you have studied.
47 3.0 MAIN CONTENT CASE SAMPLE 2 Professional Project for a BROADCAST Production As a professional project, one can present a radio drama, a documentary, a phone- in programme etc, using this as a guide.
A.
Preliminary Pages (i) Authentication/Approval (ii) Dedication (ix) Acknowledgement (x) Table of Contents i Acknowledgements ii Chapter One (Introduction) iii Chapter Two ( Production Script) iv Chapter Three (Evaluation) Bibliography B.
Main Contents (i) Chapter One: Introduction & Production Goals a.
Introduction: Social relevance of work.
That implies stating the need for your project-whether it is a Drama, a Broadcast Documentary or a phone-in Programme Presentation of choice.
b.
Objective of the work: This means what the work intends to achieve e.g.
-to entertain the radio audience, - to review the activities of the society this is part of the watchdog function of the mass media.
c. Target: Here identify the group you are producing the work for in the society, (Youths, adults, the elites, the down trodden etc.)
d. Production procedure e.g.
In the case of Drama production: The first step is writing the script; mention the number of chapters in the script.
Discuss your choice of characters, number of scenes in the play etc.
and your reasons for the necessary choices.
e. Language and style: The social context of the script determines the language to use.
Note that Broadcasters place a lot of emphasis on the type of language used in speech.
Remember that radio 48broadcasting does not present any visual reference of costume, movement, facial expressions etc.
Hence, all the characterization is embedded in the voice.
So, the language to be used should be well planned so as to be able to convey as much information as possible to achieve media realism.
f. Music: Whether on stage or on radio, drama is a re-enactment of real life situations.
Music of course, is a very essential part of life.
Thus we cannot underrate the value of music in our dram productions g. Sound Effect: Since Radio drama is a blind man’s theatre, one needs to use some good sound effect to identify the scenes, assist the listener to follow the various movements in the drama, and enhance clarity of the drama scenes.
Notes (ii) Chapter Two: The Project Proper e.g.
a.
A Drama Script, Broadcast Programme, (e.g.
Documentary, entertainment Programme).
b.
Here you will write and present your project physically.
If a drama, you will write the drama script, if a documentary you will prepare and present the work, if an entertainment programme you will produce and resent your tape for the programme.
d. In a case of Radio drama production, you can have the following components.
Components of the Drama script PRODUCTION SCRIPT 1.
SERIES TITLE: ONE DAY FOR THE OWNER i Episode: The Good Samaritan ii Producer: Dilichukwu Osuji iii Director: Dilichukwu Osuji iv Script writer: Dilichukwu Osuji 49 2.
C A S T Here list the characters you wish to use for the drama.
Example: Managing Director: The man who owns ETHIPIIA Finance house.
Tunde : The office clerical assistant Bamdele: MD, A business tycoon Tokunbo: Bamidele’s girlfriend Mr Ajayi: A Good Samaritan who returned Bamdele’s forgotten money Corporal Jones: The policeman that took mr Ajayi’s report at the police station.
Lola: Tokunbo’s neighbor Ensure that you do not use many characters since it might be too cumbersome for only the ears to carry.
For a Television drama script you could enlarge the number of characters used since both the eyes and the ears are involved.
3.
SYNOPSIS Here, do a brief summary of the episode you are scripting.
Bamidele is a business tycoon who has made fame through fraudulent business deals.
Part of what he does is to borrow huge sums of money with interest and keeps recycling theses loans whenever the moratorium (payback period) expires.
On this particular occasion the huge some of money he had collected from EPITHILIA Finance House has been stolen from him by one of his numerous girlfriends after their drink inking spree.
On her escape route to her hideout, Tokunbo equally fell asleep out of the intoxication and drowsy effect of their drinking.
On getting to her destination she forgot to pick the bag containing the money which she had neatly tucked away under the back seat of the Taxi cab she entered.
While cleaning the cab early morning the following day, Mr Ajayi found this bag of money.
His thought quickly went back to the last passangers he had carried the previous night.
He remembered that he had seen Bamidele carrying that bag into the cab.
Mr Ajayi quickly took this money bag to the Atileru Police Post near his residence.
What follows next should be the suspense which the script intends to achieve.
SCENE ONE On the way to Tokunbo’s house, noise of passers-by and music fill the air.
The enterance to the house looks permanently locked but the path way leads to the back of the 50house.
Noise of a heavy duty Generator from a near by factory is heard occluding every other activity in the vicinity.
Corporal Jones hits the boot of his shoes hard on the ground.
So, it was unmistakable that a security officer was around the corner.
Theme music comes up, fades gradually followed by the sound of the knock on tokunbo”s door 1.
Corporal Jones: Hello!
Who is in this house?
Open this door Schrum, Schrum, Sound of foot steps shuffling in the room 2.
Tokunbo: Who are you and what do you want?
Etc.
3.
Corporal Jones: Where is the man you were in the taxi with about 8p.m last night?
4.
Tokunbo: Which man, which night, where, when, what happened to him?
5.
Lola: Toks open the door, I am bringing some business friends to you.
NB: Only one scene of this drama has been presented here as sample.
At the end of all the scenes, the theme music is then lowered.
Then the signature tune.
CLOSING SIGNATURE TUNE THEME MUSIC FADES IN, HOLDS, THEN LOWERED Voice: That was ONE DAY FOR THE THIEF today’s episode was titled “The Good Samaritan” The voices you heard were: Joseph Jaiyeola as ‘Corporal Jones’ Bola Kitan played the ‘Taxi driver’ Umoh Sunday as the Office Assistant Benedict Ehi as Manging Director Shola Balogun played the Tokunbo’s neighbour 51 Production credit went to Chukwuemeka Ekwerike who was at the console and Tochi Chukwu the sound effect operator.
The programme was produced and directed by Dilichukwu Osuji and broadcast in our Studio.
Radio NOUN105.9 We hope you enjoyed this episode.
Join us next week same time, same station as we bring you another edition of “One Day For The Thief”, until then continue to have good time.
THEME MUSIC COMES UP, HOLDS, AND FADES OUT Evaluation As sated earlier, the objective of this drama is to review the activities of the society which is part of the watchdog function of the mass media.
Under evaluation, you will the discuss the people you gave the work to assess and their various comments on the drama.
These comments will be quite useful in assessing the viability of the drama series and the value of the entire project to the society.
Besides, the feedback got from these assessors will help in making necessary adjustments to the drama script.
- The criteria for evaluation should include: - Appropriateness of the title of the drama - Ability of the drama to focus on a major societal issue on ground - Simplicity of the language - General comments and suggestions by the assessors Bibliography This bibliography should be a listing of he book and documents yuou used or consulted in the process of writing the drama script.
Oduko Segun (1994): Techniques of Television Production.
Lagos: Unique Publications.
Richard Courtney (1963): Play Drama and Thought.
London: Cassells Publications.
Cheester Girund et al, (1963): Television and Radio.
New York: Appleton Century- Croft Publication.
Ojo, Olufunke O.
(1991) The Making of a Conflict Resolution Television Programme, “Gboromiro” This bibliography is important so that you can show where you drew references from while to writing the professional project.
52 Self Assessment Exercise Suggest a title for a drama series that would run for six (six weeks) in a radio broadcast station and prepare an outline for it.
4.0 CONCLUSION Drama is a very important aspect of mass communication and so should be handled carefully.
The drama presented in this unit tried to focus on a major societal ill.
In this way, it would draw the attention of those involved as well as the authorities in charge of that sector to the happenings in the society.
This is the whole essence of Mass Communication - The Watchdog Function.
Apart from informing the society, the drama equally entertained the audience thus, relieving them of some stress and consequently improving their health statuses.
5.0 SUMMARY In this unit you have been taught how to prepare and present a drama script.
You can now use it as a sample to write your own drama script and present to any broadcast medium for production.
.
6.0 TUTOR MARKED ASSIGNMENT Write and present for production, one scene of a drama entitled “Shine Your Eyes” 7.0 REFERENCES/FURTHER READINGS Ajala, V. O.
(1996) Scholarly Writing Guide For Researchers.
Ibadan: May Best Publishers.
Esiri, M. J.
(2008).
In Wilson, D. et al.
Communication Research.
Nigeria, Lagos:Course Material Published for National open university of Nigeria Osuala, E. C. (1982) Introduction to Research Methodology.
Onitsha, Nigeria: African-First Publishers.
Uyo, A.
(2002).
"Communication Research: An Africa Discourse".
In Festus Eribo and Enoh Tanjong (eds).
Journalism and Mass Communication in Africa.
New York: Oxford Press.
53 UNIT 3: PROFESSIONAL PROJECT FOR A PRINT MEDIUM CONTENTS 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objectives 3.0 Main Content 3.1 Sample of Professional Project for a Print Medium 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutor Marked Assignment 7.0 References/Further Readings 1.0 INTRODUCTION This unit 3 is the presentation of samples of Professional Projects in the Print Sequence.
The sample will show the key areas or parts of a print project such as the Prelim pages, the main work/chapters and the appendices.
Then very brief summaries of each subheading will be given to widen the horizons of your knowledge on this type of projects.
2.0 OBJECTIVES At the end of this unit you should be able to: i) Identify a Professional Project for the PRINT Medium when you see one ii) Prepare an outline for a Professional Project on the PRINT Medium iii) Enumerate the different Sections of a Professional Project on the PRINT Medium.
54 3.0 MAIN CONTENT CASE SAMPLE 3 Professional Project for a PRINT Medium A.
Preliminary Pages (i) Authentication/Approval (ii) Dedication (xi) Acknowledgements (xii) Table of Contents ii Chapter One (Introduction) iii Chapter Two (The Print Document- News story or Feature Article) iv Chapter Three (Evaluation) B.
Main Contents (i) Chapter One: Introduction & Situation Analysis a.
Introduction b.
The need for your project e.g.
a feature article, a serialized story in a weekly or monthly magazine of your choice.
c. Historical background or Profiles of persons or institutions being written on d. Situational Analysis and Statement of the Problem Notes Self Assessment Exercise 1 Sketch an outline for a professional project on a PRINT MEDIUM.
(ii) Chapter Two: The Project Proper e.g.
a.
(i) Some news stories to be published in a daily newspaper or an article to be published in a weekly or monthly Magazine b.
(ii) Or a feature article for to be published in a newspaper, weekly or monthly Magazine .
c. Goal / aim of Project d. Target audience (Public) e. Print medium of Choice (Reason for your choice) h. Evaluation of the project 55 Notes (iii) Chapter Three: Summary & Evaluation - Summary of the entire work - Comments of assessors of Project - Conclusion - Notes - Bibliography - Appendixes Self Assessment Exercise 2 Write a feature Article on a Female Celebrity to be presented to widely read magazine in the country 4.0 CONCLUSION The print medium is no doubt a very important arm of mass communication.
Most people like to usually like to relax after work with copies of their newspapers or magazines after work.
So it important that journalist should feed their sensibilities with items that are quite interesting and cool of their hectic times in the office.
5.0 SUMMARY In this unit you have taught how to write professional Project for a print Medium.
A sample has equally been provided for you to follow in writing one.
You need to keep practicing this until you get used to the format.
6.0 TUTOR MARKED ASSIGNMENT Prepare for publication, a feature article on a recent controversial issue in the country, to be serialized under three weeks.
7.0 REFERENCES/FURTHER READINGS Ajala, V. O.
(1996) Scholarly Writing Guide For Researchers.
Ibadan: May Best Publishers.
Esiri, M. J.
(2008).
In Wilson, D. et al.
Communication Research.
Nigeria, Lagos:Course Material Published for National open university of Nigeria Osuala, E. C. (1982) Introduction to Research Methodology.
Onitsha, Nigeria: 56African-First Publishers.
Uyo, A.
(2002).
"Communication Research: An Africa Discourse".
In Festus Eribo and Enoh Tanjong (eds).
Journalism and Mass Communication in Africa.
New York: Oxford Press.
57 UNIT 4: CITATION OF REFERENCE MATERIALS USED CONTENTS 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objectives 3.0 Main content 3.1 Samples for Referencing Academic Materials Used 3.2 Edited Book 3.3 Journal References 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutor Marked Assignment 7.0 References/Further Readings 1.0 INTRODUCTION This unit 4 is the presentation of samples of references used fin academic work.
2.0 OBJECTIVES At the end of this unit you should be able to: i) Properly cite a textbook as a Reference material ii) List the different types of citations available in academic writing (e.g APA, Turabian Style) iii) Identify the different sources from where Citations can be made in academic work.
(Books, Journals, Abstracts, Encyclopaedia, an unpublished works, Websites etc.)
58 3.0 MAIN CONTENT The citation of references, using the APA style, has been very elaborately treated By Esiri, M. J.
(2008) in Wilson et al.
Please find below the appropriate methods of referencing academic materials used during the course of writing a paper or project.
3.1 The APA Style of Referencing, Presentation Of The Appendix & The Prelim Pages Elements of a citation book Beck, C.A.I., & Sales, B.D.
(2001).
Family mediation: facts, myths, and future prospects.
Washington, D.C: American Psychological Association.
Book authors: Beck, C. A., & Sales, B. D. Date of Publication: (2001).
Book Title: Family mediation: Facts, myths, and future prospects.
Publication information: Washington, D.C: American Psychological Association.
According to the APA style, if a book has more than six authors, abbreviate the remaining authors as et al.
in the first and subsequent text citations.
3.2 Edited Book Gibbs, J. T., & Huang, L. N.
(Eds.)
(1991).
Children of colour: Psychological interventions with minority youth.
San Francisco: Jossey-Bass.
Note.
For a book with just one author and an editor as well, list the editor in parentheses after the title.
Book, no author or editor Merriam-Webster’s collegiate dictionary (10th ed.)
(1993).
Spring-field, MA: Merriam-Webster.
* Place the title in the author position.
* Alphabetize books with no author or editor by the first significant word in the title (Merriam in this case).
59* In text, use a few words of the title, or the whole title if it is short, in place of an author name in the citation: (Merriam-Webster’s Collegiate Dictionary, 1993).
Encyclopedia or dictionary Sadie, S.
(Ed.).
(1980).
The New Grove Dictionary of Music and Musicians (6th ed., Vol.s 1-20).
London: Macmillan.
* For major reference works with a large editorial board, you may list the name of the lead editor, followed by et al.
Article or chapter in an edited book, two editors Ejork, R.A. (1989) “Retrieval Inhibition as an Adaptive Mechanism in Human Memory”.
In H.L.
Roediger III & F.I.M.
Craik (Eds.)
Varieties of memory & consciousness.
Hillsdale, NJ: Eribaum.
3.3 Journal References Elements of a reference to a journal Herman, L.M., Kuczaj, S.A., III, & Holder, M.D.
(1993) “Response to anomalous gestural sequences by a language-trained dolphin: Evidence for processing of semantic relations and syntactic information”.
Journal of Experimental Psychology: General, 122, 184-194.
Article authors: Herman, L.M., Kuczaj, S.A, III, & Holder, M.D.
Date of publication: (1993).
Article title: Responses to anomalous gestural sequences by a language- trained: Evidence for processing of semantic relations and syntactic information.
Journal title and publication information: Journal of Experimental: Psychology: General, 122, 184 – 194.
Journal article, one author Mellers, B.A.
(2000).
Choice and the relative pleasure of consequences.
Psychological Bulletin, 126, 910 – 924.
Journal article, more than six authors Wolchik, S.A. West, S.G., Sandler, I.N., Tein, I., Coatsworth, D., Lengua, L., et al (2000).
An experimental evaluation of theory-based mother 60and mother-child programs for children of divorce, Journal of Consulting and Clinical Psychology, 68, 843 – 856.
* After the sixth author’s name and initial, use et al.
to indicate the remaining authors of the article.
* In text, use the following parenthetical citation each time (including the first) the work is cited: (Wolchik et al., 2000).
Self Assessment Exercise 1.0 Get two undergraduate research projects in any communication related discipline and critically assess the method of documentation.
Do they conform with the APA format?
List the observed errors.
Journal article in press Zuckerman, M., & Kieffer, S.C. (in press).
Race differences in face-ism: Does facial prominence imply dominance?
Journal of Personality and Social Psychology.
* A paper that has been submitted to a journal and accepted for publication is considered in press.
* Do not give a year, a volume, or page numbers until the article is published.
In text, use the following parenthetical citation: (Zuckerman & Kieffer, in press).
3.4 Magazine article Kandel, E. R., & Squire, L.R.
(2000, November 10).
Neuroscience: Breaking down scientific barriers to the study of brain and mind.
Science, 290, 1113-1120.
* Give the date shown on the publication – month for monthlies or month and day for weelies.
* Give the volume number.
(if any) Daily newspaper article, no author 61New drug appears to sharply cut risk of death from heart failure.
(1993, July 15).
Daily Independent, p.A12.
Daily newspaper article, discontinuous pages Schwatz, J.
(1993, September 30).
Obesity affects economic, social status.
Daily Independent, pp.A1, A4.
If an article appears on discontinuous pages, give all page numbers, and separate the numbers with a comma (e.g., pp.B1, B3, B5 – B7).
3.5 Citation of a work discussed in a secondary source Give the secondary source in the reference list; in text, name the original work, and give a citation for the secondary source.
For example, if Seidenberg and McClelland’s work is cited in Colt-heart et al.
and you did not read the work cited, list the Coltheart et al.
reference in the References.
In the text, use the following citation: Text citation: Seidenberg and McClelland’s study (as cited in Coltheart, Curtis, Atkins, & Haller, 1993).
Reference list entry: Coltheart, M., Curtis, B., Atkins, P., & Haller, M. (1993).
Models of reading aloud: Dual-route and parallel-distributed-processing approaches.
Psychological Review, 100, 589-608.
3.6 Citation of proceedings of meetings and symoposia * Published proceedings, published contribution to a symposium, article or chapter in an edited book Deci, E.L., & Ryan, R.M.
(1991).
A motivational approach to self: Integration in Personality.
In R. Dienstbler (Ed.
), Nebraska Symposium on Motivation: Vol.38.
Perspectives on motivation.
Lincoln: University of Nebraska Press.
3.6.1 Proceedings Published regularly 62Williams, C. J.
(2002) Pornography, callousness and the trivialization of rape proceedings of the National Academy of Social Sciences, USA, 89, 1372-1375.
3.6.2 Unpublished paper presented at a meeting (seminar paper) Lanktress, C., & Briere, J.
(1991, January).
Early data on the Trauma Symptom Checklist for Children (TSC-C).
Paper presented at the meeting of the American Professional Society on the Abuse of Children, San Diego, CA.
3.7 References of Unpublished Works Unpublished doctoral dissertation Wililey, D. E. (1989).
Interpersonal analyses of bulimia: Normal-weight and obese.
Unpublished doctoral dissertation, University of Missouri, Columbia.
3.8 Referencing Internet Sources * Internet article Fredrickson, B.L.
(2000, March 7).
“Cultivating Positive Emotions to Optimize Health and Well-being: Prevention & Treatment”, 3, Article 0001a.
Retrieved November 20, 2000, from http://journals.apa.org/prevention/volume3/pre00300011a.html Use n. d. (no date) when a publication date is not available Stand-alone document, no author identified, no date GVU’s 8th WWW user survey.
(n.d.).
Retrieved August 8, 2000, from http://www.cc.gatech.edu./gvu/user_surveys/survey-1997-10/ * If the author of a document is not identified, begin the reference with the title of the document.
3.8 Paper presented at a virtual conference Tan, G., & Lewandowsky, S. (1996).
A comparison of operator trust in humans versus machines.
Paper presented at the CybErg 96 virtual conference.
Retrieved May 16, 2000 from: http://www.curtin.edu.au/conference/cyberg/centre/outline.cgi/frame ?dir=tan 3.9 The Appendix 63The appendixes consist of materials attached to a research project at the end.
It is usually an explanatory matter that is not essential to the completeness of the research project.
It is usually the last item in a research project after the bibliography.
According to Ajala (p.52) appendixes form an important set of reference materials or supplementary parts which come after the text of the research project.
An appendix contains materials related to the research project but not included in it because they are too lengthy or bulky or because they lack direct relevance which may be distracting in the body of the paper.
The following are documents that could be classified as appendixes: - Sample questionnaires/interview guide/coding sheets/cover letters.
- Maps, photographs, newspaper pages.
- Statutes etc.
Self Assessment Exercise 2 List the different sources from which a book on Media Channels can derive references.
3.10 The Preliminary Pages These are normally the starting pages in a research project.
They are: • Title page • Certification/Authentication page • Abstract • Acknowledgements • Dedication • Table of Contents • List of Tables 3.10.1 Title Page The first page of a research project is the title page.
The form of the title page is usually prescribed by the institution awarding.
The degree/diploma.
It includes the title of the research project, the degree for which the project is presented, the full names of the candidate, matriculation number and date of degree.
Example: Public Image of Nigerian Journalists 64By Wazobia, John Musa Matric No.
09/01/07/2007 Being a research project submitted to the Faculty of Social Sciences, National Open University in partial fulfillment of the requirements for the award of the Bachelor of Science (B.Sc) degree in Journalism.
June 2007 3.10.2 Certification/Authentication page Each institution/faculty/department usually has a model or form printed for this purpose.
3.10.3 Abstract This is a brief summary of the content of the research project.
The abstract provides readers the gist of the project in one or two pages.
3.10.4 Acknowledgements This page recognizes the persons to whom the writer is indebted for guidance and assistance and those to whom he is grateful for any special or non-routine assistance.
3.10.5 Dedication This is a special person(s) to whom the project is devoted.
3.10.6 Table of Contents This page(s) provides the reader with the order of presentation of the contents of the research project.
3.10.7 List of Tables After the table of contents, the next page is the list of tables, it consists of the exact caption of tables (if any) in the text and the beginning page for each.
4.0 CONCLUSION Plagiarism is a very crucial issue in academics.
The main cause is often a writer’s refusal or inability to reference sources he /she used while writing a book or presenting a paper.
This problem could cause an author his certificates, or even some jail term depending on how the matter was judged.
We must therefore, be very careful with using other people’s works.
As you must have been taught under your JLS 612: Media Law & Ethics, the volume of author’s work that you use while developing your own work is equally controlled.
So, you must be mindful not to used excessive amounts of an author’s work.
5.0 SUMMARY 65In this unit you have not only been taught how to use reference materials while writing an academic paper, but you have equally been given a wide range of choice from where to draw your references depending on the particular academic work you are doing.
We equally looked at the Prelim Pages, what they contain and where tchey should appear on the academic work.
6.0 TUTOR MARKED ASSIGNMENT A.
Prepare an outline for the prelim pages of a Professional Project on PR B.
Of what value is Citation in the preparation of an Academic document?
7.0 REFERENCES/FURTHER READINGS Ajala, V. O.
(1996) Scholarly Writing Guide For Researchers.
Ibadan: May Best Publishers.
Esiri, M. J.
(2008).
In Wilson, D. Esiri, M.J, & Onwubere, C.H.
Communication Research.
Nigeria, Lagos:Course Material Published for National open university of Nigeria Osuala, E. C. (1982) Introduction to Research Methodology.
Onitsha, Nigeria: African-First Publishers.
Uyo, A.
(2002).
"Communication Research: An Africa Discourse".
In Festus Eribo and Enoh Tanjong (eds).
Journalism and Mass Communication in Africa.
New York: Oxford Press.
END OF WORK: 11A.M, Mon 01-03-10 66
