RESEARCH METHODOLOGY IN LAW 600 LEGISLATIVE DRAFTING Course GuideLAW600 COURSE GUIDE COURSE GUIDE LAW600 RESEARCH METHODOLOGY IN LEGISLATIVE DRAFTING Course Developer/ Writer Professor Deji Adekunle Nigerian Institute of Advanced Legal Studies University of Lagos Campus Lagos.
Course Editor Professor Justus A. Sokefun National Open University of Nigeria Victoria Island Lagos.
Course Co-ordinator Miss Omotayo Tekaron Obayemi National Open University of Nigeria Victoria Island Lagos.
NATIONAL OPEN UNIVERSITY OF NIGERIA iiLAW600 COURSE GUIDE National Open University of Nigeria Headquarters 14/16 Ahmadu Bello Way Victoria Island Lagos Abuja Office No.
5 Dar es Salaam Street Off Aminu Kano Crescent Wuse II, Abuja Nigeria e-mail: centralinfo@nou.edu.ng URL: www.nou.edu.ng Published by: National Open University of Nigeria 2008 First Printed 2008 ISBN: 978-058-832-9 All Rights Reserved iiiLAW600 COURSE GUIDE CONTENTS PAGES Introduction……………………………………………….. 1 Course Aim……………………………………………….. 1 Course Objectives………………………………………… 1 Working Through this Course…………………………….
1 Course Materials………………………………………….. 1-2 Study Units………………………………………………... 2 Textbooks and References………………………………… 2 Assessment………………………………………………... 2-3 Tutor Marked Assignment (TMA)………………………... 3 Final Examination and Grading…………………………… 3 Course Marking Scheme………………………………….. 3 Course Overview /Presentation Schedule………………… 4 How to get the most from this Course…………………….
4-5 Tutors and Tutorials ……………………………………… 5 Summary………………………………………………….. 6 ivLAW600 COURSE GUIDE Introduction In this course, LAW600, we are concerned with the nature and types of research and the suitability of each type for certain objectives.
Research is undertaken with diverse motives ranging from pure theoretical studies to applied research.
The course examines diverse issues like the choice of research themes, preliminary analysis and evaluation as well as the process for documenting research findings.
Course Aim The overall aim of this course is to expose students to the importance of research in the preparation of legislation and the material considerations associated with research methodology in the legislative process so as to write thesis properly.
Course Objectives By the end of this course, you should be able to: (a) Identify and recognize the main typologies of research; (b) Consider the various objectives that motivate research studies and factors to consider in accomplishing them; (c) Understand the various infrastructural and technical problems encountered in research; (d) Appreciate the importance of analysis and revision of the initial research hypothesis; (e) Identify the main tools of legislative research.
Working through This Course To complete this course, you are advised to read the study units, read recommended books and other materials provided by NOUN.
Each unit contains Self Assessment Exercises, and at points in the course you are required to submit assignments for assessment purposes.
At the end of the course, there is a final examination.
The course should take you about 17 weeks to complete.
You will find all the components of the course listed below.
You need to allocate your time to each unit in order to complete the course successfully and on time.
Course Materials The major components of the course are: 1.
Course guide 2.
Study units 1LAW600 COURSE GUIDE 3.
Textbooks 4.
Assignment File 5.
Presentation schedule Study Units We deal with this course in 3 modules divided into four or five study units as outlined below: Module 1 Planning Research Unit One Types of Research Unit Two Objectives and Goals of Research Unit Three Analysis of Research Proposal Unit Four Constraints in Planning Research Module 2 Research Methods Unit 1 Methodology in Research Unit 2 Tools of Research Unit 3 Evaluation and Analysis Unit 4 The Research Report Unit 5 Ethical Issues in Legal Research Module 3 Researching Legislative Proposals Unit 1 Sources of Legislation Unit 2 Objectives of Researching Legislation Unit 3 Classification of Legislation Unit 4 Tools of Legislative Research Unit 5 Constraints Each study unit consists of a week’s work and includes specific objectives; directions for study, reading material and Self Assessment Exercises (SAEs).
Together with Tutor-Marked Assignments, these exercises will assist you in achieving the stated learning objectives of the individual units and of the Course.
Textbooks and References Certain books have been recommended in the course.
You should read them where you are so directed before attempting the exercises.
Assessment There are two aspects of the assessment of this course; the Tutor Marked Assignments and a written examination.
In doing these assignments, you 2LAW600 COURSE GUIDE are expected to apply knowledge acquired during the course.
The assignments must be submitted to your tutor for formal assessment in accordance with the deadlines stated in the presentation schedule and the Assignment file.
The work that you submit to your tutor for assessment will count for 30% of your total score.
Tutor-Marked Assignment (TMA) There is a Tutor-Marked Assignment at the end of every unit.
You are required to attempt all the assignments.
You will be assessed on all of them but the best 3 performances will be used for assessment.
The assignments carry 10% each.
When you have completed each assignment, send it together with a (Tutor Marked Assignment) form, to your tutor.
Make sure that each assignment reaches your tutor on or before the deadline.
If for any reason you cannot complete your work on time, contact your tutor before the assignment is due to discuss the possibility of an extension.
Extensions will not be granted after the due date unless in exceptional circumstances.
Final Examination and Grading The duration of the final examination for LAW600 – Research Methodology in Legislative Drafting is three hours and will carry 70% of the total course grade.
The examination will consist of questions, which reflect the kinds of Self Assessment Exercises and the tutor- marked problems you have previously encountered.
All aspects of the course will be assessed.
You should use the time between completing the last unit, and taking the examination to revise the entire course.
You may find it useful to review your Self Assessment Exercises and Tutor- Marked Assignments before the examination.
Course Marking Scheme The following table lays out how the actual course marking is broken down.
Assessment Marks Assignments 1-4 Four assignments, marked out of (the best three of all the 10% assignments submitted) Totaling 30% Final examination 70% of overall course score Total 100% of course score 3LAW600 COURSE GUIDE Course Overview and Presentation Schedule MODULE ONE Unit Title of Work Week’s Assessment Activity (End of Unit) Course Guide 1 1 Types Of Research 1 Assignment 1 2 Objectives and Goals of Research 1 Assignment 2 3 Analysis of Research Proposal 1 Assignment 3 4 Constraints in Planning Research 1 Assignment 4 MODULE TWO Unit Title of work Week’s Assessment Activity (End of Unit) 1 Methodology in Research 1 Assignment 6 2 Tools of Research 1 Assignment 7 3 Evaluation and Analysis 1 Assignment 8 4 The Research Report 1 Assignment 9 5 Ethical Issues in Legal Research 1 Assignment 10 MODULE THREE Unit Title of work Week’s Assessment Activity (End of Unit 1 Sources of Legislation 1 Assignment 11 2 Objectives of Researching 1 Assignment 12 Legislation 3 Classification of Legislation 1 Assignment 13 4 Tools of Legislative Research 1 Assignment 14 5 Constraints 1 Assignment 15 Revision 1 Examination 1 Total 17 How to Get the Most from This Course In distance learning, the study units replace the lecturer.
The advantage is that you can read and work through the study materials at your pace, and at a time and place that suits you best.
Think of it as reading the lecture instead of listening to a lecturer.
Just as a lecturer might give you in-class exercise, your study units provide exercises for you to do at appropriate times.
Each of the study units follows the same format.
The first item is an introduction to the subject matter of the unit and how a particular unit is integrated with other units and the course as a whole.
Next is a set of learning objectives.
These objectives let you know what you should be 4LAW600 COURSE GUIDE able to do by the time you have completed the unit.
You should use these objectives to guide your study.
When you have finished the unit, you should go back and check whether you have achieved the objectives.
If you make a habit of doing this, you will significantly improve your chances of passing the course.
Self Assessment Exercises are interspersed throughout the units.
Working through these tests will help you to achieve the objectives of the unit and prepare you for the assignments and the examination.
You should do each Self Assessment Exercise as you come to it in the study unit.
There will be examples given in the study units.
Work through these when you have come to them.
Tutors and Tutorials There are 9 hours of tutorials provided in support of this course.
You will be notified of the dates, times and location of these tutorials, together with the name and phone number of your tutor, as soon as you are allocated a tutorial group.
Your tutor will mark and comment on your assignments, keep a close watch on your progress, and on any difficulties you might encounter and provide assistance to you during the course.
You must send your Tutor- Marked Assignments to your tutor well before the due date.
They will be marked by your Tutor and returned to you as soon as possible.
Do not hesitate to contact your tutor by telephone or e-mail if you need help.
Contact your tutor if: 1.
You do not understand any part of the study units or the assigned readings; 2.
You have difficulty with the self assessment exercises; 3.
You have a question or a problem with an assignment, with your tutor’s comments on an assignment or with the grading of an assignment.
You should try your best to attend the tutorials.
This is the only chance to have face-to-face contact with your tutor and ask questions which are answered instantly.
You can raise any problem encountered in the course of your study.
To gain the maximum benefit from course tutorials, prepare a question list before attending them.
You will gain a lot from participating actively.
5LAW600 COURSE GUIDE Summary The level of commitment you display in addressing the Self Assessment Exercises is key to success.
You will need several study sessions to complete all the units.
It will usually be possible to make a break at the end of any of the Modules.
We wish you success in the course and hope that you will find it both interesting and useful.
6
