HUMAN RESOURCES MBA 737 INFORMATION SYSTEM Course GuideMBA737 HUMAN RESOURCES INFORMATION SYSTEM COURSE GUIDE MBA737 HUMAN RESOURCES INFORMATION SYSTEM Course Writer/Developer Joseph Bel-Molokwu, Ph.D School of Business National Open University of Nigeria Programme Leader Dr. O. J. Onwe School of Business National Open University of Nigeria Course Coordinator Mr. Israel-Cookey School of Business National Open University of Nigeria NATIONAL OPEN UNIVERSITY OF NIGERIA iiMBA737 HUMAN RESOURCES INFORMATION SYSTEM National Open University of Nigeria Headquarters 14/16 Ahmadu Bello Way Victoria Island Lagos Abuja Office No.
5 Dar es Salaam Street Off Aminu Kano Crescent Wuse II, Abuja Nigeria e-mail: centralinfo@nou.edu.ng URL: www.nou.edu.ng Published by: National Open University of Nigeria 2008 First Printed 2008 ISBN: 978-058-544-3 All Rights Reserved iiiMBA737 HUMAN RESOURCES INFORMATION SYSTEM CONTENTS PAGES Introduction……………………………………………… 1 Course Content………………………………………….. 1 Course Aims…………………………………………….. 1 – 2 Objectives……………………………………………….. 2 Course Materials………………………………………… 2 Study Units……………………………………………… 2 – 3 Assignments…………………………………………….. 3 Assessment……………………………………………… 3 Tutor-Marked Assignment……………………………… 3 Final Written Examination……………………………… 3 Summary………………………………………………... 3 ivMBA737 HUMAN RESOURCES INFORMATION SYSTEM Introduction MBA737: Human Resources Information Systems is a semester course work of three credit hours to be taken by all students, in the MBA programme in the School of Business and Human Resources Management.
The course consists of 15 units embracing the application of information systems in Human Resources Management and practices.
The course guide tells you what the course is all about.
It also contains other information such as Tutor-marked Assignments / Questions.
In the course of your studies, you will be exposed to some tutorial classes.
Information concerning this will be communicated to you in due course.
Course Content The course content consists of: • Definition and Scope of Human Resources; • An Overview of System Concept and Theory; • Management Information Systems in Perspective; • Application of Information Systems; • Definition and Scope of Information Systems; • Developing a Computer-Based Information System; • The Use of MS-Excel To Programme The Payroll; • Application of Computers in Manpower Planning; • Recruitment and Selection Made Easy; • Harnessing the Benefits of Internet; • The Concept and Practice of Data Preparation and Processing; • Training and Development; • Communication, Management and Information; and • The Concept and Practice of Organization Development.
Course Aims The aim of this course is to expose you to the principles and practices of personnel/human resources management with specific reference to the application of computer-based information systems.
The aims will be achieved by: 1MBA737 HUMAN RESOURCES INFORMATION SYSTEM • Explaining the scope and practices of Human Resources Management (HRM).
• Describing the concept of Management Information Systems.
• Identifying various computer-based information systems and their application in Management Information Systems.
• Over-viewing the system concepts and theory.
• Describing the practical application of some packages.
Objectives At the end of this course, you should be able to: • Explain the definition and scope of HRM.
• Identify computer-based information systems used in HRM.
• Apply computer packages in HRM.
• Create a personnel Data-Base.
• Demonstrate the importance of effective communication in the art of HRM.
• Develop and train manpower using computer-based information systems.
Course Materials • Course Guide • Study Units • Text Books • Assignment Guide Study Units There are 15 units of this course, which should be studied carefully.
Module 1 Unit 1 Definition and scope of Human Resource Management.
Unit 2 An over-view of system concepts and theory.
Unit 3 Management information systems in perspective.
Unit 4 Application of information systems.
Unit 5 Definition and scope of information systems.
Module 2 Unit 1 Developing a computer-based information system.
Unit 2 The use of MS-Excel to programme the payroll.
2MBA737 HUMAN RESOURCES INFORMATION SYSTEM Unit 3 Developing a personnel D-Base Unit 4 Application of computers in manpower planning.
Unit 5 Recruitment and selection made easy.
Module 3 Unit 1 Harnessing the benefits of the Internet.
Unit 2 The concept and practice of Data preparation and processing.
Unit 3 Training and development.
Unit 4 Communicating management information.
Unit 5 The concept and practice of organization development.
Each study unit will take at least three hours and consists of the introduction, objectives, main content, exercise, conclusion, summary and references as well as tutor-marked question.
Assignments You are expected to study the materials and do the exercises.
Reference texts are produced at the end of each unit for you to get additional information.
There are assignments at the end of each unit and you are expected to do all of them.
Assessment Tutor-marked assignments You are expected to apply what you have learnt in the contents of the study units to do them and return to your tutor for grading.
Final Written Examination This will be a written examination at the end of the course and it will attract 60%.
Summary Course MBA737 – Human Resources Information Systems will expose you to the principles and practice of HRM with specific reference to the application of information systems in HRM.
3
