ORGANIZATIONAL LEADERSHIP MBA 791 AND CHANGE Course GuideCOURSE GUIDE MBA791 COURSE GUIDE MBA791 ORGANIZATIONAL LEADERSHIP AND CHANGE Course Developer/ Writer Dr E I Morah National Open University of Nigeria Victoria Island, Lagos Course Coordinator Mrs Caroline Aturu-Aghedo National Open University of Nigeria Victoria Island, Lagos Programme Leader Dr O J Onwe National Open University of Nigeria Victoria Island, Lagos NATIONAL OPEN UNIVERSITY OF NIGERIA iiCOURSE GUIDE MBA791 National Open University of Nigeria Headquarters 14/16 Ahmadu Bello Way Victoria Island Lagos Abuja Office NOUN Building No.
5 Dar-es-Salaam Crescent Off Aminu Crescent Wuse II, Abuja e-mail: centralinfo@nou.edu.ng URL: www.nou.edu.ng National Open University of Nigeria 2008 First Printed 2008 ISBN: 978-058-688-1 All Rights Reserved iiiCOURSE GUIDE MBA791 CONTENTS PAGES Introduction………………………………………….. 1 Course Contents……………………………………… 1 Course Aims………………………………………….
1 Course Objectives…………………………………….
2 Course Materials…………………………………….. 2 Study Units………………..………………………….
2 Assignments …………………………….................... 2 – 3 Assessment…………………………………………... 3 Tutor -Marked Assignment………………………....... 3 Final Written Examination…………………………… 3 Summary……………………………………………… 3 ivCOURSE GUIDE MBA791 Introduction MBA791 (Organizational Leadership and Change) is a semester course work of two credit hours.
It is available to all students taking the course programme in the School of Business and Human Resources Management.
The course consists of 15 units that will enable you to understand the following: • The type of people that become good leaders • The importance of leaders adapting their behaviour to suit each situation • The skills required for effective leadership • How leaders use power and influence The course guide will enable you grasp all that is required to master BHM 725.
You will have information on how to apply the information obtained.
Assignments are given to enable us assess how much you have learned.
There will be tutorial classes.
The full details concerning the tutorial class will be conveyed to you at the appropriate time.
Course Contents The course content is made up of: • What leadership is?
• Characteristics of a good leader.
• Techniques for impacting leadership • Leadership and management • Cultivated behaviour of leaders and • How leaders emerge Course Aims The aim of this course is to give you understanding of the different perspective under which particular leadership skills should be most appropriate.
With this information you can discern why some organizations fail because of lack of effective leadership.
With this in mind the major aims of this course are: • To focus attention on leadership styles and organizational changes • Leadership and organizational development • Environment and systems problems in leadership Course Objectives 1COURSE GUIDE MBA791 By the end of this course you will be able to understand: • What organizational leadership is?
• How leaders emerge?
• How to use effective leadership for organizational change and development?
Course Materials • Course guide • Study units • Text books • Assignment guide Study Units There are 15 units in this course which should be studied carefully.
Unit 1: Leadership defined Unit 2 Characteristics associated with leadership Part I Unit 3: Characteristics associated with leadership Part II Unit 4: Power and authority in leadership Unit 5: Functions of leadership Unit 6: Environment and systems problems in leadership Unit 7: Application of leadership systems Part I Unit 8: Application of leadership systems Part II Unit 9: Leadership and managing Unit 10: Cultivated behaviours of leaders Unit 11: Leadership theories Part I Unit 12: Leadership theories Part II Unit 13: Organizational leadership and team development Unit 14: Leadership, creativity and transformation Unit 15: Leadership styles of men and women Assignments There will be five assignments and you are expected to do all of them by following the schedule presented below: • What is leadership?
(Units 1,2&3) • Power, authority and the functions of leadership(Units, 4,& 5) • Environment and leaders, and application of leadership systems (Units 6, 7&8) • How leaders manage organizations (Units 9,10,11&12) 2COURSE GUIDE MBA791 • Leadership and organizational development (Units 13,14, & 15) Assessment Tutor- Marked Assignment Five tutor- marked assignments are given for grading by your tutor.
They constitute 50% of the total score.
It is expected that the assignments will enable you to apply what you have learnt in the contents.
Final Written Examination At the end of the course you will write the final examination.
It will attract the remaining 50%.
This makes the total final score to be 100% Summary Course MBA791 (Organizational Leadership and Change) informs you of the different types of leaders that exist in an organizational setting.
The course also gives information on how leaders emerge and their functions.
Consequently, how leadership is related to organizational change and development are discussed.
Good luck.
3
