SMALL BUSINESS MBA 783 MANAGEMENT Course GuideCOURSE GUIDE MBA 783 COURSE GUIDE MBA 783 SMALL BUSINESS MANAGEMENT Course Developer Leon Ikpe National Open University of Nigeria Victoria Island, Lagos Programme Leader Dr. O.J .
Onwe National Open University of Nigeria Victoria Island, Lagos Course Coordinator Leon Ikpe National Open University of Nigeria Victoria Island, Lagos NATIONAL OPEN UNIVERSITY OF NIGERIA iiCOURSE GUIDE MBA 783 National Open University of Nigeria Headquarters 14/16 Ahmadu Bello Way Victoria Island Lagos Abuja Office No.
5 Dar es Salaam Street Off Aminu Kano Crescent Wuse II, Abuja Nigeria e-mail: centralinfo@nou.edu.ng URL: www.nou.edu.ng Published by: National Open University of Nigeria 2008 First Printed 2008 ISBN: 978-058-556-7 All Rights Reserved iiiCOURSE GUIDE MBA 783 TABLE OF CONTENT PAGE Introduction………………………………………….. 1 Course Contents……………………………………... 1 Course Aims………………………………………….
1 Course Objectives…………………………………….
1 Course Material……………………………................ 1 Study Units…………………………………………... 2 Assignments/Exercises………………….…………… 2 Course Assessment…………………………………… 3 Summary…………………………………………….. 3 ivCOURSE GUIDE MBA 783 Introduction MBA 783: Small Business Management is a semester course work of two credit hours.
It will be available to all students taking the M.B.A programme in the school of Business and Human resources management.
The course consists of 15 Units involving the entire facet of small business management and small business planning.
The course guide tells you what the course MBA 783 is all about and the materials that you require to make the reading successful.
Other information contained in this course guide includes Tutor marked assignment questions.
Course Contents The course contents consist of the Nature of Small business, opportunities analysis, the development of business plans and management of small business.
Course Aims The Aims of this course are to expose you to the knowledge of how to establish, organize and operate a small business enterprise.
It aims to sharpen your skills in such areas as defining business goals, assessing market potentials, raising capital and managing business operations.
Course Objectives By the end of the course you should be able to: • Understand the nature of small business • Evaluate business opportunities in your environment.
• Describe business plans • Explain the key points involved in small business operations management.
Course Materials Major components of the course are: 1.
Course guide 2.
Study units 1COURSE GUIDE MBA 783 3.
Text books 4.
Assignment guide Study Units There are 15 Units of this course which should be carefully studied: Unit 1 - The Nature of Small business Unit 2 - Advantages and disadvantages of small business Unit 3 - Introduction to Opportunities analysis Unit 4 - Advanced Opportunities analysis Unit 5 - Characteristics for success in small business.
Unit 6 - The technical plan Unit 7 - The management plan Unit 8 - The Marketing plan Unit 9 - The Financial plan Unit 10 - The Economic plan Unit 11 - Managing manufacturing operations Unit 12 - Managing service based operations Unit 13 - Monitoring performance Unit 14 - Accounting records for small business Unit 15 - Sourcing capital for small business The first five units are designed to give you the necessary background knowledge required of a would-be-entrepreneur or small business manager.
Units 6 to 10 concentrate on the development of a business plan from technical analysis to economic analysis.
Units 11 to 14 focus attention on managing operations and monitoring performance.
The last unit, 15 addresses the issue of how to source capital for small business.
Each study unit will take at least two hours and it includes the introductions, objectives, main content, exercises, conclusion, summary and references.
Others are the Tutor marked Assignments (TMA).
You are required to study the materials, reflect and do the exercises.
Some of the exercises will require that you visit some small business organizations to see things for yourself.
You are strongly advised to pay such visits.
You should also read the text books and other recommended references.
2COURSE GUIDE MBA 783 Assignments/ Exercises In each unit, you will find exercises which you are required to do.
The exercises will enable you to understand better what you have learned.
Course Assessment 1.
Tutor Marked Assignment (TMA) In doing the Tutor marked assignments, you are expected to apply what you have learnt in the contents of the study unit.
The assignments are expected to be turned in to your tutor for grading.
They constitute 40% of the total score.
2.
Final Written Examination At the end of the course, you will write the final examination.
It will attract the remaining 60%.
This makes the final score to be 100%.
Summary The course MBA 783 (small business management) exposes you to the knowledge of how to establish, organize and operate a small business.
When you complete the course, you would have been armed with the necessary skills to manage small businesses.
3
