CONSUMER MKT 724 BEHAVIOUR Course GuideCOURSE GUIDE MKT724 COURSE GUIDE MKT724 CONSUMER BEHAVIOUR Course Developer/ Writer Mr. Lawal Bello Department of Business Administration, Faculty of Management Sciences University of Abuja Programme Leader Dr. O.J.
Onwe National Open University of Nigeria Lagos.
Course Coordinator Mr. M. A. Gana National Open University of Nigeria Lagos.
Course Editor Mr. M. A. Gana National Open University of Nigeria Lagos.
NATIONAL OPEN UNIVERSITY OF NIGERIA iiCOURSE GUIDE MKT724 National Open University of Nigeria Headquarters 14/16 Ahmadu Bello Way Victoria Island Lagos Abuja Office No.
5 Dar es Salaam Street Off Aminu Kano Crescent Wuse II, Abuja Nigeria e-mail: centralinfo@nou.edu.ng URL: www.nou.edu.ng Published by: National Open University of Nigeria 2008 First Printed 2008 ISBN: 978-058-113-8 All Rights Reserved iiiCOURSE GUIDE MKT724 CONTENTS PAGES Introduction ……………………………………………… 1 Objective ………………………………………………… 1 Structure of the Course Material ………………………… 1-2 ivCOURSE GUIDE MKT724 Introduction The course material of Consumer Behaviour is designed to serve as a guide for graduate course who are undertaking a master degree in Marketing and Business related subjects.
Course Objectives The objectives of this material are: • To highlight the importance and necessity of global approach to understanding consumer behaviour.
To offer a material that emphasizes and illustrate the relationship between individuals and the communities and cultures in which they live.
• To provide a comprehensive understanding of consumer adopting a culturally relative orientation.
To illustrate how culture affects internal, individual variables such as perception, emotions, memory, and decision making as well as self-concept, life style, values and family structure.
• To highlight the connection between understanding consumers and good marketing practice.
Structure of the Course Material This study material on Consumer Behaviour consists of Fourteen Course Units divided into four parts.
Module I provides the background for strong and comprehensive understanding of the consumer behaviour principles examined throughout the rest of units covered.
Unit 1 introduces our perspective on the nature and scope of consumer behaviour.
The chapter also provides the crucial link between understanding consumer behaviour and marketing strategy amongst others.
Unit 2 presents a comprehensive examination of effective market segmentation.
Module 2 discusses consumer as an individual.
Unit 1, present an in- depth analysis and discussion of consumer needs motivation and involvement exploring both the rational and emotional bases of consumer actions.
Unit 2 discusses the impact of the full range of personality theories on consumer behaviour.
The chapter considers the related concepts of self and self-image.
Unit 3 provides a comprehensive examination of the impact of consumer perception on marketing strategy and importance of product positioning and repositioning.
Unit 4 examines how consumers learn and discuss behavioral and cognitive learning theories.
Unit 5 offers an in-depth examination of consumer attitudes formation as well as the attitudinal change.
1COURSE GUIDE MKT724 Module 3 centered on the social and cultural dimensions of consumer behaviour.
It begins with a discussion of consumer social group, reference group, family and household role orientations.
Unit 1 examines the importance of family and household in purchase decision.
Unit 2 provides an insight into the role of social/reference group in shaping the consumer behaviour.
Unit 3 examines social class while Unit 4 investigates the impact of societal and cultural values, beliefs, and customs on consumer behaviour.
Module 4 explores various aspects of consumer decision making.
Unit 1 offers a comprehensive discussion product adoption and diffusion of innovations from consumer perspectives.
Unit 2 provides a comprehensive analysis of the consumer information processing.
Unit 3 describes how consumers make products/service decisions, and expands on the increasingly important practice of relationship marketing.
This section concludes with a comprehensive model of consumer decision making.
Unit 4 introduces the concept of organizational buying behaviour as it relates to consumer behaviour.
It provides vivid explanation of organization buying features and process.
2
