BUDGETING AND PUBLIC MPA 752 FINANCE MANAGEMENT Course GuideCOURSE GUIDE MPA 752 COURSE GUIDE MPA 752 BUDGETING AND PUBLIC FINANCE MANAGEMENT Course Developer/ Writer Ambrose O Nwulu LASU Part Time Lecturer Festac Campus Lagos Programme Leader Dr O. J. Onwe National Open University of Nigeria Lagos.
Course Co-ordinator Martha Oruku (Mrs) National Open University of Nigeria Lagos.
NATIONAL OPEN UNIVERSITY OF NIGERIA iiCOURSE GUIDE MPA 752 National Open University of Nigeria Headquarters 14/16 Ahmadu Bello Way Victoria Island Lagos Abuja Office No.
5 Dar es Salaam Street Off Aminu Kano Crescent Wuse II, Abuja Nigeria e-mail: centralinfo@nou.edu.ng URL: www.nou.edu.ng Published by: National Open University of Nigeria 2008 First Printed 2008 ISBN: 978-058-005-0 All Rights Reserved iiiCOURSE GUIDE MPA 752 CONTENTS PAGE Introduction………………………………………………….
1 Course Aims………………………………………………… 1 Course Objectives…………………………………………… 1 – 2 Course description…………………………………………... 2 – 3 Course Materials…………………………………………….. 3 Study Units………………………………………………….. 3 The Tutor-Marked Assignment (TMA)……………………... 3 Assignment File……………………………………………... 3 – 4 Tutorials……………………………………………………... 4 Preparing For Tutorials…………………………………….... 4 Tutors………………………………………………………... 4 Overall Pass Mark…………………………………………… 4 – 5 Course Assessment………………………………………….. 5 – 6 TMA Extensions Policy……………………………………... 6 ivCOURSE GUIDE MPA 752 Introduction Welcome to MPA 752: Budgeting and public Finance Management.
This is a 2 credit course within the Master of Public Administration Programme.
It is a core course and must be taken by all students wishing to complete their MPA degree.
Distance learning, you must be self- disciplined, independent, and possess initiative.
You should read this thoroughly before you begin your study.
This course contains 20 study units.
Each unit has been designed to take between 20 and 40 hours, so to complete the whole course, you will need about 320 hours.
However, everybody studies at a different rate.
So, this is just a general guide.
Refer to the section called course description for details.
MPA 712 builds on the Budgeting and Finance courses you studied at the under graduate level and the experience acquired in the handling of finance functions in the places of work where you have been exposed.
Here, we teach the theory and practice of Budgeting and finance management especially as practiced in the Nigerian Public context.
Case studies play an important part in this course.
The practice exercise or Tutor-marked Assignments at the end of each unit takes the form of case study in which you can practice the skills you have learnt.
Remember that case studies usually do not have strictly right or wrong answers.
The important thing is to form and express opinion and support them with good arguments.
Course Aims MPA 752 aims at helping to acquire more advanced theories or budgeting and public finance management.
This will in turn improve your understanding of concepts and theories you have known in the past.
It also aims at placing whatever budgeting and finance roles you have performed or are now performing in its proper theoretical context.
In general, we want this course to give you a firmer grip of all the essential elements of budgeting and Public Finance management are, in theory and practice.
Course Objectives After studying this course, the students should be able to: • Explain the meaning and definition of budgeting 1COURSE GUIDE MPA 752 • Discuss the purposes, advantages and approaches to budgeting.
• Mention and explain the different types of budgeting in the private sector.
• Explain the preparation of Budgets, types and budgetary control system in the Public sector especially in the democratic state.
• Narrate fully the issues in Public revenue, Public expenditure and public debt Management.
• Apply in practice the critical issues in Budgeting and Public Finance Management in Nigeria.
Course description MPA 752 – Budgeting and Public Finance Management is a course that exposes students to the theories Budgeting and Public Finance Management as applied to the sector of the economy.
Where theories in the strict sense of the concept do not exist, the course defines concepts, e.g.
budgetary control, public debt management, phases in budgeting etc.
as they are available in Budgeting and Finance Management literatures and state how these are applied in the Nigerian Public sector.
The titles of the twenty study units you will need to complete each one as shown below: Module 1 Unit 1 Definition and Meaning of Budgeting Unit 2 Purposes and Advantages of Budgeting Unit 3 Approaches to Budgeting Module 2 Unit 1 Sales and Raw Materials Purchase Budgets Unit 2 Production, Labour and Overhead Budgets Unit 3 Cash and Flexible Budget Unit 4 Master Budget Module 3 Unit 1 Budgeting system in a democratic state Unit 2 Methods of Budgeting: Traditional or Incremental Budgeting, Zero-Base Budgeting Unit 3 Planning, Programming Budgeting System, Performance Budgeting Unit 4 Rolling or Continuous Budgets 2COURSE GUIDE MPA 752 Module 4 Unit 1 Budgetary Control Unit 2 Weaknesses of Budgets Unit 3 Development Plan: Meaning, Features & Rationale Unit 4 Development Planning in Nigeria Module 5 Unit 1 Sources of Public Finance Unit 2 Public Expenditure-Meaning and Reasons Unit 3 Classifications and Effects of Public Expenditure Unit 4 Public Debt: Meaning and Classifications Unit 5 Management of Public Debt Course Materials The materials consist of the following: 1.
Twenty study units 2.
An Assignment File containing some Assignments supplementary Readings 3.
Course Time table Study Units The 20 study units in MPA 712 contain four to eight weeks of work.
They outline the objectives for each part, summarize key issues and ideals, provide commentary on the reading, link theoretical concepts to practical observations and applications and give directions for study.
The Tutor-Marked Assignment (TMA) Are designed to help you achieve the course objectives and require you to apply what you have learnt.
Along with the subject content, each unit, includes specific.
Objectives, tasks, questions, self-test, and a summary of the material covered.
The units are: Assignment File The assignment file gives you details about your assignments - how many marks each question is worth, approximately how much you should write and when you should submit the assignment (the “Cut-off 3COURSE GUIDE MPA 752 date”).
Note that your assignment should reach your tutor on or before the deadline.
No extension will be given.
Tutorials To assist you in this course, your assigned tutor will conduct 8 tutorials.
Each tutorial will be one hour long and will be held on a weekday evening or Saturdays.
Details of the dates, time and location will be given to you alongside with the phone numbers of your tutor.
We strongly recommend that you attend the tutorials.
The purpose is to assist you in analyzing the case studies.
The case studies are an important part of your course because they help you to apply the concepts and theories you have learnt to practical situations.
Unless you can do this, your learning is only half complete.
Tutorials are face to face sessions that enable you to exchange ideas and experiences and make contact with others.
This will benefit you as a student and a manager.
You may be seriously disadvantaged if you do not attend these sessions.
It is worthy of note that the function of these sessions is to complement your distance learning material, not to replace it in the form of lectures.
In this course, your primary means of learning is through your course materials: Preparing For Tutorials In order to prepare yourself fully for tutorials, you should also prepare your answers to the assigned case study or T.M.A so that you can participate meaningfully in the tutorial discussion.
Time has been allowed in the study schedule to do this.
Tutors Your Tutor will: Conduct the Tutorials Assess your assignments Be available, at certain times, for consultations.
Your tutor is your first point of contact in NOUN.
If you need any information or have any problem, please, speak to him or her before contacting your course coordinator.
4COURSE GUIDE MPA 752 Your tutor is able to provide you with considerable assistance.
We urge you to make use of this guideline.
Tutors are required to start tutorial sessions on time.
If a tutor fails to turn up 30 minutes after the scheduled time, students may assume that the session is cancelled, and the case should be reported to the course coordinator so that a make-up session will be arranged.
If the assignment is posted to the tutor, it is the responsibility of the student to check with his or her tutor that the assignment has successfully arrived.
Extension applications without support documents on the ground of post loss will not be accepted.
The university will not accept any responsibility for assignments that are not received by your tutor due to problems with the post.
As a precaution, you are advised to keep a copy of each assignment you submit and obtain a certificate of posting from the post office when you post your assignments.
Overall Pass Mark To pass the course, you must achieve at least 40% in the TMA as well as in the final examination your performance in these two components determines your total score for the whole course.
You are advised to organize informal meetings among colleagues offering the same course.
They are purely voluntary, but they are ways, for you and your fellow students to help each other.
Course Assessment The course is designed to help learners to move easily from the stated objective through the required readings, self-test, practice exercise and assignments to a final examination.
In assessment, you will be expected to: Demonstrate understanding of the concepts you have learnt in the course.
Integrate course concepts and knowledge with your own experience and observations.
Apply course concepts and your own knowledge to “case problems”.
5COURSE GUIDE MPA 752 Assignments and examinations are designed to test you and facilitate your progress.
To complete the course successfully, you are required to pass both the continues assessment and the final examination.
TMA Extensions Policy The assignment policy of the University should be observed.
Applications for extension of up to seven days should be submitted to the tutor.
For extensions of over seven days, students should note the following: Assignment Extension may be granted in extenuating circumstances work commitments and travelling are not regarded as extenuating circumstances unless they are unexpected.
Supporting documents should be submitted along with the application for extension of over seven days to justify the claim.
Applications without supporting documents will not be considered.
Applications for extension should be submitted either before or on the due date.
The decision to refuse or grant an extension is made by the course coordinator for extension of up to 21 days.
6
