THE SHIFTING SYSTEM IN HOSPITAL MPA 778 /MULTIPLE HOSPITAL MANAGEMENT SYSTEM Course GuideCOURSE GUIDE MPA778 COURSE GUIDE MPA778 THE SHIFTING SYSTEM IN HOSPITAL/MULTIPLE HOSPITAL MANAGEMENT SYSTEM Course Developers & Writer Dr Joel A. Afolayan Course Editor/ Coordinator Martha Oruku National Open University of Nigeria Lagos Programme Leader Dr O J Onwe National Open University of Nigeria Lagos.
NATIONAL OPEN UNIVERSITY OF NIGERIA iiCOURSE GUIDE MPA778 National Open University of Nigeria 14/16 Ahmadu Bello Way Victoria Island Lagos Abuja Office No.
5 Dar es Salaam Street Off Aminu Kano Crescent Wuse II, Abuja Nigeria e-mail: centralinfo@nou.edu.ng URL: www.nou.edu.ng National Open University of Nigeria 2008 First Printed 2008 ISBN: 978-058-676-8 All Rights Reserved Printed by: For National Open University of Nigeria iiiCOURSE GUIDE MPA778 CONTENTS PAGE Introduction………………………………………………... 1 Course Content…………………………………………….
1 Course Aims……………………………………………….
1 Course Objectives………………………………………….
1 Course Materials…………………………………………….
2 Study Units………………………………………………… 2 Assignments ……………………………………………….. 2 Course Assessment ……………………………………….. 3 Tutor- Marked Assignment (TMAs) ……………………… 3 ivCOURSE GUIDE MPA778 Introduction The shifting system in the hospital and multiple hospital system is a one- semester course for students offering a Master of Public Administration Programme.
It is a 2- credit unit course consisting of 17 units.
Each unit is supposed to be covered in 2 (two) hours.
It is also a core course.
Course Content The course is about the shifting system in hospitals and its relevance to efficient hospital management.
Course Aims The aim of the course is to expose students in the media and hospital support services to the management in a health institution setting.
This will be achieved by aiming to: • Introduce you to the basic concepts and principles in shifting system in hospital administration.
• Explore levels of health care services in Nigeria.
• Give an insight to the staff development process in hospitals.
• State the parameters in safe shifting in the hospitals.
• Appraise team-building in shifting system in Hospital Management.
• Remove the negative effects of frequent shifting.
• Discuss the changing shift schedules of health workers.
Course Objectives To achieve the aims set-out above the course sets overall objectives.
In addition, each unit also has specific objectives.
The unit objectives are always included at the beginning of a unit.
You are advised to refer to them as you study each unit both at the beginning and at the end to ensure that you check your progress and that you have done what is required of you by the unit.
1COURSE GUIDE MPA778 Course Materials Major components of the course are:- (1) Course guide (2) Study units (3) Further readings (4) Tutor-Marked Assignment Everything is contained in each unit except the textbooks which you may have to acquire.
You are advised to read some more materials in shifting system in hospitals in some medical journals.
You may also contact your tutor where you run into problem about recommended text books Study Units There are seventeen (17) study units in this course as follows: Unit 1 Levels of health care services in Nigeria Unit 2 The staff development process Unit 3 Safe staffing in the hospitals Unit 4 Staffing the hospital units Unit 5 Conflicts among the major groups in health care services in Nigeria Unit 6 Staffing modules and modified approaches to staffing and schedules Unit 7 Staffing the hospital units Unit 8 Team-building in shifting system Unit 9 Changing shift schedules Unit 10 Negative effects of frequent shifting Unit 11 Hospital management system Unit 12 The qualities of the health manager Unit 13 Interpersonal relationship in shifting system Unit 14 Human environment Unit 15 Participative health care Unit 16 Group dynamics in health care system Unit 17 Stress and adaptation Assignment The major assignment required of you is a Tutor-Marked Assignment (TMA) which you are expected to complete at the end of each unit and mail to your tutor.
2COURSE GUIDE MPA778 Course Assessment Your assessment for this course is made up of two components.
• Tutor-Marked Assignment • Final Examination Tutor-Marked Assignment Each unit of this course has a TMA attached to it.
You can only do this assignment after covering the materials and exercise in each unit.
Normally the TMA are kept in a separate file.
Your tutor will mark and comment on it.
Pay attention to such feedback from your tutor and use it to improve your offer assignments.
You can write the assignment by using materials from your study units, and from textbooks or other sources.
It is however preferable that as a graduate student, you should demonstrate evidence of independent reading especially from texts and other sources, something to show that you have done some more research on the course.
The assignment is in most cases essay question.
Examples from your own experience or environment are useful when you answer such questions.
This allows you to apply theory to real life situations.
3
