LEGAL STRUCTURE IN MPA 775 HOSPITALS Course GuideCOURSE GUIDE MPA775 COURSE GUIDE MPA775 LEGAL STRRUCTURE IN THE HOSPITAL Course Developer Dr. Joel A. Afolayan Course Editor Martha Oruku National Open University of Nigeria Lagos Course Coordinator Martha Oruku National Open University of Nigeria Lagos Programme Leader Dr. O. J. Onwe National Open University of Nigeria Lagos NATIONAL OPEN UNIVERSITY OF NIGERIA iiCOURSE GUIDE MPA775 National Open University of Nigeria Headquarters 14/16 Ahmadu Bello Way Victoria Island Lagos Abuja Office No.
5 Dar es Salaam Street Off Aminu Kano Crescent Wuse II, Abuja Nigeria e-mail: centralinfo@nou.edu.ng URL: www.nou.edu.ng National Open University of Nigeria 2007 First Printed 2007 ISBN: 978-058-592-3 All Rights Reserved Printed by …………….. For National Open University of Nigeria iiiCOURSE GUIDE MPA775 TABLE OF CONTENT PAGE Introduction………………………………………….. 1 What you will learn in this course…………………… 1 Course Aims………………………………………….
1 Course Objectives…………………………………….
2 Working through this course………………………….
2 Course Material……………………………................ 3 Study Units…………………………………………... 3 Set Textbooks………………………………………... 4 Assignment file……………………………………… 4 Tutor – Marked Assignment (TMA)………………… 4 ivCOURSE GUIDE MPA775 Introduction Legal Structure in Hospitals is a course for students offering Master of Public Administrator.
It is a 3 credit unit course consisting of 16 units.
Each unit is supposed to be covered in three hours.
It is a core course for those specializing in Hospital Administration under Master of Public Administrative Programme.
This course Guide therefore, tells you briefly what the course is all about, what course materials you will be using and how you can work your way through the course material.
It also highlights the issues of timing for going through these units, and explains the activities and Tutor Marked Assignment.
There are tutorials attached to this course and taking advantage of this will bring you into contact with your tutorial facilitator which will enhance your understanding the course.
What You Will Learn In This Course The overall aim of this course on Hospital administration is to expose the role of health administration in bringing about efficiency and effectiveness in health care provision.
This is done to broaden your perspective on Hospital administration in its totality.
It also make you appreciate that the legal structure in effective hospital administration whether the outfit is large or small.
During this course you will learn the idea about the types and structure of health care institutions.
Course Aims The aim of this course as pointed out earlier is to expose the students of Public Administration with specialisation in hospital administration to the concepts, structure, organization and service delivery capacity of health administration.
It is to make you to appreciate the scope of Hospital management and the way they operate and what they are capable of doing.
This will be achieved by among to: • Introduce you to types and structure of health care institutions.
• Trace the History of health care in Nigeria.
• Give an insight of levels of Health Care Services in Nigeria.
• Appraise the hospital as an organization.
1COURSE GUIDE MPA775 Course Objectives To achieve the aims set out above, the course sets overall objectives.
In addition each unit has a specific objectives.
The unit objectives are always included at the beginning of a unit.
You are advised to refer to them as you study each unit both at the beginning and at the end to ensure that you check your progress and that you have done what is required of you by the unit.
Below are the under objectives of the course as a whole.
By meeting these objectives you should achieve the aims of the course as a whole.
On successful completion of the course you should be able to: 1.
Appraise a hospital as an organization 2.
Situate a hospital as a system 3.
Understand departmentalization in the hospital situation.
4.
Discuss the pattern of communication in the hospitals.
5.
Explain the human environment and its relationship with human health.
6.
State the inter personal relationship in shifting system 7.
Describe group dynamics in health care system.
8.
Explain the issue of stress and stress management.
9.
Discuss information management in hospital.
Working through This Course To complete this course you are required to read and study units and recommended text books and explore more current materials on the internet.
In this course, each unit consists of exercises or activities to test your understanding from time to time.
At a point in your course, you are required to submit assignment for assessment purposes.
At the end of the course is a final examination.
Below you will find listed all the components of the course, what you have to do and how you should allocate time to each unit in order to complete the course successfully on time.
Course Materials Major components of the course are: 1.
Course guide 2.
Study units 2COURSE GUIDE MPA775 3.
Further readings 4.
Activities and tutor Marked Assignment Study Units There are 4 Modules in this course as follows: Module 1 Unit 1 History of Health Care in Nigeria Unit 2 Types and Structures of Health Care in Institutions.
Unit 3 Levels of Health Care Services in Nigeria.
Unit 4 Hospital as an organization Module 2 Unit 1 Hospital as a system Unit 2 Hospitals by department Unit 3 Communication in the Hospitals.
Unit 4 Effective Communication through Organizational Structure Module 3 Unit 1 Hospital Management System Unit 2 Human Environment Unit 3 Inter-personal relationship in Shifting System Unit 4 Dynamics in Health care System Module 4 Unit 1 Health administration and bureaucracy Unit 2 Factors responsible for inefficiency in government health Institution in Nigeria Unit 3 Information Management in Hospital Unit 4 Stress and adaptation Set Textbooks There is no compulsory textbook for this course.
However, as you go through the course, you will observe that some textbooks are recommended often this shows that it is current to a number of units.
Please try and consult some of them.
Moreover each unit has its own assigned texts and documents.
You should also lay your hands on these for further understanding.
3COURSE GUIDE MPA775 Assignment File The major assignment requires of you is a Tutor Marked Assignment (TMA) which you are expected to complete at the end of each unit and mail to your tutor.
Course Assessment Your assessment for this course is made up of two components.
 Tutor Marked Assignment  Final examination Tutor Marked Assignment (TMA) Each unit in this course has a TMA attached to it.
You can only do this assignment after covering the materials and exercise in each unit.
Normally the TMA are kept in a separate file.
Your tutor will mark and comment on it.
Pay attention to such feedback from your tutor and use it to improve your other assignments.
4
