INTERNATIONAL MPA 753 ADMINISTRATION Course GuideCOURSE GUIDE MPA753 COURSE GUIDE MPA753 INTERNATIONAL ADMINISTRATION Course Developer Emmanuel K. Akintoye Course Coordinator Martha Oruku National Open University of Nigeria Lagos Programme Leader Dr. O. J. Onwe National Open University of Nigeria Lagos NATIONAL OPEN UNIVERSITY OF NIGERIA iiCOURSE GUIDE MPA753 National Open University of Nigeria Headquarters 14/16 Ahmadu Bello Way Victoria Island Lagos Abuja Office No.
5 Dar es Salaam Street Off Aminu Kano Crescent Wuse II, Abuja Nigeria e-mail: centralinfo@nou.edu.ng URL: www.nou.edu.ng Published by: National Open University of Nigeria 2007 First Printed 2007 ISBN: 978-058-568-0 All Rights Reserved iiiCOURSE GUIDE MPA753 TABLE OF CONTENT PAGE Introduction………………………………………….. 1 What you will learn in this course…………………… 1 Course Aims………………………………………….
1 Course Objectives…………………………………….
2 Study Units………………..………………………….
2 - 3 The Modules…………………………….................... 3 Assessment…………………………………………... 3 Tutor Marked Assignment………………………....... 3 Final Written Examination…………………………… 3 ivCOURSE GUIDE MPA753 Introduction MPA753: International Administration is a semester course work of two credit units.
It is only available to students undergoing a Master’s degree in public administration.
The courses comprise 15 units involving the nature and ‘modus operandi’ of international organization.
The course will involve international organizations such as the United Nations Organization, International Governmental Organization (IGOs), regional economic bloc, and North-South dichotomy.
The concept is to enable students get acquired with how international organizations are administered and managed for effectiveness.
Course Contents The course contents consists of the nature and development of international institutions/organizations, roles of international organizations; international law; decision making in international context, economic blocs and cooperation; and the concept of international civil service.
Course Aims This course aims at exposing students to how international organizations are administered; the politics involved in their administration as well as the approaches used to explain their operations.
In view of the importance of administration in any human organization, the course is aimed at making students have greater appreciation of the unique administration of international global organization.
The aims will be realized by: • Explaining the nature and development of international institutions.
• Explaining the mode of operations of these institutions.
• Highlighting the politics involved in the actual functioning of international organizations.
• Describing the approaches to the management of these institutions.
• Describing the power and influence of the North over the South.
• Explaining the North-South relationship/dichotomy.
• Explaining decision-making in the international context.
• Identifying the critical roles of these organizations in global affairs.
Course Objectives 1COURSE GUIDE MPA753 At the end of the course, you should be able to: • Explain the nature and the development, and roles of international organizations worldwide, regional and specialized agencies.
• Explain and justify the international law and conventions governing international interactions and relations.
• Discuss the process of decision making in the international context.
• Examine and explain the concept of international civil service.
• Discuss the current concepts of human rights and environmental protection as issues of great importance to global institutions.
Study Units There are 15 units in this course which should be studied carefully.
Module 1 Unit 1 The twenty-first century international system.
Unit 2 Transnational Problems and International Cooperation.
Unit 3 International Decision Making.
Unit 4 Global International Organizations.
Module 2 Unit 1 Regional Economic Cooperation.
Unit 2 North-South Relations.
Unit 3 Approaches to North-South cooperation Unit 4 The South and International Political Economy.
Unit 5 South- South Cooperation.
Unit 6 Specialized International Organizations.
Module 3 Unit 1 International Law and Morality.
Unit 2 Application of International Law and Morality.
Module 4 Unit 1 Regional International Organizations.
Unit 2 International Institution/Organizations.
Unit 3 The International Civil Service.
The first two units are meant to introduce you to the twenty first (21st) century international system and the various problem confronting nations which warranted and endorsed the necessity for international 2COURSE GUIDE MPA753 cooperation.
Unit 3 discusses variables usually taken into account before decisions could be made on vital international issues.
Unit 4 discusses the United Nations as the only organization really qualified to be called “international organization” in the sense that all the sovereign nations of the world are members.
Unit 5 – 10 and 13 concentrate on regional and bloc economic relations while 11 – 12 discuss the evolution of International Law and morality and the application of this law to virtually all the international organizations.
It should be noted that Units 4 and 14 do not mean the same thing in the sense that only agencies of the former were discussed under the latter and that not all members of the former belong or are members of the latter.
Unit 15 takes a historical and administrative look at the UN Secretariat.
Treatment of each unit will not last less than two hours and it includes the introductions, objectives main content, exercise, conclusion, summary, and tutor-marked question and references/further readings.
You regular practice of tutor-marked-assignment will greatly enhance your understanding and by so doing the stated learning objectives will be achieved.
The Modules The course is divided into four modules.
The first module consist of 4 units (1 –4), the second module contains six units (5 – 10), the third comprises 2 units (11 – 12) while the fourth three units (13 – 15).
The entire work contains 15 assignments and you are expected to do all or at least 10 out of 15 given.
Assessment Tutor Marked Assignment In doing the tutor-marked assignment, it is expected that you would apply what you have learnt in the contents of the study units.
These assignments take care of your continuous assessment of 40%.
Final Written Examination At the end of the course, you will sit for final examination, which will attract the remaining 60%.
This brings the total score to be 100%.
3COURSE GUIDE MPA753 Good luck.
4
