PUBLIC SERVICE MPA 754 PROVISION Course GuideCOURSE GUIDE MPA754 COURSE GUIDE MPA754 PUBLIC SERVICE PROVISION Course Developer/ Writer Abdullahi Mohamed Yamma, B.Sc.
M.Sc.
Department of Political Science Nasarawa State University, Keffi Course Editor Martha Oruku National Open University of Nigeria 14/16 Ahmadu Bello Way Victoria Island, Lagos Programme Leader Dr. O. J. Onwe National Open University of Nigeria 14/16 Ahmadu Bello Way Victoria Island, Lagos Course Co-ordinator Martha Oruku National Open University of Nigeria 14/16 Ahmadu Bello Way Victoria Island, Lagos NATIONAL OPEN UNIVERSITY OF NIGERIA iiCOURSE GUIDE MPA754 National Open University of Nigeria Headquarters 14/16 Ahmadu Bello Way Victoria Island Lagos Abuja Office No.
5 Dar es Salaam Street Off Aminu Kano Crescent Wuse II, Abuja Nigeria e-mail: centralinfo@nou.edu.ng URL: www.nou.edu.ng National Open University of Nigeria 2006 First Printed 2006 ISBN: 978-058-580-X All Rights Reserved Printed By ……………….. For National Open University of Nigeria iiiCOURSE GUIDE MPA754 TABLE OF CONTENTS PAGES Introduction ………………………………………………… 1 Course Content……………………………………………... 1 Course Aims ……………………………………………….. 1 Objectives ………………………………………………….. 1 Course Materials …………………………………………… 2 Study Units ………………………………………………… 2-3 Assignment ………………………………………………… 3 Assessments………………………………………………… 3 Tutors Marked Assignment………………………………….
3 Final Written Examination………............................................ 3-4 Summary..................................................................................... 4 ivCOURSE GUIDE MPA754 Introduction Public Service Provision is one-semester course for students offering Master of Public Administration.
It is a 2 credit unit course consisting of 16 units.
Each unit is supposed to be covered in 2 (two) hours.
It is also a core course.
Course Content The course comprises of 5 modules and 16 units.
The modules are: Principle of Public Enterprises (5 units), Public Enterprises Reforms (5 units), Organisation (2 units), The Civil Service (4 units) and Civil Service Reforms in Nigeria (4 units).
The discussion of organisation and civil service and its reforms is to enable you understand the concept of Public Enterprises better.
However, the civil service discussion is restricted to Nigerian experience.
Course Aims The aim of this course is to expose you to the concept of Public Enterprises, organisation and civil service with its reforms.
This, is made easy by introducing you to: - The Nigerian Civil Service and some of its Reforms.
- Public Enterprises Reforms (that is Privatization and commercialization of Public enterprise) - What organisation means and its characteristics - The Nigerian Civil Service and some of its reforms.
Course Objectives The set objective of this course has been stated in each unit.
Nevertheless, the end of the successful completion of this course, you should be able to: • Identify and explain the main concepts associated with public enterprises • Understand the concepts of privatization and commercialization • Know what an organisation is, since public enterprises are also • organisation - • Have full knowledge of civil service system in Nigeria and some of its reforms 1COURSE GUIDE MPA754 Course Materials The major components of this course are: i.
Course Guide ii.
Study Units iii.
Further Readings iv.
Activities and Tutor-Marked Assignments Everything is contained in each unit except the textbooks, which you may have to acquire.
You are advised to source current materials on the Internet and Bureau for Public Enterprises (BPE).
However, you may contact your tutor where you encounter any problem about recommended textbooks.
Study Units Fifteen (15) units in this course as follows: Unit 1 Definition and origin of public enterprises Unit 2 Characteristics, classification, creation and reasons for the establishment of public enterprises Unit 3 Problems of public enterprises Unit 4 Management and control of public enterprises Unit 5 Performance, probes and Commission Unit 6 Privatization and Commercialization of Public Enterprises Unit 7 Definition and Principles of Civil Service Unit 8 Analysis and types of organisations Unit 9 Definition and principles of civil services Unit 10 Features and functions of the civil service Unit 11 Evolution and structure of the civil service Unit 12 Nigerianisation policy Unit 13 The Udoji Commission Unit 14 The 1988 Civil Service Reforms Unit 15 The 1994 Review Panel on Civil Service Reforms (Ayida Panel) The Modules The units are classified into modules as Modules 1 Unit 1-3 Modules 2 Unit 4 -6 Modules 3 Unit 7 -8 Modules 4 Units 9 -12 Modules 5 Units 13 - 15 2COURSE GUIDE MPA754 Each modules consists of related topics.
Modules 1 discusses definition, origin, classification problems of public enterprises and reasons for establishment of public enterprises.
Module 2 expatiation management and control performance, probes and commissions of inquiry, and the privatization and commercialization of public enterprises.
Module 3 is on organisations and its characteristics.
Module 4 analyse civil service system in Nigeria and Module 5 emphases civil service reforms.
You must read each unit carefully.
The basic knowledge on the topic is provided in the lecture materials.
You can update materials quoted.
Supplementary reading is highly recommended.
The core of the units is at 3.0 level while conclusion which is 4.0 helps you to roundup what you have read so far.
The "summary" (5.0) summarizes the major issues discussed.
This is to enable you remember the key issues and simplify the discussion at the end.
Meanwhile at the end some issues discussed at the 3.0 level in each unit, you will come across "Activity."
These are meant to provide simple questions to enable you comprehend and refresh yourself of the things discussed before the activity.
Answers are directly provided in most cases.
However, do not consult the answers until you have attempted the questions.
The answers may give you more insight than you might have attempted.
Assignments There is a Tutor-Marked Assignment (TMA) which you are expected to do at the end of each unit and give to your facilitator.
Assessments Your assignment for this course are made up two components: to facilitate your understanding of the subject matter or topic and your tutor-marked assignments.
Tutor-Marked Assignment Each unit in this course has a TMA attached to it.
You can only do the TMA after reading the materials and do exercise in each unit.
Normally, the TMAs are kept in a separate file.
Your facilitator will mark and comment on it.
You should therefore pay attention to such feedback from your facilitator and use it to improve your other assignments.
You can write the assignment by using materials from your study units and from textbooks or other sources.
However, it is preferable that as a 3COURSE GUIDE MPA754 graduate students, you should demonstrate evidence of wide reading especially from texts and other sources, something to show that you have researched more widely.
Meanwhile, you must remember that copying from any source without acknowledgement is plagiarism and is not acceptable.
References must be properly written if you use other people's work, the assignment are, in most cases, easy questions.
Examples from your own experience or environment are relevant when you answer such questions.
This allows you to apply theory to real life situations: Summary Public Service Provision treats Public Enterprises Organisations and Civil Service in Nigeria and its reforms.
The concepts are basically discussed with their fundamental characteristics.
The course is interesting and educative.
You will know better the public service system in Nigeria after you have completed reading the course materials 4
