 NATIONAL OPEN UNIVERSITY OF NIGERIA SCHOOL OF MANAGEMENT SCIENCES COURSE CODE: MPA 751 COURSE TITLE: INTRODUCTION TO PUBLIC ADMINISTRATION  COURSE GUIDE MPA 751 INTRODUCTION TO PUBLIC ADMINISTRATION Course Team Mrs.Martha A. Oruku (CourseWriter/Developer/ Coordinator) – NOUN Dr. C. P. Maduabum (Course Editor) – NOUN Dr. Onyemachi J. Onwe (Programme Leader) – NOUN NATIONAL OPEN UNIVERSITY OF NIGERIA None MPA 751 COURSE GUIDE National Open University of Nigeria Headquarters 14/16 Ahmadu Bello Way Victoria Island, Lagos Abuja Office 5, Dar es Salaam Street Off Aminu Kano Crescent Wuse II, Abuja e-mail: centralinfo@noun.edu.ng URL: www.noun.edu.ng Published by: National Open University of Nigeria Printed 2013 ISBN: 978-058-628-8 All Rights Reserved Printed by: ii  MPA 751 COURSE GUIDE CONTENTS PAGE Introduction……………………………………………….
iv What you will Learn in this Course…………………….. iv Course Aims……………………………………………… iv Course Objectives………………………………………... iv Working through this Course…………………………….. v Course Materials………………………………………….
v Study Units……………………………………………….
v Assignment File…………………………………………... vi Presentation Schedule…………………………………….
vi Assessment……………………………………………….. vi Tutor-Marked Assignment……………………………….. vi Final Examination and Grading………………………….. vii Total Course Marking Scheme…………………………… viii Course Overview………………………………………….
viii How to Get the Most from this Course…………………... ix Facilitation/Tutors and Tutorials………………………….
x Summary………………………………………………….. xi iii  MPA 751 COURSE GUIDE INTRODUCTION MPA 702: Introduction to Public Administration is a two-unit Master Degree level course designed to enable students acquire an introductory knowledge of the administrative systems and the concept of both public and private administration.
The course is compulsory for the Master of Public Administration programme.
It is expected that students taking the course already have some basic knowledge of Public Administration courses.
WHAT YOU WILL LEARN IN THIS COURSE The overall aim of MPA 702: Introduction to Public Administration is to expose you to the ideology behind public administration, the various political and administrative milieu in which public administration operates and consequently impact on administrative styles and outcomes.
COURSE AIMS This course aims to: • familiarise you with the basics of administrative systems • equip you with the basic strategies to understand the concept of public administration • describe the peculiarities and characteristics of the private and public administration • explain the concept of the chief executive officer • enable you appreciate the relevance of public corporation in the developing world despite the calls for their privatisation.
COURSE OBJECTIVES At the end of the course, you should be able to: • define the terminology "public administration" as against “private administration” • discuss the concept of the chief executive officer • describe the evolution of public administration • discuss the characteristics of the Nigerian civil service • explain the purposes, functions and funding of local government • justify the establishment of public corporation, particularly in developing countries.
iv  MPA 751 COURSE GUIDE WORKING THROUGH THIS COURSE To successfully complete this course, you are required to read all the study units and the recommended texts.
You are also required to do some self- assessment exercises, while the tutor-marked assignments would be submitted for assessment.
Below are the lists of all the components of the course.
COURSE MATERIALS The major components of the course are as follows.
• Course Guide • Study Units • References • Assignment • Presentation Schedule • Tutor-Marked Assignment STUDY UNITS The study units in this course are as follows: Module 1 Unit 1 The Principles of Public Administration Unit 2 The Historical Development of Public Administration Unit 3 Public and Private Administration Unit 4 The Ecology and Evolution of Public Administration Unit 5 The Concept of the Chief Executive Officer and its Responsibilities Module 2 Unit 1 Control Systems in Public Administration Unit 2 Public Organisations Unit 3 The Legal Aspect of Administration Unit 4 The Nigerian Civil Service Module 3 Unit 1 The Organising Process Unit 2 Communication in Organisation Unit 3 Personnel Management and Public Administration v  MPA 751 COURSE GUIDE Module 4 Unit 1 Communication in an Organisation Unit 2 Personnel Management and Public Administration Unit 3 Comparative Public Administration Unit 4 Local Government Administration ASSIGNMENT FILE You will find the assignment questions for each tutor-marked assignment in the folder labeled "Assignment File."
You will find the details of the work you must submit to your tutor in the file.
The marks you obtain in these assignments and how much time you should spend on each study unit, period for revision and tutorial dates can be found in the folder.
PRESENTATION SCHEDULE The presentation schedule included in your course materials gives you the important dates in the year for the completion of tutor-marked assignments and attending tutorials.
Remember, you are required to submit all your assignments by the due date.
You should guard against falling behind in your work.
ASSESSMENT There are three aspects to the assessment of the course: first are self-assessment exercises, second, are the tutor-marked assignments; and third, is the written examination.
In tackling the assignments, you are advised to be sincere in attempting the exercises.
You are expected to apply information, knowledge and techniques gathered during the course.
The assignments must be submitted to your tutor for formal assessment in accordance with the deadlines stated in the Presentation Schedule and the Assignment File.
The work you submit to your tutor for assessment will count for 30% of your total course mark.
At the end of the course, you will need to sit for a final written examination of three hours' duration.
This examination will also count for 70% of your total course mark.
TUTOR-MARKED ASSIGNMENT There are nine tutor-marked assignments at the end of each unit in this course material.
You need to attempt all the assignments.
You are encouraged, however, to submit eight assignments in which case the vi  MPA 751 COURSE GUIDE highest five of the eight marks will be counted.
Each assignment counts 10% towards your total course mark.
Assignment questions for the units in this course are contained in the Assignment File.
You will be able to complete your assignment from the information and materials contained in your reading, references and study units.
However, it is desirable in all degree level education to demonstrate that you have read and researched more widely than the required minimum.
Using other references will give you a broader viewpoint and may provide a deeper understanding of the subject.
When you have completed each assignment, send it together with a TMA form to your tutor.
Make sure that each assignment reaches your tutor on or before the deadline given in the Presentation Schedule and Assignment File.
If for any reason.
you cannot complete your work on time, contact your tutor before the assignment is due to discuss the possibility of an extension.
Extensions will not be granted after the due date unless there are exceptional circumstances.
FINAL EXAMINATION AND GRADING The final examination for MPA 702 will be of three hours duration.
It will have a value of 70% of the total course grade.
The examination will consist of questions, which reflect the types of self-testing, practice exercise and tutor-marked problems you have previously encountered.
All areas of the course will be assessed.
Use the time between finishing the last unit and sitting for the examination to revise the entire course.
You might find it useful to review your self-assessement exercises, tutor-marked assignments and comments on them before the examination.
The final examination covers information from all parts of the course.
vii  MPA 751 COURSE GUIDE COURSE MARKING SCHEME ASSESSMENT MARKS Assignments Nine assignments, best five marks of the nine count @ 1 — 9 6% each = 30% of course marks Final Examination 70% of overall course marks Total 100% of course marks COURSE OVERVIEW This table brings together the units, the number of weeks you should take to complete them and the assignments that follow them.
Unit Title of work Weeks Activity I Assessment (end of unit) 1 The Principles of Public Administration Assignment 1 The Historical Development of 1 Assignment 2 2 Public Administration 3 Public and Private Administration 1 4 The Ecology and Evolution 1 Assignment 3 of Public Administration 5 The Concept of the Chief Executive Assignment 4 Officer and its Responsibilities 6 Control Systems in Public Administration 7 Public Organisations 1 8 The Legal Aspect of Administration 1 Assignment 5 9 The Nigerian Civil Service 1 10 The Bureaucracy 1 Assignment 6 11 The Organising Process 12 Communication in Organisation Personnel Management and Public 1 Assignment 8 13 Administration 14 Comparative Public Administration 1 15 Local Government Administration 1 Assignment 9 viii  MPA 751 COURSE GUIDE HOW TO GET THE MOST FROM THIS COURSE In distance learning, the study units replace the university lecturer.
This is one of the great advantages of distance learning.
You can read and work through specially designed study materials at your own pace, and at a time and place that suits you best.
Think of it as reading the lecture that a lecturer might give you to do.
The study unit will tell you when to read your other materials.
Just as a lecturer might give you an in-class exercise.
your study units provide exercises for you to do at appropriate points.
Each of the study units follows a common format.
The first item is an introduction to the subject matter of the unit, and how a particular unit is integrated with the other units and the course as a whole.
Next is a set of learning objectives.
These objectives let you know what you should be able to do by the time you have completed the unit.
You should use these objectives to guide your study.
When you have finished the unit, you must go back and check whether you have achieved the objectives.
If you make a habit of doing this, you will significantly improve your chances of passing the course.
The main body of the unit guides you through the required reading from other sources.
This will usually be either from a reading section of some other sources.
Self-tests are interspersed till the end of the units.
Working through these tests will help you to achieve the objectives of the unit and prepare you for the assignments and the examination.
You should do each self-test as you come to it in the study unit.
There will also be numerous examples given in the study units, work through these when you come to them too.
The following is a practical strategy for working through the course.
If you run into any trouble, telephone your tutor.
Remember that your tutor's job is to help you.
When you need help, do not hesitate to call and ask your tutor to provide it.
(1) Read this Course Guide thoroughly.
(2) Organise a study schedule.
Refer to the course overview for more details.
Note the time you are expected to spend on each unit and how the assignments relate to the units.
Important information e.g.
details of your tutorials, and the date of the first day of the semester will be made available.
You need to gather all this information in one place, such as your diary or a wall calendar.
Whatever method you choose to use, you should decide on and write in your own dates for working on each unit.
ix  MPA 751 COURSE GUIDE (3) Once you have created your own study schedule, do everything you can to stick to it.
The major reason that students fail is that they get behind with their coursework.
If you get into difficulties with your schedule, please let your tutor know before it is too late for help.
(4) Turn to unit I and read the introduction and the objectives for the unit.
(5) Assemble the study materials.
Information about what you need for a unit is given in the 'Overview' at the beginning of each unit.
You will always need both the study unit you are working on and one of your references, on your desk at the same time.
(6) Work through the unit.
The content of the unit itself has been arranged to provide a sequence for you to follow.
As you work through the units, you will be instructed to read sections from other sources to enrich your reading.
(7) Well before the relevant due date check your Assignment File and make sure you attend to the next required assignment.
Keep in mind that you will learn a lot by doing the assignments carefully.
They have been designed to help you meet the objectives of the course and, therefore, will help you pass the exam.
Submit all assignments not later than the due date.
(8) Review of the objectives for each study unit confirms that you have achieved them.
If you feel unsure about any of the objectives, review the study material or consult your tutor.
(9) When you are confident that you have achieved a unit's objectives, you can then start on the next unit.
Proceed unit by unit through the course and try to face your study so that you keep yourself on schedule.
(10) When you have submitted an assignment to your tutor for marking, do not wait for its return before starting on the next unit.
Keep to your schedule.
When the assignment is returned, pay particular attention to your tutor's comments, both on the tutor-marked assignment form and on the assignment.
Consult your tutor as soon as possible if you have questions or problems.
(11) After completing the last unit, review the course and prepare yourself for the final examination.
Check that you have achieved the unit objectives (listed at the beginning of each unit) and the course objectives (listed in the Course Guide).
FACILITATION/TUTORS AND TUTORIALS There are 17 hours of tutorials provided in support of this course.
You will be notified of the dates, times and location of these tutorials, together with the names and phone numbers of your facilitator/tutor, as soon as you are allocated a tutorial group.
x  MPA 751 COURSE GUIDE Your tutor will mark and comment on your assignments, keep a close watch on your progress and on difficulties you might encounter and provide assistance to you during the course.
You must mail your tutor-marked assignments to your tutor well before the due date (at least two working days are required).
They will be marked by your tutor and returned to you as soon as possible.
Do not hesitate to contact your tutor by telephone, e-mail, or discussion board if you need help.
The following might be circumstances in which you would find help necessary.
Contact your tutor if: • you do not understand any part of the study units or the assigned readings • you have difficulty with the self-test or exercise • you have a question or a problem with an assignment with your tutor's comment on an assignment or with the grading of an assignment.
You should try your best to attend the tutorials.
This is the only chance to have face-to-face contact with your tutor and to ask questions which are answered instantly.
You can raise any problem encountered in the course of your study.
To gain the maximum benefit from course tutorials, prepare a question list before attending them.
You will learn a lot from participating in discussions actively.
SUMMARY As earlier stated above, this course MPA 702: Introduction to Public Administration introduces you to the various techniques, guides, principles, and practicesrelating to public administration in Nigeria.
We wish you every success in the course.
xi  MAIN COURSE CONTENTS PAGE Module 1…………………………………………………... 1 Unit 1 The Principles of Public Administration…… 1 Unit 2 The Historical Development of Public Administration……………………………… 12 Unit 3 Public and Private Administration………..... 30 Unit 4 The Ecology and Evolution of Public Administration……………………………… 34 Module 2………………………………………………….
47 Unit 1 The Concept of the Chief Executive Officer and its Responsibilities…………………….. 47 Unit 2 Control Systems in Public Administration 57 Unit 3 Public Corporations……………………….,.
77 Unit 4 Public Administration and the Administrative Law……………………….
90 Module 3………………………………………………….. 96 Unit 1 The Nigerian Civil Service ………………… 96 Unit 2 The Bureaucracy …………………………… 105 Unit 3 The Organising Process…………………….. 112 Module 4……………………………………………… 117 Unit 1 Communication in an Organisation………….
117 Unit 2 Personnel Management and Public Administration……………………………….
127 Unit 3 Comparative Public Administration……….... 136 Unit 4 Local Government Administration………….. 140  MPA 751 MODULE 1 MODULE 1 THE FUNDAMENTALS OF PUBLIC ADMINISTRATION Unit 1 The Principles of Public Administration Unit 2 The Historical Development of Public Administration Unit 3 Public and Private Administration Unit 4 The Ecology and Evolution of Public Administration UNIT 1 THE PRINCIPLES OF PUBLIC ADMINISTRATION CONTENTS 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objectives 3.0 Main Content 3.1 Definition of Terminologies 3.1.1 Meaning of Public Administration 3.1.2 Nature and Scope of Public Administration 3.1.3 Public Administration and other Social Sciences 3.2 Public Administration: Art or Science?
3.2.1 Approaches to the Study of Public Administration 3.2.2 Basic Principles of Public Administration 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutor-Marked Assignment 7.0 References/Further Reading 1.0 INTRODUCTION This unit is foundational in nature.
It focuses mainly on the definitions, meaning, features, scope and basic principles of public administration.
The concept of public administration will be examined from the context of its universality and its relevance to all human formations.
2.0 OBJECTIVES At the end of this unit, you should be able to: • define the term administration • contextualise the term public administration • state the scope of public administration • discuss whether public administration is art or science.
1  MPA 751 INTRODUCTION TO PUBLIC ADMINISTRATION 3.0 MAIN CONTENT 3.1 Definition of Terminologies Administration is a universal practice and also of universal importance.
Administration exists whenever people cooperate to achieve the goals of their groups and such achievements require planning, organisation, command, cooperation and control.
It involves the mobilisation, deployment and direction of human and material resources to attain specified objectives.
Public Administration may be considered both a field of action and a field of study.
As a field of action, public administration refers to the mechanics and structures through which government policies are implemented.
As a field of study or discipline, public administration refers to the academic discipline which studies the mechanics and structures through which government implements its programmes.
According to Woodrow, “…Public Administration is a detailed and a systematic application of law.
Every particular application of law is an act of administration.” In the words of Dwight Waldo, “Public Administration is the art and science of management as applied to the affairs of the states ….” Luther Gullrich asserts: “Public Administration is that part of science of administration which has to do with the government and thus concerns itself primarily with the executive branch where the work of government is done.” All these definitions of public administration exhibit the following characteristics.
• Organisation and direction of material resources into an organised structure.
This organised structure is well guided to attain, human acceptable goals for the interest of all.
• The issue of cooperation and unity of purpose for the welfare of all; public administration is a collective caring process for the welfare and well-being of all.
It therefore, involves the harmonisation of personal and group goals.
It harmonises personal and group goals.
2  MPA 751 MODULE 1 SELF-ASSESSMENT EXERCISE Define public administration.
3.1.2 Nature and Scope of Public Administration The nature of public administration may be narrow whereby it is defined only as the action side of government or mainly the activities of the executive arm of government.
That is when it deals with the functions of the Manager or the Chief Executive Officer only.
There is also the broader view of public administration where it embraces the three organs of government: the executive, the legislative and the judiciary.
It reflects the collective caring activities of the three organs of government.
Furthermore, it involves the role of the least personnel to the highest in a work situation.
The scope of public administration is as follows: • the formulation and implementation of public policies • the executive arm of government • the involvement of problems concerning human behaviour at governmental level • a field that is differentiated in several ways from private administration.
Public Administration is broad and cannot be restricted to a specific detail.
It is multi-disciplinary because students and practitioners need to draw from several disciplines like political science, psychology, sociology and especially the sciences in order to reach the truth about a particular administrative problem or before the best decision can be taken and implemented.
3.1.3 Public Administration and other Social Sciences Public administration is a distinct discipline of its own.
However, as human beings and nations relate with one another through interactions so do various disciplines.
There is a close relationship between public administration and other social sciences.
Psychology and Public Administration Psychology is the science of the mind.
Mental activity is known to guide the behaviour of an individual.
Public Administration is mostly for the efficient implementation of public policies.
How do we get 3  MPA 751 INTRODUCTION TO PUBLIC ADMINISTRATION efficient human beings to carry out public related tasks?
This is why psychology comes in from recruitment, the individual stay and exit from an organisation.
Public administration is the ability to master human behaviour to a reasonable degree due to the assistance of psychologists and the knowledge of psychology in a work place.
This would definitely produce well-motivated and happy workers.
Law and Public Administration Laws are carefully established rules and regulations that are made to regulate conduct and performance of individuals and groups, hence public administration is the administration of public laws.
In a democratic process, under the separation of powers, checks and balances, rules and regulations are analysed by the legislature.
The judiciary is well known by the function of judicial reviews.
Therefore, every political settings and administrative processes in public administration has legal connotations in law making, execution and interpretation.
Philosophy and Public Administration The knowledge of philosophy enables public administration to systematically accumulate knowledge and wisdom from all fields of human undertakings.
This enables administration to guide, teach, lead and serve the human society in the creation of pleasant world for the benefit of humanity.
Religion and Public Administration Religion is a social science which deals with human relationship with the Supreme Being.
In all intents and purposes, the essence of religion is to truly identify with the Almighty.
Religion is one instrument of peace and obedience to constituted authority which public administration symbolises.
3.2 Public Administration: Art or Science?
Public Administration is the implementation of rules and regulations by the executive arm of government.
It is the totality of all government activities.
There is always this friction about public administration being an art or a science course.
Art is the knowledge acquired by learning and practice and science is the act of doing an activity in a systematic way.
4  MPA 751 MODULE 1 However, public administration can be viewed as a science course based on certain criteria.
Existence of Agreed Principles The principle of public administration as agreed by writers in the field, are: planning, organising, staffing, directing, coordinating, reporting and budgeting.
There is also a span of control that limits the number of subordinates one can conveniently control.
The outcome of good administration can be predicted to be efficient work force and efficient and productive output.
Therefore, the ability to determine future occurrence through present indices makes Public Administration Science-oriented in nature.
Public Administration is concrete and exact because it has the organisational outlook.
Organisation is the putting in their right perspectives human and material resources to achieve set goals.
It further creates formal authority structure and allocates duties and functions.
Another proof that public administration is science, is that, in an attempt to carry out its various functions; there are some forms of experiments.
The whole world can be termed “the laboratory” of public administration.
Policies and laws are tentative intentions to regulate human affairs.
They (laws and regulations) are experimented upon to see how good they would work for the benefit of mankind.
Lastly, it is an agreed principle that everyone is equal before the law.
This involves the calculated use of resources to actual set goals.
A calculated use of resources must involve careful and uniform use of thoughts, words and actions both in theory and practice.
This is scientific because it is a systematic accumulation of knowledge.
As an Art, public administration can be seen as having more than one definition.
For Science, the definition would be only one.
Public Administration as an Art has various definitions both at a narrow or broader view.
Another attribute of public administration that makes it an Art subject is that, human behaviours are subject to irrational acts which may also affect the policy content which may vary due to the variation in human nature.
There is also the issue of unequal treatment of people when it comes to public administration.
This unequal treatment may be due to corruption, nepotism and favouritism.
Irregular human behaviour cannot be subjected to laboratory experiment.
Therefore, Public Administration is an Art because knowledge is gained through learning.
But in all, it 5  MPA 751 INTRODUCTION TO PUBLIC ADMINISTRATION should be noted that it is not true to say that public administration is absolutely an Art or a Science course.
SELF-ASSESSMENT EXERCISE Defend public administration as an Art or a Science course.
3.2.1 Approaches to the Study of Public Administration The word “approach” means to come nearer or closer to something.
The approaches discussed here depend on the definition of public administration and the extent to which the boundaries of the subject are adjusted.
The following are the approaches to the study of public administration.
Judiciary Approach Of all the approaches to the study of public administration, the judicial approach is the oldest.
This approach assumes that public administration carried out primarily by the executive organ of government is nothing more than the implementation of rules and regulations as passed by the legislature.
Public Administration is the science of government and is the knowledge of the laws by which every society is regulated.
It can be concluded here that public administration originated from the study of the judiciary or Administrative Law Scientific Approach Fredrick W. Taylor, the father of Scientific Management, made effort to develop public administration into a science from principles within the engineering and management sciences.
Taylor’s desire was to increase production by motivating the workers to work harder.
Comprehensive Approach Here, public administration is considered as the total performance of governmental functions or organisational functions by those placed in position to do so.
This approach to the study of public administration sees both the functional and the administrative tasks as public administration and hence the term “comprehensive.” 6  MPA 751 MODULE 1 Administrative Process Approach As the name suggests, this approach sees administration as the make-up of some processes or functions which include policy, organisation, personnel, finance procedures and control.
Conventional Approach This is a transition from the comprehensive and the administrative process approaches.
Here, a distinction is drawn between specialised professional and the “generalists” or the administrative staff.
The question that arises here is who is fit to head the organisation between the generalists and the administrators as the technical experts?
Economy and Efficiency Approach Under this approach, economy is replaced with the issue of efficiency.
There is a strong relationship between the scientific approach and the economy and efficiency approach.
While the scientific approach attempts to identify the principles of making management of men and materials in any organisation more efficient, the efficiency approach largely introduces and applies these management principles in the organisation of men in the public and private sectors of a political system.
Historical Approach This approach sees public administration from the perspective of historical developments or events in a nation’s public service.
A typical example is the reform in the Nigerian civil service from 1922 till date.
The Nigerian civil service is growing and getting refined due to the several reforms she has undergone to make it what it is today.
Equity Approach The equity approach to the study of public administration states that public officials should become sensitive to the needs, desires and aspirations of the public.
This approach is the outcome of the widespread disorder experienced in the United States of America in the fifties and especially the development and spread of Socialism which emphasised equity of human beings.
Realising that man’s actions towards his fellow man had been inhuman, the equity approach is aimed at rectifying man’s injustice or inhumanity 7  MPA 751 INTRODUCTION TO PUBLIC ADMINISTRATION towards man by encouraging the American public servants to discard self-interest and to be sensitive towards man’s social problems.
3.2.2 Basic Principles of Public Administration Public Administration is defined as a body of knowledge systematised and synthesised from various public utterances and actions.
Therefore, it has certain principles which are essential tools for providing goods and services to the people.
Principles are sources for action or essential regulations or fundamental truths capable of guiding human conduct or behaviour and performance.
Public Administration has the capacity to organise and direct human and material resources to achieve set goals.
The principles of public administration include the followings.
Hierarchy This simply means the orderly arrangement and distribution of power, functions, positions and authority in an organisation.
Here, the objectives of the organisation are sub-divided into sub-objectives; tasks are broken down into smaller units, power and authority delegated downwards.
Administrative hierarchy provides a determinate procedure that decides who is to decide.
To avoid contradictory authority-relationship, there is the need to establish a determinate hierarchy of authority either by zoning authority along functional lines or by maintaining organisational structure.
Formal organisational structure is a plan for the division of work and allocation of authority.
The organisation gives each member of the group his status and role in relation to other members, but specifies the content of his work and his functions in general terms.
The whole operation of the organisation is organised into an unbroken order and clearly defined hierarchy.
Political Direction Public administration obtains leadership from politics.
It is said that public administration is the youngest branch of political science.
Furthermore, public administration is a political system in action.
A political system is a set of interaction, abstracted from the totality of social behaviour through which authoritative values are allocated to the society.
This principle shows that administration obtains instruction from politics in providing the needed services to the people.
The top frames the broad policies or laws which the administration executes.
8  MPA 751 MODULE 1 Unity of Command This means that each member of the organisation should receive order from only one supervisor.
This is to avoid conflict and confusion.
A situation where two supervisors issue two conflicting orders to a subordinate will create conflict and confusion within the organisation.
Public Responsibility Political representatives are responsible to the people for their acts of omissions and commissions.
Public responsibility ensures the exercise of certain power and authority in the execution of specified duties of functions for the benefit of the people.
It also stipulates the need for accountability to the people.
Unity of Direction Organisation is effective when members work together towards achieving same objectives.
There must be subordination of individual interest of the organisation.
Members should not work at cross-purposes with the organisation.
The objectives of the organisation can be best achieved if members work towards the same goal, that is, the goal of the organisation.
Public Relations Public Relations (PR) is a means through which people are informed about the policies and intention of the government.
It relates to the people that government is aware of their problems and steps taken to solve the problems.
It also picks up the reactions of the people on government policies and laws as well as the solution to problems.
The general public must be aware of the happening in the government.
Chain of Command There must be a chain of command in an organisation.
This is the power and authority linkage order and power must flow from the top to the bottom in an unbroken order that makes for proper communication of decision taken at each level of authority.
There must be a clearly defined level of authority and decision-making and each decision taken should be communicated downward through these defined chains of command.
9  MPA 751 INTRODUCTION TO PUBLIC ADMINISTRATION Social Necessity The essence of public administration is the process of formulating and implementing public policies.
Public here refers to the people or the masses in the society.
Public policy goes to express the will of the people through providing them the civic amenities as well as developing them socially, economically and politically.
Span of Control This has to do with the number of people that a supervisor should conveniently control.
There is the need for a smaller number of people to be supervised and controlled so as to allow for an effective control/supervision.
A supervisor should also be able to coordinate the activities of the subordinates.
This coordination involves orderly arrangement of group effort to provide for unity of action in the pursuit of common purpose.
To do this effectively, the number supervised should not be too large as to be uncontrollable.
Division of Labour This is the division of work or specialisation which gives room for higher productivity.
This is because each worker can work at his or her area of competence.
Authority and Responsibility This is the right to give orders to subordinates and be responsible and accountable for such orders.
They should also be responsible for the consequences of such orders.
Discipline This is the respect for or obedience of rules and objectives of the organisation.
It is also obedience to constituted authority as represented by the management of the organisation.
Efficiency The power to accomplish expected result is efficiency.
Public administration, therefore, must have efficient personnel to execute public programmes, satisfy the needs of the society and promote its expansion and growth.
Career development of public and civil servants is achievable through pre-entry and in-service training programmes for 10  MPA 751 MODULE 1 both senior and junior cadre.
It is essentially meant to promote efficiency.
Organisation These are observable levels of government at the local, state and federal government.
In addition to this organisation, public administration is also organised into legislature, the executive and the judiciary.
There are also visible formal and informal structures within the system.
This organisation is the basic principle of public administration capable of bringing human and material resources together for effective use and service to the people.
Equity This means kindness and justice based on pre-determined conditions which must be known to all workers.
The management should not be partial and should treat all workers fairly and as equals.
Esprit-de-Corp This is unity.
Union is strength; workers must cooperate and regard themselves as one in an attempt to achieve the organisational goals and objectives.
4.0 CONCLUSION In this unit, you have learnt the definition of public administration as that which involves the coordination of all organised activities, having as its purpose the implementation of public policy.
5.0 SUMMARY In this unit, you have learnt the meaning, the nature, scope and approaches to public administration.
6.0 TUTOR-MARKED ASSIGNMENT i.
What is administration?
ii.
Make a distinction between private and public administration.
7.0 REFERENCES/FURTHER READING Willoughby, W. F. (nd).
Principles of Public Administration.
White, L. O.
(nd).
Introduction to the Study of Public Administration.
11  MPA 751 INTRODUCTION TO PUBLIC ADMINISTRATION UNIT 2 HISTORICAL DEVELOPMENT OF PUBLIC ADMINISTRATION CONTENTS 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objectives 3.0 Main Content 3.1 The Scientific Management Theory 3.1.1 Principles of Scientific Management 3.1.2 Elements of Scientific Management 3.1.3 Contributions to the Development of Public Administration 3.2 The Human Relation Theory 3.2.1 The Hawthorne Experiments (Western Electric Plant) 3.2.2 Elements of Human Relation Approach 3.2.3 Significant Contribution of the Human Relation Approach 3.2.4 Behavioural Science Approach 3.2.5 Behavioural Approach Contribution to Management Decision Making 3.2.6 Administrative Theory (Henri Fayol) 3.2.7 Bureaucratic Theory (Max Webber) 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutor-Marked Assignment 7.0 References/Further Reading 1.0 INTRODUCTION Though Public Administration changed greatly in the 1950s and 1960s, the nature of such changes and its significance can only be understood in terms of past doctrines.
Up to the 19th Century, the predominant concerns of the study of government affairs were political philosophy, constitutional arrangement and law making.
However, the complexity in economic and social life was forcing a change of emphasis.
European countries had begun taking very seriously the training of civil servants and the scientific study of administration.
In this unit, you are going to trace the historical development of Public Administration among other things.
12  MPA 751 MODULE 1 2.0 OBJECTIVES At the end of this unit, you should be able to: • trace the historical development of Public Administration • explain the significant contributions of different management schools of thought to the development of Public Administration.
3.0 MAIN CONTENT 3.1 The Scientific Management Theory The industrial revolution of 1890 was several decades old.
Power- driven machines were being developed which could perform the work hitherto done by workmen with hand tools.
Therefore, the effective use of high output specialised machines were sine qua non of the emerging industrial society.
With it came the factory system and the efficient use of highly productive machines and the need to develop an efficient man- machine and man-work relationship, hence, the emergence of scientific management school of thought in 1900.
The scientific management school of thought evolved in the following three phases.
(1) Classical or traditional school of management theory – Administrative Management Theory.
(2) Human Relations Movement or Neo-classical thoughts.
(3) Behavioural Science Approach.
The classical organisational school of thought comprised of two distinctive theories namely, scientific management theory and administrative management theory.
The scientific management theory was developed by writers whose primary interest was to improve the practice of administration and management.
As they were not contented with mere description of organisation like bureaucracy theorists, they prescribed principles and practices for better organisational performance.
The emphasis of scientific management movement was on the individual worker and the foreman (supervisor) particularly in manufacturing activities.
Historically, Henry R. Towne initiated the search for a science of management but scientific management is generally credited to Frederick Taylor who has been honoured with the title Father of Scientific Management.
He published a book in 1911 entitled “The 13  MPA 751 INTRODUCTION TO PUBLIC ADMINISTRATION Principle of Scientific Management” in which he enunciated his thoughts on management and administration.
Taylor focused his unit of analysis on the physical activities of workman-machine relationship and how productivity and job efficiency can be enhanced.
He believed that the principal object of management should be to secure the maximum prosperity for the employer, coupled with maximum prosperity for each employee.
Taylor made a determined effort to change the system of management.
He strongly believed that workers were holding back production.
His emphasis was productivity rather than the workers.
He felt that the greatest obstacle to a harmonious relation between labour and management was in management’s ignorance of what really is a proper day’s work for a workman.
Taylor was resolutely committed to eliminating the inefficient and wasteful practices of the past.
To him, workers were truly rational and real economic men who could be programmed to be efficient machines.
3.1.1 Principles of Scientific Management This can be summarised as follows: • scientific management is thought of broadly as application of the scientific method of study, analysis and problem-solving to the organisation • a set of mechanisms or techniques for improving organisational efficiency Frederick Taylor’s principles as guides for an effective management are as follows: • formal grouping and organisation of employees into specialist functional departments • hierarchically structured organisations with authority flowing from top to bottom • there should be organisational chart indicating the chain of command and the means of organisational communication • span of control should be limited to allow for effective supervision • there should be job description • authority should be commensurate with responsibility • categorisation of departments, e.g., “line” of “staff.” 14  MPA 751 MODULE 1 Other outstanding contributions to the scientific management school of thought were made by Gantt, Frank and Lillian Gilbreth and Hamington Emerson.
Gantt was a disciple of Frederick Taylor’s idea of scientific management especially the incentive system.
He organised a charting system for production scheduling, called Gantt Chart for which he is mostly remembered.
The charting system is considered as one of the management techniques.
Gantt’s useful contribution to management includes the following.
• Man is goal-oriented: Gantt, here, stressed that the most important and valuable means of stimulating interest in people is to set a task which gave birth to the idea of task and bonus plan.
• Training should be the responsibility of management: to Gantt, management will benefit from training its workforce because it will increase productivity.
• Authority and responsibility: Gantt stressed the need to accord a corresponding authority with the representative assigned to a worker.
According to him, this will encourage their performance on the job.
Planning and Control The work to be done must be properly planned before execution and proper control mechanism must be put in place to ensure strict compliance with the set goals.
Frank and Lillian Gilbreth (1868-1924; 1878-1972) Frank and Lillian were husband and wife who immensely contributed their quota to the scientific management movement.
They concentrated on fatigue and motion studies.
However, Lillian showed interest on how best the welfare of the workers could be protected and encouraged.
Frank started his career as an artisan, a bricklayer.
He later rose to the level of management as was the case with Frederick Taylor.
His experience, while a bricklayer, made him to note that bricklayers used three different sets of motions.
(i) One for teaching apprentices (ii) Another for working fast and (iii) The third for deliberately holding down the pace.
15  MPA 751 INTRODUCTION TO PUBLIC ADMINISTRATION He believed that motion and fatigue were interwoven and consequently every motion that was eliminated also reduced fatigue.
They then attempted to find the most economical motions for each task, thus upgrading performance and reducing fatigue.
They argued that motion study raised workers’ morale not only because of its obvious benefits but because it demonstrates management’s concern for the workmen.
He also devised a system of dividing work into its most elementary elements which were called THERBLIGS.
His goal was the development of methods of least waste.
Hamington Emerson He was another contributor to scientific management.
His major works are: efficiency as the basis for operational efficiency and wages.
Emerson stated basic principles of efficiency as follows: • clearly defined goal(s) • common sense • competent courses • discipline • the fair deal • dispatch • standards and schedules • standardised operations • written standards and practice institutions • efficiency reward.
3.1.2 Elements of Scientific Management The scientific management theorists developed a science for each element of a man’s work which replaces the old “rule of thumb” method.
They scientifically select, train, teach and develop the workman whereas in the past he chose his own work and trained himself as best as he could.
There was cooperation with men so as to ensure that all of the work is being done in accordance with the principles of science which has been developed.
There is a division of work and the responsibility between the management and the workman.
Scientific management further stressed that, although planning under the old system was by initiative and incentive, the new system must be done by management in accordance 16  MPA 751 MODULE 1 with the laws of science; and that, the most important single element in modern scientific management is the task idea.
That is, the work of every workman is fully planned out by the management at least one day in advance and each man receives complete written instructions describing in details the table to be accomplished as well as means of doing the work.
3.1.3 The Contributions of the Scientific Management School to the Development of Public Administration It advocated management by systems and standards and production as its major concern.
The work organisation is purposeful with set goals to be achieved and that the goals of the organisation are to stimulate activities that must be performed.
That the best method of accomplishing organisational goals must be discovered, and the task of the manager is to discover these methods, use them, and back them up with adequate supervision.
It developed motivation – theory of the piece rate system, which is a method of adequate compensation for work done.
A fair day’s work deserves a fair day’s pay.
It also attempted to develop a first class and functional foreman.
It made contribution in the area of work study, motion and time study.
Planning is another area, as all work to be done must first of all be planned ahead.
The system also leads to specialisation and work standardisation.
It also made great contribution in the development of work instructions and work serving implements.
Lastly, it introduced wage system into management.
Despite its several contributions to the development of public administration, the theory has been criticised as follows: • that it is too mechanical and impersonal and does not recognise workers’ social group and their informal relationships 17  MPA 751 INTRODUCTION TO PUBLIC ADMINISTRATION • that it is too interested in techniques which bring about too much pressure on workers • that too much specialisation brings about monotony • that it is applicable in repetition production jobs • that it over-emphasised purely economic motivation.
3.2 The Human Relation Theory Human Relationists Movement is also referred to as the traditional era or Neo-Classicist Movement.
The Human Relationists Movement set in motion a vast amount of serious scientific research on the psychological aspects of work and administration /the movement focused on people and their relationship in the organisation rather than emphasising increase in productivity as was the case in scientific management theory.
3.2.1 The Hawthorne Experience Human Relationists Movement started from the puzzling discovery of Elton Mayo, Roethlisberger and N. J. Dickson in Chicago between 1924 and 1932.
Theirs is regarded as a Neo-Classical Theory.
After their discoveries, they defined an organisation as “a group of persons with common objectives”.
The Human Relationists emphasised social factor at work, which they called the informal organisation.
They made a famous Hawthorne studies conducted between 1927 and 1933 to study the relationship of varying illumination of workers output at Hawthorne plant of the Western Electric Company at Cicero near Chicago in USA.
The researchers noted that workers output increased with an intense illumination up to the point where the workers could barely see what they were doing.
Elton Mayo and his associates have discovered that when special attention is given to workers by management, productivity is likely to increase regardless of actual changes in the working condition and that in an informal work group, the social environment of employers have great influence on productivity.
To Mayo, the concept of the social man (motivated by social needs, job relationship, and more response to work group than to management control) is of the rational man motivated by personal economic needs.
It is known that the outcome of the Hawthorne experience marked the beginning of the recognition of human factor in the effectiveness of an organisation.
Consequently, the privilege of annual maternity and sick leaves accorded workers as at when due came to existence as a result of the perception that the temporary absence of workers from work will not 18  MPA 751 MODULE 1 hinder or reduce productivity but increase it when the workers are allowed some form of the rest.
Other proponents of Human Relationists Movement were Mary Parker Follet, Douglas Macgregor and a host of others.
Mary Parker Follet (1868-1933) Follet fell into the category of socio-political philosophers and a protagonist of human relations perspective.
Mary Parker Follet initiated the ideal of contingency or situational approach when she spoke on the “Law of the Situation.” She noted that different situations require different kinds of knowledge.
The man who possesses the knowledge demanded by a certain situation, in the best managed business, tends to become the leader.
It should be noted that an integral part of the human relations theme was the interest in group dynamics and interpersonal relations in small groups.
The emphasis on meeting the psychological needs of workers as a motivating force was a major departure from the strict economic motivation concept.
Follet’s point of view was different from that of classical management theories.
Her basic contention was that any enduring society or organisation must be based upon recognition of the motivating desires of the individual and of the group.
She believes that all organisational problems are fundamentally human relations problem.
Follet considered “coordination” as the key to building an effective organisation.
She expressed “coordination” in four fundamental principles of organisation.
Douglas Mcgregor’s Theory X and Y (1906-1964) Douglas compared the two ideal types of management philosophies along with the assumptions which emerged from these views of human nature as outlines below under X and Y assumptions.
Theory X Assumption • That an average human being has inherent dislike for work and will avoid it if possible.
• That because of this human characteristics of dislike of work, most employees must be coerced, controlled, directed and threatened with punishment to get them to put forth adequate efforts towards achieving organisational goals.
19  MPA 751 INTRODUCTION TO PUBLIC ADMINISTRATION • That an average human being lacks ambition, dislikes responsibilities, prefers to be led.
• He is by nature resistant to change.
• That he is self-centred, indifferent to organisational needs.
Theory Y Assumption Theory Y is the opposite of theory X.
Theory Y assumption describes man in his objective nature and this must have been based on the Human Relations theory.
The assumptions of the Y theory include the following: • that commitment to organisational objective is a function of reward associated with their achievements • that the average human-being learns under adequate conditions • that external control and threat of punishment are not the only means of bringing about efforts towards organisational objective to which they are committed • that the average human being does not inherently dislike work and • that under the conditions of modern industrial life the intellectual potentialities of the average human being are only partially realised or utilised.
3.2.2 Element of Human Relations Theory Elton Mayo is generally regarded as the father of the school.
Mayo and his associates discovered, after the Hawthorne experiment, that: i. the amount of work (out-put) by a worker and organisational level of efficiency is determined by his social capacity and not his physical capacity ii.
that the non-economic rewards play a central role in determining the motivation and happiness in the work place iii.
that the highest specialisation is by no means the most efficient form of division of labour iv.
that the workers do not react to management and its norms and rewards as individuals but as members of a group or groups v. it emphasised the role of communication, participation and leadership in setting and enforcing group norms.
vi.
The Human Relations School discovered three variants of leaderships: authoritarian, who uses order in directing groups but remains aloof, democratic leader, who allows for participation in decision-making and the laissez-faire leader, who supplies 20  MPA 751 MODULE 1 knowledge to group members of a social group working with the same objectives which may or may not correspond with organisational objectives.
3.2.3 The Human Relations Theory and Contribution to the Development of Public Administration Through the Human Relation Approach, the importance of the human element in work organisation is stressed.
The concept of informal group was developed.
It helps the organisation and the management to view workers not only as individuals but as members of a social group working with the same objectives which may or may not correspond with organisation objective.
They made contributions in their discoveries of informal social group that help boost workers’ morale and production.
The importance of the informal group and knowledge of their activities also helped management in taking decisions as it affects them and the organisation.
This includes man’s need for satisfying social interaction with others in the organisation.
Finally, the approach made a great contribution to public administration because of its emphasis on participatory management.
3.2.4 Behavioural Science Approach Robert A. Dahl and Herbert Simon are two great scholars that made significant contributions to behaviourism as an approach to administration.
According to Dahl in his book “The Science of Public Administration”, a study of certain aspects of human behaviour must be a major priority in public administration.
The study of administration, therefore, must embrace the whole psychological man and must not presume that man is a simple machine responding only fully to goals of self-interest narrowly concerned.
His views and those of others led to the development of science of public administration.
Chester Barnard originated much of the behavioural science approach.
In his book titled “Function of the Executive” he introduced social aspect into the analysis of administrative functions and processes, though a theory of cooperation and orgnisations focused principally on the role of human beings as the starting point for the success of any administrative organisation.
21  MPA 751 INTRODUCTION TO PUBLIC ADMINISTRATION He equally brought into being a comprehensive theory of cooperative behaviour in all formal organisations – cooperative system.
He sees the entire organisation as a system making up for inter-related and inter- dependent units functioning differently and the functions so performed by different units contribute to the survival and overall existence of the organisation.
This cooperative system, he maintained should have a common impersonal purpose, the process of organisational communication to allow for functional dynamism within the organisation and the satisfaction of individual’s needs and desires.
Chester Barnard’s concept was more or less a mixture of both the formal and informal organisations and in this perspective sees a formal organisation as a system of consciously coordinated activities of two or more people.
The two types of organisations that Chester Barnard focused on are relatively inter-related and inter-dependent on each other.
Another important area emphasised by Chester Barnard is the vital role of communication in modern organisations.
He maintained that managers accomplish the functions of planning, organising, leading and controlling, and that communication is the activity to which managers devote an overwhelming proportion of their time.
Effective communication in organisations involves getting an accurate message from one person to another or perhaps to several people.
Unclear organisational communication lines, according to Chester Barnard, can make a complex idea or process completely unintelligible.
In their interpersonal roles, managers or administrators act as the figure heads and leaders of their organisational unit, interacting with subordinates and customers in the organisation, and in their informational roles, administrators seek information from peers, subordinates and other personal contacts about anything that may affect their job and responsibilities.
Chester Barnard also emphasised the motivational technique as a crucial force in organisational growth and development.
Here, the extent to which an organisation succeeds depends on the way in which individuals in the organisation are treated.
The attention here is on the manner or system of recruitment employed by an organisation.
It is, however, important to note that the best hands and skilled labour should be employed.
The ability to recruit the best hands and the ability to retain them is through various motivational techniques.
Behavioural science – human relation theory – made tremendous progress because 22  MPA 751 MODULE 1 the discovery of the informal group was a breakthrough in administrative thought.
3.2.5 Behavioural Approach Contribution to Management Decision-making Most of behavioural contributions centred on management/administration and their behaviour in work organisation.
Since decision-making is the heart of administration, there is the need for rationality in taking decisions so that the best decisions would be arrived at.
Decisions determine the success of an enterprise or administration and also its quality.
Management success, therefore, depends on the quality of decisions taken.
Decision is commitment to one of several options.
Decision is a movement in an on-going organisational process at which a commitment is made.
A decision that maximises benefit is a quality decision.
A decision can be organisationally rational, that is made towards achieving organisational goals.
It can be personally rational, if it is made to satisfy individual goal.
It can be objectively rational if it is based on facts.
It can be subjectively rational if it is relative and not factual.
It can be deliberately rational if it is deliberately brought about by an individual or the organisation.
All these decisions, according to the behaviouralists, are to be made within the environment surrounding such choices.
An environment surrounding choice is described as a set of alternative behaviours each leading to a definite anticipated consequence.
Knowledge is to discover a single unique possibility which is consequent on behaviour.
Therefore, to discover this unique possibility we need to use those techniques that guarantee quality decision.
Such techniques include operational research, management game, critical path analysis, performance evaluation, reporting technique and so on.
These techniques are used by managers and administrators today and it is significant contribution of the behaviouralists.
3.2.6 Administrative Theory by Henri Fayol (1841-1925) The administrative management theory emerged concurrently with the scientific management theory in the 12th century.
The administrative management theory has some peculiarities in idea with the scientific school of thought.
Henri Fayol, the founder of this management school, was a French Geologist.
He concentrated his management theory on the management level of the organisation.
Hence, he was referred to as the 23  MPA 751 INTRODUCTION TO PUBLIC ADMINISTRATION father of administrative process.
Fayol was the first to present a breakdown of the functions of management as follows.
Planning It is an idea or method that has been thought about in details, in advance towards the realisation of organisational goals and objectives.
Organising This involves the organisation’s structure of authority, responsibility, assigning tasks, human and material resources of the organisation to specific role which will lead to the attainment of organisational aims and objectives.
Commanding This refers to directing the subordinates and making the staff do their work.
Coordinating It refers to the correlation of the activities of all factors of production in the organisation with a view to achieving the organisational activities.
Controlling Controlling is to ensure that everything is done in accordance with the established rules and expressed command.
Fayol was the first to formulate a universal list of good management principle as a guide in the management of decisions.
Henri Fayol also highlighted the principles of management as the following: • division of labour • authority and responsibility • discipline • unity of command • unity of direction • subordination of individual interest to general interest • payment for work done • centralisation • scalar chain • order 24  MPA 751 MODULE 1 • equity • stability of tenure • initiative • espirit-de-Corp. 3.2.7 Bureaucratic Theory by Max Webber (1864-1920) Bureaucracy is a formalised and systematised method of administration which emphasises impersonal relationship, hierarchy of command and control, rationality, merit, objectivity and formal communication.
Max Webber, a German Sociologist, is unduly acclaimed to have propounded the concept of bureaucracy.
He tried to give a model form of administration that was not in existence anywhere.
This was to aid the industrialised society.
The idea of bureaucracy had already been mentioned by many scholars such as Von Stein, Saint Simon, Spencer and Schomoller, although Max made it popular.
Max Webber’s contribution to the study of organisations was his focus on authority structure which caused him to group organisations in terms of the authority relations, and this has created substantial impact on the comparative study of administrative systems.
Basically, Webber’s concept of bureaucracy is normally said to be the “Ideal Type” on its application to authority patterns.
An ideal type of bureaucracy according to Max Webber is a conceptual pattern bringing together some relationships and events of historical life into a complex and consistent administrative system.
Bureaucracy forms an important element of the modernising elites in many of the economically less developed countries.
Before the present industrial stage in the western world, administration was carried out in an informal way because positions of responsibilities were obtained through favour, and officials had no training and possessed little competence.
During this period, there was no systematic and coordinated administrative action and in many cases, administrative actions were governed by their whims and caprices rather than by reason and rationality.
This method of administration became irrelevant in the post industrial age as a result of administrative and societal transformation which allowed for increasing need in expanding the number of public employees and systematic methods of operations.
This and many more forces compelled the early administrators into 25  MPA 751 INTRODUCTION TO PUBLIC ADMINISTRATION establishing formal organisational structures based on impersonal rules and hence bureaucracy.
Bureaucracy constitutes a social sub-cultural segment, the high prestige strata of the society.
Entrance into it was not theoretically barred to any section of the society, although in actual practice only the traditionally privileged could provide the necessary general background and the expensive education required for the success in the stiff tests prescribed for entry into the higher hierarchy.
Bureaucracy has a class bias and it is highly class stratified.
It is upper crust, functions as a privileged class.
On the whole, it symbolises achievement rather than ascription, and it has come to have distinct vested interests and is sensitive to all threats to its position and privilege which it guards jealously against encroachments.
The concepts relevant to understanding Webber’s types of authority system include power and authority.
Power is the ability to make other people do what they would not ordinarily have done left on their own.
It could also mean participation in decision-making or ability to bring about a change in a desired direction.
To Webber, power is the “probability that one actor within a social relationship will be in a position to carry out his own despite resistance.” Within the context of “ideal-type” power and authority exist when a command with a given specific content will be obeyed by a given group of people – legitimate power without resistance.
Webber classified the ideal-type authority on the basis of legitimacy, authority exercised and available staff.
Power is an ability to achieve results through concerted effort and action.
But the evolution of governmental techniques does not terminate with power.
Power is able to include the ingredient of force that makes government ultimately effectively, because of the support mobilised in its favour.
The force that power may deploy may be resented, resisted or disagreed with.
Opponents may have to submit to the decisions of power, but submission is different from acquiescence.
The imperatives of power may secure compliance but this is not the same as allegiance.
Authority is power that all accept as valid, right and adequate.
What demarcates authority from power is that the former is power recognised as “rightful.” Its exercise is, therefore, sanctioned by those who approve the particular act or agent and is tolerated by those who disapprove it.
Confronted with authority, it is the citizens’ duty to obey.
26  MPA 751 MODULE 1 Resistance to power may be lawful; resistance to authority is regarded as unlawful.
Power is naked and authority is power legitimised.
According to Max Webber, there are different types of authority as follows: • traditional • charismatic • legal–rational Traditional authority: Under traditional authority, power is reposed on traditional institutions.
The right to issue command and be obeyed is attributable to customs and belief system and traditional way of behavior of the people over a period of time.
Legitimacy is claimed and accepted on the basis of sanctity of order.
Personnel here are recruited from patrimonial – persons tied to traditional loyalties and non-patrimonial personal loyalties.
Many positions are occupied on the basis of kinship.
But here traditional administrative staff lacks a clearly defined area of competence, regular appointment and promotion, technical training.
Charismatic authority: Charisma and personal magnetism is another type of authority.
A charismatic authority or right to command and be obeyed is attributed to personal qualities of the leader.
A leader with this attributes is better able to use personal identification, inspirational appeals, and rational faith to influence subordinates.
The subordinates will tend to identify with him, imitate his behaviour and possibly emulate his beliefs.
An important characteristic of charismatic leadership seems to be insight into the needs, hopes and values of followership.
Another attribute of charismatic leadership is a dramatic, persuasive manner of speaking which enables the leader to enunciate the hopes, ideals and fears of followers and inspire faith in his ability to lead them properly.
Charismatic leaders usually radiate the impression of complete confidence and intense inner conviction, which implies either that they really have extreme self-confidence, or that they possess the acting ability necessary to project this impression to followers.
The charismatic leader appears somewhat mysterious and larger than life, a person who can be trusted to succeed where many cannot.
Legal rational – authority: Max Webber postulated the third ideal type of authority, which is the foundation of modern civilisations, namely, legal-rational authority.
It is based on a belief in the legitimacy 27  MPA 751 INTRODUCTION TO PUBLIC ADMINISTRATION of the pattern of normative rules and the rights of those appointed or elected to authority under such rules to issue command.
Here, obedience is based on the legally established impersonal rules and regulations governing a particular group of people within a stated society.
Legal-rational authority vests power on the office, rather than the occupier of the office.
Thus, anyone can rule as long as he or she comes to office according to the rules.
Legal-rational authority sometimes requires rational persuasion – a logical argument that includes evidence supporting the instrumentality of the recommended behaviour and a rational faith which is the suggestion of a particular person occupying position of authority is sufficient to evoke compliance by the subordinates without any necessary explanation The subordinates act out of faith in the expertise and credibility of the person in authority.
Rational faith as an aspect of legal – rational authority is a form of influence that is most likely to occur when the subordinate is confronted with a problem he has little or no knowledge of how to solve it ad perceived as the person in the position of authority can be trusted to indicate the best cause of action.
4.0 CONCLUSION Public administration touches every aspect of human life.
The greatest merit of public administration lies in its educative value.
The modern state is a welfare state and the administrations are expected to provide the people with all the increasing demands for a comfortable life.
5.0 SUMMARY In this unit, you have learnt that public administration is the action side of the government.
Its importance as an instrument for the expression of the will of the people, sustenance of democracy and as a discipline cannot be over-emphasised.
You were able to trace the growth of public administration from the rudimentary stage to the present day period of sophistication as expounded by Max Webber.
6.0 TUTOR-MARKED ASSIGNMENT i.
State and explain the salient features of the scientific management theory.
28  MPA 751 MODULE 1 ii.
Why was the need for the shift of paradigm from scientific management to human relation?
7.0 REFERENCES/FURTHER READING Willoughby, W. F. (nd).
Principles of Public Administration.
White, L. D. (1999).
Introduction to the Study of Public Administration.
Anifowose, & Enemuo (nd).
Elements of Politics.
29  MPA 751 INTRODUCTION TO PUBLIC ADMINISTRATION UNIT 3 PUBLIC AND PRIVATE ADMINISTRATION CONTENTS 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objectives 3.0 Main Content 3.1 Definitions of Public and Private Administration 3.2 Differences 3.3 Similarities 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutor-Marked Assignment 7.0 References/Further Reading 1.0 INTRODUCTION Public Administration is defined as all the activities that are involved in the implementation of public policies and orders as made by the executive, the legislature and the judicial arms of government, while private administration on the other hand, can be defined as all activities that are concerned with the implementation of policies of private organisations and institutions that are not owned jointly or principally by the government.
2.0 OBJECTIVES At the end of this unit, you should be able to: • define public and private administration • state the differences between public and private administration • outline the similarities between public and private administration.
3.0 MAIN CONTENT 3.1 Definitions of Public and Private Administration Public administration is synonymous with all the activities of government and its agencies, while private administration is concerned with the activities of private enterprise.
All activities that involve the implementation of government orders either in the ministries, extra-ministerial departments, parastatals, local governments, educational institutions owned by government, the police and the armed forces are regarded as public administration.
But such 30  MPA 751 MODULE 1 activities that are concerned with implementation of policies or rendering of services to the public by private enterprises or organisations not owned by the government are private administration.
3.2 Differences between Public and Private Administration Differences in terms of recruitment Personnel procurement in the public sector is done by a centralised body, the Civil Service Commission or by ministries acting on its behalf and according to the guidelines formulated by it.
But in the private sector, individual organisation is responsible for the hiring of the staff.
Also in the private sector individual organisations are responsible for the recruitment of their staff.
While well established private organisations like Shell, Chevron, PZ Industries, etc.
have their own recruitment sections or departments, other private organisations employ the services of consultancy agencies like Arthur Anderson, Cooper and Lybrands, Omolayole and Associates for the recruitment of their staff.
The Principle of “To Whose Benefit” Public organisations are meant for the promotion of the overall public interest.
Therefore, the “public” is the major beneficiary of any function it is expected to perform.
But with respect to private organisation, except humanitarian organisations like the Red Cross/Red Crescent, and advocacy groups, the major objective of private administration is to maximise profit.
In effect, the main beneficiary of the private organisation is the individual owner or the private group.
Focus on service or profit The overriding aim of most private organisations is to make profit.
Accordingly, administration within such organisations is concerned with the management of men and materials to attain private aims, usually the maximisation of profit.
This is not the case in public administration.
The primary purpose of public administration is service to the public, even when government establishes agencies which undertake commercial activities such as electricity, telecoms and transportation.
Accountability and measure of success Private organisations are usually established and financed by individuals and groups.
Administration within private organisations is expected to reflect the needs and aspirations of the citizens.
Besides, public organisations are supported with public funds.
Therefore, public 31  MPA 751 INTRODUCTION TO PUBLIC ADMINISTRATION officials who manage public organisations are made accountable to the public.
The parliament, the press and even the ordinary citizens have a right to inquire into the activities of such public officials in order to ensure that the public purpose is served, and that resources are not misappropriated.
It is noted also that while efficiency can easily be measured in private organisations by reference to profit, this is not so in most public organisations.
It is not possible to measure the profitability of some of the services provided by public agencies because of the nature of such services.
Furthermore, in order to promote public welfare, government often undertakes unprofitable projects or provides services at subsidised rates.
Level of complexity It has been suggested that public administration is more complex than private administration.
The reasons for this viewpoint are that public agencies, much more than private organisations, need to respond to more conflicting demands of the public.
Public administration is required to respond to demands for provision of services, equal representation of all sectors of the societies, minorities and majorities, equal and fair treatment of all citizens.
Organisational procedure The process of administration in government organisation is much slower when compared with the process in private organisations.
This is often referred to as “red tapism” and unnecessary bureaucracy.
Public organisations respond more slowly to the wishes of the people.
One major reason for the delays in procedure is the need to ensure adherence to established rules and to protect public funds.
3.3 Similarities In spite of the differences between them, administration in the public and private sectors share important similarities.
Administration in both sectors requires effective mobilisations and the use of human and material resources to achieve specified goals.
Both public and private administrations face the challenge of regularly reviewing their goals in the context of existing resources.
Although profit still remains the critical focus of private organisations, they are also being urged to “treat employees fairly and take account of 32  MPA 751 MODULE 1 the effect of the firm’s” activity on the community it serves and the environment in which it functions.
Many private organisations have grown greatly in size, numerous businesses raise their capital from the public through the Stock Exchange, and the management of these firms is in the hands of professionals who are different from the shareholders.
These developments come to mean that administration in the private sector has grown in complexity and is also sometimes marked by “red tapism” as in the public sector.
In recent times, governments have adopted many management practices that were hitherto exclusive to private business organisation.
Governments’ adoption of private management practices is as a result of changing times, particularly rapid changes in technology, which government bureaucracy cannot ignore.
Some of these changes are also brought about by the environment under which public administration takes place.
4.0 CONCLUSION In conclusion, administration is the ability to state objectives and striving to achieve them.
5.0 SUMMARY In this unit, you learnt about administration both in the public and private spheres, their differences and similarities.
6.0 TUTOR-MARKED ASSIGNMENT i.
What is administration?
Attempt an historical sketch of the development of the discipline.
ii.
Make a distinction between public and private administration.
7.0 REFERENCES/FURTHER READING Patrick, M. (nd).
Public Administration:a Broad View.
Dahl, R. A.
(nd).
The Science of Public Administration.
33  MPA 751 INTRODUCTION TO PUBLIC ADMINISTRATION UNIT 4 THE ECOLOGY AND EVOLUTION OF PUBLIC ADMINISTRATION IN NIGERIA CONTENTS 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objectives 3.0 Main Content 3.1 The Concept of Ecology 3.2 The Ecology of Nigerian Public Administration 3.3 Public Administration in the Pre-colonial Northern Region of Nigeria 3.4 Public Administration in the Pre-colonial Western Region of Nigeria 3.5 Public Administration in the Pre-colonial Eastern Region of Nigeria 3.6 The Reforms Action in the Nigerian Public Service 3.7 Influences on the Nigerian Public Services 3.7.1 Population Growth 3.7.2 Norms and Administrative Practices 3.7.3 The State of the Economy 3.7.4 Political Stability/Instability 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutor-Marked Assignment 7.0 References/Further Reading 1.0 INTRODUCTION Ecology of public administration refers to the influence of public administration by the environment or society in which it operates.
So, this unit explains how the environment impacts on its administrative systems, be it negative or positive.
2.0 OBJECTIVES At the end of this unit, you should be able to: • state and explain the meaning of ecology • discuss the concept of ecology in the Nigerian public system • explain pre-colonial administration in the three Nigerian regions • enumerate and state reform activities in the Nigerian public system • highlight influences in the Nigerian public system.
34  MPA 751 MODULE 1 3.0 MAIN CONTENT 3.1 The Concept of Ecology Ecology deals with the interrelationships of living organisms and their environment.
Ecology of public administration refers to the influence on public administration by the environment or society in which it operates.
The development and all the activities that evolve around public administration are normally influenced by the immediate environment, and that is why public administration is different in countries both in structure and operation.
An example can be seen in the case of Nigeria and the United States which public administration systems are structurally and operationally different, yet the two concepts are called public administration.
This, therefore, is mainly due to the impact of all the interrelationships of living organisms and their environment on public administration.
It is very important to note here that the idea of the influence of ecology on public administration was made popular by John Gaus of the Harvard University, who observed in his numerous writings on the impact of the environment on administration.
Administration existed in form during the pre-colonial period in Nigeria.
This consisted of independent communities divided mainly on ethnic grounds.
One major feature of Nigeria is the diversity of the people, culture, custom and tradition.
Each of these ethnic communities has their peculiar style of administration.
As seen in Northern Nigeria, the history of Islam has a great influence on its administrative practices.
3.2 The Ecology of Nigerian Public Administration In Nigeria, the organs and development of public administration and public service can be traced to the administration of Lord Lugard who was the Governor-General of the amalgamated administration of Northern and Southern Nigeria.
Public administration in Nigeria is greatly influenced by its ecology which is mostly patterned along what British Colonialists regarded as an extension of British Civil Service.
Hugh Clifford took over from Lord Lugard.
Clifford first established a central secretariat in Lagos in 1921.
In 1939, secretariats similar to the central secretariat in Lagos were equally established for the emerging three regions, administered from Ibadan, Enugu and Kaduna respectively.
35  MPA 751 INTRODUCTION TO PUBLIC ADMINISTRATION The colonial administration, whose pre-occupation was the maintenance of law and order over its territory for the purpose of exploitation, attempted between 1941 and 1947, at the reforming and re-organising the Nigerian Civil Service, but those exercises were concerned mainly with the renew of wages and salaries of the civil servants.
3.2.1 The Ecology of Nigerian Public Administration The post 1914 amalgamation of the Southern and Northern Nigeria saw a lot of racial discrimination against the native Africans.
Many highly educated Africans (mainly Nigerians) were not given position due to them.
The result of this was that the Nigerian civil servants saw the service as a foreign imposition.
But this was to change as the WW II gave great impetus to the Nigerianisation of the civil service, as the British were desirous of compensating Nigerians for their enthusiastic support of British efforts.
There were also agitations for the administrative service to be opened to Africans and that Nigerianisation should be actively pursued.
There were gaps in the administrative and educational services of the country as many British officials had to be called upon for service and it was difficult to recruit men from Britain after the World War.
In 1942, the WALWIN Committee was appointed to consider the question of admitting Africans to posts other than secretarial posts in the administrative service.
With the adoption of the Committee’s report by the Government and for the first time, the administrative service was now thrown open to Africans.
Limited Nigerianisation of the civil service also became an accepted policy.
Many Nigerians filled the positions left behind by the British who joined the Army during the war, even though there was still shortage of candidates, particularly in the professional and technical fields.
This led to a lot of reforms that later brought about positive changes in the Nigerian Civil Service which greatly influenced the practice of Public Administration in Nigeria.
3.3 Public Administration in the Pre-colonial Northern Nigeria The Northern part of Nigeria enjoyed a relatively centralised form of government based mainly on Islamic injunctions.
Islam thus played a dual role of religion and politics.
The historical background of the Hausa can be traced to the area of Western Sudan.
Therefore, the traditional political setting was like that of any other group in Western Sudan.
The arrival of Fulani, and the impact of Islam, revolutionised the entire system.
Its government, therefore, was based on Islamic doctrine.
In the Hausa-Fulani traditional political system, you will observe that 36  MPA 751 MODULE 1 the traditional system is hierarchical in nature and structure.
It is usually headed by an Emir.
The structure of the Hausa-Fulani political system is as stated below.
• The Council of State is composed of the Emir as the head with centralised power and the other village chiefs and heads.
• The Sarkin-Fada is the palace administrator; he organises the palace administration.
• The Galadima is usually the city or capital administrator.
He is in-charge of the smooth running of the city.
• The Madawaki is the Calvary Commander, otherwise stated, the Madawaki is the Commander-in-Chief of the troop.
He advises the king on security issues.
• The Waziri is the Chief Adviser to the Emir.
He is also like the modern day Prime Minister to the Emir.
• The Magaji or Maaji is the Finance Minister.
• The Sarkin Yan Kaka is charged with the maintenance of law and order.
He is the Chief Police Officer and he is responsible for the internal security of the State.
• The Yari is the Chief Prisons Officer.
The judicial system of the Hausa-Fulani political system is governed by the Islamic Laws.
The Emir is regarded as the presiding judge with full consultation with the Quadri or Alkali, which is the Chief Muslim Legal Adviser.
It is the duty of the Chief Alkali to ensure that judicial decisions are made according to Maliki Law.
The Hausa-Fulani political system is highly structuralised and in a hierarchical form though the Islamic and Muslim religious doctrines dictate the method of administration.
The system is more of the feudal system and highly authoritarian in nature.
The Emir enjoys supreme power but could be checked by Islamic Laws.
3.4 Public Administration in the Pre-colonial Western Region of Nigeria The history of the Yoruba people in the western part of Nigeria is traced to a common descent from Oduduwa and common dispersion from Ile- Ife, the cradle of Yorubaland.
In the Yoruba political setting, the Ooni of Ife was and is accepted as the spiritual leader of the Yoruba race, while on the political front, the Alaafin of Oyo Empire wielded political as well as military leadership.
However, there are various autonomous traditional institutions rulers that lead various towns and villages.
The political administrative 37  MPA 751 INTRODUCTION TO PUBLIC ADMINISTRATION authority is headed by an Oba which is a natural political monarch assisted by various chiefs each heading a particular group or family in that society.
There is decentralisation of function but the collective decision as regards the rulership of the entire political space, is carried out by joint decision of the monarch and his chiefs.
This is the more reason why the Oba political system is regarded as democratic and monarchical because the Oba or Chiefs do not enjoy absolute power.
There is also an element of separation of power as it is seen under democratic system.
The traditional political system in the Yoruba nation clearly demarcates the functions within or amongst the arms of government.
While the monarch or the Oba is the Chief Executive, he does not enjoy absolute control, the Oyomesi in the Oyo Kingdom acts as checks on the Alafin of Oyo while the “Aare Ona Kakanfo” is the Chief Military Officer.
The King, if he errs, could be asked to commit suicide especially by the Ogbonis.
About the judiciary, cases and disputes are settled by the quarter chiefs while seniors are usually transferred to the Oba and the Council of Chiefs.
They give verdicts on cases and disputes.
The process of succession is, therefore, automatic to the royal family.
3.5 Public Administration in the Pre-colonial Eastern Region of Nigeria The Ibos are the third largest ethnic groupings in Nigeria.
The origin of the Ibo people suffers from proper documentation.
However, the traditional political system of the Ibos is basically woven around their social and cultural system.
The system concedes leadership to age and wisdom.
Respect for elders is not due entirely to age but also to their leadership in the performance of civil and spiritual functions.
While the relevance of the family lineage is respected, it is highly structured into clans and family age group pattern.
The Ibo political organisation or structure has been described as being segmentary and its government referred to as Republican.
When a particular structure is regarded as segmentary, it connotes a political set- up that has no central authority.
It is also different from stratified societies because of its egalitarian nature.
This is achieved through balancing small equal groups against each other and the ties of clanship, marriage and religious associations, 38  MPA 751 MODULE 1 Ibo society is organised around family clanship and a leader is selected from the elders of the family.
Each village has the Council of Elders or Ama-ala- the assembly of citizens.
The Ama-ala is the supreme decision making body.
In the Council of Elders, decisions are made by desires and proclamation.
The Council of Elders also acts as the Supreme Court and adjudicates for disputing parties.
3.6 The Reforms Action in the Nigerian Public Service A reform is any structural change which sole aim is to bring about positive changes.
It involves restructuring, reconciliation and re- orientation.
Reforms are innovations that ensure continuity and responsiveness of Government to issues on efficiency in public administration.
The evolution of the Nigerian Public Service can be likened to the historical development of Nigeria.
The search for a more responsive and effective civil service led to the setting-up of various Commissions.
The Harragin Commission of 1946 The first major Public Service reform in Nigeria was the Harragin Commission in 1946, which was headed by Sir Walter Harragin.
The major notable feature was the establishment of a two-service structure of the senior and junior service.
The Foot Commission of 1948 The Foot Commission came immediately after the Harragin Commission.
It was set up to make recommendations as to the steps to be taken for the execution of the declared policy of the Government of Nigeria to appoint Nigerians to posts in the government senior service as fast as available and suitable candidates with the necessary qualifications came forward, with special reference to scholarship and training schemes.
The Commission made a wide range of recommendations which led the British administration to appoint some qualified Nigerian into the Administrative/Senior Service.
39  MPA 751 INTRODUCTION TO PUBLIC ADMINISTRATION Gorsuch Commission of 1954 The highlight of the Gorsuch Commission Report was the abolition of the senior and junior structure due to the racial discrimination inherent in the system.
The committee recommended as below the five-grade service whose traces have remained in existence in the Nigerian public service structure.
• Super Scale • Administrative/Professional Group • Sub-Professional/Technical Cadre • Secretarial/Clerical Cadre • Sub-/Clerical Cadre.
News Commission of 1959 This Commission came on board at the eve of Nigerian’s independence.
The major concern was the integration of departments into ministries and to enable ministers have portfolios or responsibilities in preparation for Nigeria’s independence.
The Commission proposed the role and functions of the permanent secretaries as well as the administrative machinery for control of government expenditure and establishment matters.
These permanent secretaries were made accounting officers and chief executives of their various ministries.
Morgan Commission of 1963 The Morgan Commission is remembered today for its grading review.
While the Commission was directed towards wages and salaries and conditions of service of junior employees, it recommended that a grading review be made of the entire service, covering all the five grade levels.
It recommended the establishment of a National Wage Advisory Council which was to keep pace with the cost-of-living changes and recommended wage changes to the government.
The Morgan Commission also introduced differential earnings based on geographical locations.
Elwood Grading Team of 1966 The highlight of this Commission was the recommendation that job evaluation and other scientific methods to be used to grade the various positions in the service before attaching salaries to them.
40  MPA 751 MODULE 1 Adebo Commission of 1970 The Adebo Commission apart from ending the concept of daily pay, it also recommended a Public Review Service Commission to look at the entire civil service and to use scientific approach to analyse jobs and recommend salary based on such.
Udoji Commission of 1972 This Commission made a wide range of recommendations which include salary increase to all categories of workers back dated and paid in areas.
This was popular nationwide, however, many regarded it as the brainchild of the Gowon government used then to uplift its dwindling popularity.
Subsequently, inflation rate which stood at 16% under the Adebo Commission rose to a staggering 36% under Udoji Commission.
Apart from this, the Udoji Commission also introduced scientific management approach into the Nigerian Civil Service.
Management by Objective (MBO), Programme Performance Budgeting System (PPBS) and Project management It recommended Open Reporting System of staff assessment.
The Udoji Commission introduced and emphasised merit as a yard stick for promotability of officers in the public service.
The Commission furthermore, brought in the four cadres or groups.
P.A.T.T.C.E.S.
Professional, Administrative, Technical, Technological and Clerical Evaluation System (Grade Level 03 to 12) G.S.O.E.
- General Service Operational Evaluation (Grade Level 01 to 06) S.M.E.S.
- Senior Management Evaluation System (Grade Level 13 to 17) N.P.F.E.S.
- Nigeria Police Force Evaluation System (Grade Level 01 to 17).
All the above constitute what is known as the Unified Grading Salary Structure (UGSS).
After this, Udoji structured the grade into one, that is level 01 to 17, the highest being Permanent Secretary on grade level 17, while the new graduate entrants are given level 08 irrespective of their discipline and qualification.
41  MPA 751 INTRODUCTION TO PUBLIC ADMINISTRATION The 1988 Civil Service Reforms Another major Reform that made a notable impact in the Nigerian civil Service was the 1988 civil service reform.
This reform was brought on board by the Buhari/Idiagbon military regime.
It was headed by Dotun Philips in 1985 and their major function was to study the structure, operation and modus operandi of the Nigerian Public Service.
But the group’s report was not considered as it is normal mode of operation of the Nigerian Government until 1987 when the Federal Government, under the Babangida regime, set up an implementation committee led by Vice-Admiral Patrick Koshoni, the then Chief of Naval Staff, to look into the recommendations of the Dotun Philips team.
The implementation committee upheld most of the recommendation of the team.
This was the foundation of the 1988 civil service reforms.
The major highlights of the 1988 civil service reforms included the followings.
Professionalisation of the Civil Service Here, civil servants are to perform specialised functions and spend their entire career in their respective ministries.
This actually brought to a halt the practice of posting civil servants from one ministry to another.
With regard to staff structure, all civil servants are to have functional titles to reflect their specialisation or profession.
Each ministry should now appoint, promote and discipline its staff.
The power to do this was given to the Personnel Management Board of each ministry.
The functions are, however, to be carried out under the guidelines of the Federal Civil Service Commission.
However, the Federal Civil Service will continue to recruit staff on grade level 07 to 10 based on merit.
Each civil servant can also appeal to the Federal Civil Service Commission if dissatisfied with any decision taken by the parent ministry or Personnel Management Board as it affects him.
Authority and Responsibility The Minister was made the Chief Executive and Accounting Officer of his Ministry, although this was later revised by the Ayida Panel set up under the Abacha regime.
Now the Director-General, which has been renamed Permanent Secretary, is the Chief Accounting Officer.
42  MPA 751 MODULE 1 Tenure of Office of the Permanent Secretary The post of the Permanent Secretary was taken out of the regular civil service structure and renamed Director-General, while the salary attached to it is fixed by the President.
The Director-Generals should also come and go with the regime that appointed them, though the title has now been reversed to that of the Permanent Secretary.
Staff Training The importance of staff training is further emphasised by the fact that under the new dispensation successful participation in prescribed training courses are pre-requisite for promotion from certain level to another.
Each ministry is also to have Departmental Training Officer (DTO) who, in addition to organizing induction courses for newly employed professional colleagues and clerical officers, acts as the major link between the parent ministry and the Ministry of Establishment which is the Ministry specifically assigned the responsibility of training officers in the public service.
Performance Evaluation Besides training, the Annual Performance Evaluation Report (APER) now emphasises performance.
Through the open reporting system, the hitherto heavy emphasis on subjective factors and character, gave way to factors which focused on concrete and measurable performance.
Promotion Promotion was now based on performance, thereby seniority no longer weighted as high as it was in the past, while “the Federal Character” syndrome was de-emphasised as criterion for promotion.
The criteria for promotion were stated as follows: Annual Performance - 50% Interview - 30% Additional Qualification - 15% Seniority - 5% In the area where interview or examination was not relevant for a particular promotion, weight allotted to performance was to be increased correspondingly.
43  MPA 751 INTRODUCTION TO PUBLIC ADMINISTRATION 3.7 Influences on the Nigerian Public Services 3.7.1 Rapid Population Growth With rapid increases in population, greater responsibility is thrust on the public service.
This tends to make public administration very cumbersome and more complex as a lot of interest in the society need to be satisfied.
There is that ample need for public service provision in terms of shelter, potable water, good roads, electricity supply, etc.
Population growth will also lead to an increase in the budget of the administration as there will be increase in social overhead costs.
The Government will then have to find ways of sourcing for funds and increase in revenue base.
These will put a lot of pressure on the administration and make public administration’s scope broader.
3.7.2 Norms and Administrative Practices Certain norms and beliefs in the society also influence the practice of public administration.
It is the general belief in Nigeria, that most public officers, if not all, are corrupt.
The officers see the public office as an avenue to amass wealth and convert public money to their own personal use.
The pressure is on the public administrators to satisfy their ethnic groups or extended family members.
This is called nepotism, which is one of the problems confronting the public service.
3.7.3 The Buoyancy of the Nation’s Economy The buoyancy or otherwise of the economy of a country also affects its public service.
Public service, which is public administration, is about implementations of rules and policies of the state.
In implementing these wills and the various programmes of the government, a lot of resources are needed.
Government will be able to provide most services needed by the populace if the economy is well-managed by Public Administrators.
Well regulated policy which can promote investments both in the public and private sector will also help to develop the practices of Public Administration.
Public administration, therefore, must involve the formulation of well- intended policies and programmes that will satisfy the yearnings of the populace.
The implementation must also be well intended.
When these are done, the scope of public administration will widen as greater 44  MPA 751 MODULE 1 percentage of the populace will not have a sense of belonging, but feel the impact of public administration.
3.7.4 Impact of Political Stability or Instability Terminations of various governmental policies and programmes are attributable to political instability.
Stability or instability in the political system, therefore, affects the practice of public administration.
Frequent changes in government affect policies and create conflict in administration as there are usually conflicting policy changes.
It does not allow for continuity in policy and in the smooth running of the government.
Anxiety, fear and insecurity are the bane of instability as public officer and administrators do not know which direction to follow.
Policies are not properly implemented as a new government may come with its own policy which may negate the preceding one.
Political stability on the other hand, builds stability into the system.
There is always a direction and commitment of purpose.
Policies are carried out and implemented for a long period which allows for continuity, evaluation and corrective measure.
In most politically stable government like the United States and Britain, Public Administration is enriched and this can be seen by the degree of the social services provided for their citizens and the buoyancy of their economy.
While instability influences and affects public administration negatively, political stability influences it positively and contributes to its development in a way that benefits a larger segment of the society.
4.0 CONCLUSION This unit discussed the ecology and the evolution of Public Administration in Nigeria.
You were able to see Public Administration in the pre-colonial and post-colonial Nigeria.
5.0 SUMMARY In this unit, you have learnt how our past is shaping the future in the administration of the Nigerian public.
You also learnt about some factors that are responsible for the malfunctioning of our Public Administration.
45  MPA 751 INTRODUCTION TO PUBLIC ADMINISTRATION 6.0 TUTOR-MARKED ASSIGNMENT i.
How does the ecology of a state affect the public administration efficiency?
ii.
Relate economic buoyancy of a state to its public administration efficiency.
7.0 REFERENCES/FURTHER READING Ajayi, K. (200).
International Administration and Economic Relations in a Changing World.
Ibadan: MAJAB.
Pfiffner, J. M. & Presthus, R. V. (1960).
Public Administration.
New York: Ronald Press.
Waldo, D. (1955).
The Study of Public Administration.
New York: Random House.
46  MPA 751 MODULE 2 MODULE 2 Unit 1 The Concept of the Chief Executive Officer and its Responsibilities Unit 2 Control Systems in Public Administration Unit 3 Public Corporations Unit 4 Public Administration and the Administrative Law UNIT 1 THE CONCEPT OF THE CHIEF EXECUTIVE OFFICER AND ITS RESPONSIBILITIES CONTENTS 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objectives 3.0 Main Content 3.1 The Concept of the Chief Executive Officer (CEO) 3.2 The Major Responsibilities of the Chief Executive Officer 3.3 Typology of the Concept of Chief Executive Officer 3.4 Operative Duties of the Chief Executive Officer 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutor-Marked Assignment 7.0 References/Further Reading 1.0 INTRODUCTION In this unit, you will be exposed to the concept of the Chief Executive Officer (CEO).
You will learn about the definition of the CEO, their major roles in any organisation and their oversight functions.
The unit will also discuss the importance of CEOs in any organisation which may lead to the success or failure of the organisation.
2.0 OBJECTIVES At the end of this unit, you should be able to: • define the concept of a Chief Executive Officer (CEO) • state the major responsibilities of the Chief Executive Officer • explain the typology of the concept of the Chief Executive Officer • describe the management duties of the CEO.
47  MPA 751 INTRODUCTION TO PUBLIC ADMINISTRATION 3.0 MAIN CONTENT 3.1 The Concept of the Chief Executive Officer The Chief Executive Officer (CEO), in the context of a governmental organisation, is the person who coordinates the entire activities of the organisation.
He is at the apex of the organisation’s management structure.
He is an administrator or the coordinator of all the activities in an organisation.
Therefore, the CEO is directly or indirectly involved in all major functions or activities that will lead to the achievement of the set goals of the organisation.
He is basically responsible for formulating the goals of the organisation.
Management consists of the determination of corporate or organisational goals and the means of accomplishing them.
In addition, it consists of the evaluation of the product thereof against the backdrop of the established goals with a view to determining the degree of success and the CEO, the overall leader of a team i.e., the management, is entirely involved in decision making.
In making decisions, he relies on the report of the decision taken by the various departments of the organisation.
In this context, communication and information are important.
The Chief Executive Officer will have to communicate with others both inside and outside the organisation.
Communication is important to the CEO in order to solve all the perceived problems of the organisation.
The Chief Executive in a private organisation is normally referred to as the Managing Director or the Chairman.
But in public organisations they are referred to as a Minister, a Director-General, a Director or a Commissioner.
In educational institutions, we have the Vice-Chancellor of a university, Rector for the polytechnic or Provost in colleges of education.
He is mainly concerned with the formulation and definition of the goals of the organisation.
The CEO emphasises the importance or effectiveness in the realisation of the common goals of the organisation.
He is also mindful of staff efficiency, which is the satisfaction of individual and organisational motives towards achieving high productivity.
3.2 The Major Responsibilities of the CEO A Chief Executive Officer is an administrator or the coordinator of all the activities in an organisation.
He is directly and sometimes indirectly 48  MPA 751 MODULE 2 involved in all major functions or activities that will lead to the achievements of the set goals of the organisation.
He is basically responsible for formulating the goals of the organisation.
A good CEO must bear in mind staff welfare, customers’ interest and the achievement of the goals and objectives of the organisation.
Some of the major responsibilities of the CEO include the following: • motivating, activating and training subordinates • responsible for monitoring the environment for a variety of special information required for adequate understanding and exploiting the environment as well as the organisation • CEOs are responsible for disseminating information to all the vital sectors externally and internally • the CEO scans the environment for investment opportunities especially those in the private sector • they are responsible for allocating organisational resources of all kind, be it human and non-human resources.
The responsibilities of a CEO can also be grouped as follows.
Planning Planning as a process involves anticipating, predicting and forecasting.
It is a process of articulating the aspirations of the organisation and the means to achieving the corporate goals.
Corporate plan can be defined as the embodiment of the dream of an organisation and how to realise it.
Corporate planning is the process of accomplishing the dream.
Planning as a decision-making process is a rational process of determining the goals and objectives of the organisation and how to accomplish them.
The main role of the CEO in the planning is to identify all options and alternatives open to the organisation, analyse the cost/benefits of all alternatives comparing the alternatives in terms of cost/benefits to be derived making a choice of an alternative with the least cost and maximum benefit and lastly, make a commitment to implement the preferred alternative/option.
The CEO’s ability to scan the environment and ability to respond to changes will build flexibility into the plans.
These plans help guide the activities of the management.
It also helps in the rational allocation and uses of resources.
It helps in forecasting and predicting the future.
It is also a benchmark for evaluating the achievement or performance of the organisation.
It identifies responsibility and achievement and non- 49  MPA 751 INTRODUCTION TO PUBLIC ADMINISTRATION achievement of those given responsibilities.
Lastly, it is a management control mechanism as there cannot be control without planning.
Selection The selection process in the organisation involves the hiring of the right quality and quantity of staff needed to man the organisation for effective realisation of the organisational goals.
The role of the Chief Executive is to put in place effective machinery for hiring the right calibre of staff.
The CEO must make sure that there is a job related man-fit-job.
Here, the man hired must be qualified and be able to perform the job to be given.
He provides the job specification which enumerates in details the nature of the job to be done and the qualifications and experience needed to perform the job.
He will then match the man specification with that of the job specification to arrive at a man-fit-job.
By doing this, qualified staff are employed.
Selection process involves the identifying the area in which the organisation needs personnel, followed by advertising either through the print or electronic media.
This includes the short-listing of candidates by placing job and man specifications side-by-side.
Induction and orientation of newly employed staff is undertaken.
In some low brow private organisation, the CEO is always involved in the processes that will lead to the selection of the right calibre of persons into the organisation.
Organising This involves the building of structures which deals with essential elements in the organisation.
These elements are power, responsibility, division of labour, specialisation, and the interdependence of various departments in the organisation.
The Chief Executive’s role is to construct, develop and maintain an effective organisational structure.
Organisational structures can be viewed as a process of analysis by which a particular area or work is sub-divided into divisions, departments and finally jobs assigned to particular persons.
The CEO takes the goal of the organisation and the work to be done into consideration in organising the whole mass by dividing the work and delegating authority to people, so as to achieve the set corporate goals.
Work can be divided into levels and functions.
The levels provide a scale or grading of duties according to the degree of authority and responsibility.
50  MPA 751 MODULE 2 Concurrently with division into levels, the work must be divided into different kinds of duties.
This is functionalism and it specifies the type of functions performed by the individuals in the different departments of the organisational structure.
For effective performance of these functions, the CEO is required to delegate authority to individuals responsible for carrying out the duties.
The relationships and duties determined by division of work are communicated and assigned to persons by means of delegation which is defined as the assignment of duties, authority and responsibility to others.
Delegation of duty enables the CEO to extend his influence and authority beyond the limits of his own personal time, energy and knowledge.
This is known as decentralisation of authority.
Decentralisation is a useful practice in any organisation that hopes to succeed.
Directing and leading The Chief Executive is the leader of a team and his main responsibility is to direct his numerous staff towards achieving the corporate set goals.
Leadership is part of management and it is the ability to persuade others to seek defined objectives willingly and enthusiastically.
It is the human factor that binds a growth together and motivates it towards achieving the organisation goals.
The CEO can direct his staff towards achieving the desired goals by motivation.
Motivation takes various forms and depends on the leadership style.
Autocratic leaders concentrate power and decision-making on themselves.
A benevolent autocrat achieves productivity and job satisfaction in some situations because certain workers have an expectation of an autocratic leader and they derive security and satisfaction from working with them.
These set of workers lack initiative and their principal job is to carry out orders.
They do negligible planning, organising and decision making.
Free-rein or Laissez-faire are those leaders who avoid power and depend largely upon the group to establish its own goals and work out its own problem.
Group members, therefore, provide their own motivation.
The participative leadership style is the best.
Participative leadership decentralises authority and decisions taken are not unilateral but a result of consultation with followers.
The leader and the workers are acting as a social unit and workers are thoroughly informed about conditions affecting their jobs, which encourages them as their ideas and suggestions are used.
Generally, the trend nowadays is towards the use of participative practices.
This is because it motivates workers, as they regard themselves as part of the decision making process.
It then 51  MPA 751 INTRODUCTION TO PUBLIC ADMINISTRATION follows that they will try to make sure that such decisions are carried out satisfactorily in order to achieve corporate goals.
A CEO must, therefore, use his technical, human and conceptual skills in setting meaningful goals.
This is often referred to as Management by Objectives (MBO).
Leadership is situational, that is, different styles are required and needed in different situations.
Coordinating and Controlling The last of the roles of a CEO and an important one, is indeed the coordinating and controlling of the various activities of the organisation.
Internal coordination is concerned with the integration of ideas, plans, functions and activities within the organisation.
External coordination involves activities which the CEO faces as a result of the problem pertaining to individuals and agencies outside the organisation.
There is a corrective coordination designed to rectify error or preventive coordination which anticipates problems that might occur and device early action to ward off a possible difficulty.
In all respect, the goal of coordination is to unify or harmonise policies, plans and programmes of the organisation.
Controlling is checking to determine whether plans are being made and acting, if necessary, to correct any deviation.
It is checking to ascertain whether the work is being executed as intended.
Control is action directed at bringing work activities into conformity with pre-determined objectives.
The Chief Executive, in controlling, therefore, must devise a means of assessing performance and to correct perceived deviations.
3.3 Typology of the Concept of the Chief Executive Officer There are different types of executives.
In the olden days, most heads of state were hereditary monarchs; they were absolute monarchs in the sense that they wielded legislative, executive as well as judicial powers.
In modern times, they are being replaced with constitutional monarchs of limited monarchies with seriously curtailed powers.
3.3.1 Titular and Real Executives The titular executives are the heads of state as found in Britain, Australia, India and in Nigeria’s first Republic, who serve as the emblems of national unity.
They perform symbolic and ceremonial functions, thus relieving the real executives from numerous public engagements and thereby enabling them to concentrate upon the solution of governmental problems.
52  MPA 751 MODULE 2 The titular heads of state have the right to be informed and consulted about public issues by the heads of government who are the real executive.
The real executive is the head of government who performs the day-to-day business of government.
In parliamentary system of government, the real executive is the cabinet headed by the Prime Minister, while in the presidential system; the real executive is the President, a single individual who serves as chief of state as well as head of government.
The role of the political head of state and ceremonial head of state is thus fused in one individual.
He carries final decision- making power and ultimate responsibility.
3.3.2 Single and Collegial Executives In the single executive, a chief to whom all other executives are subordinate has final control.
The outstanding instance is the President of the United States of America.
He appoints cabinet ministers who are directly responsible to him.
They are his advisers and not his colleagues.
A clear advantage of the single executive is that it secures unity, singleness of purpose, energy and promptness of decision so necessary for the success of an executive.
The advantage of a single executive is apparent during the period of emergency when unity of control is absolutely necessary.
In collegial executive, executive powers are performed by a council or a cabinet.
The number of persons constituting collegial executives varies from seven (7) in Switzerland to fifteen (15) or twenty (20) in the cabinet systems of some nations.
Although a collegial executive impairs unity of control by dividing responsibility, it is safer than a single executive.
It renders more difficult the encroachment of the executives on the liberties of the people in general.
3.3.3 Parliamentary and Non-Parliamentary Executives Another distinction is between an executive as in (Britain), chosen from the parliament and holding office only so long as it commands a majority in that parliament and another as in USA chosen independently of the legislature and holding office for a fixed term.
In the British cabinet system, the Queen is the titular head of state.
The real executive powers are lodged not in a single person but in a cabinet which is composed of a Prime Minister and about twenty other 53  MPA 751 INTRODUCTION TO PUBLIC ADMINISTRATION ministers.
The members of this collegial executive are selected from the parliament and are responsible to it.
A majority in the House of Commons can force the cabinet out of office but the cabinet can also dissolve the house and force the members to undergo expensive election campaigns.
The American Presidential system of government is an outstanding example of the non-parliamentary executive.
All executive powers are subject to few limitations and are vested in a single chief executive, the President, who exercises wide constitutional and discretionary powers.
He or she is elected for a fixed term, and except in the case of some definite crime being judicially proved against him, he cannot be removed before the expiration of the term of office.
However, both the parliamentary and presidential executives have their advantages and defects.
3.3.4 Corporate Executives This type of executive in any organisation coordinates the entire activities of the organisation.
He or she is at the apex of the management structure.
He or she is a policy maker and in charge of major decisions.
But in taking decisions, he or she relies on the report of the decisions taken by the various departments of the organisation.
A corporate executive may be for a government establishment or a private organisation.
In the governmental organisation, if it is a ministry, he or she is referred to as a Minister but in the extra-ministerial departments they are known as Permanent Secretaries or Directors- General.
The Chief Executive in a private sector is referred to as a Managing Director or the Chairman.
3.4 Operative Duties of the Chief Executive Officer A Chief Executive Officer is an administrator or the coordinator of all the activities in an organisation.
He is directly or indirectly involved in all major functions or activities that will lead to the achievement of set goals of the organisation especially in the area of formulation of goals and objectives of the organisation.
Here are some operative duties of the Chief Executive Officer.
3.4.1 Interpersonal Role The first important role of the entrepreneur is that of functional leadership.
Here, he or she has the motivational role in the area of 54  MPA 751 MODULE 2 staffing (especially in the banking industry), activating and training with its associated duties.
The second important role is that of liaison.
The CEO maintains self- developed network outside the organisation and as an informer who provides information through the functional head.
The third role, which is operative in nature, is the symbolic head of the organisation who represents the organisation and is obliged to perform a number of routine duties which are legal or social in nature.
Some good Chief Executives do delegate this whole important function.
3.4.2 Informational Role The Chief Executive acts as a monitor by receiving special and current information to develop through understanding of the organisation and the environment.
In this aspect, the Chief Executive emerges as a nerve centre of the organisation.
Information dissemination is another informational role of the Chief Executive Officer.
Information collected is transmitted to all the departments of the organisation.
However, some of this information will be factorial and others will be subject to value interpretations of top level managers and functional heads.
3.4.3 Decision Maker The CEO is responsible for corrective action when the organisation faces important but unexpected disturbances among workers and colleagues.
He is also a resource allocator, for; he allocates resources of all kinds, materials, human and financial resources.
The CEO may be sometimes involved in the negotiation process within and outside the organisation.
He or she could negotiate with union officials and also government officials and potential investors in the organisation.
Lastly, he/she plays the role of an entrepreneur which is a motivator in any organisation.
He converts factors of production into productive use.
He searches the environment and the organisation for opportunities and improvement.
He then initiates good projects that would bring about changes.
He furthermore supervises the implementation of projects through the managers who are directly responsible for such tasks 55  MPA 751 INTRODUCTION TO PUBLIC ADMINISTRATION 4.0 CONCLUSION The Chief Executive Officer of any organisation is the head of the management team of that organisation.
He or she is directly involved in all the management activities of that organisation.
The unit was able to explain the concept, responsibilities and typologies of the CEO.
5.0 SUMMARY You have learnt that, for any organisation to thrive and succeed, the CEO plays a very vital role.
Their responsibilities are the live wire of such an organisation.
6.0 TUTOR-MARKED ASSIGNMENT i.
State and explain the managerial activities of the Chief Executive Officer in any organisation.
ii.
The CEO is the head of an organisation.
Explain.
7.0 REFERENCES/FURTHER READING Sharfritz, J. M. & Russel, E. W. (2005).
Introducing Public Administration.
Pearson Education Inc. Ajayi, K. (2000).
International Administration and Economic Relation in a Changing World.
Ibadan: Majab.
Waldo, D. (1955).
The Study of Public Administration.
New York: Random House.
56  MPA 751 MODULE 2 UNIT 2 CONTROL SYSTEMS IN PUBLIC ADMINISTRATION CONTENTS 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objectives 3.0 Main Content 3.1 The Legislature 3.1.1 Legislative Control of Administration 3.1.2 Legislative Powers and Functions 3.1.3 Typology of Legislatures 3.1.4 Legislative/Executive Relations 3.1.5 The Declining Power of the Legislature 3.2 The Executive 3.2.1 Executive Powers and Functions 3.2.2 Typology of Executives 3.2.3 The Growing Concentration of Powers in the Executive 3.3 The Judiciary 3.3.1 Functions of the Judiciary 3.3.2 Need for the Independence of the Judiciary 3.4 Military Era and the Functioning of Public Administration 3.4.1 Military Decrees and Impact on Public Administration 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutor-Marked Assignment 7.0 References/Further Reading 1.0 INTRODUCTION In all the political systems of the world, there are three arms of government – the Legislature, the Executive and the Judiciary.
These are respectively the rule making, rule application and rule adjudication organs of government.
In this unit, you will be introduced to the organs of government called the three arms of government.
By the end of the unit, you should be able to describe and analyse the functions of the three arms of government and identify the reasons behind the declining power of the legislature.
Finally, you should be able to explain the impact of military decrees in public administration.
57  MPA 751 INTRODUCTION TO PUBLIC ADMINISTRATION 2.0 OBJECTIVES At the end of this unit, you should be able to: • explain what an organ of government is • describe the three organs of government – Legislature, Executive and the Judiciary • analyse the functions of these organs in the present dispensation • identify the reason behind the declining power of the legislature • explain the impact of military decrees in public administration.
3.0 MAIN CONTENT 3.1 The Legislature The Legislature is usually an elected body which has the primary responsibility of making laws for the whole society.
Although practically everywhere, the universal duty of the legislative body is law making, yet it does more than simply make laws.
3.1.1 The Legislative Control of Public Administration The legislature is that arm of government which responsibility is to make laws for the entire country or state or local government as the case may be.
Apart from law making, the legislature also acts as a check on the activities of the other arms of government.
Since administration involves the implementation of public policies and laws made by the legislature, there is the need for the legislature to exercise control over such implementation.
This is to ensure that these policies or laws are being implemented as intended.
The major reason behind this is to avoid and prevent tyranny, autocracy and maladministration.
It also allows for good government that will meet the yearnings and aspirations of the populace.
Though public administration theorists support the claim for administrative independence from detailed legislative controls, the massive growth in the size of government and its extended powers over all the citizenry has necessitated legislative intrusion into the details of administration.
Such controls run into the particulars of policy formulated and to its manner of implementation and not just its general shape.
Moreover, the emphasis of the legislature is on controlling current activities up to the highest level and to tell the Executive President “No” when he wants to act on certain matters when there is a disagreement.
A 58  MPA 751 MODULE 2 typical example is that of President Musa Yar’Adua of Nigeria and the National Assembly on the performance of the 2009 budget.
Legislative control of administration is through three devices.
First is legislative evaluation.
This device occurs after an administrative action has taken place.
This is to determine whether the intention equals the outcome.
The second is what is known as legislative vetoes that influence pending administrative actions.
The third is the legislative authorisation that permits the legislature to shape government administrative policies, prior to their initiations.
The executive arm of government controls the functions of government.
Administration is the source of power in modern government, therefore public administration functions in the service of executive power.
Thus, controlling means indirectly controlling the “EXECUTIVE”.
SELF-ASSESSMENT EXERCISE Name and explain the three devices used by the legislature to control administration.
3.1.2 Legislative Powers and Functions The legislature constitutes the chief organ of popular government.
Their major powers and functions are as stated below.
Statute-Making The main role of the legislatures all over the world is statute or law making.
In the process of governance, they examine and discuss in details bills on various subjects that are brought before them.
They can repeal, alter or add to the provisions of existing laws and make them applicable to changing conditions.
Control of Administration In many countries, the most important function of the legislature is the control it exercises over the administrative authorities.
Since most existing departments and other administrative agencies were created by the legislature, it may alter or abolish them at will.
It may grant them generous or little or no money at all.
59  MPA 751 INTRODUCTION TO PUBLIC ADMINISTRATION Secondly, the legislature must ratify treatises and approve appointments to important state offices before they become effective.
It also has the power to discipline members of the executive or any administrative officer by impeachment, by address or by voting due to lack of confidence.
Such control is necessary to check the abuse of office and excesses of the government, thereby enhancing individual liberty.
Electoral Most democratic legislatures play a significant role in selecting public officials.
An example could be seen in parliamentary dispensation where the prime minister is elected by the legislature.
These legislatures do not always, of course, directly cast ballots for various candidates for the office, yet every time one votes on a question of confidence, it is, in effect re-electing or defeating the incumbent prime minister.
Even in presidential democracies, the legislatures have some electoral powers.
The constitution of the United States provides that, when no candidate for president or vice-president receives a majority of electoral votes, the House of Representatives (each state casting one vote) will choose the president from among the top three candidates.
Financial The legislatures also hold what is known as financial power.
The legislature determines the nature and amount of taxes and how public money should be spent, only as a result of legislative appropriations.
Executive In addition to acting upon executive budgets, most democratic legislatures also act upon certain other executive proposals.
International treatises are negotiated by the executives but must be approved by the legislatures before they become effective.
In the United States of America and the 1979 Constitution of Nigeria, presidential appointments are only provisional until approved by the majority of the senate.
Judicial Some democratic legislatures also perform judicial functions.
This is done through the instrument of impeachment.
Examples can be seen during the Nigerian Second Republic (1979-1983).
Governor Balarabe Musa was impeached by the State Legislature of Kaduna State.
Also in 1974, President Nixon resigned when it became clear that the House was 60  MPA 751 MODULE 2 going to impeach him.
This all important function of impeachment is to curtail the excesses of the executive arm of government.
Investigative The legislatures of most democratic nations perform investigative functions.
Legislative committees are set up for the purpose of digging up information desired by the legislators.
These committees hold hearings, subpoena witnesses, keep records and correspondence and often submit reports to the legislatures.
In the United States, the Watergate Scandal investigations are good examples of congressional investigations.
Constitutional The legislatures in most democratic systems have certain powers over the establishment and amendment of their nation’s constitutions.
Many constitutions were originally drawn up by the legislative bodies, and every legislature is authorised to play some role in formal amendments.
Representation The legislature is the very essence of representative government.
Law making has often been treated as the method of expressing the sovereign will of the whole political community.
In a number of nations, provisions are made for submitting certain legislative proposals to popular referendum, so that there can be no mistake about what the majority of the people or electoral desires.
The legislature may be considered a mechanism for achieving some form of representation.
A legislature, more than any other government institution, includes among its members, individuals representing the broad range of interest and wide range of viewpoints.
Interest Articulation and Aggregation The legislature might be viewed as one of the areas in which conflict occurs, or as a forum in which demands made by different interests are identified, exposed and communicated.
Demands and interests by various groups in society can be articulated within the context of a national legislature.
Once interests and demands are articulated, the legislature can play an important role in aggregating them.
Aggregation means some efforts of reconciliation and compromise.
61  MPA 751 INTRODUCTION TO PUBLIC ADMINISTRATION Supervision, Scrutiny and Surveillance Legislatures serve as an overseer of the executive on behalf of the general public.
The supervisory function of the legislative extends to public institutions established by the legislature such as public corporations, local authorities or activities which are supported by public funds.
The legislature may supervise the operation of such institutions to see if it is meeting the goals set forth for it, if the funds are being well spent and if the operation is being performed within the limits prescribed for it.
A popular instrument of surveillance is the parliamentary commissioner or ombudsman.
An ombudsman is an officer of the legislature.
Generally, his purpose is to investigate complaints about the behavior of administrative officials.
Educating and Informing the Public The last but not the least is the function which occurs in legislative debates, committee hearings and elections and during the period between elections when legislators attempt to maintain ties with their constituents by interpreting major issues in newsletters, in television and radio talks and through visiting their constituencies.
Legislatives debates are thus forums for educating the people about the activities of government.
The media coverage given to legislative debates and answers provided to questions raised by the opposition enable the broader pubic to learn about what is going on in the polity.
3.1.3 Typology of Legislature Legislatures are classified according to the number of chambers.
There are two main types: unicameral and bicameral.
Unicameral Legislature Unicameral legislature is one made up of only one chamber and usually composed of members who are directly elected by the electorate.
Examples of unicameral legislatures include Greece, Turkey, Bulgaria, Israel, Denmark and New Zealand.
Countries adopt unicameral legislatures due to certain factors.
They work well in small countries with homogenous, social and economic organisations.
The structure is simple and definitely locates responsibility.
Here, legislations are easily passed into law without delay unlike bicameral legislatures.
Unicameral legislatures are less costly to maintain.
The financial burden of paying salaries and allowances to 62  MPA 751 MODULE 2 members of the second chamber is removed.
But at times unilateralism is often frowned at due to certain factors.
The factors in favour of unilateralism rest on the supposed demerits of bicameralism and conversely, factors opposed to it are the assumed advantages of bicameralism.
Concretely, the virtues of checks and balances and the lessened likelihood that the two houses could be subject to a demagogue, are absent in the single-chamber legislature.
Also, in a state with many conflicting interests, it is often impossible to provide a formula for representation in a single house.
Bicameral Legislature This type of legislature has two chambers: the upper and the lower house or the upper or lower chambers.
Examples of bicameral legislature are found in Nigeria, United States, Canada, Britain and India.
The lower chambers are made up of members elected in direct elections on the basis of universal, equal and secret suffrage.
Usually members of the upper chambers belong to an older age group and are more experienced in public affairs than members of the lower house.
The upper house is in the main hereditary, but this is not applicable in the case of Nigeria as every member of the Senate or House of Representatives are periodically elected.
Certain merits are likely to be attached to bicameralism.
Here, two houses are less likely than one to be carried away by the excitement of the moment or the influence of a demagogue.
In bicameralism there is greater likelihood of temperate and deliberate discussion resulting in balanced equitable careful legislation.
It checks upon hasty passages of laws by a single chamber.
It is a safeguard against the despotism of a single chamber.
The bicameral system is a bulwark of individual freedom against the tyranny of a legislature made up of a single interest.
In federal states, the second chamber affords an opportunity for equal representation of units.
It enables the use of the people of political and administrative experience and ability without necessarily subjecting them to the rigorous process of electioneering.
Bicameralism allows the special representation of certain interests in a country.
Thus, apart from regional representation, different interests of 63  MPA 751 INTRODUCTION TO PUBLIC ADMINISTRATION socio-economic, traditional and aristocratic are given special representation in the second chamber.
Such representation may serve to secure national unity.
The existence of two chambers allows a division of labour through the assignment of certain minor matters to one house or the other.
Despite the several advantages of bicameralism, there are certain arguments against it.
The two houses are often deadlocked, preventing or delaying the business of legislation especially during the period of emergency.
A typical example can be seen in the Nigerian National Assembly on the issue of constitution review where the House of Representative wanted to assume equal status with the Senate often regarded as the upper legislative chamber.
Bicameralism encourages unhealthy competition between the two houses which may lead to the paralysis in the process of governance.
Apart from the above mentioned, it is expensive to run.
The financial burden of maintaining two houses is considered an unnecessary waste of resources.
There is also the issue of duplication of efforts as both houses seek independently to obtain the same information and as both debate on the same “question.” The operation of a cabinet system of government may become almost impossible where either house can cause a cabinet to fall just by voting “lack of confidence” in the government.
Bicameralism may breed political instability of government.
If membership is by nomination it can be used as a dumping ground for those who were rejected at the polls by the electorate.
3.1.4 Legislative/Executive Relations In most nations, the legislature exercises some degree of control and influence over the executive.
Legislatures in parliamentary system of government influence the decision making process of the executive during the “question period.” Law makers are provided the opportunity to question members of the government on many points of policy administration.
In presidential system of administration, the legislature may influence the executive by delaying or disapproving presidential nominations to high offices.
Thus the powers of the legislature to approve certain 64  MPA 751 MODULE 2 presidential appointments and ratify treatises negotiated by the president, provides an opportunity for the legislature to influence the policy of the executive.
In parliamentary-cabinet systems of government, members of the cabinet are chosen from the legislature.
The prime minister and his cabinet are collectively responsible to the legislature.
Even in presidential systems where the executive is chosen outside the legislature, the executive still depends upon the support of the legislature since all executive policies need its approval to become effective.
The success and stability of the executives in both systems of government depend significantly upon the continuous mutual cooperation and understanding between the legislature and the executive.
A hostile legislature can frustrate the execution of executive programme.
The issue of financing government projects rests squarely on the shoulders of the legislature.
Legislatures in most countries debate on the appropriation bill before the President or the Prime Ministry assents it to become a budget, because legislatures in most countries authorise the raising and spending of the money by the executive.
Financial control is a traditional weapon in the hands of the legislature in seeking to exercise some control and influence over governmental policies.
If the legislature refuses to appropriate money, the executive cannot prosecute designated programmes.
There is also the investigative function of the executive.
The legislature can launch investigations into the conduct of administrative activities and into the personal conduct of and lives of members of the executive.
These investigations may be carried out by committees of the legislature.
The abuse of executive powers can be checked by the investigatory power of the legislature.
Moreover, parliamentary executives can be defeated by the legislature through ensure motion or vote of no confidence in the executive.
This system is designed to keep the executive closely in tune with the desires of the voters and a majority of their representatives in the legislature.
There is also the issue of impeachments.
The executive can be impeached and removed from office on being found guilty of an impeachable offence by the parliament.
3.1.5 The Declining Power of the Legislature The legislature in most countries has declined while the executive continues to arrogate more powers to itself.
In most democratic nations, the legislatures have largely lost their traditional policy-initiating role 65  MPA 751 INTRODUCTION TO PUBLIC ADMINISTRATION and have become checkers, ‘revisers’, and critics of policies initiated by the executives.
What are the probable factors responsible for the declining fortunes of the executives?
First and foremost is the growing volume and complexity of problems requiring public policy intervention.
The legislative bodies cannot cope with the increasing governmental functions, because of its size, limited time ad processes of decision making.
Secondly, there is the erosion of legislative functions by the executive when there is the need for the exercise of the emergency powers by the executive.
Some legislatures lack technical expertise.
Since most bills are technical in nature, most members of the legislature do not understand them and are, therefore, unfit to participate effectively in the legislative processes.
There is also the lack of adequate time to devote to discussion of legislature bills.
Lastly, the limitation imposed on the powers of the legislature that influences it includes the activities of pressure groups, public opinion and the growth of disciplined political parties.
3.2 The Executive The executive arm of government is that organ which sole responsibility is mainly to implement rules and regulations as necessitated by the legislature, the law making arm of government.
Those who apply the authoritative rules and policies of a society are called the political executives.
This arm of government gives effect to the will of state by carrying out or executing the law of the land being constitutions, statutes, decrees and treatise as the case may be.
A Chief Executive is invested with the executive power and is assisted by the ministries’ extra-ministerial departments.
In modern times, those officials generally called “Executives” perform two distinct principal roles.
The first here is the chief-of-state.
Here, he or she is acting as the nation’s official ceremonial head and spokesman for the entire political entity.
Secondly, he or she is referred to as the “Head of Government” acting as the leader of office holders who propose, direct and enforce the nation’s public policies.
In a parliamentary system of government, each role is 66  MPA 751 MODULE 2 performed by distinctly different officials or groups of officials whereas in the presidential system both are performed by the same official.
3.2.1 Executive Powers and Functions The executive arm of government derives its powers mainly from the country’s constitution and the laws that may be reviewed by the judiciary.
Their major functions include that of law enforcement, the execution of administrative policy, the conduct of foreign affairs, the control of armed forces and the authority to grant pardon and amnesty to offenders against the state.
An example of this is when President Umaru Musa Yar ‘adua granted amnesty to Niger Delta militants on 4th October, 2009.
The powers of the executive are enormous.
Its discretionary authority is very great.
It must not merely execute laws, but must take action on many matters not covered by law.
The executive branch of government is responsible for much of the planning of the modern state.
In reality, the executive is the active force in any government.
But these enormous powers conferred on the executive can be grouped under the legislative, administrative and judicial.
Administrative Functions The major function of the executive here is that of coordinating and controlling the administration of the state i.e.
directing and supervising the execution of law.
The administrative also has the power to nominate individuals and sending them to the senate for screening before their appointments; the executive is also in control of the armed forces.
These include the supreme command of the army, navy and the air force.
In some states, the chief executive has the power to declare and prosecute war.
They also conduct foreign relations.
The executive in every state is charged with conducting relations with other states.
At his discretion, the chief executive appoints, instructs and controls the activities of ambassadors, ministers, consuls and other foreign-service officers.
He/she may dismiss the ambassador of a foreign state by recalling his or her own ambassador.
He determines the direction of the country’s foreign policy and also sends representatives to international assembles and conferences.
He/she has the power to negotiate binding treatise with foreign countries.
67  MPA 751 INTRODUCTION TO PUBLIC ADMINISTRATION Legislative Functions The executive recommends and initiates bills for the consideration of the legislature.
The executive exercises vetoing of bills.
They delegate legislation which is power to issue statutory orders and rules under the power vested on them by the legislature.
Such power is necessary to meet the changing circumstances of modern day exigencies.
There is also the power of summoning, proroguing and dissolution of the legislatures especially in parliamentary systems.
Judicial The last but not the least is the judicial functions.
The chief executive has the power to issue pardons for offences against the state either before or after trial and conviction.
Such a pardon either releases a person from the legal consequences of a crime or remits the penalties imposed.
The chief executive may reduce a sentence or by a reprieve, delay its execution.
Also he may issue a proclamation of amnesty whereby a specifically described class of persons is freed from the legal consequences of their actions.
3.2.2 Typology of Executives In the ancient time, most heads of kingdoms as they were then known, were either hereditary monarchs, although some were absolute monarch in the sense that they wielded legislative/executive as well as judicial powers.
Today, most executives have drastically curtailed their powers.
Most nations have been replaced with constitutional monarchies or “Limited Monarchies.” In constitutional monarchies, government is formally conducted in the monarch’s name.
The British Queen is a typical example as she opens and dissolves parliament; gives her assent to all acts of parliament before they become law and appoints ministers.
Despite all these assumed functions in parliamentary system of government, the real executive power is vested in the cabinet headed by the Prime Minister.
Constitutional monarchs then are chiefs of state who perform symbolic and ceremonial functions.
However, with increasing civilisation, some nations have entirely abolished their monarchies and replaced them with republic regimes formally headed by elected officials called President.
68  MPA 751 MODULE 2 There are three types of executives.
• Parliamentary and Non-Parliamentary Executives • Titular and Real Executives • Single and Collegial Executives Parliamentary and Non-Parliamentary Executives We have what is known as Parliamentary Executive when an Executive normally referred to as the Prime Minister is elected in the parliament and not directly by the electorate.
This is the case of Britain.
The Prime Minister holds on to office only as long as it commands majority in the parliament.
Then the Presidential system is where the executives are chosen independently of the legislature and holding office for a fixed term.
A presidential system of government is an outstanding example of the non-parliamentary executive.
Here, all executive powers, subject to a few limitations, are vested in a single chief executive which is the president, who exercises wide constitutional and discretionary powers.
He/she is elected for a fixed term and except in the case of some definite crime being judicially proved against him, he cannot be removed before the expiration o his term of office.
However, both the parliamentary and presidential executives have their good and bad points.
Titular and Real Executives The titular executives are heads of states who serve as emblems of national unit.
They perform solely symbolic and ceremonial functions, thus relieving the real executives from numerous public engagements and thereby enabling them to concentrate upon the solution of governmental problems.
The titular heads of state have the right to be informed and consulted about public issues by the heads of government who are the real executives.
The real executive is the head of government who performs the day-to-day business of government.
In parliamentary system of government, the real executive is the cabinet headed by the prime minister while in the presidential system the real executive is the president, a single individual who serves as chief of state as well as head of government.
The role of the political head of state and ceremonial head of staff is thus fused on one individual.
He carries final decision-making power and ultimate responsibility.
69  MPA 751 INTRODUCTION TO PUBLIC ADMINISTRATION Single and Collegial Executive In the single executive, a chief to whom all other executives are subordinate has final control.
The outstanding instance is the President of the United States and Nigeria.
He appoints cabinet ministers who are directly responsible to him.
They are mainly advisers and not his colleagues.
A clear advantage of a single executive is that it secures the unit, singleness of purpose, energy and promptness of decision so necessary for the success of an executive.
The advantage of a single executive is apparent during the period of emergency when unity of control is absolutely necessary.
In collegial executives, executive powers are performed by a council or a cabinet.
The number of persons constituting collegial executives varies from seven as in the case of Switzerland or twenty in the cabinet system of most nations.
Although a collegial executive impairs unity of control by dividing responsibility, it is safer than a single one.
It renders more difficult the encroachment of the executive on the liberties of the people in general.
3.2.3 The Growing Concentration of Powers in the Executive In recent times, there is a noticeable growth in the powers of functions of both the presidential and parliamentary executives.
This also is an indication that the legislative powers in modern democracies are declining.
This may be due to a lot of reasons.
The growth of disciplined party system First, the chief executive is usually the party leader who exercises considerable influence over the legislature.
Political parties spell out the basic policy lines a government will follow and assume a particular policy line by putting their people or trusted allies into cabinet and other important administrative positions.
Second, is the growing number and complexity of governmental policies and problems.
Third, national emergencies, whether real or imagined, also bring extensive increases in executive powers.
70  MPA 751 MODULE 2 Lastly, the nature of modern government is such that leadership, continuously concentrated and coordinating, adequately informed and equipped, is virtually necessary.
In all nations, there is a deep seated human impulse to centre responsibility for leadership in a single person.
This is especially of great advantage during the period of national emergency when the chief executive should act much more speedily and effectively in taking vital and necessary decisions than legislative bodies which are by nature deliberative organs.
3.3 The Judiciary This constitutes the third arm of government.
It entails law, judges and courts.
The primary duty of the judiciary is the interpretation of law and application of existing laws to individual cases.
The role of the judiciary in modern day democracies cannot be over- emphasised.
The liberty of individuals depends upon the fairness of courts in protecting them both from other individuals and from tyrannical or over-zealous member of government.
To enable the judiciary to fulfill this important role, it is separated from the control of the other branches of government – the legislature and the executive.
Also important to the preservation of individual liberty is that the judiciary should consist of judges who are men of honesty, impartiality, independence and sound legal knowledge.
3.3.1 Functions of the Judiciary The overall function of the judiciary is to interpret and apply the law with certainty and uniformity to specific cases as they arise.
The major function of the judiciary is that of settlement of disputes.
Here, the court deals with cases between private individuals and the government.
Both civil and criminal cases are settled by the court.
A civil case is the one brought in the name of the state against a person accused of a misdemeanour or felony.
It is the duty of the court to determine whether a person is innocent or guilty and accordingly invoke appropriate penalties.
Prevention of wrongful act This is done by means of writs and restraining orders.
Courts may act to prevent violations of the law.
Failure to obey an injunction constitutes contempt of court, and may be punished by fine or imprisonment.
71  MPA 751 INTRODUCTION TO PUBLIC ADMINISTRATION Judicial review This refers to the process by which courts, especially in the federal systems, are given the power to determine whether the legislative statutes are in conflict with the constitution.
The courts will declare them void on the grounds of unconstitutionality.
Judicial Review is thus a valuable check upon headstrong executive or legislative action.
Preservation of civil liberties The courts frequently play a leading role in the preservation of civil liberties.
In most countries, the courts are effective in protecting civil rights.
They make certain that the executive branch, in carrying out its functions, adheres to the rules of procedure laid down by law.
Declaratory judgments Many countries provide by law that courts may in actual controversies render declaratory judgments – that is judicial determinations of the rights of parties existing under statutes, contracts, will or other documents.
Such judgments enable the parties to ascertain their respective rights, without becoming involved in wasteful and unnecessary litigations.
Declaratory judgments are binding on the parties.
3.3.2 The Need for the Independence of the Judiciary Independence of the judiciary refers to the absence of bias in the administration of justice by the courts.
The independence of the judiciary is essential to individual freedom.
Judges must as far as humanly possible, make the liberties and rights of individuals be protected against the encroachment of tyrannical executives.
Judges must be able to act independently without fear or favour.
Before law can be properly administered, there must be a thorough knowledge of the law.
There must also be a developed judgment, which is the ability to be impartial and non-partisan as well as to have the highest personal integrity and honesty.
To perform their roles effectively, judges should be selected based on merit and not on other criteria.
To secure the impartiality of the judiciary, certain modes should be used in the selection of judges.
72  MPA 751 MODULE 2 The appointment of judges should be based upon the recommendations of an impartial body, which in Nigeria, is the National Judicial Council (NJC).
Under the system of tenure, Judges should have a secured tenure of office.
As long as they are not guilty of any crime known to the law, they continue in office.
This system serves to maintain judicial independence and high integrity.
Under no circumstances should judges be removed from office until the prescribed retirement age except on grounds of incapacity, infirmity of mind and proof of stated misdemeanour.
Short tenure tends to place on the bench judges who are under the temptation to please the public rather than fulfill the law.
Anything less than these, make the law inconsistent.
Security of salaries The salaries of judges must be fixed and charged on the consolidated fund, which means that whether the annual budget is passed or not, judges should not be denied their pay.
Salaries of judges should not be subjected to legislative debates.
The judiciary should be independent of the pressures of both executive and the legislature.
To this end, members of the judiciary should not belong to either the executive or the legislature.
The judiciary should be kept distinct and separate from the organs of government so that the members of the bench are not unduly influenced in the discharge of their functions.
The independence of the judiciary is to be secured by appointing as judges, men of exemplary quality, impeccable character, high integrity and honesty, especially those who are not easily susceptible to financial, social and political influences and pressures.
Immunity of judges from prosecution as regards the performance of their official duties This protection of the law enables the judge to perform his function without fear and favour.
The immunity of judges from legal liability for words spoken and acts done by them in the performance of their functions enhances their independence and impartial administration of justice.
73  MPA 751 INTRODUCTION TO PUBLIC ADMINISTRATION From the above discussion, it is clear that judicial independence can be secured and maintained through the selection of judges by an impartial body, a secured tenure of office, adequate remuneration and absence of prosecution arising out of performance of duties.
However, the experience of some countries especially in Africa, has demonstrated that many factors can limit judicial independence.
These factors include the political contract and manipulation of the judiciary by the executive as well as the likelihood of bias arising out of personal interest of members of the judiciary themselves.
3.4.
Military Era and the Functioning of Public Administration 3.4.1 Military Decrees and Impact on Public Administration Decrees are laws made by the military under military regimes.
Such decrees, when not repealed are laws which any administration must comply with.
Even though military government or military rule is an aberration, the Nigeria populace has been contending with it because out of about 52 years of independence, the military had been in power for more than three decades in Nigeria.
(1) The purpose of military decrees is to expedite actions in the implementation of government policies.
Military decrees guide the actions of the public administration under military government.
Such decrees are made by the highest body under the military.
At various times, they are called the Supreme Military Council (SMC), Armed Forces Ruling Council (AFRC) and Provisional Ruling Council (PRC).
Their modus operandi is as follows.
(1) Setting up of military tribunals to try public officers (2) Making decrees guiding the activities of the administration especially on how to raise and spend funds (3) Making decrees restricting the amount and types of information a public officer can release for public consumption (4) Making decrees ousting the power of the judiciary (courts) to entertain any case brought against the administration in the exercise of their executive powers or actions taken by them (5) Establishing decrees used to suspend the constitution, thereby making many administrative actions not to be subjected to 74  MPA 751 MODULE 2 judicial review when such contravenes the provision of the constitution.
Other forms of control over administration include: • public opinion and • activities of pressure groups which may influence government decisions.
All of the above are effective in controlling the administration and each can be used depending on the circumstances and situations.
The general purpose is to provide good government.
4.0 CONCLUSION In this unit, you learnt the functions of the three arms of government being the executive, the legislative, and the judiciary.
You also learnt the reasons behind the declining power of the legislature and the growing concentration of powers in the executive arm of government.
You were also enlightened on military decrees and their impact on public administration.
Also highlighted was the need for the independence of the judiciary.
5.0 SUMMARY This unit was solely about control systems in Public Administration, where the three arms of government and their impacts on public administration were examined.
6.0 TUTOR-MARKED ASSIGNMENT i.
How can the independence of the judiciary be guaranteed in any democratic dispensation?
ii.
What is accountable for the declining influence of the legislature and the growth in the powers of the executive?
iii.
Name and explain the various types of the executive.
7.0 REFERENCES/FURTHER READING Olaniyi, G. (1997).
Element of Public Administration.
Ibadan: Jeddidiah Publishers.
Waldo, D. (1955).
The Study of Public Administration.
New York: Random House.
75  MPA 751 INTRODUCTION TO PUBLIC ADMINISTRATION Anifowose, R. & Enemuo, F. (1999).
Element of Politics.
Lagos: Malthouse Press Limited.
Agagu, A.
A.
(2001).
Comparative Political and Administrative Studies.
Department of Political Science.
Ado-Ekiti: UNAD.
76  MPA 751 MODULE 2 UNIT 3 PUBLIC CORPORATIONS CONTENTS 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objectives 3.0 Main Content 3.1 Definition of Public Corporation 3.1.1 Meaning of Public Corporation 3.1.2 Origin of Public Corporation 3.2 Reasons for the Establishment of Public Corporation 3.2.1 Classification of Public Corporation 3.2.2 Characteristics of Public Corporation 3.3 The Control of Public Corporations 3.3.1 Performance, Probes and Commissions of Enquiry into Public Corporations 3.3.2 Privatisation and Commercialisation of Public Corporations 3.3.3 Privatisation and Public Corporation 3.4 Analysis and Types of Organisations 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutor-Marked Assignment 7.0 References/Further Reading 1.0 INTRODUCTION In this unit, you are going to be introduced to the concept of public corporations.
This is to make you aware of the definition, meaning and the origin of public corporations.
The comprehension of any concept depends on its analysis, features, problems and prospects.
2.0 OBJECTIVES At the end of this unit, you should be able to: • define what public corporation is • trace the origin of public corporation • explain the concept of pubic corporation.
77  MPA 751 INTRODUCTION TO PUBLIC ADMINISTRATION 3.0 MAIN CONTENT 3.1 Definition of Public Corporation A Public Corporation can be defined as “financially semi-autonomous body created by an Act of Parliament to provide goods and services on a commercial basis and is ultimately responsible to the minister through the parliament and the general public.” It is an organisation that is set up as a corporate body and as a part of the governmental apparatus for entrepreneurial or entrepreneurial-like objectives.
Public enterprises are organisations which merged as a result of government acting in the capacity of an entrepreneur.
Public enterprises, also known as public corporation, can also be defined as publicly-owned enterprise that has been chartered under Federal, State or Local Government law for a particular business or financial purpose.
It is a body framed for the purpose of enabling a number of persons to act as a single person.
3.1.1 Meaning of Public Enterprises A public enterprise is viewed as an artificial person who is authorised by law to carry on particular activities and functions.
It essentially has the features of several individuals who act as one.
It is described as a corporate body created by the legislature with defined powers and functions and independently having a clear-cut jurisdiction over a specified area or over a particular type of commercial activity.
It is a part of government apparatus and three implications are hereby highlighted.
First, a public enterprise, by virtue of its intricate relationship with government, is an instrument of public policy and its primary mission is in connection with governmental objectives and programmes.
It is, therefore, naturally under governmental control.
Second, a public enterprise, by its nature, mostly manages public resources, especially public money and this means that attention must be paid to mechanisms for enforcing accountability.
Third, the combination of financial and economic objectives with social and political aims invariably makes it difficult to devise appropriate performance measurement instrument.
78  MPA 751 MODULE 2 SELF-ASSESSMENT EXERCISE Define the term “Public Corporation.” 3.1.2 Origin of Public Corporation The origin of public enterprises could be traced to early 20th Century when government intervened in economic management through departmental organisations, which did not involve creating autonomous public bodies.
In the alternative, it granted license to private enterprise for the management of natural or national monopolies and where public bodies were involved in managing economic ventures, such bodies did not enjoy financial autonomy.
Public corporations made a very strong appearance after WWI for a variety of reasons including managing the consequences of the war, especially the economic crisis of the 1930s.
However, public enterprises sector developed rapidly because of the spread of Keynesian Interventionist.
Between the two world wars, political and ideological consideration prompted the establishment of parastatals in the former colonies.
The movement towards the establishment of public enterprises received new impetus after the WWII for reasons related to both ideological and political considerations and economic efficiency.
Economic nationalism and the success of the Sonnet Revolution paved the way for nationalisation and the strong state intervention in national economic management.
When the former “European colonies in Africa” became independent in the late 1950s and the 1960s, there were only a few public enterprises in different countries.
The public enterprises sector then developed at a tremendous pace in the immediate years after independence through the 1980s and a huge public enterprise sector was firmly established in most of the countries.
The weakness of the private sector, the lack of infrastructure, the low level of social and human development and the unfavourable social, economic and financial environment are some of the reasons given to explain the proliferation of public enterprises in all areas of economic and social development.
Other reasons include the urge to generate revenue to limit foreign economic domination and to provide a substitute for private initiative where it was not forthcoming.
Public enterprises in Nigeria dates back to the colonial era when the colonial government established some public enterprises for private essential services like electricity, railway and water.
The post- 79  MPA 751 INTRODUCTION TO PUBLIC ADMINISTRATION independent era marked a watershed in the growth and spread of public corporations.
At independence in 1960, Nigeria had 50 public enterprises, 200 in the 1970s and 500 in 1987, when government embarked upon economic reform programmes.
The factors that account for the phenomenal increase include, the evolution of the Federal administrative structures from four units in the 1950s to twelve in 1976, twenty-one in 1987, thirty in 1991 and thirty- six in 1996, and the oil boom and the commitment of successive governments to making public enterprises an instrument of state economic intervention in the 1970s.
SELF-ASSESSMENT EXERCISE State the two main factors for the establishment of public enterprises.
3.2 Reasons for the Establishment of Public Corporations There are many reasons for the establishment of public enterprises.
They include: • the desire to use the public enterprise as an instrument of effective plan implementation in a context where it appears a futile devise; a development plan for the private sector • the need to secure economic independence • the urgent desire to assure government control over “strategic” sectors of the economy, e.g.
the Central Bank • the need to separate some activities from the civil service and allow more autonomy in their running • the perceived need to provide employment for the citizens in context where the private sector offers very lucrative employment opportunities • the need to ensure state control of key profitable enterprises with a view to generating revenues that will add to available national capital for financing development programmes and projects and • the desire of some socialist-oriented regimes to use state control of key profitable enterprises to pursue the objectives of preventing the concentration of wealth or of the means of production and exchange in the hands of few individuals or groups, i.e., promoting equitable distribution of wealth.
80  MPA 751 MODULE 2 3.2.1 Classification of Public Corporation Public Corporations are classified into three as follows: • public/statutory • state-owned and • public/private partnership.
Public/statutory corporations These are enterprises which arise when the government assumes responsibility for the management of an economic or social pursuit through a special entity that has its own legal personality and still keeps some of the special prerogatives or privileges associated with a governmental organisation.
The blend of these features is aimed at enabling the organisation to function effectively as an autonomous body while it remains an instrument of government policy.
Enterprises that fall under statutory corporations include Central Bank of Nigeria (CBN) and Nigerian Television Authority (NTA).
State-owned companies These are companies created by the government under the provisions of ordinary company law, though they belong entirely to the government.
They are registered in the registry of companies, with the government as the sole proprietor.
Government, therefore, appoints the Board of Directors as is customary in private companies, e.g., the New Nigeria Development Company, Odua Investment Company Limited, etc.
Public/private partnership These are enterprises where the government is the majority shareholder in a partnership with private entrepreneurs.
In such companies, government usually dominates the board since it is the major shareholder.
An example is the Peugeot Automobile Nigeria (PAN).
3.2.2 Characteristics of Public Corporation Public corporation came into existence as a result of an act passed by the legislature or a decree under a military rule.
Public enterprise also defines its aims and objectives, powers and duties, immunities, the form 81  MPA 751 INTRODUCTION TO PUBLIC ADMINISTRATION of management and relationship with established departments and ministries.
It is a legal person, capable of suing and being sued, entering into contracts, acquiring and owning property in its own name and can also dispose of property in its own name and can also dispose of property than ordinary government departments.
It is wholly owned by the state.
Except for appropriations to produce capital or to cover losses, a public enterprise is usually independently funded or financed.
It obtains its funds from the treasury or the public and from revenues derived from the sale of goods and services.
It is authorised to use and re-use its revenues.
It is generally exempted from most regulatory and prohibitory statutes applicable to expenditure of public funds.
There are no hard and fast rules behind them in the matter of making contracts of buying and selling, works, etc.
Thus a great deal of liability and discretion is left for the management in the matter of procedure.
It is ordinarily not subject to the budget, account and audit laws and procedures applicable to government departments.
Their audit is done by the Accountant- General of Nigeria or any other person appointed by him.
However, both account and audit are commercial in nature.
Excluding the offices taken from government departments on deputation, the employees of public corporations are not civil servants and are not governed by government regulations in respect of conditions of service.
The recruitment is not subject to civil service rules, promotion is by seniority and personnel can be fired easily, if they are incompetent.
Corporations are free from the control of the legislature.
3.3 Control of Public Corporations The management and control of public corporations are necessary in order to have effective and efficient public enterprises.
The management of public corporations is done through the management boards and the policy board.
The executive board In the executive board, majority of the board are staff of the organisation.
They are usually the heads of the various departments of 82  MPA 751 MODULE 2 the organisation.
However, a few outside representatives are brought to be in charge of some outside interests.
The policy board Majority of the members of the policy board are from outside the organisation with few members from within the organisation.
The policy board is responsible for managing all the policy decisions of the organisation, but the implementation of policies and the day-to-day operation of the organisation are carried out by the Managing Director.
This method is applied to most public corporations in Nigeria.
Control of public corporations Even though public corporations are created to enable them have some degree of freedom to manage their affairs, they are still subject to various levels of control.
Ministerial control The supervising minister controls the public corporations under his portfolio in the following modes.
i.
By the appointments of board members Since the minister is politically responsible for appointing members of the board, he can dissolve it, if he is not satisfied with their performance.
These controls may include the appointment of external auditors to audit the account of public corporations, re-organisation of departments and controls on borrowing.
ii.
Parliamentary control This control is necessary to ensure that the operation of public corporations is in accordance with public policy.
Such a control is through the annual report.
Public corporations are expected to submit comprehensive annual reports of their activities to the parliament through the minister and such reports are tabled before the parliament.
3.3.1 Performance and Probes of Public Commissions of Inquiry into Public Enterprises The performances of public corporations are dismal in nature.
Instead of improving their services, most of them seemed to be retrogressing and became drain pipes on the economy without making any meaningful 83  MPA 751 INTRODUCTION TO PUBLIC ADMINISTRATION contribution to the nation’s economic development through service delivery.
Virtually all public corporations in Nigeria render epileptic and unsatisfactory service to the people.
Due to problems faced by public corporations in Nigeria in the recent past, which included corruption, inefficiency and poor management, the Nigerian Government attempted to solve these problems by taking certain measures.
A commission was set up under Michael Ani, the then Minister, to look into the problems of public corporations and make appropriate recommendations.
The Ani Commission recommended that the responsibility for personnel matters be removed from the boards and entrusted to an independent body to be called the Statutory Corporation Service Commission (SCSC).
The recommendations were implemented at both the Federal and State levels.
However, after its review in the early 1970s, the Udoji Commission recommended that it should be abolished.
The government accepted the recommendation and SCSC was eventually abolished.
The second option to solve the problems of public corporations by the government was to invite foreign management consultants to manage some of them.
In 1979, the Federal Government brought into the country some experts to manage public corporations.
A two-year management services agreement was signed between the Federal Government and Rail India Technical and Economic Services Corporation (RITES) for the management of Nigerian Railways.
Another agreement was signed with the Metallurgical Engineering Consultants of India (MECON) to manage the Nigerian Steel Authority.
The government later terminated these agreements and reverted to the previous methods of management.
3.3.2 Privatisation and Commercialisation Privatisation is the fact that business should be left for those who are better qualified to handle them, which is the private sector, while the government concentrates on its core duty of governance and policy regulation through the ministries.
Government involvement in business takes the form of regulation and this is done through its agencies.
The main motive about government regulation in a purely private sector, amongst other things, is to achieve public policy objectives of financial stability, high economic growth, stable prices, full employment, levels of output and equilibrium and balance of payments position.
84  MPA 751 MODULE 2 This privatisation, without adequate regulatory agency measures, will mean allowing laissez-faire attitude pervade the economy which may lead to what is known as economic disorder and financial chaos.
Businessmen driven by the pursuit of profit, employ both ethical and unethical means.
It is only law that will restrain their activities thereby protecting the people, business and society in general.
3.3.3 Privatisation and Public Corporation In the Nigerian context, privatisation involves the disposal of all parts of shares held by the government directly or through any of its agencies.
Privatisation involves the sale of government shareholding in any enterprise to non-governmental entities.
The Nigerian economy is non-cultural, being dependent on petroleum for 90% of its foreign exchange earnings.
In July, 1988, the Federal Military Government promulgated Decree No.
25 on Privatisation and Commercialisation which gave a legal backing to the execution of the privatisation and commercialisation programme in Nigeria.
The major objectives were to: • re-orientate the enterprises for privatisation and commercialisation towards a new horizon of performance improvement viability and overall efficiency • develop the capital market • restructure the capital of affected enterprises in order to facilitate good management and access to capital market • restructure and rationalise the public sector in order to lessen the dominance of unproductive investments in that sector • ensure positive reforms on public sector investments in commercial enterprises • check the present absolute dependence on the treasury for the funding by the otherwise commercially-oriented parastatals and encourage their approach to the capital market • initiate the process of gradual cession to the private sector of such public enterprises which by their nature and type of operations are best performed by the capital market • promote wide share ownership.
The decree provides for the establishment of the Technical Committee on Privatisation and Commercialisation (TCPC) which is vested with the responsibility of implementing the programme.
85  MPA 751 INTRODUCTION TO PUBLIC ADMINISTRATION Commercialisation This is the re-organisation of enterprises wholly or partly owned by the government in which such commercial enterprises shall operate as a profit-making commercial venture and without subvention from the government.
The main reasons behind the commercialisation projects include ; 1) to restructure and rationalise public enterprises to ensure an effective, cost-conscious and goal-oriented management and staff whose future is linked with the fortunes of the organisation they operate 2) to undertake a comprehensive review of the accounting and management information system of the parastatals with a view to installing and maintaining modern and effective accounting systems which will produce promptly the necessary data for monitoring their financial and operational performance 3) to re-orientate the enterprises for commercialisation towards a new horizon of performance improvement, viability and overall efficiency through the enforcement of strict commercial principles and practices 4) to check the present absolute dependence on the treasury for funding the otherwise commercially viable parastatals through a more realistic capital structure which will enable them approach the capital market to fund their operations without government guarantees.
3.4 Analysis and Types of Organisations According to Spiers (1975), organisations can be analysed through the following six (6) different perspectives.
1) Organisations as machines The most basic of all approach to the study of organisation assumes that organisational behaviour can be considered to be most usefully described in terms of machines.
According to him, if one supposes that organisations can in some sense, be perceived as machines, the following consequences ensue.
First, the conception of organsiations as a system of interrelated parts predisposes one to think that coordination is a primary task in the evaluation of organisational behaviour.
86  MPA 751 MODULE 2 Second, this necessitates the definition of functions in relation to work to be done, both for separate parts of the organisation and for interrelated parts.
Third, behaviour and activity are viewed primarily in terms of their work coordination.
Fourth, unsatisfactory circumstances are viewed in the same mechanical sense.
2) Organisations as needs and responses There are certain thinkers who give more emphasis to structure and function in the interpretation of organisational behaviour.
The functionalist approach mainly concentrates on needs and responses to needs.
He defines needs in terms of the “goals” or purposes of: (a) an individual (b) groups within the organisation (c) the organisation as a whole (d) a group order than the organisation but less than the society and (e) the society itself.
Organisation as societies This analysis closely resembles the functionalist approach.
It views the organisation as a miniature society.
The functionalists believe that the central problem from a society as a whole is the reconciliation of varying needs and interests of its members.
The social functionalism as this may be called, points out the prior necessity of a shared value system in order that such reconciliation may take place.
The broad administrative consequence of this kind of approach is that there is a predisposition to see the organisation not simply as a system of relatively discrete and interrelated parts but as a community of people.
The structure of this community is analogous to the structure of the society at large.
This conception aids in understanding the internal life of an organisation.
An organisation can be seen as an individual person.
Instead of seeing organisations as elements in society-wide system, this approach concentrates on the experience of the individual member.
This human 87  MPA 751 INTRODUCTION TO PUBLIC ADMINISTRATION relations approach stresses the need for organisations to make provision for the adjustment of individual psychological needs as expressed through small group relationships, to the wider needs of an organisation’s behaviour.
3) Organisation and the technological core There are some theorists who give importance to the concept of socio- technical system.
This means that in any organisation, there is always a kind of technological core.
In administration, the work processes of routine information systems could be regarded as the technological core.
They state that the consideration of internal technology must have certain important consequences for administrative section.
First, attention is shifted to the physical environment of the work process.
Second, the conception of the person and his physical environment lead to much more flexible possibilities to see that changing technology or even the technical expression of changing economic circumstances may have psychological effects because of its impact on the system.
4) Organisation as a culture This theory states that the activities of persons in organisations cannot be understood apart from meanings given to them by the persons themselves, colleagues, supervisors and official goals which condition their actions and relationships.
The main impact of this cultural approach is that individuals and groups are seen as constrained, not by formal structures or even beliefs but by roles and expectations, which in turn determine the norms in an essentially relative fashion.
Secondly, it is assumed that the organisational change and possibilities for change to have taken account of these roles and expectations.
It also diverts attention towards the exploration of internal sub-cultures and subtle cultural factors which determine norms and attitudes to work, authority and types of organisation.
4.0 CONCLUSION In this unit, you were made aware of public corporations, the definitions, origin, classification, characteristics and reasons for their establishment.
Their control and typologies were also treated.
88  MPA 751 MODULE 2 5.0 SUMMARY In this unit, you were introduced to the concept of public corporations.
This is to make you aware of the definition, meaning and the origin of public corporations.
You are now conversant of the fact that the comprehension of any concept depends on its analysis, features, problems and prospects.
6.0 TUTOR-MARKED ASSIGNMENT i.
Give a thorough analysis of organisations.
ii.
Relate the origin of public corporation.
iii.
Why should public corporations be privatised?
7.0 REFERENCES/FURTHER READING Akpan, U. N. (1982).
Public Administration in Nigeria.
London: Longman.
Ujo, A.
A.
(1994).
Understanding Public Administration.
Kaduna: Solmora Ventures Ltd. Fubara, B.
A.
(1983).
Government in Business Management in Nigeria.
Lagos: Spectrum.
Sexty, R. W. (1985).
“Currency Issues in Public Enterprises, Commercialisation and Privatisation”.
Public Sector, 8 (4).
89  MPA 751 INTRODUCTION TO PUBLIC ADMINISTRATION UNIT 4 PUBLIC ADMINISTRATION AND THE ADMINISTRATIVE LAW CONTENTS 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objectives 3.0 Main Content 3.1 Meaning of Administrative Law 3.2 Scope of Administrative Law 3.3 Reasons for the Growth of Administrative Law 3.4 Delegated Administration 3.4.1 Need for Delegated Legislation 3.4.2 Typology of Delegated Legislation 3.5 Administrative Adjudication 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutor-Marked Assignment 7.0 References/Further Reading 1.0 INTRODUCTION In this unit, you are going to be introduced to the concept of public administration and the administrative Law.
This is to enable you comprehend the definition, meaning and impact of administrative law.
Remember that the comprehension of any concept depends on the analysis of its features.
2.0 OBJECTIVES At the end of this unit, you should be able to: • explain the meaning of administrative law • state the scope of administrative law and public administration • give reasons for the recent growth in administrative law • describe the concept of delegated administration.
3.0 MAIN CONTENT 3.1 Meaning of Administrative Law Due to the fact that public administration is what a state does, it is both created and bound by an instrument of the law.
It is an academic subject that has never escaped from the faculties of law.
90  MPA 751 MODULE 2 Public administration is inherently the execution of public law.
Every application of general law is necessarily an act of administration.
Administration cannot exist without legal foundation.
The law that creates an agency is known as its enabling legislation.
Therefore, in theory, no government administrator can do anything if it is not provided for in the legislation or in the rules and regulations and that the legislation allows the agency to promulgate laws.
While public administration is the law in action, the law on how, when and where these actions can be taken is called administrative law.
It does not deal with the substantive content of agency policies and practices.
Instead, it focuses on the procedures that agencies use in exercising their authority.
In effect, administrative law is the totality of constitutional provisions, legislative statutes, court decisions and executive directives that regulate the activities of government agencies.
3.2 Scope of Administrative Law Administrative law covers the whole of public administration.
The scope of administrative law covers the following areas.
• The public service • Problems surrounding financial administration • Government agencies and policy regulations • Remedies against administrative actions • Law relating to the status and recognition of professional association of plural heads of administrative bodies.
The scope of administrative law can also be seen as the law of internal administration which expounds the nature of public office or elucidate official relation.
It comprises such areas as legal qualifications for office, legal disqualifications for officers, legal aspects of appointments, tenure and conditions of service, legal aspects of the hierarchical form of departmental organisations, the legal relation of administrative superior to the subordinate and the legal relation between the power of removal and of administrative management.
Meanwhile, the law of external administration comprises: • the powers and duties of administrative authorities related directly to private interests • the scope and limits of such power • sanctions attached to official decisions • the remedies against official action and the nature of administrative law.
91  MPA 751 INTRODUCTION TO PUBLIC ADMINISTRATION 3.3 Reasons for the Growth of Administrative Law Urbanisation and industrialisation The complexities and growth of modern cities and industries resulted in exploitation and helplessness of the individuals.
The administrative law simply goes to establish socio-economic conditions for providing help to citizens in a complex economy.
The industrial revolution led to a concentration of production in the hands of comparatively small number of capital owners.
This resulted in the emergence of special type of laws known as administrative laws which subordinated the common law rights of personal freedom and private property to the conception of common good.
Since administrative law stands for the furthering of policies of social improvement, there must, therefore, be flexibility of standard.
It lays down certain flexible standards to be applied to cases instead of cut and dried legal rules or precepts to be powered.
Thus, the substitution of general standards for legal rules makes administrative law more flexible than the traditional body of the older law.
Such a flexibility of standard is the need of the hour.
Administrative law allows the officials discretion and freedom for the efficient management of public services.
The modern state is a welfare state.
Hence it manages the business which was previously the monopoly of a few individuals.
This necessitates freedom of action.
Hence, discretionary powers to the state officials will equip them with requisite freedom of action without which the government is apt to fail in the fulfillment of its newly spring up functions.
Moreover, matters of highly technical nature necessitate laying down of certain standards.
The interpretation and application of the laws, entrusted to administrative courts, are composed of suitable subject matter experts.
The ordinary courts, manned by judges, having legal acumen can hardly be the best judges of such standards.
Administrative Law provides the bases for experiment into the new social and economic order.
3.4 Delegated Administration Delegated administration is the power which the legislature confers on the executive to carry out certain orders.
It is the rule-making power vested upon the executive by the legislature.
The legislature has the major function which is statute-making.
92  MPA 751 MODULE 2 However, due to the pressure of time and the peculiar nature of certain functions of the legislature, the need to delegate arises.
The rules made by the executive have the force of law and are enforced by the courts of law.
This rule of law enforcement is known as Delegated Legislation.
It is the exercise of minor legislative power by ministers or subordinate authorities and bodies in pursuance of statutory power and authority given by the parliament itself.
3.4.1 Need for Delegated Legislation Expansion in state activity Due to the impact of science and technology, the functions of the state have very much expanded.
The legislatures of today are burdened with so much work so the need to delegate authority.
The pressure of work and paucity of time on the part of the legislature have resulted in the growth of delegated legislature.
Lack of expertise among the legislature The average member of a legislature is not an expert, but probably a layman in certain fields that are highly technical in nature.
Therefore, the legislature, by its very nature, is not in a position to deal with too technical matters which can be handled efficiently only by experts.
Here, their major function is to lay down the guidelines for the experts to now take charge.
The law set down may require amendment with the change of time.
Parliament, because it is not always in session, cannot make instant changes to meet the changing conditions so as to allow the executive to make rules and provide alterations to them whenever necessary.
Delegated legislation is very apt in emergency situation.
This is needed in order to meet emergencies like natural disasters, epidemics or war.
In complex situations, it is not possible for the legislature to foresee and include in the law itself all the contingencies which may possibly arise especially in cases of large and complex issues.
Therefore, exigencies of this nature are naturally delegated for proper regulation.
3.4.2 Typology of Delegated Legislation Contingency type of legislation This happens where the legislature provides that the act will be applied on the occurrence of a certain exigency.
93  MPA 751 INTRODUCTION TO PUBLIC ADMINISTRATION Supplementary type of delegated legislation This fleshes up the skeletal law passed by the legislature in a skeletal form.
Interpretative delegated legislature It clarifies and explains the provision of the law to which it relates.
This power may be given by the statute itself or the administrative agency on its own account, may issue clarifications of law without any statutory authorisation.
SELF-ASSESSMENT EXERCISE Define the true administrative law.
3.5 Administrative Adjudication This is an inter-disciplinary concept which reveals the quasi-judicial nature of administration.
It can also be defined as the investigation and settling of disputes involving a private party on the basis of a law and fact by an administrative agency.
Modern public administration is the latest edition to the administrative department or agency.
Administrative adjudication is a legal role played in administrative department technically recognised as quasi-judicial functions in determining certain rights or interest of concerned persons or parties.
The features of administrative adjudication are as follows: • it is quasi judicial in nature • it determines individual rights in administrative acts • it is performed outside the ordinary court of the law • it functions here because they are technical in nature and are carried out by experts.
SELF-ASSESSMENT EXERCISE Define the term “administrative adjudication.” What are the types of administrative adjudication?
94  MPA 751 MODULE 2 4.0 CONCLUSION This unit has enabled you to define public administration law aptly called administrative law.
It also covered the scope of administrative law, the reasons for the growth of administrative law, delegated administration, types, the reason behind it and administrative adjudication.
5.0 SUMMARY In this unit, you have learnt the definition of public administration as a detailed and systematic application of public law.
Every act in the application of public law is an act of administration.
6.0 TUTOR-MARKED ASSIGNMENT 1.
Define the term “administrative adjudication.” Why is it necessary in a democratic dispensation?
2.
Define public administrative law.
Elucidate reasons for the growth of administrative law in Nigeria.
7.0 REFERENCES/FURTHER READING Gortner, H. F. (1977).
Administration in Public Sector.
New York: Ronald Press.
Pfiffner, J. M. & Presthus, R. V. (1960).
Public Administration.
New York: Ronald Press.
Stillman, H. R. J.
(1980).
Public Administration: Concepts and Cases.
London: Haughton Mifflin.
Waldo, D. (1955).
The Study of Public Administration.
New York: Random House.
95  MPA 751 INTRODUCTION TO PUBLIC ADMINISTRATION MODULE 3 Unit 1 The Nigerian Civil Service Unit 2 The Bureaucracy Unit 3 The Organising Process UNIT 1 THE NIGERIAN CIVIL SERVICE CONTENTS 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objectives 3.0 Main Content 3.1 Characteristics 3.1.1 Functions 3.2 Reforms in the Nigerian Civil Service 3.2.1 The 1988 Reforms 3.2.2 The Post 1988 Reforms 3.3 Problems of the Civil Service 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutor-Marked Assignment 7.0 References/Further Reading 1.0 INTRODUCTION The Civil Service The civil service in Nigeria and that of many countries is regarded as a bureaucracy.
A bureaucracy is defined as a large unwieldy organisation that is controlled and funded by the government.
The civil service comprises all servants of the state other than holders of political or judicial offices who are employed in a civil capacity and whose remunerations are paid wholly and directly out of the money voted by the parliament.
The civil service is part of the machinery of the executive branch of the government and exists to put into effect government policies.
The effectiveness of government, therefore, depends on the efficiency of the civil service and its ability to respond in practical terms, to its policy decisions.
It is for these reasons that the civil service is often described as the custodian of the government’s reputation, for if it is unable to carry out the policies faithfully and efficiently, it does not only frustrate 96  MPA 751 MODULE 2 the government, but it might seriously undermine the government’s position and stability in power.
The civil service is structured into: • administrative class • executive class • professional class and • junior cadre class This unit will cover the Nigerian civil service in relation to its definition, scope, characteristics, functions, reforms and the problems confronting it.
2.0 OBJECTIVES At the end of this unit, you should be able to: • trace how Nigeria came about the civil service institution • describe the characteristics of the Nigerian civil service • discuss the functions of the civil service • enumerate the problems confronting the civil service.
3.0 MAIN CONTENT 3.1 Characteristics of the Civil Service The characteristics of the Nigerian civil service are modeled after that of Britain.
As the structure was modeled after that of the British, so also were the operational procedures such as the general order and financial instructions, while some of these rules, regulations and instructions have been amended, a large portion of them remains unchanged.
The civil service shares similar characteristics with the British model since it was its creation.
The characteristics of the Nigerian civil service include the followings.
Hierarchical structure Nigeria’s civil service is vertically structured with a flow of positions from top to bottom with different layers of positions.
The chief civil servants are the heads of service to who all other top civil servants in each cadre report.
They carry out the posting of top civil servants in each ministry; the permanent secretary occupies the apex position, 97  MPA 751 INTRODUCTION TO PUBLIC ADMINISTRATION followed by directors, deputy directors, assistant directors, etc.
Communication flow here is vertical in nature, from top to bottom.
The civil service also has horizontal structure indicating the different job divisions in each ministry.
Each ministry is structured into departments, units, sections, divisions and field offices.
The permanent secretary coordinates all departments in the ministry.
Directives flow both vertically and horizontally.
Written rules and regulations Since the civil service relies on written rules and regulations for its daily operations, the service relies on the General Order (GO) and financial instructions to guide it.
The GO contains the guiding laws and professional ethics for civil servants.
Civil servants are not expected to operate outside the law.
Besides the GO, there are other regulatory instruments that can be found in the reforms by successive regimes.
The principle of impartiality Civil servants are, by regulations, not expected to be partial or show undue favouritism in the performance of their official assignments.
As they are being paid from the tax payer’s money, they cannot discriminate.
The civil service is, therefore, considered to be the epitome of fairness and justice.
Political neutrality Civil servants are not expected to engage in partisan politics.
They should not be seen belonging to all visible political parties.
Permanence Civil servants enjoy permanent tenure.
Their job is guaranteed until retirement age.
Civil servants can only be removed from office before attaining retirement age if they commit a serious crime, or, if they take voluntary exit from service.
The service is only guaranteed if civil servants remain loyal and politically non-partisan and abide by the law.
Principle of anonymity Civil servants are expected to do their job like loyal servants.
They are neither supposed to be heard, praised or blamed on government policies.
They must not talk to the press on official issues or express personal opinions unless it is so directed from the above.
They do not take 98  MPA 751 MODULE 2 blames for the failure of government policies.
The minister or commissioner is the chief policy maker and official spokesman of government in each ministry.
He, therefore, takes the blame or praises on official issues as the case may be.
3.1.1 Functions of the Nigerian Civil Service Public Administration is often referred to as the action part of government.
Civil servants are often referred to as public administrators and, therefore, are identified by several functions they perform.
The functions are as follows.
1.
Assisting in policy formulation Policy formulation is the exclusive preserve of politicians and political office holders.
However, they may not be able to do this without the assistance of civil servants, who usually possess the necessary data and information which will guide policy choices by political masters.
Civil servants go to the field to collect data, analyse them and provide policy alternatives with supportive arguments on each.
The final policy choice and decision are not the responsibilities of civil servants.
2.
Policy execution The primary function of civil servants is to carry out government’s order and directives without complaints.
Official policies are practically implanted by civil servants.
They are expected to perform such functions to the best of their administrative and technical ability.
3.
Assisting in law making The executive, under a democratic regime, presents bills to the parliament for legislation.
Before, it is the duty of civil servants to draft the bill and flesh it up with the necessary details before presentation to parliament for debate.
After becoming law with the assent of the president, it is also the duty of civil servants to work out the modalities for its operations.
4.
Provision of social amenities and services Civil servants engage in the provision of some social services as their official assignment.
99  MPA 751 INTRODUCTION TO PUBLIC ADMINISTRATION 5.
Continuity of government Civil servants in the past, especially during the numerous military regimes Nigeria had witnessed, had always played prominent roles in maintaining the continuity of government.
Civil servants often provided continuity in government by ensuring provision of social services in all its ramifications.
SELF-ASSESSMENT EXERCISE What are the major functions that civil servants are expected to perform under any democratic dispensation?
3.2 Reforms in the Civil Service A reform is anything that brings about positive changes.
It involves restructuring, reconciliation, re-organisation and re-orientation.
Reform is an innovation that ensures continuity in public administration system.
Introduction of reforms to the Nigerian civil service is a direct acknowledgement of the problems of the service at some particular times and therefore, a way of correcting the perceived inadequacies by the authorities.
The colonial authorities, who heralded the British patterned administrative model to the country itself, flagged off reforms in the system.
The reforms were initiated by way of setting up commissions.
The first of these commissions to be so recognised was the 1948 Foots Commission.
It came about as a result of meeting nationalist demands.
However, the first major reform came in 1946 and was headed by Sir Walter Harragin.
This Commission established a two- service structure of the senior and junior service.
The major pre-occupation of the Foots Commission was the Nigerianisation of the civil service.
Hitherto, the middle and top levels of the service were occupied by colonial administrators, while educated Nigerians and nationalist were not recruited to the service.
Prolonged agitations by the nationalist brought about the recommendations of the commission for the recruitment of educated Nigerians to the service and the training of Nigerians in higher institutions in Nigeria and abroad to replace the expatriates.
The 1954 Phillipson Commission followed the first commission.
The Commission’s recommendations heralded the abandonment of the united civil service, leading to the decentralisation of the service on regional basis.
The central and regional governments had a separate 100  MPA 751 MODULE 2 public service commission each.
Nigerian officials were given the options to join either the Federal or Regional service.
At Independence in 1960, and up till 1966 when the first coup took place, the Nigerianisation process continued at all levels but at a different pace.
Almost immediately after independence, the western region announced the complete Nigerianisation of its top civil service cadres.
The military took over in 1966 and ruled until 1979.
The Gowon regime instituted the 1972/1973 Udoji Commission to recommend among other things, how to boost efficiency and productivity in the service.
The Commission recommended drastic improvement in the salary structure of civil servants and granting car credit loans to all senior civil servants in order to boost their morale.
The Gowon regime was toppled by General Murtala Mohammed which perceived the civil service as very corrupt and inefficient and, therefore, there was the need to sanitise the institution by getting rid of bad eggs.
The regime, within weeks of assumption of office, retrenched more than 10,000 civil servants of all cadres.
Not much was done by succeeding regimes in terms of restoring the confidence and permanence of tenure in the service until 1988.
3.2.1 The 1988 Reforms The 1988 Civil Service Reforms could be regarded as the most fundamental in the annals of administrative re-organisation.
The reform was instituted by the Babangida administration based on the recommendations of the Dotun Phillips Committee on the civil service.
The Reforms brought about the following issues.
The Minister at the federal level and the Commissioner at the state level were regarded as the chief executive and the accounting officer and the political head rather than the permanent secretary under the earlier arrangement.
Before now, the permanent secretary had the effective control over all human and non-human resources of the ministry.
The official nomenclature of the Permanent Secretary changed to Director-General.
The appointment became political as one could be appointed by government to occupy the position and his tenure ends with that of the regime that appointed it.
The major thrust of the 1988 Reform was the professionalisation of the civil service.
The service became professionalised as the departments and sections were re-arranged based on professional lines and personnel 101  MPA 751 INTRODUCTION TO PUBLIC ADMINISTRATION in each department and its other sub-units were to have professional qualifications that agreed with their duties in the department.
More so, transfer of civil servants across ministries and departments became a thing of the past.
New promotion criteria were set up for advancement of officials on merit system and other criteria such as promotional examination and additional qualification replaced the old system of length of service for promotion.
Accountability control The audit arm was set up to expose misappropriation of funds and corruption.
3.2.2 The Post 1988 Reforms The Babangida regime was succeeded by the Shonekan-led interim government in 1993 but was shortly toppled by Gen. Sani Abacha’s regime.
This change had its greatest impact on the civil service by its reversal of the nomenclature of the Director-General back to Permanent Secretary thereby depoliticising the office and making it once again permanent.
The Abubakar regime that succeeded the Abacha regime separated the office of the Secretary to the Government and Head of Service which were previously combined.
These two offices are now occupied by different people.
The secretary to the Government is political while the Head of Service is appointed from among the most senior civil servants.
SELF-ASSESSMENT EXERCISE Enumerate the basic features of the 1988 Reforms.
3.3 The Problems Confronting the Civil Service The Nigerian civil service is confronted with myriads of problems.
Many of the civil servants, both serving and retired, were aware of some basic weaknesses in the service.
The first of these problems is identified as attitudinal factor leading to the problem of inefficiency and ineffectiveness.
Nigerian civil servants are often adjudged to hate work because files are piled up without being attended to thereby undermining desired productivity.
Many civil servants play truancy and absenteeism and therefore, the jobs are left undone.
102  MPA 751 MODULE 2 The second problem is that of corruption and bribery.
Civil servants across the hierarchies abuse their offices by engaging in official corruption and bribery.
Top civil servants collude with contractors to defraud government, present fictitious receipts for journeys not made and for goods and services procured.
Revenue collectors embezzle revenues collected or print private receipts for revenue collection.
The public has to offer bribes before civil servants perform their official duties.
In essence, bribery, corruption, graft and manipulation of accounts are the hallmarks of the civil service.
Among the reasons adduced for corruption in the service is poor remunerations which comprised the major problem on its own.
Civil servants are poorly paid, salaries are not paid as at when due.
Many civil servants at all levels, Federal, State and local governments are owed salary arrears up to months thereby giving room for civil servants to make ends meet at all costs.
To encourage efficiency and accountability the salaries of workers need an upward review.
Ethnicity and favouritism Nigerian civil servants suffer from lack of national outlook like the general civil society of which the civil servants are a part.
The civil service is supposed to be a national institution promoting national unity.
Primordial relations underscore everything in the civil service.
The merit system, which is part of the American model, is supposed to be the guiding principle in appointments and promotions in the service.
Rather, appointments and promotions and other privileges in the service are determined by ethnic considerations.
The ethnic groups are all interested in who becomes the head of service, permanent secretary and other key positions; cooperation or lack of it in the service depends on the ethnic origin of the officials.
Cooperation is guaranteed among the immediate subordinates if they are from the same ethnic bloc with the superior, while it is denied if the contrary is the case.
The service is also marked with favouritism.
Administrative favours are extended to ethnic bloc, .friends, relations and those generally known and those not known are left behind.
Favouritism violates the principles of impartiality and impersonality in the civil service.
4.0 CONCLUSION In this unit, you have learnt the concept of the Nigerian civil service, its characteristics, functions and problems.
103  MPA 751 INTRODUCTION TO PUBLIC ADMINISTRATION 5.0 SUMMARY In this unit, you have learnt that the Nigerian civil service is guided by the principles of hierarchical structure and political neutrality.
These are enduring characteristics inherited from the British colonial administrative system.
You also learnt the functions of the service which are mostly traditional functions of civil services all over the world.
Exceptional cases of performing political roles were during the times of political crises and coups by military officers when civil servants were appointed as sole administrators, board members and care-taker committee members.
6.0 TUTOR-MARKED ASSIGNMENT i.
Identify the needs for political neutrality by civil servants in Nigeria.
ii.
Identify and discuss the basic responsibilities of civil servants in Nigeria.
7.0 REFERENCES/FURTHER READING Ajayi, K. (2001).
Military Regimes and the Nigerian Public Administration.
Lagos: Bolabay Publications Omoloshu, F.
(Ed.).
Contemporary Issues in Public Administration.
Dudley, B.
(1982).
Nigerian Girls and Politics.
London: Macmillan.
Kolawole, D.
(Ed.).
Issues in Nigerian Girls and Politics.
Makinney, J.
B.
& Howard, L. C. (1979).
Public Administration: Balancing Power and Accountability.
Moore Publishing Company.
104  MPA 751 MODULE 2 UNIT 2 THE BUREAUCRACY CONTENTS 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objectives 3.0 Main Content 3.1 Bureaucracy- Meaning and Definition of Concept 3.2 Characteristics of Max Webber’s Bureaucracy 3.3 Max Webber’s Ideal Types of Authority 3.4 Criticism of Bureaucracy 3.5 Evaluation of Bureaucracy in the Public Sector of Nigeria 3.6 Solutions to Problems of Bureaucracy in Nigeria 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutor-Marked Assignment 7.0 References/Further Reading 1.0 INTRODUCTION In this unit, you will be exposed to the term bureaucracy.
The definition, meaning, characteristics, evaluation, criticism and solutions to its problems will be discussed extensively.
2.0 OBJECTIVES At the end of this unit, you should be able to: • define bureaucracy as a concept • highlight the different types of authority as expounded by Max Webber • state the different criticisms of bureaucracy 3.0 MAIN CONTENT 3.1 Bureaucracy-Meaning and Definition of Concept The mention of the word bureaucracy, especially among workers in the private sector, connotes everything that is negative in nature.
Generally, people equal democracy to unexplained delay and general delay and frustration and red-tapism.
It means to them “inefficiency, corruption, self-interest, secrecy and slowness of action.” These people vent their angers on the irritating aspect of bureaucracy, without grasping the central importance and meaning which bureaucracy as a phenomenon has for the study of public administration.
105  MPA 751 INTRODUCTION TO PUBLIC ADMINISTRATION From the several sciences and public administration in general, bureaucracy means “the general formal structural elements of a type of human organisation particularly the collective personnel and structures of a governmental organisation.” Bureaucracy has both good and bad aspects.
It is a term generally used in modern organisation to refer to orderly and structural arrangement of things rather than the hostile and negative traits associated with the organisation.
In the field of public administration, bureaucracy is like a lens by which the core of modern organisation can be viewed.
Bureaucracy in its purest sense does not exist, though it has contributed immensely to the discipline of public administration and it is a reliable way of efficiently achieving organisational aims and objectives.
3.2 The Characteristics of Max Webber’s Bureaucracy Hierarchy of authority This refers to the label of grades of authority whereby the superior officers supervises the lower officers under their control.
Administrative hierarchy provides a determinate procedure that decides who is to decide.
To avoid contradictory authority-relationship, there is need to establish a determinate hierarchy of authority either by zoning authority along functional lines or by maintaining organisational structures.
Hierarchical structure of organisation is to plan for the division of work and allocation of authority.
The organisation gives each member of the group his status and role in relation to the other members.
The hierarchical order of bureaucracy separates the supervisor from the subordinates on the basis of this hierarchy.
Rules, regulations and procedure Decisions in a bureau are governed by consistent system of abstract rules, regulations and procedures.
There is a large use of records and files.
Here the rules, regulations and procedures give room for rationality, routine objectivity and consistency in the running of the organisation.
If the orgnisational goals and objectives are to be achieved, then there must be rules and regulations to regulate the employees’ behavioural patterns in the organisation.
This will help to coordinate activities in the hierarchy and also ensure uniformity in the action of the employee.
106  MPA 751 MODULE 2 Impersonality Bureaucrats or officials in the organisations are not free to act arbitrarily.
Any choice being made by bureaucrats must conform to prescribed patterns of conduct imposed by legal rules and laid down procedures.
Bureaucratic rules provide systematic control of superior over subordinates, thus limiting the opportunities for arbitrariness and personal favouritism.
An office holder takes an impersonal formalistic orientation in dealing with others in the execution of its official duties.
Written records and documentation Modern organisation administration placed high importance on written records and documentation as emphasised by Max Webber.
This allows for decisions, instructions and adequate planning.
Career orientation This refers to the technical competence in handling specific responsibilities in the organisation.
Max Webber corroborated Frederick Taylor’s preference for scientific methods of appointing employees into any post.
Webber emphasised the need to base promotion on security and the ability of the employee to meet the target outlines for him/her.
He emphasised the need for training and development of workers through internal movement from one position to another.
Discipline This is the respect for obedience of rules and objectives of the organisation.
It is obedience to superior official’s orders by their subordinates and obedience to constituted authority as represented by the management of the organisation.
Division of labour This brings about specialisation of labour.
Specialisation of labour means that work in a bureaucracy is rationally divided into units that can be undertaken by an individual or groups of individuals competent to perform such tasks.
In a bureaucracy, workers do not own their offices but enjoy tenure of office based on their abilities and competence to perform the work assigned to them.
SELF-ASSESSMENT EXERCISE Explain the term “bureaucracy” as expounded by the German sociologist, Max Webber, 107  MPA 751 INTRODUCTION TO PUBLIC ADMINISTRATION 3.3 Max Webber’s Ideal Type of Authority Concept To Webber, there are only three ideal types of authority or reasons why individuals throughout the modern world obey their leaders.
The traditional authority One of the earliest is the traditional authority of primitive societies which is based on the established belief in the sanctity of tradition as providing status and power to those who exercise authority.
They state that their rulership is done by nature.
Because a family of rulers has always ruled, they are presumed to be just and right in whatever decision they take and should be obeyed.
Through precedence and the authority of tradition, custom and conventions give the rulers their legitimacy in the eyes of the people they rule.
Charismatic authority Charismatic authority is based upon the attractiveness of the leader.
Charismatic figures are self-appointed leaders who command obedience because of the extraordinary qualities they possess to exercise authority.
The leaders under the charismatic authority include popular party leaders, founders of religious groups and great nationalists.
Legal-rational authority According to Max Webber, the legal-rational authority is the third – ideal type, which is often recognised as the foundation of modern civilisation.
It is based on a belief in the legitimacy of the pattern of normative rules and the right of those appointed or elected to authority under such rules to issue command.
That is obedience is owed to the legally established impersonal set of rules rather than a personal ruler.
Legal-rational authority vests power in the office, rather than the occupier of that office.
Thus everyone can rule as long as he or she comes into office according to the rule.
The legal-rational authority type is the basis for Webber’s concept of bureaucracy.
Bureaucracy is the normal way the legal-rational authority appears in an institutional form and holds a central role in ordering and controlling modern societies.
For Webber, bureaucracy is indispensible in modern government or administration in spite of its inadequacies.
To Max Webber, it will be sheer illusion to think for a moment that continuous administrative work can be carried out in any field or organisation except by means of officials working in offices.
108  MPA 751 MODULE 2 3.4 Criticism of Max Webber’s Ideal Type of Bureaucracy Max Webber’s concept of bureaucracy has a lot of criticisms surrounding it.
Over-emphasis on rules and regulations This is a draw-back on the speed of carrying out official functions.
Too- much emphasis laid on rules and procedures, record-keeping and paper work may become more important in its own right, as to bring about unnecessary delays in handling official matters.There is too much officialdom; therefore, there is the tendency in stifling initiative.
Position and responsibilities in the organisation can lead to officious bureaucratic behaviour.
There may also be the tendency to conceal administrative procedures from outsiders.
Impersonal relations can lead to stereotyped behaviour and a lack of responsiveness to individual incidents or problems, consequently resulting to lack of attention to the informal organisation and the developments of groups with goals of their own and inadequate recognition of the organisation.
Bureaucracies restrict the psychological growth of the individual and cause feelings of failure, frustration and conflict.
There is, therefore, a suggestion that organisational environment should provide a significant degree of individual responsibility and self-control.
Commitment to the goals of the organisation, productivity and work, are opportunity for individuals to apply their full potentials.
3.5 Evaluation of Bureaucracy in the Public Sector of Nigeria In spite of the criticisms that trailed the application of bureaucracies in many organisations, it is difficult to envisage how modern large-scale organisation could function effectively without exhibiting at least some of the features of a bureaucratic structure.
In the public sector, there is demand for uniformity of treatment, irrespective of political lineage or tribal origin, regularity of procedures and accountability for their operations.
This leads to adherence to specified rules and procedures which limit the degree of discretion exercised by management and to the keeping of detailed records.
It must be emphatically stated that the incursion of the military into politics has bastardised the functioning and efficiency of bureaucracies as laid down by the British colonial masters when they handed over political power to brilliant and intelligent civil servants.
With the 109  MPA 751 INTRODUCTION TO PUBLIC ADMINISTRATION military incursion into politics, they targeted their way to the top.
Due to their greed and avarice, they totally ignored the laid down procedures in the civil service both in appointments of civil servants to sensitive posts and the protocol in the performance of civil service functions.
This, to a large extent, has contributed in no small measure, to the abysmal performance being witnessed both in the state as well as the Federal civil service in Nigeria presently.
However, it is interesting to note that despite the criticisms of bureaucracy, people dealing with public sector organisations, often unconsciously call for what amounts to the enlargement of bureaucracies in Nigeria.
SELF-ASSESSMENT EXERCISE Name three of Max Webber’s authority type.
3.6 Solutions to the Problems of Nigeria Bureaucracy Many scholars have highlighted that Nigerian civil servants are extremely corrupt, slow and grossly inefficient.
However, many problems have been left unsolved.
However, solutions can be proffered to some of the problems confronting the bureaucracy especially in Nigeria.
Recruitment and selection of civil servants should be completely overhauled and the principle of merit should be strictly adhered to as against the present practice of tribalism, nepotism, God-fatherism, quota system and sectionalism.
Training and development of civil servants should be given the needed priority.
Possibly it should be contracted out in some cases.
Appraisals of civil servant should be objective and a staff member who does not perform up to expectation should be laid-off.
Motivation of staff in terms of pay, working conditions, recognition and opportunity for advancement should be implemented.
Job security, pensions and gratuity as well as political appointments are not enough to motivate civil servants.
The control process in the public service should be more effective to check bribery and corruption.
The civil service should be de-layered to promote efficiency.
110  MPA 751 MODULE 2 Professionalism should be introduced into the public service by the recruitment of specialists and the retention of efficient employees.
Political neutrality should be encouraged while all forms of undue interference either from the legislature or the executive should be discouraged.
4.0 CONCLUSION From the social science and public administration’s point of view, bureaucracy cannot be jettisoned if a sound governmental organisation should be in place.
Bureaucracy has both good and bad qualities for it is the orderly and structural arrangement of things rather than the hostile and negative traits associated with oganisations.
5.0 SUMMARY In this unit, bureaucracy has been thoroughly defined.
Its characteristics and its negative and positive attributes were exhaustively discussed.
Certain solutions were also proffered for problems bedeviling the Nigerian public service.
6.0 TUTOR-MARKED ASSIGNMENT i.
Define the term bureaucracy.
State the various problems confronting bureaucracy in Nigeria and proffer solutions to them.
ii.
Name and explain five characteristics of Max Webber’s ideal bureaucracy.
7.0 REFERENCES/FURTHER READING Adebayo, A.
(1981).
Principles and Practice of Public Administration in Nigeria.
Spectrum Books Ltd. Fajayomi, S. B.
(1986).
Topical Issues in the Nigerian Public Administration.
Olamiyi, G. (1997).
Elements of Public Administration.
Lagos: Jeddidial Publishers.
111  MPA 751 INTRODUCTION TO PUBLIC ADMINISTRATION UNIT 3 THE ORGANISING PROCESS CONTENTS 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objectives 3.0 Main Content 3.1 Organising Process- Definition and Concepts 3.1.1 Departmentalisation 3.2 Establishing Authority Relationships 3.3 Division of Managerial Work 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutor-Marked Assignment 7.0 References/Further Reading 1.0 INTRODUCTION In this unit, you are going to learn the process of organisation in a work place.
Organisation process can be seen in terms of departmentalisation, establishing authority relationship and the division of managerial work.
2.0 OBJECTIVES At the end of this unit, you should be able to: • define the organising process • state the ideology behind departmentalisation • explain establishing authority relationships in a work place.
3.0 MAIN CONTENT 3.1 Organising Process-Definitions and Concepts An organisation is a group of people who jointly work to achieve at least one common goal.
Organising is the process by which the chief executive, by combining the efforts of the people under his or her supervision, achieves success.
While the success of a company or an organisation may be attributed to many factors, the skill with which the chief executive determines and implements its organisational plan is one of the factors to achieve the end result.
112  MPA 751 MODULE 2 3.1.1 Departmentalisation Due to today’s large and complex organisational structures, which are characterised by a high degree of division of labour and task specialisation, the operating and managerial work of the organisation must be broken up or differentiated to determine which department and persons are responsible for a certain specialised activity.
Departmentalisation can be in terms of hierarchy or horizontal differentiation to managerial tasks.
Departmentalisation deals with the horizontal dimension of organisational structure and is the process of rationally grouping the work necessary to achieve the goals of the organisation or a basis that permits cooperation and coordination.
This process takes place at all levels in an organisation and in most cases the activities are grouped on the basis of functions, process, geographical area, products and customers.
By function Departmentalisation by function occurs when the activities of the organisation are grouped into the primary tasks to be performed such as production, marketing and finance.
This grouping also includes any aspect of operation or management that requires technical knowledge or skill such as legal works, computer engineering or customer relations.
By process This type of departmentalisation refers to a functional specialised type of operation, e.g.
in a carpentry workshop, we may have the manufacturing, welding, polishing, painting and the assembly departments.
By geographical area Here, all the organisational activities performed in a particular region or location are brought together and integrated into a single unit.
Geographical divisions are common especially in the breweries and bottling companies.
By products Activities directly associated with a product or service are grouped together, e.g., food, drinks, snacks and perfumes.
113  MPA 751 INTRODUCTION TO PUBLIC ADMINISTRATION By customer Departmentalisation by customer is often found in sales operation as large customers with their purchasing department and technical requirements may have to be treated differently than smaller customers.
Likewise, a hardware company may group its activities into wholesale and retail division in order to serve the different types of customers who buy from the company.
SELF-ASSESSMENT EXERCISE Define departmentalisation.
3.2 Establishing Authority Relationship An organogram or organisation chart of a company shows how the work load is divided and assigned to specific individuals or departments.
An equally important step that rarely appears on organisation chart describes authority responsibility relationships between the persons doing these jobs.
Chief Executive must have an understanding of who is supposed to do what before a managerial team is effectively organised.
These relationships are usually established on the basis of: • line authority • staff authority • functional authority The organisation manual or management guide defines each position as listed below.
Line authority relationship Managers functioning in a line authority relationship or other persons or department are involved with the direct supervision of subordinates in the chain of command.
The chain of command indicates the formal authority relationships that run in a direct line from the top to the bottom of the organisation.
This is a vertical relationship.
Line managers are in the chain of command because they are responsible for an activity that directly contributes to the earnings of the company.
They are usually concerned with the accomplishment of quantitative objectives, cost control and the on-going decision that allows them to accomplish the tasks for which they are responsible.
114  MPA 751 MODULE 2 Staff authority relationship Staff authority relationship is based on expertise in specialised activities and includes the authority to advise, plan, gather information and provide guidance to line managers in the organisation.
Functional authority relationships Individuals who have functional authority have the right to issue policies and procedures for their functions or area of expertise throughout the organisation and to expect compliance.
Staff prepares recommendations for the line manager, persons with functional authority issue directives in their names instead of submitting them through the line manager.
A production manager may have the authority to specify maintenance schedules for machines in any part of the company.
A personnel manager may have the right to establish policies and procedures used throughout a company in the hiring of employees.
3.3 Division of Managerial Work This specialisation of managerial work is accomplished through two organisational concepts: • the span and level of management, and • the decentralisation of managerial authority.
Span and levels of management The horizontal and vertical differentiation of activities in an organisation are costly in terms of managerial and staff personnel and also in terms of communication and co-ordination.
They remain crucial factors in organising because of the span of management or span of executive control - the number of subordinates a manager can effectively supervise.
The smaller the span the more levels that are needed and, of course, the more executives needed to manage the various levels.
Decentralisation of managerial authority A broader span of management occurs when there is a managerial decentralisation of authority.
Decentralisation is the delegation of authority for making managerial decisions to subordinates at lower levels in the organisation.
The degree of decentralisation in an organisation is not measured by the quality of the decision but rather by 115  MPA 751 INTRODUCTION TO PUBLIC ADMINISTRATION the importance and the scope of the decision and their impact on the entire organisation.
SELF-ASSESSMENT EXERCISE In the organising process, division of managerial work is accomplished through two organisational concepts.
What are they?
4.0 CONCLUSION In this unit, you have learnt the organising process as a concept in an organisation.
5.0 SUMMARY Organisation process in any organisation is mainly about the process in which the executive officer strives to achieve its objectives by the combination of the people under his supervision.
An organisation can be termed successful when there is a proper combination of capital and personnel resources in that organisation.
6.0 TUTOR-MARKED ASSIGNMENT i.
(a) Define the term departmentalisation.
(b) How is departmentalisation carried out in an organisation?
ii.
How can you establish authority relationships in an organisation?
7.0 REFERENCES/FURTHER READING Silverman, D. (1970).
The Theory of Organisation.
Heinemann.
Webber, M. (1964).
The Theory of Social and Economic Organisation.
Colher: Macmillan.
Obisi, C. (1996).
Personnel Management.
Ibadan:Jackbod Enterprises.
116  MPA 751 MODULE 4 MODULE 4 Unit 1 Communication in an Organisation Unit 2 Personnel Management and Public Administration Unit 3 Comparative Public Administration Unit 4 Local Government Administration UNIT 1 COMMUNICATION IN AN ORGANISATION CONTENTS 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objectives 3.0 Main Content 3.1 Meaning and Definition of the Concept of Communication 3.1.1 Importance of Communication 3.1.2 Fundamentals of Communication 3.1.3 Process of Communication 3.2 Organisational Communication 3.2.1 Downward Communication 3.2.2 Upward Communication 3.2.3 Horizontal/Diagonal Communication 3.2.4 Informal Communication/Grapevine 3.3 Barriers to Communication 3.3.1 External Barriers 3.3.2 Emotional or Psychological barrier 3.3.3 Organisational Barriers 3.3.4 Personal Barriers 3.4 How to Make Communication Effective 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutor-Marked Assignment 7.0 References/Further Reading 1.0 INTRODUCTION In this unit, you will be introduced to the issue of information dissemination in an organisation which is also referred to as communication.
No organisation can function without communication.
You are going to define and state the importance of communication as a management function, and also explain the fundamentals of communication.
Before the end of the unit, you shall be able to list the 117  MPA 751 INTRODUCTION TO PUBLIC ADMINISTRATION barriers to effective communication and explain the process of communication.
2.0 OBJECTIVES At the end of this unit, you should be able to: • define communication and state the importance of communication as a management function • explain the fundamentals of communication • explain the process of communication • list the barriers to effective communication.
3.0 MAIN CONTENT 3.1 Meaning and Definition of the Concept of Communication Communication is a process by which all forms of information are transferred from one person to the other.
So, for communication to take place, there must be some information to be conveyed and there must be two persons at least – one to deliver the message and the other to receive it.
Communication is said to be perfect only when the receiver understands it in the sense the sender expected him to understand it.
According to Dale, S. Beach, communication is defined as “the transfer of information from one person to another.” Communication is further defined as “a process of meaningful interaction among human beings.” It is also a process involving the transmission and accurate replication of ideas reinforced by feedback, purporting to stimulate a section to accomplish organisational goals.
3.1.1 The Importance of Communication In the sphere of public administration, the importance and functions of communication cannot be over-emphasised.
First, all the functions of management such as planning, organising, leading and controlling involve communication without which they cannot be performed at all.
Second, public administration devotes a major part of its time to the activity of communication.
118  MPA 751 MODULE 4 Third, interpersonal relations and group relations are maintained and developed only through the system of communication.
Communication is essential to integrate and coordinate the activities of the people in the organisation.
In the absence of communication, no individual worker can appreciate the overall objectives of an organisation and there is a possibility that people in the same organisation will work towards different goals instead of a common goal.
3.1.2 Fundamentals of Communication The effectiveness of management largely depends on communication styles and abilities.
Therefore, the fundamentals of communication cannot be overlooked.
Words do not have meaning on themselves.
A word may represent a certain thing, an action or a feeling, the meaning of words actually depends on the way they are interpreted.
Words mean different things to different people.
Also, different people may interpret the same word in different ways when their background, education and the culture are different.
Perceptions of people may differ from the reality.
If two people experience the same phenomenon, it cannot be taken for granted that they have felt or perceived it in the same way, because a person’s perception does not depend only on the physical and social environment, but also depends on his background, attitudes, prior knowledge and experiences accumulated since birth.
An optimist may say that the cup is half-full while a pessimist says that the cup is half-empty.
Sometimes, the emotional state of a person also affects understanding.
Facts must be distinguished from opinions.
Lastly, communication is deemed complete when the receiver has understood it in the same sense the sender has conveyed it.
It is up to the sender to find out whether the receiver has understood the true meaning of the message.
So, constant feedback becomes an essential component of the communication process.
3.1.3 Process of Communication For the communication process to be complete, it must have three elements.
These are: the Sender-Message-Receiver.
Communication is a complex process that involves the following components.
Source Encoding Transmission of Message Medium Reception Decoding Action.
119  MPA 751 INTRODUCTION TO PUBLIC ADMINISTRATION Sender - This is the person who has a message to communicate.
He/she is the source where the idea originates.
He/she is the one who invites or begins the process of communication.
Encoding - This involves the translation of information into a series of symbols or gestures which will carry the same meaning to the receiver Message - When the information is encoded into a physical firm, it is called a message.
The form of the message should be such that it can be experienced and understood by one or more of the senses of the receiver.
Channel - A channel is a vehicle by which the message travels to the receiver.
For spoken words, air is a channel and for written message, paper is a channel.
Efficient communication also involves the selection of appropriate channel depending on the kind of message to be conveyed.
Decoding- When the channel brings the message to the receiver, he interprets the message and translates it into information that is meaningful to him.
Receiver - Receiver is a person who has to perceive the meaning of the message in its proper sense.
If the receiver does not receive the message then there is no communication.
Feedback - Feedback helps the sender to know what and how the receiver understood the message.
This is important for effective communication.
Better feedback always results in better communication.
Without feedback, the communication process is not said to be complete.
3.2 Organisational Communication What is relevant about interpersonal communication is also true of organisational communication.
However, there are certain factors that are unique to the organisation which influence the effectiveness of communication.
According to Raymond V. Lesikar, there are four factors that influence the effectiveness of organisational communication.
1.
The formal channels of communication 2.
The organsiation’s authority structure 3.
Job specialisation 4.
Information ownership.
120  MPA 751 MODULE 4 The communication effectiveness is influenced by formal channels in two ways.
First, the formal channels cover the widening distance that usually occurs when the organisation develops and grows.
Second, the formal channels inhibit the free flow of information between organisational levels, particularly in upward communication.
The authority structure in the organisation also influences the effectiveness of communication.
The content and accuracy of information are also affected because of the differences in authority and status.
Job specialisation also affects the effectiveness of communication.
Members belonging to the same work group use the same jargon and understand one another better, while communication between the highly differentiated groups is likely to be a problem for both.
Information ownership refers to the unique knowledge and information about the jobs possessed by the individuals.
For many individuals, such information is a sort of power that helps them to function more effectively than others.
Most persons with such skills are often reluctant to share the information with others.
Hence, open communication is not always possible in the organisation.
Organisational communication takes place in a variety of ways.
It may flow vertically or horizontally.
The vertical communication can be either downward or upward.
3.2.1 Downward Communication Downward communication starts at the top management level and goes down through all management levels to workers.
This is mainly used to advise, inform, direct, instruct and evaluate subordinates.
This is also to inform the members about organisational goals and policies.
3.2.2 Upward Communication What is happening at the lower levels is made known to the upper levels through the upward communication.
This is usually in the form of progress reports, suggestions, explanations and requests.
This information is particularly useful for the top management to make their policies consistent with the attitudes of the people below.
121  MPA 751 INTRODUCTION TO PUBLIC ADMINISTRATION 3.2.3 Horizontal or Diagonal Communication Communication is said to be horizontal when it takes place between two employers working at the same level in the organisational hierarchy.
An example is the communication between the accountant and the personnel manager.
Horizontal communication is essential because of the fact that the departments in an organisation are interdependent and the coordination of their activities is necessary.
3.2.4 Informal Communication or Grapevine The communication that arises not out of formal relations between people, but out of informal or social relationships is called the grapevine or informal communication.
The management has no absolute control over this type of communication as they are not created or destroyed by it.
This kind of communication does both good and bad to the organisation.
The informal channel satisfies the communication needs of the various persons.
Most of the time, the information passed on this channel is false or at least inaccurate as each person may add to or subtract from the message as desired by the perpetrators.
It should be remembered that it is a part of the manager’s job to have a little control over this informal communication so that he can take appropriate action to minimise the adverse effects of this channel.
SELF-ASSESSMENT EXERCISE Name the four factors that influence the effectiveness of organisational communication.
3.3 Barriers to Communication A barrier can be defined as a blockade or distortion.
There are certain factors that impede the proper flow of communication.
All those factors that adversely affect effectiveness of communication may be called barriers to communication and are classified into six distinct forms.
3.3.1 External Barriers External barriers are usually in the following forms.
122  MPA 751 MODULE 4 Semantic barriers These barriers arise at the stage of encoding or decoding in the process of communication.
These barriers are often due to linguistic capacity of the sender and the receiver.
Badly expressed message Here, if the message is not expressed clearly and precisely and when the right word is not used at the right place, it may not convey the proper meaning that the person has in mind.
Faulty translation Managers are often required to translate the message into a form suitable to their superiors or subordinates.
Unless one has good linguistic capacity, one cannot do the job well.
Specialised language Technical personnel and other experts usually fall into the habit of using their own technical terms, which others outside their group fail to understand.
Examples are medical doctors and pharmacists.
This hinders communication to a large extent.
3.3.2 Emotional or Psychological Barriers The emotional or psychological state of a person also influences the communication.
The following examples abound.
• Premature evaluation • People often jump into conclusion even before the message is completely communicated.
This discourages the sender.
• Existence of pre-conceived notion • Inattention due to lack of interest.
• Distrust in the communicator - Here, if the receiver does not trust that sender for any reason, he does not pay the required attention to the message and he does not believe in the message received.
• Fear - Fear of misinterpretation of message by the receiver i.
Fear of distortion.
Sometimes the message of the sender is filtered when it gets to the receiver.
This is also known as loss by transmission ii.
Fear of exposing self to criticism iii.
Information is held back deliberately by the sender with the feeling that some action will be taken against him if he 123  MPA 751 INTRODUCTION TO PUBLIC ADMINISTRATION expresses his opinion frankly.
This is known as fear of reprisal.
• Poor retention by the receiver due to certain disabilities • Defensive behaviour - Employees have a tendency to become defensive when they feel they are being threatened.
In such circumstances, they tend to stop listening to the sender’s message.
3.3.3 Organisational Barriers Organsiational policies, rules and regulations, status relationships also affect the effectiveness of communication.
Here, the subordinates are afraid of their superiors.
3.3.4 Personal Barriers There are two types of personal barriers, namely: (1) barriers in superiors (2) barriers in subordinates.
Under the barriers in superiors are the following.
(a) Attitude of superiors - here, if the superior has an unfavourable attitude to the subordinates’ act of giving message, adequate information cannot flow from the subordinates to the superior.
(b) Lack of confidence in subordinates-the information from the subordinates does not interest the superior when he lacks confidence in him or her.
(c) Lack of awareness of importance of communication - the manager may not understand the communication with the subordinates if he does not know its importance.
(d) Insistence on proper channel-superiors always insist that subordinates are often reluctant to provide information through proper channels and this definitely discourages him to furnish the factional information.
(e) Barriers in subordinates • Unwillingness to communicate- subordinates are often reluctant to provide information for the fear of its adverse effect on the attitudes of the superiors.
Even when the information is provided, there is a tendency for certain modification.
• Lack of proper incentive- when the information provided by the subordinates is not accepted and/or ignored, they may be unwilling to provide more.
124  MPA 751 MODULE 4 SELF-ASSESSMENT EXERCISE List some barriers to communication.
3.4 How to Make Communication Effective For communication to be effective, four elements must be in existence.
They are as follows.
The content - it calls for clear thinking about the objective of the information, which must be definite, frank, sensible, accurate clear, convincing, planned, appropriate and effective The system - must be clearly defined and recognised The technique - must involve the selection of the most appropriate; technique, it may be oral, written, graphic or psychological The media or mode of transmission- may be personal contact, meetings, conferences, telephone, talks, letters, reports, minutes, notices, etc.
A proper regard for content, system, technique and medium will help to communicate effectively.
The basic elements of good communication should include honesty, sincerity, clear thought and simplicity.
4.0 CONCLUSION In this unit, you have learnt the importance of communication in an organisation.
Communication is conceived with the creation, transmission and the use of information.
It may be oral or written.
Most of the functions of the organisation are performed through communication.
5.0 SUMMARY You have learnt that, it is through communication that management keeps its employees informed of policies and plans that may affect them and what action the management expects from them in order to fulfill the organisational objectives.
In this case, communication is used as a means of monitoring and controlling performance.
It is presumed in communication concept that management can adopt an effective communication system to foster the loyalty of its workers.
125  MPA 751 INTRODUCTION TO PUBLIC ADMINISTRATION 6.0 TUTOR-MARKED ASSIGNMENT i.
Critically examine the process of communication.
ii.
What do you consider as barriers to communication?
List and explain them.
7.0 REFERENCES/FURTHER READING Rao, P. S. & Rao, V. S. P. (1997).
Personnel/Human Resource Management: Text, Cases, Games.
New Delhi: Ronask Publishers PVT Ltd. Adebayo, A.
(1981).
Principles and Practice of Public Administration in Nigeria.
Spectrum Books.
Banjoko, S. (1996).
Human Resources Management: Expository Appraisal.
Lagos: Sabau Publishers.
126  MPA 751 MODULE 4 UNIT 2 PERSONNEL MANAGEMENT AND PUBLIC ADMINISTRATION CONTENTS 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objectives 3.0 Main Content 3.1 Aims and Objectives of Personnel Management 3.1.1 Major Personnel Management Functions: Public Sector Experience 3.1.2 Features of Personnel Management Functions in the Public Sector 3.1.3 Recruitment, Selection and Placement 3.1.4 Wages and Salaries Administration 3.1.5 Training and Manpower Development 3.1.6 Discipline, Promotion and Transfer 3.1.7 Staff Performance Appraisal 3.1.8 Human Resources Management Manpower Planning 3.1.9 Employee Motivation 3.1.10 Industrial and Labour Relations 3.1.11 Communication 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutor-Marked Assignment 7.0 References/Further Reading 1.0 INTRODUCTION In this unit, you will be introduced to personnel management which is the field of administration that is responsible for the planning, organising and controlling various operative functions of procuring, developing, maintaining and utilising the human capital in a work place.
2.0 OBJECTIVES At the end of this unit, you should be able to: • define personnel management • list and explain the features and functions of personnel management in the public sector.
127  MPA 751 INTRODUCTION TO PUBLIC ADMINISTRATION 3.0 MAIN CONTENT 3.1 Aims and Objectives of Personnel Management Personnel management is concerned with the procurement, development, compensation, integration and maintenance of the human capital in any organisation.
The aims and objectives of personnel management irrespective of whether in the public or private sector, are as follows: • to achieve an effective utilisation of human resources on the achievement of organisational goals • to help the organisation to secure the right type of men and women to employ • to maintain a high morale and better human relations inside an organisation by sustaining and improving the conditions which have been established so that employees may stay in their jobs in a longer period • to recognise and satisfy individual needs and group goals by offering an adequate and equitable remuneration and economic and social security in the form of monetary compensation.
3.1.1 Major Personnel Management Functions: Public Sector Experience Functions performed by personnel management could be divided into two major sectors as follows.
The management functions are as listed below.
• Management functions • Operation functions • Planning • Controlling • Coordinating • Organising • recruitment, selection and placement • manpower planning • compensation, wages and salaries administration 128  MPA 751 MODULE 4 The operation functions include: • training and development • employee motivation • labour and industrial relations • staff performance appraisal • discipline, promotion, transfer and • communication Public Sector Experience The management of personnel functions in the public sector can hardly be differentiated from the political process.
The government holds political sovereignty in trust for the people.
Consequently, certain actions, which may have far reaching implications for the conduct of public personnel functions, may not be issues of negotiations between the government and the workers.
In addition, the public sector is characterised by lengthening chains of command, which tend to de-personalise the employment relationship on the part of the workers.
However, in view of the unique role of government as a pace-setter, the administration of public sector personnel functions does not only call for policies which are consistent with economic reality and political stability, but also the maintenance of industrial peace and democracy.
3.1.2 Features of Personnel Management Functions in the Public Sector It is generally observed that the organisation of public personnel functions is disjointed, fragmented and highly uncoordinated especially in developing economies.
In Nigeria, there are various organs which are responsible for personnel management functions in the public sector and these are: • the ministry of establishment • the public service commission; and • the head of the civil service.
According to the report of the Public Service Review Commission of 1974, there is lack of clear definition of authority and responsibility for the overall management of the civil service, unlike the private sector where the personnel functions are handled by the parent organisation.
However, the public sector personnel functions are shared among the 129  MPA 751 INTRODUCTION TO PUBLIC ADMINISTRATION office of the Head of Service, the Federal Ministry of Establishment and the Federal Public Service Commission.
Even then, it is sometimes difficult to determine who has the ultimate responsibility and authority for some personnel functions.
The office of the Head of Service is responsible for ensuring the efficiency of the machinery of government, it has the ultimate control and responsibility for the management or personnel functions.
3.1.3 Recruitment, Selection and Placement Recruitment is simply the process of attracting and stimulating job applicants in order to locate a pool from which selection will be made.
Selection, on the other hand, takes place after the recruitment had been done and it involves choosing the best which meets the job requirements from among the pool of recruits who have applied for the job.
Placement is the process of ensuring that the employees are given responsibilities for which they are best suited considering their qualifications, experiences, skills as well as knowledge.
Since the objective of the recruitment, selection and its processes is to appoint the best for the job available, employment process comes in the following manner: • completed job application • initial screening interview • testing • background information • in-depth selection interview • physical/medical examination • job offer • placement.
Unlike the private sector which bases its employment decision strictly on merit, entry into the Nigerian Civil Service to a large extent is based on political or tribal considerations.
Political connection is more of a qualification than merit or capability.
The reason for this is not far- fetched, the main objective of the public sector is to give as many as possible employments as against the profit motive objective of the private sector.
The use of the quota system in appointments to Federal Institutions of higher learning has become the order of the day.
The use of the quota system is predicated on the belief that, the distribution of government 130  MPA 751 MODULE 4 jobs should be proportional to or representative of the population at large.
Appointments here reflect the federal character.
Whenever the quota system is used, individual’s ability and potentials are relegated to the background.
Mediocrity and incompetency are encouraged unlike the private sector where this is not allowed.
3.1.4 Wages and Salary Administration Wages are earnings for the performance of services in a given period of time which may be daily or weekly, while salaries can be for a prolonged period of time usually monthly.
The major factors which influence how workers will be compensated in the public sector is based mainly on the salaries and wages commission, although lately the unions like ASSU and NASU have taken over the responsibility.
General pay levels and policies in the public sector are determined by a number of factors.
Notable among them are the buoyancy of the national economy, the productivity of workers, the supply of labour and social and ethical values.
The nation’s wealth reflects its ability to pay.
Government’s ability to pay is a function of the size of its revenue which is chiefly obtained from oil, customs duties and taxes.
Another distinguished feature of wages and salary administration is the pay uniformity.
3.1.5 Training and Manpower Development Training and development are very important in a work place.
Training and development programmes foster the initiative and creativity of employees and help to prevent manpower obsolesce, which may be due to age, temperament or motivation or the inability of a person to adapt self to technological changes.
Training is a process or procedure through which the skill, talent and knowledge of an employee are enhanced and increased.
Development on the other hand, is the programmes designed for higher level personnel.
Training is specific, short and designed for the technical staff and lower level personnel, while development is general, long and conceptual skills which are learnt.
131  MPA 751 INTRODUCTION TO PUBLIC ADMINISTRATION The objectives of training and development include the following.
• High performance of the employees.
• To impact knowledge, skills and capabilities to new and old employees.
• To broaden and equip employees to carry out future roles.
• To bring about team spirit and high morale in the organisation.
• To help in adapting to changing work environment and technology.
In the Nigerian public sector, any noticeable appreciation of the importance of training is only recent.
Even the training is generally not highly developed functions in most public personnel programme.
In the Federal civil service, there is no central body or agency charged with coordinating training efforts.
Each department identifies its training needs, selects candidates and organises a training programme where possible.
When employees are sent on training, no one really knows what is gained owing to the absence of any systematic evaluation of the training and development programmes.
3.1.6 Discipline, Promotion and Transfer Discipline can be defined as sanctions meted out to erring workers.
It can come in form of queries, warnings and in severe cases outright dismissals.
Admittedly, public personnel managers have excessive constraints on their power to dismiss or discipline even the most grossly inefficient employee.
The notion that government jobs are “second jobs” has created a lot of laxity and indiscipline in most public sector employees.
Hence, laziness, lateness to work, violation of rules and other indiscipline permeate the civil service.
Promotion, on the other hand, is a form of level upgrade in the service as a motivational tool.
It encourages employees to perform their duties well.
It has been discovered until recently, that promotion in the public sector is not based on merit, but rather on seniority, quota system, federal character, ethnicity and political lineage.
The same goes with transfer which has to do with the relocation of a staff from one place to another.
Transfer can be intra and inter.
Inter has to do with movement between two locations within the service, while intra transfer is within the same office.
132  MPA 751 MODULE 4 3.1.7 Staff Performance Appraisal This is a systematic evaluation of the employee’s work performance and potentials with the organisation.
Factors that normally come under evaluation include: • job knowledge • amount of work performed • quality of work performed • time of completion • general company information • appearance.
Performance appraisal is the systematic description of an employee’s job- relevant strengths and weaknesses.
The basic purpose is to find out how well the employee is performing the job and establish a plan of improvement.
They are arranged periodically according to a definite plan.
Appraisals are continuous process.
3.1.8 Human Resources/Manpower Planning This involves all the activities that will lead to the acquisition of the right number and quality of staff that are to do certain jobs in the organisation.
The public sector in Nigeria hardly embarks on comprehensive human resource planning, thereby heading to over-staffing.
Here, many workers are redundant and this gives room to the existence of “ghost workers.” This usually constitutes inflated and huge labour cost to the government.
SELF-ASSESSMENT EXERCISE Explain the term “recruitment.” 3.1.9 Employee Motivation The specific wants of an employee may include pay, security of job, recognition, advancement, etc.
Motivation is the force behind a person’s behaviour.
Motivation is derived from the work motive.
A motive is an inner state that energises, activates and moves, directs or channels behaviour towards goals.
Motivation represents an unsatisfied need which creates a state of tension or disequilibrium causing the 133  MPA 751 INTRODUCTION TO PUBLIC ADMINISTRATION individual to move in a goal directed pattern towards a state of equilibrium by satisfying the need.
According to the Encyclopedia of Management, “motivation refers to the degree of readiness of an organisation to pursue designated goal and implies the determination of the nature and focus of the forces including the degree of readiness.
People can be motivated in the following two ways.
Positive motivation - People are motivated positively when they are shown a reward which may be financial or non-financial.
Negative motivation – By instilling fear in the minds of people, one can get desired work done.
In this method a fear of consequences of doing something or not doing it, motivates the worker in the desired direction.
This method of motivation has several limitations.
Fear creates frustration, a hostile state of mind and an unfavourable attitude towards the job, which hinder efficiency and productivity.
3.1.10 Industrial and Labour Relations The need for industrial relations arises from the fact that, attainment of organisational goals is largely influenced by the type of relationship that exists between employers, employees and the management.
Industrial relations means, the system, rules and procedures used by employees, unions, employers association and government agents to determine: • how to share economic returns • how to protect the interest of staff involved • terms and conditions of employment.
The practice of industrial relations is turbulent in the public sector because of the strong central labour organisation which exists to fight against low-wage income of the public servants.
The dominant central labour organisation in Nigeria is, the “Nigerian Labour Congress”.
SELF-ASSESSMENT EXERCISE Name two types of motivation.
134  MPA 751 MODULE 4 3.1.11 Communication Here, communication is defined as the transmission and reception of ideas, feelings and attitudes both verbally and non-verbally to elicit responses.
It is a dynamic concept underlying all kinds of living systems.
In the public sector, because the majority of the Federal civil servants are scattered all over the country, government gazette, radio, television, newspapers and magazines are relied upon by the civil servants in all tiers of government for receiving information.
This is usually slow and at times gives room for rumour and apprehension.
The line of communication is longer in the public sector and is characterised by red- tapism and bureaucracy.
4.0 CONCLUSION The unit explained to you in details, the personnel functions in the public sector.
The management of personnel functions is not distinguished from the political process.
5.0 SUMMARY The unit listed the salient functions of personnel management in the public sector, which included recruitment, selection, placement, training and development, etc.
6.0 TUTOR-MARKED ASSIGNMENT i. Isolate and discuss the environment of the practice of personnel management in the public sector of Nigeria.
ii.
Distinguish between managerial functions and the operation functions of personnel management in the public sector.
7.0 REFERENCES/FURTHER READING Silverman, D. (1970).
The Theory of Organisation.
Heinemann Publishers.
Lawal, A.
A.
(1993).
Management in Focus.
Abdul Industrial Enterprises.
Klatt, L. A.
& Schuster, F. E. (1978).
Human Resources Management.
Homeroun, Illinois 135  MPA 751 INTRODUCTION TO PUBLIC ADMINISTRATION UNIT 3 COMPARATIVE PUBLIC ADMINISTRATION AND INTERNATIONAL CIVIL SERVICE CONTENTS 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objectives 3.0 Main Content 3.1 Meaning and Scope of Comparative Public Administration 3.1.1 The Structure of Public Administrative System 3.1.2 The Nature of Public Administrative System 3.2 Comparative Role of Civil Service in the Modern World (International Civil Service) 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutor-Marked Assignment 7.0 References/Further Reading 1.0 INTRODUCTION This unit focuses mainly on the comparative studies of several systems of public administration.
Public administration is a social science which relies on scientific approach to its findings.
There is a need also for comparative studies to find a suitable system for modern democracies.
2.0 OBJECTIVES At the end of this unit, you should be able to: • define comparative administration • state their nature and features • explain the structure of comparative studies • analyse the structure of the international civil service.
3.0 MAIN CONTENT 3.1 The Meaning and Scope of Comparative Public Administration The primary goal of the discipline is in line with the scientific demand which is to build and test propositions about administration and assumption that is universally shared within the public administration fraternity.
It is committed to verifiable generalised statements about 136  MPA 751 MODULE 4 public administration across political systems and different environments.
Essentially, therefore, comparative public administration’s major interest is in building theories from the study of public administrative practice in different political setting so as to generate a universal theory of public administration that can be applied to varied cultures and political environments.
3.1.1 The Structure of Public Administrative System Public Administration in modern concept is a political system in action.
Political system is a modern term used to replace government, society, state and the nation.
A political system is a set of interactions abstracted from the totality of social behaviours through which authoritative values are allocated to the society.
The classifications are as listed below.
Despotism – here, only one man known as a despot controls the administration Democracy – here, the will of the people dictates the direction of the administration Limited monarchy – here, the head of state is a king who is generally a hereditary one but the real authority is not enjoyed by the king but by the people.
He acts on the advice of his ministers Republic – here the head of state is elected by the people either directly or indirectly.
His tenure of office is fixed but he can be removed before the expiration of the tenure Unitary – in a unitary state, the central government is the fountain head of all the process and states are completely subordinated to the centre Federal – here, state process are distributed between the states and local governments by the constitution.
Both the centre and the states are independent and autonomous in their own sphere Parliamentary – parliamentary system represents dual leadership in administration.
On the other hand, the Head of State is two-in-one – normal and real executive.
The real executive is the prime minister and the cabinet and the normal chief executive is either the king or the president.
This is based on the principles of collective responsibility 137  MPA 751 INTRODUCTION TO PUBLIC ADMINISTRATION Presidential – here the leader is the head of state and is regarded as the real executive which is called the president.
It is not an easy task to make a comparative study of various structures in public administration due to variations in different political systems.
However, the nature, the scope and the structure of public administration depend largely on the cultural and ideological background of different people in different geographical locations.
3.1.2 The Nature of Public Administration Systems The nature of public administration is divided into two, these are: broad and narrow.
The narrow concept looks at public administration from the: • narrow angles of public sector only • executive side of government • function of the chief executive.
The broad nature looks at public administration from a wider angle, via: • public, private and the joint sectors of the economy • the organs of government – judiciary, executive and legislature • the environmental conditions – treats comparative administration within the fields of traditional, transitional and modern administration.
It further handles administration from internal and external management environment • the study aspect – handles public administration as a subject or programme of study.
SELF -ASSESSMENT EXERCISE Define comparative public administration.
3.2 Comparative Role of Civil Service: International Civil Service International Civil Service is organised on the same principles on which national civil services are organised.
The merits are political neutrality, impartiality, independence and loyalty.
International civil servants are persons who, on the basis of an international treaty, constitution and a particular international 138  MPA 751 MODULE 4 community, are appointed by the international or by an organ of it and are under its control to exercise, in a continuous way, functions on the interest of this particular international community and who are subject to a particular personnel status.
On comparative analysis, the role of civil service and modern international affairs were seen from various contributory bases.
In service to humanity, the civil servants within the civil service structure made efficient and effective use of these principles and practices in providing the much needed services to humanity.
SELF- ASSESSMENT EXERCISE Name 5 structures in comparative public administration.
4.0 CONCLUSION In this unit, you have thoroughly analysed the issues of comparative public administration.
5.0 SUMMARY The unit was able to define comparative public administration.
The nature, structure and the bases for comparison were also explained 6.0 TUTOR-MARKED ASSIGNMENT i.
Make a commentary on the broad nature of public administration.
ii.
Structuralise the concept “comparative public administration.” 7.0 REFERENCES/FURTHER READING Allan, D. (1995).
“Good Government and Sustainable Anti-corruption Agencies.” A Journal of Public Administration and Development, 15.
Stillman, R. J.
(1980).
Public Administration Concepts and Cases.
(2nd ed.)
Houghton Muflin Company.
Kwaku, A.
(nd) Principles of Modern Government.
University of Ghana’s Institute, Adult Education.
139  MPA 751 INTRODUCTION TO PUBLIC ADMINISTRATION UNIT 4 LOCAL GOVERNMENT ADMINISTRATION CONTENTS 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objectives 3.0 Main Content 3.1 Definition and Concept of Local Government Administration 3.1.1 Reasons for the Creation of Local Government 3.1.2 Principles Underlying the Creation of Local Government Institution 3.1.3 Legal Framework of Local Government 3.1.4 Functions of Local Government 3.2 Local Government Finance 3.3 Central Government Controls of Local Governments 3.3.1 Legislative Control 3.3.2 Judicial Control 3.3.3 Administrative Control 3.3.4 Financial Control 3.4 Problems Facing Local Governments in Nigeria and the Region in General 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutor-Marked Assignment 7.0 References/Further Reading 1.0 INTRODUCTION This unit introduces you to some basic concepts that describe local governments on the basis of how much power local governments enjoy vis-à-vis the central government.
2.0 OBJECTIVES At the end of this unit, you should be able to: • explain the concept of local government • state and explain the legal framework and control in local government administration • mention reasons for the creation of local government • describe the principles behind the creation of local government institutions.
140  MPA 751 MODULE 4 3.0 MAIN CONTENT 3.1 Definition and Concept Classification in Local Government Administration Local Government is the closest tier of government to the people.
In a unitary system, power is shared between the central government and the local government.
In a Federal system, power is shared between Federal, State and Local Governments.
Local governments are grass root governments recognised by law.
It is further defined as a sub-unit of government controlled by a local council which is authorised by the central government to pass ordinances having a local application, levy taxes, or exact labour and within limit specified by the central government which by implication the constitution, vary centrally decided policies in local applications.
3.1.1 Reasons for the Creation of Local Government The reasons for the creation of local governments include the followings.
• The consideration and the making of recommendations to a state commission on economic planning or any similar body on the economic development of the state, particularly in so far as the area of authority of the council and of the state are affected and proposals made by the said commission or body • Collection of rates, radio and television licenses • Establishment and maintenance of cemeteries, etc.
• Licensing of bicycles, trucks, etc.
• Registration of births and deaths • Provision and maintenance of health services • Naming and numbering of streets.
3.1.2 Principles Underlying the Creation of Local Government Administration In establishing local units and in assigning powers to them, a state should observe the following norms.
• Firstly, it should attempt to set units that have homogenous populations whose affairs need common local management 141  MPA 751 INTRODUCTION TO PUBLIC ADMINISTRATION • Secondly, it should retain the two to rearrange the units when local conditions change • The state should guard against designating an excessive number of units as this would result in overlapping powers, duplication of functions and consequent wastage of public funds • It should centre the responsibility clearly within each unit, so that separately appointed officers will not abscond or relegate their duties • The central government should reserve the executive power to appoint and certainly to remove officers entrusted with the administration of state laws • It should properly supervise the exercise of power within the local government by working towards the prevention of dishonesty and inefficiency.
3.1.3 The Legal Framework of Local Government Local authorities are “corporations with perpetual succession.” This can be interpreted as follows.
1.
They have a legal existence like an ordinary individual.
They can sue and be sued in the courts of law as if they are individuals.
2.
Unlike individuals, they never die.
They are continually in existence, though all the counselors may change owing to death or defeat in the council polls.
3.
Local councils can only act within the framework of the law.
4.
The law which binds local authorities may be either mandatory or permissive.
A mandatory law is one which orders a local authority to do something and a permissive law permits if it wishes.
5.
Local authorities may pass bye-laws which have the full force of laws with the authority areas to enable them to carry out their responsibilities.
3.1.4 Functions of Local Government The functions of local governments are usually spelt out by the central government and the local units are expected to operate within the framework of the statutes establishing it.
That is to say that local government functions are contained in the constitution of the Federal Republic of Nigeria, which pronounces their existence.
The functions or services provided by local authorities include the provision of the following.
142  MPA 751 MODULE 4 (a) Health and environmental services such as public health, etc (b) Personal services, e.g.
church, school, hospital, market, etc (c) Protective services like fire fighting (d) Trading services, e.g.
bus transport (e) Economic ventures (f) Legal services – marriage services, etc.
It is pertinent to restate that the functions are of two main types: mandatory and permissive.
3.2 Local Government Finance Local authorities need money to be able to perform both mandatory and permissive functions.
Each year, draft estimate of what it proposes to spend during the financial year is prepared.
Local authorities derive their funds from two main sources - external and internal sources.
Internal Sources These are local revenues (revenues that are within the tax jurisdiction of local government) and are classified as local tax revenues, user charges and administrative revenues.
The dominant and the most promising of this three is tax revenue.
The principles of taxation are efficiency, equity and revenue productivity.
Tax administration must be much easier to manage at the city or urban level than the rural area.
Under taxes we have property tax and user charges.
External Sources The major external source available to local governments is generally classified as grants.
Here there are two types of grants – general revenue or unconditional grants, specific or conditional grants and loans.
SELF-ASSESSMENT EXERCISE List the general/administrative revenues of local government.
3.3 Central Government Controls of Local Governments There are three main central government organs – the legislative, the executive and the judiciary.
143  MPA 751 INTRODUCTION TO PUBLIC ADMINISTRATION 3.3.1 Legislative Control Local governments normally operate within the framework of the laws passed by the legislature because local authorities are the creations of the supreme legislative organ of the state.
The parliament can amend the law establishing such authorities at any time.
Besides it can also enact laws forbidding the local authority to take certain actions.
All bye-laws must be approved by the appropriate authorities before enactment.
3.3.2 Judicial Control Judicial control is exercised by the courts under the doctrine of ultra vires.
The court may declare void any act of local authorities which is contrary to the law in excess of the powers granted her by the legislature.
Citizens who consider themselves to be angered by any action of a local government can institute a legal action against the local authority.
3.3.3 Administrative Control The central government, through the minister for local government, has regulating powers over the appointments, conditions of service and dismissal of local government officers.
Central government has the power to suspend or dismiss local authorities and may, in certain circumstances, order a private or public inquiry into a local authority’s affairs.
A management committee may be set up to take over the functions of a council.
Ministers, commissioners or senior civil servants as in the old Western Nigeria, are appointed by central government to take responsibility for the local administration of major areas of the country.
These representatives of the central government are expected to take a close interest in the affairs of local authorities in their areas and often attend council and supervisory powers prescribed by statute.
3.3.4 Financial Control The bulk of local government revenue comes from grants from the central government.
The central government, after warning the local government, may decide to reduce the grant or to withhold it entirely if the services for which such grants have been allocated are either not being provided or provided unsatisfactorily.
If the grant is withheld, the council can hardly function.
144  MPA 751 MODULE 4 At the end of the financial year, annual accounts are prepared showing active revenue and expenditure and are subject to audit.
If the auditor detects any improper, unauthorised or charge upon the person on whom the surcharge is imposed, he/they must refund to local authority out of his own pocket the sum of money surcharged.
3.4 Problems Facing Local Governments in West Africa As important as local government administration is to the development of any nation, nevertheless it is confronted with many problems.
Financial Lack of adequate financial resources is the major handicap of local authorities in Nigeria.
A collection of several factors have compounded these problems, e.g.
some local governments have a weak revenue base; people do not pay taxes as amenities which they are taxed are never provided.
Excessive embezzlement is another factor confronting the local councils.
Furthermore, lack of proper method of revenue collection had in the past resulted in inadequate financial support.
The method of collection was inefficient.
Political Changes in government accompanied by changes in local government structures have not provided the required stability and performance that local government institutions need to fulfill their objectives.
Also, the presence of ineffective and incompetent political functionaries in the membership of the councils, coupled with the interference in the operations of the local governments, have not only discriminated against certain areas in terms of the provision of social amenities, but also by such actions encouraged the people to refuse to support the councils financially.
Another political constraint has been the lack of political or ideological framework with its consequent ill-denied functions of the agencies of local government.
There have been duplicate operational inefficiencies and waste of material and human resources because the federal government agencies at the local level used to exercise similar functions.
Administrative Although the Federal government’s control over local government authorities has been spelt out in details, yet there is lack of rigid 145  MPA 751 INTRODUCTION TO PUBLIC ADMINISTRATION enforcement of these federal government controls.
Consequently, the local authorities have, in certain areas, neglected the performance of the statutory functions with impunity.
The appointment of incompetent staff to manage the local government machineries is another major constraint.
The qualified personnel often migrate to the urban centres for well-paid jobs.
The effect of this is moral brain drain which gives opportunity to half-baked individuals who are also incompetent in their duties.
Secondly, border dispute amongst the local government authorities is another major problem confronting local councils.
This problem had caused serious problems which had led to killings and arson.
Examples are those of Osun and Bauchi States.
4.0 CONCLUSION In this unit, you have learnt several issues about local government in Nigeria, such as its definition, concepts and problems.
5.0 SUMMARY This unit, in a nutshell, defined local government, the reasons for its creation, the principles underlying its creation, financing, control system and problems confronting the system.
6.0 TUTOR-MARKED ASSIGNMENT i.
State and explain the four characteristics of local government that enjoy dissolution of powers.
ii.
Discuss the reasoning behind the concept of grassroots government.
iii.
Highlight and explain the problems confronting local government councils.
7.0 REFERENCES/FURTHER READING Akpan, P.C.
(1984).
Modern Local Government Administration in Nigeria.
Barber, M. P. (1975).
Local Government.
(3rd ed.)
Macdonald & Evans.
Adigwe, F. (1974).
Essentials of Government for West Africa.
Ibadan: University of Ibadan Press.
146
