 MPA 871: PUBLIC PERSONNEL MANAGEMENT COURSE GUIDE NATIONAL OPEN UNIVERSITY OF NIGERIA 2 TABLE OF CONTENTS Introduction Course aims Course objectives Course description Course materials Study units Set textbook Supplementary readings Assignment File Tutorials Preparing for tutorials Tutors Self- help study groups Course assessment Assignments Examination Overall pass mark Study skills Note- taking skills Assess your note-taking skills Developing your note-taking skills Organizing your notes Noting bibliographical information Case studies The purpose of case studies Analysis and synthesis Advantages of case studies A method of analyzing case studies Questions to ask yourself when analyzing case studies Some problems with the case study method Preparing assignments Preparation What the question means What the assignment requires you to do How many marks it is worth 3 When it is due How long it should be What your mark means Testing your understanding Begin writing Summary About the School of Business and Administration INTRODUCTION Welcome to MPA 871 Public Personnel Management.
This is a 2-credit course within the Master of Public Administration programme.
It is a core course and must be taken by all students wishing to complete their MPA degree.
To be a successful student in distance learning you must be self-disciplined, independent, and possess initiative.
You should read it before you begin your study.
This course contains 10 study units.
Each unit has been designed to take between 20 and 40 hours, so to complete the whole course you will need about 160 hours.
However, everybody studies at a different rate, so this is just a general guide.
Refer to the section titled 'Course description' for details.
MPA 871 builds on the personnel courses you did at the undergraduate level and for the experience acquired in the handling of personnel function in the places of work where you have been exposed.
Here we teach the theory and practice of personnel management especially as practiced in the Nigerian Public context.
You will find that case studies play an important part in this course.
The practice exercise at the end of each unit takes the form of a case study in which you can practise the skills you have learnt.
Remember that case studies usually do not have right or wrong answers.
The important thing is to form and express opinions and support them with good arguments.
COURSE AIMS MPA 871 Aims at helping acquire more advanced theories of personnel management to improve your understanding concepts and theories you have 4 known in the past.
It also aims at placing whatever personnel functions you have performed or are now performing in its proper theoretical context.
In general we want this course to give you a firmer grip of all that the essential elements of personnel management are in theory and practice.
COURSE OBJECTIVES After completing this course, you should be able to: 1.
Explain what public personnel management is, where it started and how it has evolved to the stage it is now.
2.
Distinguish between the theories and practice of public personnel management and how environment impacts on theories.
3.
Distinguish between the process of obtaining and that of maintaining a satisfactory and a satisfied work force.
4.
Acquire theories and techniques of applying them 5.
Explain what each of the critical functions are 6.
Apply in practice the critical functioning of personnel management COURSE DESCRIPTION MPA 871 - Public Personnel Management is a course that exposes students to the theories of personnel management and applies them to the public sector.
Where theories in the strict sense of the concept do not exist, the course defines concepts, e.g.
refinement, job specifications, compensation, etc as they are available in personnel management literature and states how those are applied in the Nigerian Public Sector.
The titles of the ten study units together with the amount of time you will need to complete each one are as shown below: UNIT 1 Origin, evolution, definition and place of personnel management in organizations UNIT 2 Planning the organization's human resources UNIT 3 The classification of positions UNIT 4 Recruitment policies and procedures UNIT 5 Staff Selection Process UNIT 6 Compensation 5  UNIT 7 Training and Development UNIT 8 Motivation UNIT 9 Employee Relations UNIT 10 Separation COURSE MATERIALS - The course materials consist of the following: - Ten study units - An Assignment File containing three assignments Supplementary Readings - Course Timetable STUDY UNITS The 10 study units in MPA 871 Contains two to four weeks' work.
They outline the objectives for each part, summarize key issues and ideas, provide, commentary on the reading, link theoretical concepts to practical observations and applications, and give directions for study.
They ainlscoo r porate exercises related to the in-text readings.
The practice exercises for each unit reinforce issues and ideas and provide feedback.
Like the tutor- marked assignments, these exercises are designed to help you to achieve the course objectives and require you to apply what you have learnt.
Along with the subject content, each unit includes specific objectives, tasks, questions, self-tests, practice exercises, and a summary of the mcoavteerreiadl.
T he units are: ASSIGNMENT FILE The Assignment File gives you details about your assignments - how many marks each question is worth, approximately how much you should write and when you should submit the assignment (the 'cut-off date') Note that your assignments should reach your tutor on or before the dateline.
No extension will be given.
TUTORIALS To assist you in this course, your assigned tutor will conduct six tutorials.
Each tutorial will be two and a half hours long and will be held on a weekday 6 evening.
You will be notified of the dates, times and locations of tthuetosrei a ls, together with the name and telephone number of your tutor.
We strongly recommend that you attend the tutorials.
The purpose is to assist you in analyzing the case studies.
The case studies are an important part of your course because they help you to apply the concepts and theories you have learnt to practical situations.
Unless you can do this, your learning is only half complete.
Tutorials are face-to-face sessions that enable you to exchange ideas and experiences and make contact with others.
This will benefit you both as a student and as a manager.
You may be seriously disadvantaged if you do not attend these sessions.
Note: The function of these sessions is to complement your dleiasrtnainncge m aterial, not to replace it in the form of lectures.
In this course, your primary means of learning, through your course materials.
PREPARING FOR TUTORIALS In order to benefit fully from a tutorial, you should also prepare your answer to the assigned case study so that you can participate meaningfully in the tutorial discussion.
Time has been allowed in the study schedule for you to do this.
TUTORS Your tutor will: 1) Conduct the tutorials 2) Assess your assignments 3) Be available, at certain times, for consultations.
Your tutor is your first point of contact in NOUN.
If you need ainnfyo r mation or have any problems, please speak to him or her before you contact your course coordinator.
Your tutor is able to provide you with considerable assistance.
We urge you to make use of this guidance.
Tutors are required to start tutorial sessions on time.
If a tutor fails to turn up 30 minutes after the scheduled starting time, students may assume that the session is cancelled and they should report the case to the Course Coordinator so that a make-up session can be arranged.
7 SELF-HELP STUDY GROUPS You are advised to organize informal meetings between colleagues sheding the same course.
They are purely voluntary, but they are a way for you and your fellow students to help each other.
COURSE ASSESSMENT The course is designed to help learners to move easily from the sotbajteecdt iv es through the required readings, self-test, practice exercises and assignments to a final examination.
In assessment, you will be expected to: 1.
Demonstrate understanding of the concepts you have learned in the course.
2.
Integrate course concepts and knowledge with your own experience and observations 3.
Apply course concepts and your own knowledge to case problems.
Assignments and an examination are designed to test you and facilitate your progress.
To complete the course successfully, you are required to pass both the continuous assessment and the final examination.
TMA EXTENSION POLICY The assignment policy of the University should be observed.
Applications for extension of up to seven days should be submitted to the tutor.
For extensions of over seven days.
students should note the following: 1.
Assignment extensions may be granted in extenuating circumstances, which should be interpreted as circumstances that are unexpected.
Work commitments and traveling are not regarded as extenuating circumstances unless they are unexpected.
2.
Supporting documents must be submitted along with the application for extension of over seven days to justify the claim.
Applications without supporting documents will not be considered.
3.
Applications for extensions should be submitted either before or on the due date.
4.
The decision to grant or refuse an extension is made by: The Course Coordinator for extensions of up to 21 days; The Dean for extensions of over 21 days.
8 If the assignment is posted to the tutor, it is the responsibility of the student to check with his/her tutor that the assignment has successfully arrived.
Extension applications without supporting documents on the ground of postal loss will not be accepted.
The University cannot accept any responsibility for assignments that are not received by your tutor due to problems with the post.
As a precaution, you are advised to keep a copy of each assignment you submit and obtain a certificate of posting from the post office when you post your assignment.
OVERALL PASS MARK To pass the course, you must achieve at least 40% in the TMA as well as in the final examination.
Your performance in these two components determines your total score for the whole course.
9  MPA 871: PUBLIC PERSONNEL MANAGEMENT COURSE DEVELOPMENT Course Developer Unit Writer Dr I. Omale Prince Abubakar Audu University P.M.B.
1008, Anyigba Kogi State Programme Leader O. J. Onwe Course Coordinator Martha.
U. Nkom NATIONAL OPEN UNIVERSITY OF NIGERIA 10 MODULE ONE UNIT 1 ORIGIN, EVOLUTION AND DEFINITION OF PERSONNEL MANAGEMENT IN ORGANIZATION.
Table of contents 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objectives 3.0 Main contents 3.1 Origin of personnel management 3.2 Evolution of personnel management 3.3 Definition of personnel management 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutor marked assignment 7.0 References and other resources 1.0 Introduction Having gone through the course guide, you are by now aware of what we intend to cover in this course.
This unit is to establish the foundation for it.
In it we give the origin, the evolution and the definition of pmearnsoangnemel e nt.
2.0 Objectives By the end of this unit you should be able to: • Define personnel management • Identify its origin • Trace its evolution over time 3.0 Main content 11 3.1 Origin of personnel management The origin of personnel management is the same as that of all managements.
At the beginning of management practice, everything was done without the niceties of the subdivisions we now have today, e.g.
public administration, business management, financial management, personnel management etc.
Be this as it may, we shall attempt to trace the origin of management including personnel management and later isolate personnel management and trace its evolution.
Paul Mali, in his work - Management Handbook, says that "...the process of getting things done through people" and the various practices which make it up have been around almost since the dawn of time.
He said, next, that the art or sciences of planning and control, materials scheduling system, organizational hierarchy, were behind the construction of the pyramids in Egypt in the years 5.000 - 1,600 BC.
He also said that the science of span of control is said to be the invention of Moses' father-in-law, Jethro, in the year 1491 BC.
You will note here that when Paul Mali talks of management as getting things done through people, which is what it is, personnel i.e people, plays a centre stage.
Therefore we can say tphearts o nnel administration also dates as far back as the dawn of time.
3.2 The evolution of personnel management Although there has always been a human side to general management what characterizes modern management and distinguishes it from its historical antecedents, is the fact that the latter paid little attention to the human side i.e., personnel management.
Paul Mali notes that from the period of the construction of the pyramids to the early years of the Industrial Revolution in England, i.e.
from 5,000 BC to the years 1,700 - 1,785 AD, the handling of men at work was characterized by slavery and repression.
In order to give you a vivid picture of the type of slavery and repression with which the human side of enterprise was treated, let us cite an instance of what happened in England in even as late as the year 1799.
In 1799, the lawmakers decreed that any workman.
who conspired with any other workman to extort an increase of wages, or decrease in hours, was liable to three months in jail.
Further, if any workman so much as attend a meeting called for the purpose of plotting such extortions, or if he urged any other workman to attend such a meeting, or if he gave aid to the family of any worker convicted for attending such a meeting, ... then he was likewise liable to three months j(aMila y n.a..r d , Top Management Hand Book P.62).
Today.
however, because of in civilization, better laws pertaining to trade unions, the works of management scholars such as Douglas MAbcrGahreagmo r , M aslow, etc, the human side of enterprises by which we mean 12 personnel management has reached a stage far above its origin of slavery and repression.
3.3 Definition and scope Definition of personnel management You will discover in the course of your programme that many concepts and terms in the management sciences have slightly varying definitions depending upon who is defining them.
Personnel management, which is our concern here, takes place in differing environments or milieu.
For example, we are here concerned with personnel management in the public sector, i.e.
in the environment of government organizations.
You are most probably aware that personnel management also takes place in the private sector, i.e.
in organizations not owned by the government, e.g.
the Lever Brothers Plc.
makers of Omo washing powder, the Cadbury Nigeria Plc makers oBfo u rnvita, etc.
Because we are aware of all these, we shall provide you a number of definitions so that you can choose anyone you want to udseep e nding upon the context or environment of your speech or your writing.
One of such definitions which we have put together after going through so many texts is this: Personnel Management is the process of obtaining and maintaining a satisfactory and a satisfied work force Let us remind you at this point that personnel management is a cspoaunrsnei n g a semester of over fifteen weeks.
To put the whole subject matter in a box as small as this means that it has been compressed to make it possible for you to carry it with you in a small package.
In this package there are two distinct sub-packages, namely:- the process of obtaining a satisfactory work force and the process of maintaining a satisfied work force.
Each of the sub-packages has many functions, which we shall be examining one after another in subsequent units.
For example, the process of obtaining a satisfactory work force contains the following sub-processes:- recruitment, examination of those who have applied for jobs, interviewing them, offering own acceptance of the jobs and assuming duties, their being inducted into the organization and placed on specific jobs in given sections of the organization.
Much later in their lives in the organization their being sent for training for better performance and bigger responsibilities in the organization, etc.
13 The sub-package which we have identified as maintaining a satisfied work force also has its own numerous functions e.g.
the payment of salaries and wages as and when due, the provision of houses or allowances in lieu of houses, the case for their health, the putting in place of methods for their advancement or promotion, motivation in order to give the staff reason to desire to love the work they do and to do more etc.
As you have seen that this first definition we have given here is "packed" with many ideas and functions, so you will see that a second definition we offer next is "packed".
The following definition was proffered by a well- respected personnel management theorist by name Edwin B. Filippo, in his popular and widely read book,', Personnel Management,' 'which he has issued now for at least the sixth time.
This definition is contained in the sEidxitthi o n issued in 1984.
There he defined personnel management thus: Personnel Management is the planning, organizing, directing, and controlling of the procurement, development, compensation, integration.
maintenance, and separation of human resource to the end that individual, organizational and societal objectives are accomplished.
You will notice that this second definition is by far longer than the first.
Here, a number of functions which are performed or which you will perform if you find your-self in the position of a personnel manager are listed.
Let us list and describe them briefly, much briefer than did Flippo, in order to show you what they mean and why they are significant to the subject of personnel management.
Planning According to Flippo, this means "...the determination.
in advance of a personnel program that will contribute to goals established for tehnet e rprise".
What this means is that, assuming you were the pmearnsoangnere l i n a ministry, you will be required to map out and present the personnel requirement of either a new project or an enlargement of aenx is ting activity in advance of the project or the increase in its performance.
Organizing - This, in the words of Flippo, entails ".... designing the structure of relationships among jobs, personnel, and physical factors" Directing Flippo say that the function of "direction" from which this action word directing comes, ".... may be called by other names, such as 'motivation' or 'actuation' or 'command'.
He then leads us to sum up that it entails "..... getting people to work willingly and effectively".
Controlling Again, to quote Flippo "control is the managerial function concerned with regulating activities in accordance with personnel plan, which 14 in turn was formulated on the basis of an analysis of fourngdanamizaetnitoanl g oals" Flippo refers to the four functions above as "managerial functions opfe r s onnel management".
The following six, he refers to as operative functions of personnel management".
Procurement, Flippo calls this the "first operative function of personnel management "and that it is "...concerned with the obtaining of the proper kind and number of personnel necessary to accomplish organization goals".
This, as you will notice.
is similar to the sub-package we classified under the process of obtaining a satisfactory work force in the first definition.
As we said there, Flippo says here, that procurement "..deals specifically with such subjects as the determination of human resources requirements and their recruitment, selection, and placement".
Development, Flippo says that "After personnel have been obtained, they must be to some degree developed.
Development has to do with the increase of skill.
through training that is necessary for proper job performance.
He says further that "this is an activity of very great importance and wcoinllt i nue to grow because of the changes in technology, the realignment of jobs, and the increasing complexity of the managerial task".
Integration, This is the words of Flippo, "is concerned with the attempt to effect a reasonable reconciliation of individual, societal, and organizational interests".
Compensation This Flippo says is "...defined as the adequate and equitable remuneration of personnel for their contributions to organization objectives".
Maintenance You remember the sub-package we labelled as a process of maintaining a satisfied work force in our first definition?
This is it.
Flippo says "if we have executed the foregoing functions well, we now have a willing and able work force.
He says "Maintenance is concerned with the perpetuation of this state.
Issues related to the maintenance of this state are issues as communication with employees and concern about their health conditions".
Separation Finally, and according to Flippo, "if the first function of personnel management is to secure the employee, it is logical that the last should be the separation and return to society".
He says "most people do not die on the job.
The organization is responsible for meeting certain requirements of due process in separation, as well as assuring that the retired citizen is in good shape.
15  4.0 Conclusion In this unit, we have seen that personnel management, similar to all other forms of management has been with us since human history.
That it was used in the building of the pyramids in Egypt and other similar ancient works.
We have seen that personnel management has evolved from antecedents of periods of slavery and repression to the stage it is today.
We have also seen definitions of personnel management which contain the functions and processes undertaken in it - some of obtaining, some of maintaining.
5.0 Summary This unit has covered the origin of personnel management, its evolution and has provided its definition.
Two definitions have been given and tfhuen c tions, processes of personnel management have been outlined.
6.0 Tutor marked assignment l. State the origin of personnel management and trace its evolution listing the names of which authors did what at the various stages.
2.
Define personnel management and list with brief notes.
3.
Major functions of personnel management.
7.0 References and other resources Flippo Edwin B (1984) Personnel Management (Sixth Edition) McGraw Hill Book Company, New York UUNNIITT 2 2 16 Location of Personnel Management in Organizations Table of Contents 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objectives 3.0 Main content 3.1 What we mean by location 3.1.1 Line and staff concept 3.2 Organizational location of the personnel unit 3.2.1 The central personnel unit 3.2.2 The operating personnel office 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutor marked assignment 7.0 References and other resources 1.0 Introduction Personnel functions, the performance of which constitutes personnel management are all pervasive in the organization.
The supervisor and the manager in any particular unit perform one type or the other of tfhuenscet io ns.
The top executive does some of them.
This unit is to "pin down" where and what functions are performed and by whom 2.0 Objectives By the end of this unit you should be able to: • locate personnel management (functions) in the organization • draw an organizational chart indicating the location of personnel management • define line and staff (concepts) 3.0 Main contents 3.1 What we mean by location` 17 Personnel management as you have seen from the definition in unit l is a process, in a function, and to talk of it as being located in an organization may not be readily understood.
What we mean is a response to the usual management question of what, where, who, when, etc.
Our discussion of location here will attempt to answer the question of where and who.
Where, in the concept of line and staff, is personnel management performed; who, of staff functionaries vis-à-vis line functionaries, does what aspect of personnel work, etc.In order to make these issues clear to you, we have to examine fully.
the concept of line and staff.
3.1.1 Line and staff Line and staff is a concept which has its origin in the army.
In the days when most of warfare was done by the infantry, i.e.
soldiers on foot, opposing forces faced each other with a dividing line between them.
All the troops engaged in battle on either side of the line are line personnel.
Because they have to be on the line fighting, certain other personnel, e.g.
medical personnel, transport personnel, accounts personnel, etc must be available to take care of medical, transportation and financial needs.
These other personnel's are staff personnel.
Putting this concept in the realm of personnel management outside the army, a public personnel scholar, O.Glenn Stahl (1962) said:- "... according [to the line and staff concept], the functions for which the organization was created - carrying the mail, putting out fires, running a mental institution - are the line functions, and those existing as the result of creating the organization - personnel management, financial control, supply services are "staff".
Making the distinction clearer, O. Glenn Stali says further: "It follows from this construct that the functions are paramount and that the staff must serve the line.
Staff is therefore advisory and should not control, while line is the 'doing' side of the operation and should not be inhibited but only helped by the staff activity".
We shall give yet another example so that this concept which is often grossly misunderstood becomes clear to you.
The misunderstanding is more ipnr a ctice and among staff functionaries who assume superiority over line functionaries.
You are familiar with the university system.
A university's main function is teaching students.
Here, the line personnel, those who are engaged in the "doing" side of university function are the lecturers.
Those who exist as a result of creating the university, i.e; the registry personnel, the lpiebrrsaorny n el, the bursary personnel, the canteen personnel, the medical personnel, etc, are "staff' functionaries and are advisory and should not control.
18 It is by now clear that according to the line and staff concept, personnel management is a "staff" and not a "line" function.
O. Glenn Stahl states this clearly when he says:” Hence the only test for the propriety and adequacy of the personnel function as one of the staff duties, would be its degree of support and service to the original functions of the organization".
This is why he says, "It is common place to hear the assertion that personnel administration is not an end in itself'.
We want at this juncture to caution that you do not put a hard and fast rule around the division between line and staff.
Also that you do not because of what we have said above, look down on staff or personnel functions - O. Glenn Stahl puts this caution this way: "....it is [not] wise to insist that by definition, a staff duty is subservient to a line duty.
Many a pperirnscoinpnlee l must be maintained even if it interferes at the moment with the desires of a particular line official ---- presumably because the personnel goal is serving a larger and longer range of government than is the immediate success of the activity supervised by that official".
The enormity and importance of personnel management especially in its ensuring the application of uniform policies, have made it more important that most individual line functions.
Concluding his discussion on this concept, O. Glenn Stahl states: "The management of 9,000,000 persons who constitute [at that time] the federal, state and local civilian bureaucracy in America is a most significant government function.
It has indeed become almost an end in itself, ranking close in importance to the national defense.
the management of communication and transportation, the conservation of resources, the conduct of public education, and the direction off foreign affairs....".
3.2 Organizational Location of the personnel unit By now you must have noticed that personnel functions are pervasive in the organization.
This has to be so because there is not part of the organization that does not have personnel.
Wherever a person is, he has all issues that deserves the aptetresnotnionne l m oafn a g ement.
For example, he is paid for the work he does, he is attended to when ill. he is given leave when due, his work is supervised and assessed etc.
Despite its ubiquity however, there are units in which certain personnel functions are performed.
In order to make this issue clear to you; we shall be using the Nigeria civil service as a case study.
Many organizations have their personnel management functions carried out in two units.
The first unit is 19 what O. Glenn Stahl refers to as the "central personnel Agency".
The second is the "Operation Personnel Office".
We shall start with the central personnel Agency.
3.2.1 The Central Personnel Agency As you can see from the name, the Central Personnel Agency is one that has responsibility for organization wide function.
In the Nigerian government and quite a number of other environments, e.g.
the United State of America, it is known as the Civil Service Commission.
Its functions, especially in the U.S.A, have been a product of evolution.
As stated by O. Glenn Stahl, "under the impetus of the civil service reform wave which broke in the 1ce8n8t0rsa,l personnel agencies were created in the Federal Government and in several state and municipal jurisdictions, with the primary aim of freeing the public servant from allegiance to and dependence upon the politician".
This means that before civil service commission were established, the method of becoming a civil servant and remaining so was solely through the political spoils system.
Initially, therefore, the civil service commission were designed, in the work of Stahl, "as 'politics eliminators' * and little more".
It is because it was originally introduced as “politics eliminator” that its composition (i.e.. the number and kinds of people appointed a civil service commissions) is, in the U.S.A., be 'partisan.
There, the law provides for three commissioner, not more than two of whom may be members of the same political party.
In order to further play down the role of partisan politics, stahl says ".....in order to prevent the executive who has the appointing power from 'packing' the commission, it is usually provided that commission members shall serve years each, one being named every two years".
Fig 1.1 Organization chart of a governmental set-up showing location of civil service commission vis-à-vis other units.
20  Chief executive President/governor Civil service commission Head of service Ministry of ministry Ministry of Ministry of youth & Ministry of education Finance of workWs oman affairs sport The next issue you need to know about the central personnel agency is its relative isolation.
As you can see in Fig 1.1 the location of the civil service commission is isolated from the other units of government.
The disadvantage of this is as aptly stated by Stahl as follows: "The ....serious charge to be brought against the usual type of commission is that it both is and is not part of the administrative machinery.
So far as prescribed functions are concerned, it is, in its practical operations, it often is not".
In the Nigerian context, the fact that the Civil Service Commission is far from the operating ministries has led to a lot of problems.
Problems of the Nigerian Civil Service Commission The Udoji Commission has an impressive catalogue of what one might call structural problems of the Civil Service Commission.
One of such problems 21 is that of isolation of the Civil Service Commission from the operating Ministries/Departments.
Quite a number of people are of the opinion that operating units should be given power of hiring, motivating, and firing, over the staff who work for them, in the same way as it is done in the private sector.
One thing such "thinkers" are oblivious of is the fact that in the public service, most, if not all the top executives are, and perhaps have to be, partisan.
And being partisan, given the power to hire and fire, their partisanship will influence tpheer fo rmance of such functions.
Indeed, elimination of politics is the raison d'etre of the Civil Service Commission and will always remain the most plausible reason for retaining it, and as an extra-ministerial outfit.
Another problem is that of "sheer volume of work" at its hands and the size and calibie of its membership.
Over the years the Civil Services hinacvree a sed in size and complexity which increases have not been matched by corresponding increases in size and expertise of the members of the Civil Service Commissions.
There is need to increase the size of the Commission from the traditional three permanent members to one, perhaps twice as large, and one with members representing various professional and political interests.
However, these structural problems are less of a problem than the procedural and behavioral problems of the Commission which do not readily meet the eyes of an onlooker but only those of an interested participant observer.
One such problem is that of its custody and use of one of its most important tool for staff promotion and discipline - the performance evaluation report.
The procedure for completion and submission of these reports was such that it left a lot of room for fraudulent practices.
The commission had, for example, no way of knowing the names and ascertaining the signatures of the officers responsible for completing and countersigning the reports in the various Ministries.
Under such a situation, an officer could get any "friendly" senior officer to complete the form on him and get it submitted to the Commission.
The malpractice was made easier to perpetrate by the frequent and constant movements of staff from Ministry to Ministry and thus frequent changes in superior and subordinate officers in the Ministries.
Another problem connected with the evaluation reports was the use of three consecutive years' reports for consideration for promotion or punishment.
Again, perhaps due to the large number of these reports and the inadequacies of storage facilities as well as lack of knowledge of sptroorcaegdeu/rreetsr,i ethvea l incidence of missing reports were rife.
And when reports were missing, substitutes had to be written in arrears and, of course, even where they were written by the same officers, they were certain not to contain 22 the same "facts" as the lost ones.
Invariably, however, the officers who wrote the original ones would not be available to write the substitutes and so they would have to be written by officers under whom the officer reported or never worked at the material time, and this occasioned fake reports.
A third problem with respect to these reports is that, with the connivance of clerical staff, officers who have adverse reports could retrieve them from the Civil Service Commission and replace them with favorable ones which they get written for them by "friendly" top officers.
What all these problems aside was also the tools in which the Commission used to assess officers for promotion and or discipline was subject to "fakery" in very many ways.
The consequences of this could have been tahdev a ncement of those who least deserved it and the failure to sanction those who deserved sanction.
It is not possible to assess the magnitude of such malpractice but when this is added to the falsification of performance rating which arises as a result of fear or favor, or lack of know-how in the appraisal of staff, one might be correct to attribute much of the mediocrity ainnedf f iciency in the Civil Service to these phenomena.
The Ministry of Establishment In Nigeria, the role of the Civil Service Commission in personnel management is limited to employment, promotion and discipline.
All other personnel functions e.g., determination of conditions of service, formulation and review of the Civil Service Rules.
deter mination of staff nsturmenegrtihc,a lp o sition classification and wage administration, staff training, and development, etc., are not its concern but those of the Ministry oEfs t ablishment or the Establishment Division of the Office of the Head of Service (where it is not a Ministry).
The existence of two separate bodies handling one piece of job by a corporate entity constitutes a problem.
What this means is that the body which is in charge of determining what vacancies there should be, or that there are, and which body knows the urgency with which has the knowledge of the training needs of the Service (as is supposed to be contained in the performance evaluation report).
It also means that the person who trains is to play in the promotion of officers particularly in the senior (administrative) positions.
For a given cadre of staff, i.e., those controlled by the EMsitnaibsltirs hym/Deinvti s ion, e.g., executive officers, secretarial staff, senior clerical staff, etc., the body which interviews and employs, and thus knows the strengths and weaknesses, the likes and dislikes, etc, of new entrants, is not 23 the body to place them on jobs.
No wonder we have so many square pegs in round holes.
If the example of the USA is worth going by, after it had tried the Civil Service Commission with the limited functions of employment, promotion and discipline, it later rationalized and professionalized its Civil Service Commission, giving it expanded functions which "...cover(ed) recruitment, examination, job evaluation, training, and the administration of personnel investigations and retirement and issuance systems".
3.2.2 The Office of the Permanent Secretary as a Personnel Office - The Operating Personnel Office This is the third arm of the tripartite arrangement which handles personnel matters.
The personnel function of the Office of each Permanent Secretary in charge of a Ministry consist of the following: Each Ministr y has the delegated responsibility for employment, promotion and discipline of all its junior staff, i.e., staff on Grade Level 01-06.
Each Permanent Secretary also had the responsibility to report on all senior staff in is Ministry to the Civil Service Commission and to liaise between hMisi n istr y and the establishment Ministry Division on staff matters, particularly on staff welfare.
With regards to junior staff, the Secretary for Administration and Finance in each Ministry as well as the Staff Officers play a leading role in tehmepirl o yment, promotion and discipline.
Through the aid of the DAC, (Departmental Appointments Committee) they submit recommendations on any of these functions to the Permanent Secretary for necessary action.
The problem with this ministerial, in-house arrangement was that, in employment matters, it hardly pays heed to merit principles.
In the first place, the existence of vacant positions are hardly publicized (not to use the term advertised).
The best it does when it needs to select new staff is to shortlist candidates for interview from its usually burgeoning file containing unsolicited applications.
In the second place, those who get to receive letters of invitation to the employment interviews are mainly relatives and hangers-on as well as house boys of top officials of government.
Notes such as "We spoke.
Bearer is my in- law's daughter.
Please absorb as store-keeper" were the stock-in-trade of Ministries shortly after the budget had been approved and Ministries given the go-ahead to recruit.
24 Another problem with the in-house personnel office is that it is invariably staffed with non-personnel experts.
The Secretaries for Administration and Finance who are put in charge of the Ministry's personnel functions are generalist administrative officers who, neither by training nor by experience on the job, can be said to possess any expertise in personnel administration, the staff officers with little, if any, passion for staff.
Most of the negative attitude to work and to the public which characterize the lower echelon of the Civil Service is perhaps attributable to the lack of professionalism with which the in house personnel functions are handled.
4.0 Conclusion This unit has discussed personnel management in the context of where it is performed in organizations.
In the distinction between line and staff aosr g anizational concepts, personnel management belongs to the line side of the "divide".
However, because personnel functions are all pervasive, they are performed by both staff and line managers and supervisors.
5.0 Sum mary This unit has covered the concepts of line and staff; located pmearnsoangnemel e nt mainly as a staff function.
It has provided an organization chart depicting that position of the central personnel agency which in our context here are identified-,as the civil service commission.
You have also seen the other arms of organization particularly if the public sector, that perform personnel functions, e.g.
the Establishment Ministr y or Office, and finally, the operating personnel office are located in each ministry.
6.0 Tutor marked assignm ent Q.1 Explain the concept of line and staff?Why is it not possible to locate personnel management in the staff side of the "divide" wholly?
7.0 References and other resources Shah], Glenn O.
(1962) Public Personnel Administration, (Fifth Edition) Harper & Row Publishers, New York. )
UUNNIITT 3 3:: 25 PLANNING THE ORGANISATION'S HUMAN RESOURCES Table of Contents 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objectives 3.0 Main contents 3.1 Human Resource Planning 3.1.1 Definition 3.1.2 Manpower Inventory 3.1.3 Forecast of future manpower requirements – The Nigerian Situation 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summar y 6.0 Tutor Marked Assignment 7.0 Reference and other resources 1.0 Introduction: Manpower planning is at the root of the process of obtaining a satisfactory work force for an organization.
The planning we are concerned with here is a method for determining the manpower requirements in an organization and developing action plans for meeting them.
2.0 Objectives: By the end of this unit, you should be able to: - Define human resource planning - List all the processes involved in human resource planning - Explain how each process is carried out 3.0 Main contents\ 3.1 Human Resource Planning 3.1.1 Definition 26 As we said and did in unit 2, the definition of this term, you will notice differs slightly from author to author and we shall give a number of them.
Before we begin the definition of human resource planning, let us state that we shall be using this term interchangeably with manpower planning.
Also, as we did in unit 2, let us start our definition from the one we are most familiar with.
We wrote a chapter in a book titled New Trends in Personnel Management".
A book of Readings edited by Professor Ali D. Yahaya and Dr. Caleb 1.
Akinyele in 1992.
There, we defined manpower planning, quoting Professor Eric Vetter as the: "process by which a firm ensures that it has the right numbers and kinds of people, in the right place, at the right time, doing the right things for which they are economically most useful."
We noted and will want you to note that manpower planning is essentially a method for determining future manpower requirements and developing action plans for meeting them.
Three processes are involved in this fnuanmcetiloyn:- Manpower inventory, manpower forecast and manpower plans.
We shall take you through what all these mean later.
G. A. Cole, in his book Personnel Management theor y and practice (1997) defines Human Resources Planning at the glossary of Management terms pages as: "A technique aim ed at securing and improving an organization's human resources to meet present and future needs, three principal stages can be distinguished: evaluation of existing resources, forecast of future requirements and, finally, action plan.
3.1.2 Manpower Inventory In our paper referred to earlier, we said of manpower inventory that icto n sisted of "... Data which describe the present work force in both quantitative and qualitative terms.
Citing an example of what this could look like in practice and which we do how now to make it more real to you for euansdee r s toanf d i ng, we said: "What is required.
for example, a Ministry oEfd u c ation, having a complete and comprehensive staff list of all teachers, all their qualifications, their performances and potentials, and where deployed".
Making a more detailed analysis of this concept, G.A.
Cole, who raises the following questions:, typical questions that managers need to ask when assessing the state of their internal labor market are as follows: 27 Job Categories:- What categories of staff do we have?
(e.g.
epnrogcinesese rwso, r kers etc.)
Num bers:- How many people do we have in each category?
Skills:- What skills are available amongst existing employees?
Perform ance:- What levels of perfor mance are we getting from our various categories of employees?
F l e x ib il ity:- How easy is it to transfer employees between jobs?
Are individual skills transferable?
What about trade union views on this point?
Promotability:- How many of our employees are ready for promotion into more demanding roles?
What training could be reasonably provided to assist promotion?
Age Prof iles:- Do we have any age related problems due to ibmetbwaeleann ceexsp e rienced and inexperienced staff?
S e x: -d istribution Have we an appropriate balance between the sexes, given the requirements of our business?
Minority groups:- Are minority groups properly represented in twhoer k force?
Leavers:- What is our labor turn--over rate by staff categor y and/departments?
How many people are due for retirement?
Are any redundancies likely?
How many people left for reasons of dissatisfaction?
Are any trends noticeable?
G. A.
C ole concludes by saying that: "Answers to the above questions can provide a reliable picture of the state of the organization's own labor force.
The resulting information can be matched with the demand forecast for labor in the various categories identified by the management.
3.1.3 Forecast of future manpower requirements: Again to make reference to the contribution we made to the book “New Trends in Personnel Management”.
In that paper, we talked on manpower 28 forecast thus: "This is dated on the manpower required at specific times in the future, described either in gross numbers or in specific categories such as skill, educational level and experience".
Discussing this subject, Edwin B. Flippo, in his work that we have earlier talked about said: "The forecasting of human resources requirements is often subdivided into longer range and short range forecasts.
The latter type is almost unavoidable in most firms, but a survey of 589 members of tAhme e rican society of Personnel Administration revealed that only 32 percent reported any long-range planning of human resources needs in their organizations".
We shall at this point, state what goes into both short-range and long-range human resources forecasting Short-range hum an resources forecasting Put in our own words for you to understand better, Flippo cites as a first factor for human resources forecasting, the specific volume of work for the coming year.
Thus, the forecast of manpower requirement should be related to "....plans... made concerning the amount of work that each segment of the firm is expected to accomplish during some coming period".
Flippo says that "Various techniques can be used in making a short term projection of both the amount of work to be done and the number of personnel necessary to do it.
"He gives the following as some of them.
Time series analysis - this can be used to identify trends in the past.
Computing of various ratios, e.g.
number of sales per sonnet in relation to the level of sales, or the nteulmepbheorn e so fi n relation to the number of customer service representatives.
This done, the number of new sales personnel to be added can be derived from the projected increase in sales, assuming that everything else remains unchanged.
Discussing this same issue, G. A. Cole says, "Estimating the numbers of people required is usually undertaken in one or more ...ways".
One of the ways he discussed is ".....Exercising managerial judgment".
About this he said: "In a typical work organization, ..the single most important element in forecasting personnel requirements is managerial judgment".
The way this is done is "individual managers, in the light of (a) tkhneoirw l e dge of events and (b) personnel in their own areas of responsibility, draw up their own estimates of their requirements".
Other methods which he discussed are the use of statistical techniques and another.
the application of Work study techniques such as "Work Management, Method Study and O M (organization and method) which can 29 be helpful in identifying the numbers of people required to achieve certain tasks.
Long-range hum an resources forecasting The factors that you will have to note which influences long-range human resources forecasting as given by Flippo, are:- The organization's long-range plans - This relates to the human resources (in future) to what tohreg a nization has decided to do at a given time in future .
A company which deals in a certain product now and which has planned to change to another product line, makes a human resources forecast that is in consonance with such a decision.
Other factors are demographic, economic, technological and social in nature.
Out of these, the one that is of immediate concern is probably tthecaht n oolfo g y. Cole says: "Advances in technology have definite effects on the nature and mixture of jobs available.
For example, advances in computer technology resulted in a decrease in the number of book-keepers, and an increase in the number of computer programmes.
The use of robots will have similar effects on human resources forecasting.
Cole states that "General Electric has plans for replacing nearly one-half of its 37,000 awsoserkmebrsl yw ith "steel collared workers" as an example of what increase in the use of robots might be doing to humans at work in future.
Resistance by organized labor may be the only solution to massive replacement of men by robots.
Such resistance has so far been minimal because the jobs being taken so far by robots relieve men of work that is hazardous, dirty, or monotonous, such as loading, presses or spraying paint in confined areas.
Level.
Clerical/Messengerial Class:- consisting of all levels of clerks, typist, messengers etc.
As has been pointed out, in any enterprises, large or small, private or public, one of the most important branches of management is personnel administration.
The function of selection, promotion, maintaining morale and efficiency dismissal and the like, in which the commission ordinarily has some share, are part and parcel of this administration.
But when tfhuenscet io ns are carried on by a kind of extra-administrative agency which is all too frequently looked on askance by department heads, situation arises that runs counter to the principles of sound management.
A last point we shall discuss here is the caliber of people appointed to serve in the civil service commission as commissioner.
30 Under what he classified as "Amateur Quality" Stahl says, "Not only is the civil service commission semi-isolated agency, located outside the regular administrative hierarchy, but also frequently, its members know little or nothing about employment procedures".
Citing the U.S experience of many years ago he said, "perhaps no other field has the democratic dogma of the amateur in administration been carried so far and with disastrous results as in that of personnel.
Farmers, lawyers, housewives and journalists as well as professional politicians characterize the range of occupations from which commissions are drawn".
Stahl ends up his section on Amateurs Quality by noting that "Not all amateurs, however, have been failures at civil commission posts.
Witness for example, the militant leadership given to the Federal Civil Service Commission in its early days by Theodore Roosevelt".
The Nigerian Situation The arrangement for personnel management in the public sector in Nigeria has a lot of similarities with the theor y as that of the U.S case discussed above.
However, you will notice quite a lot of dissimilarities as we present the Nigeria case below.
We do have a civil service commission at both the Federal and the State levels in Nigeria.
Their functions are however similar to those of the U.S, at its initial stages, i.e limited to only recruitment, promotion and discipline.
Also unlike the civil service commission in the U.S.A, no law prescribes that its membership should be bipartisan and no effort is made to make it so.
Because its function is limited to recruitment, promotion and discipline, another central personnel agency performs the remaining personnel functions of examining, job evaluation, training, recruitment, and such other issues as determination of conditions of service, formulation and review of the civil service rules, deter mination of staff numerical strength, position classification, salary and wages administration, etc.
This other agency is the unit known as Establishment and management Service Matters which may be a ministry or a unit in the office of the Head of Service.
It is this unit, which is responsible for policies related to these issues, and it sets aenndfo r ces standards related to them.
That two different bodies undertake a corporate function-personnel management, causes some problems in the Nigeria case.
For instance, the body that determines the stal3strength and therefore the vacancies, is different from the body which recruits.
This can lead to inadequate attention being paid to recruitments since the one which recruits may not bsuef f iciently sensitive to needs and urgency.
In addition to these two central personnel agencies, there are operating personnel offices at the level of each ministry of extra-ministerial department.
31 An extra-ministerial department is a department, which is independent of a ministry although not up to the magnitude of a ministry.
At the level of ministries, the personnel office is managed by an administrative officer who occupies the office of Administration and Finance Department.
He is assisted in his personnel functions by a "staff officer".
A staff officer is an executive officer cadre who is posted to the ministry by the establishment and service matters unit.
They both handle the personnel management functions of the ministry under the supervision of the Chief administrative officer, the personnel secretary.
In the main, the personnel function at the operating level is a delegated function by the civil service commission.
These functions are recruitment, promotion and discipline of the junior staff of the ministry i.e., staff on salary Grade Level 01-06.
For the purpose of these functions, the civil service commission provides that a Departmental Appointments Committee (DAC) be set up to assist in its performances.
The office of the DAidrmecitnoirs tr a toifo n and finance is the secretariat of the DAC, whose recommendations of staff recruitment, promotion and discipline are made to the permanent secretary.
In conclusion with senior staff of the ministr y, the permanent speecrrfeotramrys t he personnel function of completing and forwarding their annual performance reports to the civil service matters division on staff welfare.
4.0 Conclusion In this unit you have seen the thoughts that go into the determination of the basis of the number and caliber of the staff that organizations "hire" for their work.
You have also seen what happens in the Nigerian situation in particular - the roles of the civil service commission, the establishments ministry, etc.
The roles are meant to complement but sometimes they are contradictory and conflicting.
5.0 Sum mary This unit has examined the concept of human resource planning in organizations.
It has dealt with the concepts of manpower planning, which comes after an inventor y of resources and based upon which a forecast of future need is made.
6.0 Tutor Marked Assignm ent 32 Q.1 What effects do any two of the following factors have in an organization's human resource profile:- age, sex, promotability, minority groups - relate your answer to the Nigerian situation.
7.0 References and other resources References - Cole, G.A (1997) Personnel Management Theory and Practice (Fourth Edition) ELST with Letts Educational, London.
- Flippo, Edwin B (1984) Personnel Management (Sixth Edition) McGraw-Hill Book Company, New York.
- Omale, I "Past Practices in Personnel Management in the Nigerian Civil Service: Issues and Problems" in Yahaya, Ali D, and Akinyele, Caleb 1.
(eds) (1992) New Trends in Personnel Management, Administrative Staff College of Nigeria, Topo Badagry.
UNIT 4 RECRUITMENT AND RECRUITMENT POLICIES 33 AND METHODS Table of Contents 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objectives 3.0 Main contents 3.1 Definition of recruitment 3.2 Methods of recruitment 3.3 Recruitment policies 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summar y 6.0 Tutor Marked Assignment 7.0 References and other resources 1.0 Introduction This unit focuses on one of the most crucial activities of pmearnsoangnemel e nt - recruitment.
As you will see, it is a fairly misunderstood concept by personnel management practitioners.
Also as you will sbeeec,a u se it is the beginning of the processes of procuring staff for tohreg a nization, it is very important and deserves maximum attention of personnel specialists in organizations.
2.0 Objectives By the end of this unit you should be able to: define recruitment expertly • distinguish the concept of recruitment in the context of its theory from the context of its practice • identify all the "markets" open to an organization for recruitment purposes and their limitations • identify and explain the various tools used in the recruitment process 3.0 Main content 3.1 Definition of recruitment Ibrahim Omale, in his paper which is contained in chapter 4 of a book of readings edited by Professor Ali D. Yahaya and Dr Caleb I. Akinyele (1992) 34 talks about recruitment fairly differently from how practitioners of personnel management talk.
He said, in defining recruitment that: In its conceptual and restricted sense, however, recruitment is tphraotc e s s which starts from getting an applicant interested enough in a job and in a particular organization to write an application, and the process stops when his application has been received in the organization.
Omale continued the definition of recruitment by adding that "Thus, recruitment is the salesmanship which organizations do for themselves and the various jobs they have for filling".
This definition of recruitment is contained in what G. A Cole, in his book on Personnel Management: Theory and Practice says about recruitment.
He said, "The principal purpose of recruitment activities is to attract sufficient and suitable potential employees to apply for vacancies in the organization".
He thereafter distinguished this process from the very next step to recruitment i.e.
selection, by saying, "The principal purpose of selection activities, by comparison, is to identify the most suitable applicants and persuade them to accept a position in the organization".
O. Glenn Stahl sums it all up when he says: "The goal of recruiting activities is the production of an adequate number of qualified applicants for employment.
Recruitment ends with an application.
We shall conclude this issue of definition by giving you what Omale says in contrasting it with what happens in the Nigerian Public service.
He said: The civil service hardly sees recruitment in its proper cpoenrscpepecttuiavle .
In the civil service; recruitment is tantamount to em ploym ent, i.e.
all that it takes to get an applicant interested in a job in the organization, through examining or interviewing him, to issuing him a letter of appointment.
The misunderstanding of the concept of recruitment in the civil service might be one of the reasons why the recruitment process is not given the attention it deserves.
3.1.1 The field of recruitment O. Glenn Stahl, in his book Public Personnel Administration (1962) talks about the field of recruitment in the public sector as "The area open to public recruiting agencies".
An organization desires to create a market from where 35 to recruit staff, takes steps to "sell" itself to potential employees only when people are not willing to take up appointment with it.
Depending upon people's perception of an organization or a service, such organization or service may find it difficult to attract potential employees.
In the U.S.A at one point in time, according to O. Glenn Stahl, ".... public service recruiting was a shadow, Business was a good, government an evil.
It was to business that social prestige attached.
It was there that your people of ability naturally looked for a career".
Those of you in your 50s now will remember that in the middle 60s to the middle 70s.
government was the first choice of employment for your people of ability.
This situation contrasts very sharply to today's scenario where university graduates with 2nd class and above degrees do not go ngeoavre r n ment offices for employment.
Their first choices are the oil companies, the banks, and other business houses.
This leaves government choosing employees from 3rd class degree holders and drop outs oufn i versities.
It is this type of situation that makes recruitment a cfurunccitaiol n in personnel management.
So, what are the areas open to public recruiting agencies and what are their limitations?
(a) The Schools; Schools are the largest markets from which the public as well as private agencies Main their work force.
You are aware of the various Bevels - primary, secondary (mad up of secondary grammar and secondary technical schools) and the tertiary level at which we have universities, polytechnics and colleges of education where primar y and secondary school teachers are prepared.
Availability of potential employees in the school system thus depends on their areas of emphasis.
If, for example, the system closes down its colleges of education, as it did its Grade Two teacher training schools a few years ago, the availability of potential employees as teachers is affected.
(b) Citizenship; Ordinarily, potential employees in the public sector service of a country is limited to its citizens.
The area open to public agencies for recruitment is the generality of its citizenship, although limitation 36 relating to place of origin and age does limit the size of potential employees.
(c) Place of origin; It is usual, in order to prevent "monopoly" of jobs by only particular sector of society to require that jobs be spread.
To do this requires representation by all areas concerned and therefore, even if the best potential employee comes from a given place, if it is not the turn of the place, or if the place has exhausted its share, this plilmaciteast io na on it.
Perhaps you are aware of the Nigerian Fcheadrearcatle r principle and the quota system.
This is what they refer to.
It may interest you to know that this type of practice is not peculiar to Nigeria.
Glenn Stahl says that the fact that "... the apportionment provisions of the federal civil service law, (requires) distribution of appointments in proportion to state population" is an operation of restriction on the basis of residence (or place of birth).
(d) Age limits; Although the entire citizenry of Nigeria provides the market fpoort e ntial employees, not ever y Nigerian is employable on the basis of age limits.
Currently no one below the age of 16 may be employed in government.
Also, no one above 50 years may be given a tenure job in the civil service.
Tenure job is a concept we shall be discussing later in this course.
The other factors that affect, by limiting the recruitment market, are preferences given to certain groups in jobs.
In the U.S.A. vetrans are given preference in certain jobs.
Also, sometime in the past sex barriers existed to preclude females from jobs.
The removal of such barriers has broadened the market.
Exercise 1.1.
Give and explain a comprehensive definition of recruitment.
List out all the areas of recruitment open to a public agency and discuss three of them stating their limitations.
3.2 The Methods of recruitment The traditional methods of recruitment are advertisements in newspapers.
the pasting of notices on bulletin boards of public buildings and other centers of 37 congregation.
and circulating information to individuals, organizations, and institutions that might be expected to be in touch with suitable applicants.
On the basis of the importance attached to this personnel function, O. Glen Stahl gives a list of what he terms "more enterprising" recruitment methods as follows: Exercise 1.2.
Q. Glenn Stahl has given you a list of recruiting methods above.
choose 7 of them and explain what they mean and how you apply them in Nigerian organizations.
3.3 Recruitment policies In the words of G. A. Cole, a recruitment policy ".....represents tohreg a nization's Code of conduct in this area of activity".
He then gives an example of a typical policy statement for recruitment as, "in the recruitment activities" the organization will: (1) advertise all vacancies (2) reply to every job applicant with the minimum of delay (3) aim to inform potential recruits in good faith about the basic details and job conditions of every job advertised (4) aim to process all applications with efficiency and courtesy (5) seek candidates on the basis of their qualification for the vacancy concerned (6) aim to ensure that every person invited for interview will be given a fair and thorough hearing.
The organization will not; (1) discriminate unfairly against potential applicants on grounds of sex, race, religion or physical disability.
(2) Discriminate unfairly against applicants with a criminal record (3) Knowingly make any false or exaggerated claims in its recruitment literature or job advertisements.
Item number 2 (immediately above) making reference to criminal records in respect of pardoned criminals.
You will notice and likely be amazed at the details the literature orenc r uitment has gone to extol this function.
It has been given such recognition for reason that organizations realize that first rate staff are a critical asset and that first rate applicants are difficult to attract even in times of high rate of unemployment.
38 4.0 Conclusion Recruitment is critical and one of the first steps in the personnel management functions of an organization.
Once the need for staff has been established via the process of the study of the human resource in an organization, recruitment functions come next.
However as you have seen in this unit breeccrauuistme e nt entails salesmanship of the organization in the job mreacrrkueittm, e nt which entails such salesmanship is an ongoing thing in tohreg a nization.
5.0 Sum mary Unit 4 has taken you from the definition of recruitment through the methods employed in carrying it out to the policies an organization should have in order to have a good image in the job mark and to be a respected employer.
6.0 Tutor marked assignm ent (1) In your own words, give and then defend the definition of recruitment (2) Using the recruitment policies given in this unit, assess the performance of any organization you know on the basis of tphoelsicei e s. 7.0 References and other resources - Cole, G.A (1997) Personnel Management: Theory and Practice, (ELST) Letts Educational, London - Omale, 1 (1992) "Past practices in Personnel Management in the Nigerian Civil Service: Issues and Procedures" in Professor Ali D. Yahaya & Dr Caleb 1.
Akinyele (eds) New Trends in Personnel Management - A Book of Readings, Administrative Staff College of Nigeria (ASCON) Topo, Badagry.
- Stahl, Glenn O (1962) Public Personnel Administration, Harper & Row Publishers, New York.
UNIT 5.
STAFF SELECTION PROCESS 39 Table of contents 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objectives 3.0 Main content 3.1 What selection means (definition) 3.2 Types and uses of examination 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutor marked assignments 7.0 References and other resources 1.0 Introduction Selection is a process in the personnel management field which not too many distinguish as a separate function from recruitment.
As we said in unit 4 this failure to see them as separate function is more in the context of personnel management practice than theory.
Having given you the meaning, methods and the processes of recruitment in Unit 4, we shall do same thing in respect of the selection process here.
2.0 Objective By the end of this unit you should be able to: - Identify the selection process in personnel management - define what staff selection is - explain the difference between selection and recruitment - identify various forms of examination - know the situations demanding the use of which type of examination aspects of selection 3.0 Main Content 3.1 Definition of Selection Some writers divide this process into two distinct functions.
1.
Omale in his paper we have referred to earlier discusses recruitment examinations as a separate thing from selection of the qualified applicant.
This is the method Glenn Stahl uses - he devotes a whole chapter of his book we referred to above to "Methods of Examination" in the staffing process and one to "Selection: from outside the service" and yet another to "Selection: from inside the service".
40 On the other hand, G.A.
Cole takes the process of selection to mideeannti f ication of the most suitable applicant.
The process of identification involves examinations and other parameters established to distinguish one applicant from the other.
On his own part Edwin Flippo.
also in his work we alluded to earlier in this unit uses the American ter minology "Hiring".
By this terminology he means all that is involved in getting an applicant selected from amongst many and this process in his own categorization ends with the "induction or orientation of the successful applicant.
The meaning we shall give to selection here is, after G. A. Cole; That personnel function whose applicants amongst others who function includes examinations, eliciting the qualities of people purpose is to identify the most suitable have made a bid for employment.
This interviews and other parameters used for recruitment.
You should note in the definition above that we are being careful to maintain the distinction between recruitment and selection.
Recruitment ends with the applications of those who have made a bid (submitted applications) to work in the organization (secure employment).
We will next turn our attention to the numerous ways in which we can measure the qualities of those who have applied for jobs in the organization in order to select from amongst them.
1.1 Exercise: Device your own definition of selection and itemize elements in it which will aid your remembrance of it.
3.2 Examinations and their types 3.2.1 Examinations In order to make this aspect of the selection process have the importance you ought to accord it, let us give you two assertions that O. Glenn Stahl made about it.
The first one is that "The cornerstone of the public pperorsgornamneml e is the process of selection by means of competitive examinations, a process .... By (which) means favoritism was to be excluded and the goal of securing the best man for every job achieved.
The second one is, "other factors being equal, (examinations) can spell the difference between a top- notch service and a mediocre one.
No merit system worthy of the name can afford to take less than a fully professional approach to examining applicants for employment.
He ends this advocacy for examinations as a process in the selection of staff by saying, "In today's government, with its world-shaking 41 responsibilities and its vast range of occupations and skills, nothing less than the best examination system ought to be tolerated".
Now that we have made you realize the need for examinations isne le c tthioen process.
we turn attention to criteria for their effectiveness.
3.2.1 Criteria f or effectiveness of examinations O. Glenn Stahl gives three criteria for the effectiveness of (employment) examinations.
The first one is Objectivity.
An employment examination is objective if it succeeds in identifying those characteristics of mind and skill necessary to the given purpose.
The second criterion is validity.
An employment examination is valid if it measures what it purports to measure.
A valid examination would rate prospective employees in exactly the same relationship to one another as they would stand after trial on the job.
The third criterion is reliability.
By reliability we mean the consistency with which the examination serves as a measuring instrument.
In the words of Stahl, "if a test is reliable, a person taking it at two different times should make substantially the same score each time".
Exercise 2.1 List out the essentials criteria for effective examinations and criterate a brief description of each.
3.3 Types of Examinations 3.3.1 Systematic Evaluation of Education and Experience If you have never applied for a job, you will know that either you submit an application written by yourself, or you fill out an application form (application blank) and submit to the organization concerned.
What makes the organization interested in you to invite you for further processes in the bid to employ you would be your education and/or experience.
However, in addition to your education and experience playing this role, they could be considered as an examination in themselves.
Glenn Stahl puts this point this way.
"...the evaluation of education and experience is also a kind oexf a m ination which can differentiate among candidates as to their degree of fitness for a position or occupation.
A good example of how this works is in the appointment of academic staff in universities.
An evaluation of their education and experience assigns "weights" to each element of education, e.g.
a first degree could be weighted 5 points if it is at a second class lower level and 7 points if second class upper and 10 points if first class; three years teaching experience in aunnoivtheersri t y could be weighted 3 points and 5 years experiences, 5 points.
Done 42 this way, whether or not the applicants appear before the employer for a further examination, a differentiation can be arrived at amongst competing candidates.
3.3.2 Written Tests O. Glenn Stahl refers to this as "paper-and-pencil tests" and says they are included in examinations for which "aptitudes, intelligence, or concrete knowledge are prime determinants".
They are most useful in cases where no experience is required.
As a method, they hold greater promise of objectivity than many others.
Depending upon the use to which it is put, written tests may be divided into two - the essay and the objective (short answer) type.
The essay type, more susceptible to subjectivity than the other type, is used where literary skill is being measured.
The short answer type, much easier to administer oconncest r ucted and less liable to subjectivity, is used in testing intelligence or specific knowledge.
3.3.3 Perform ance Tests As you can see from its name this test is one that demands amount of the job demonstration of knowledge and especially, skills.
O. Glenn Stahl speaks of them thus: "among the tests that may be classed in this group are actual demonstrations on the job (involving use of tools or equipment).
Wdishtaint g uishes them from other types is that they employ some kind opfe r fo rmance other than writing or speaking.
The most common examples are tests for stenographer, typists, mechanics, drivers, etc.
3.2.4 Reference Checks Stahl says, that, "candidates may meet all requirements, in terms of education and experience qualifications.
have an excellent written test record.
and still be unsuitable for employment by reason of character, temperament, quality of performance.
or similar factors which cannot be fully weighed in the formal testing program".
It is for this purpose that reference checks are useful.
The most common method is the making of questionnaires to the candidate's former employers or acquaintances.
If the numbers of those involved is not too large, it is advisable to do the reference checks before embarking on other valuation processes.
However, where the number is large.
and mainly for managerial positions, such checks are done as a final or close to the final step.
43 3.2.5 Physical Examination Edwin Flippo says that "The physical examination is an employment step found in most business (and notes that) it can vary from a vcoermyp rehensive examination and matching of an applicant's physical capabilities to job requirements to a simple check of general paphpyesiacraaln c e and well-being".
The first objective of this examination is to ascertain if the applicant is physically capable, e.g., if joining the fire-fighting corps, is he aPghiyles?ic a l examination test eyesight and hearing, etc.
The second objective is to safeguard the organization against untimely claims that may arise through deaths of unhealthy new entrants to the organization.
The third objective is to prevent communicable diseases from entering the organization.
This examination is usually the last step in the selection process and the results of the examination form the first items to be submitted by tshuec c essful candidate as he is being "documented" prior to induction into the organization.
3.2.6 Selection It may seem to you out of place for us to now talk of selection at this tail end of a unit whose title is selection.
The reason for this is that all we have done so far are processes necessary for this last and most important assignment which is what all the steps above have worked to achieve.
The end result of all the above steps except for the medical examination, is to arrive at what is known as a list of eligible.
The list of eligible consists of all those who have scored the pre-determined pass mark and above.
Anyone who has not scored below the prescribed pass mark is eligible for employment.
Omale discusses this stage says, Because this is an eligible list, anyone picked out of it for employment is a qualified candidate.
At this stage of employment it is advisable that some care be taken to ensure "spread" so that not only one interest is represented.
This is the correct usage of an eligible list.
E x e r c i se 3.1: Give a full list of all the types of examinations you have learnt in this unit.
Explain any 3 of them, and above and assuming they are 8 in number.
I will do a "reference check" on them.
If all the 8 are of good standing, I will select the 5 required but I will be advised in this to ensure some element of spread to ensure representation of various interest e.g sexes, 44 ethnicity, religion.
I will send these 5 for medical examination and if they all succeed, I will send them into the organization for documentation.
4.0 Conclusion This unit has introduced you to the first of two parts in the selection process You can see from it the importance and separate consideration of selection from recruitment.
You have also seen how important examinations are and seen also that there are various types available for different types of situations.
5.0 Sum mary This unit has taken a look at selection examinations.
It has listed adnisdc u ssed various types of examinations and given their uses.
6.0 Tutor Mark Assignm ent Question 1: Given a total of 50 prospective journalists to choose five suitable ones for employment, state step by step what you will do from beginning to the "documentation stage".
7.0 References and other resources References - Flippo, Edwin B (1984), Personnel Management (sixth edition), McGraw-Hill Book company, New York.
- Omale, I "Past Practices in Personnel Management in the Nigerian Civil Service: Issues and Procedures" in Professor Ali D. Yahaya and Dr Caleb Akinyele (eds) 1992 New Trends in Personnel Management A Book of Readings, Administrative Staff College of Nigeria (ASCON) Topo Badagry.
- Stahl.
Glenn O.
(1962) Public Personnel Administration Harper & Row Publishers, New York.
45 UNIT 6 INT ERNAL SELECTION Table of Contents 46 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objectives 3.0 Main content 3.1 Definition and types 3.1.1 Definition 3.1.2 Types 3.2 Promotion 3.3 Measures and basis for promotion 3.4 Transfers and secondments 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutor Marked Assignments 7.0 References and other resources 1.0 Introduction The recruitment and selection processes we considered in the preceding unit are recruitment and selection from outside the service or external recruitment.
Through it, vacant positions in the service are filled by bringing in people from outside the service.
Internal recruitment fills position in the service with those who are already in the service.
The extent to which this lraetctreur it m ent is done and how, is the concern of this unit.
2.0 Objectives By the end of this unit you should be able to: - Define what internal selection is - Identify the various types of internal selection processes - Explain how each type of internal selection process is carried out 3.1 Definition and types 3.1.1 Definition As you have seen in the preceding unit, when a vacancy occurs in aonrg a nization, the processes for filling such a vacancy from outside tohreg a nization starts from the recruitment process.
Also as you have seen, that recruitment process has to do with an external (outside the organization) job market.
In contrast, when a vacancy occurs and it is the desire of the 47 organization to fill it from within the organization, the external job market is excluded from the process.
Internal selection is therefore the process of filling positions in aonrg a nization by the use of those who are within the organization rather than bringing in new entrants.
One initial problem which we ought to guard against is this.
In recruitment and selection from outside the organization, we are not so much concerned with the morale of the people in our recruitment field i.e.
general public, not beyond maintenance of good publications.
In internal selection however, if one amongst many staff on the same level is advanced, except for on the basis of very obvious outstanding performance, the rest may begin tgor u mble and morale may sag.
3.1.2 Types of internal selection There is one major type of internal selection and this is promotion.
Other forms of internal selection are re-assignments, transfers and one that might not be too wide-spread but very much in practice in Nigeria is posting.
It is a variant of re-assignment but because it is a massive and iinn st itutionalized variant, it will deserve special variation here.
We shall take you through each at a time and explain how it is done.
3.2 Promotion Promotion which is the advancement of a serving employee from a lower to a higher position and which usually implies an increase in compensation, is a personnel management function that has to be handled with caution.
This is so because of its linkage to mor ale, motivation and careerism.
Stahl says of it "opportunity for advancement and the chance to make the best possible use of one's capacities from one of the wellsprings of human motivation".
He further says that "the proper determination of positions which can be filled bseyl e ction of the ablest employees for advancement, the development of employees to their maximum usefulness, and the proper balance between inside and outside recruitment lie at the very heart of good padermsoinninsetrla t ion".
Some organizations have a promotion policy which guarantees advancements to serving employees from time to time.
Others have a promotion policy which sees promotion as a general staffing programme, a policy for filling positions with the ablest available talent from within or outside the organization.
48 The problem with the policy of guaranteed period promotion foe employees is that it is capable of placing an overemphasis on seniority.
In the words of O. Glenn Stahl.
:Overemphasis on `years of experience'... plagues many agencies in their effort to achieve objectivity in selections for promotion.
Quite often the highly touted '20 years of experience' is merely one year of experience 20 times.
Many are the clerks in executive jobs who are still operating them as clerical posts".
In-bred promotions are not in themselves bad.
What makes them bad are in the words of Stahl.
the lack of the following essential ingredients (a1d)e q uate qualification standards for key positions; (2) adequate records and machinery which provide a means for finding the best candidates within the organization; (3) adequate measures of overall competence and potentiality; (4)comprehensive training programmes to keep the staff alert to new developments and to prepare promising men and women for advancement; (5) promotion and transfer across division lines within the organization and thus providing as broad a field of selection and promotion opportunity as possible and (6) clear distinction between clerical jobs, requiring certain manipulative skills and aptitudes, and ability, so that the latter are nauotto matically filled from the ranks of the former but are filled by men with education, the capacity to deal with generalizations as well as with `things' and the gifts to lead and innovate that ought to be expected of all executives.
Organizations that have promotion policies that over emphasize the "injection" of new blood through filling vacancies from outside the organization, run the risk of firstly.
being unattractive to new entrants at the lower levels.
What attracts expert juniors to organizations is the knowledge that higher positions are available to aspire to in the organization.
Indeed, without this prospect, the idea of a career is non existent.
The second reason is that, if an over emphasis is placed on filling vacancies from outside" the morale of serving officers will be dampened.
In the words of Stahl, "The most important of all non financial incentives (in organizations) is the opportunity for growth and the stimulus to grow".
Exercise 1.
List the qualities of an executive and contrast them with those of a clerk which make the latter unsuitable as mater ial for the position of the former.
3.3 Measures and bases for prom otion O. Glenn Stahl lists four methods and bases for promotion as (1) comparative performance, (2) seniority, (3) examination and (4) trial on the job.
49 3.3.1 Comparative performance If this factor is to be used as a measure or a basis for promotion, it would be necessary to, firstly, have good, up-to-date records of performance and qualifications of all employees and secondly, an efficient method for finding those employees who should be considered for a given vacancy.
For the first requirement, i.e personal achievement records of the employee, it is necessary that a comprehensive record be available of such things as performance reports.
education and training, experience, interests, hobbies etc.
The second requirement, the index of qualified candidates calls for an easy method of finding all those relevant for a particular vacancy.
In developing this list, we are engaging in a process of internal recruitment.
You remember recruitment in an earlier unit?
Its purpose was to secure applications from all those interested in any particular job.
In the same way, some organizations call for applications from their employees so that a list of those to bcoe n sidered in a promotion process can be compiled.
This first set of measures of promotion relate, as you can see, relate to the need for good recording and record keeping.
In this aspect as noted by Omale (1992) the Nigerian Civil Service is found to be lacking.
He noted that the civil service commissions which are the custodians of employee performance evaluation reports and which uses them as a measure for promotion had no way of ascertaining that they were being completed and/or countersigned by the rightful officers.
Also on account of poor storage and retrieval methods many of such reports get lost.
When they get lost, and because reports of three consecutive years are required for consideration for promotion, they are filled in arrears for the concerned staff and usually not by the staff under whom he worked, such a staff probably having been re-assigned.
left service or perhaps died.
3.3.2 Seniority Discussing this factor Glenn Stahl makes very useful comments.
He says that "....the simplest and most time-honored basis for promotion is the length of service of the employee, (but that) in most cases however, seniority is used in conjunction with other criteria for promotion".
The assumption for the use of seniority as a measure for promotion is that long and efficient service is a guarantee for handling the functions of a higher position.Stahl says that this is a false assumption because "the character of the work in the lower grades 50 may neither call into play nor develop the superior capacities required in the higher'".
The circumstance that seniority can be usefully brought in, is when all things are equal.
If the performance of all officers on the same level is adjudged equal, seniority can then become a deciding factor otherwise, it should ordinarily be assigned a small weight.
3.3.3 Examination Written examinations are useful measures of promotability depending upon the type of position and the factor being tested.
Testing for knowledge is comparatively simple and could be conclusive.
However, as noted by Stahl, "...in the matter of personality traits, which play a larger role as trheesp onsibilities of positions increase, there is no immediate prospect of conclusive tests.
Here, must be included such dynamic traits as leadership, judgment, initiative, resourcefulness, and cooperativeness".
Thus for lower level, routine, repetitive jobs, written examinations may suffice, but for supervisory and executive jobs, may not be sufficient.
Exercise: What remedy would you recommend to curb the problem of poor storage (retrieval of records in the Nigerian civil service and what would you do to curb the incidence of "make-up" performance evaluation reports some of which can be 3 years in arrears?
What weight is given to seniority in promotion exercise in any organization you know and what effect has it had on organizational performance?
3.3.4 Trial on the job This is about the best measure with which to measure suitability fporro m otion.
The intelligible which are necessary for filling more responsible positions can be objectively analyzed using this method.
Although opportunities for its use are limited as many times as they occur they should be used.
The most conducive time for their use is in the normal course of operations, e.g a subordinate acting for a boss when he goes on leave or on a fairly long assignment.
3.4 Transfers and re-assignm ents You will recall that when we discussed promotion above, we said it was an advancement from a lower to a higher position with increase in compensation.
A transfer.
according to O. Glenn Stahl, "....
Involves the movement of the employee to another position of the same class in another 51 organization unit.
This is a horizontal movement".
It does not involve a change of duties but only a change from the jurisdiction of one executive to that of another.
On the other hand, reassignment is a change of work, not involving increased responsibilities, in the same office.
There are many reasons that can account for transfers.
One, as noted by Stahl, is "original placement cannot ...wholly assure that the appointee is fitted to his job.
There always possibilities of round pegs in square holes....".
Another point you should note about transfers is that whereas some are within the same department (intra-departmental transfers) others are across (inter-departmental transfers).
Usually the former are easier to effect, not involving the authority of the central personnel agency, the latter, is usually difficult to effect and usually involves the approval or the action of tcheen t ral personnel agency.
A variant of transfers which combines the characteristics of reassignment is posting.
Posting is the reassignment of a given class or cadre of officers who are functionaries of a given office, e.g the office of the Head of Service or the Establishment Division.
from ministry to ministry, department to department as the exigencies of office/functions demand.
These class of officers are in a "pool" and are "rotated" from one ministry or department to another as a regular part of their character to improve growth of employee and of the organization.
It has its advantages and disadvantages.
The former is that it heightens morale by not tying one to a particular location and it engenders training in varied experiences.
The latter is that it can take an employee to an undesired organization unit or location.
If done too frequently it can lead to an employee not gathering any useful experience.
With a reasonable use, its advantages out-weigh its disadvantages.
4.0 Conclusion In this unit you have been introduced to the concept of internal recruitment with its varied types.
You now know that promotion comes with higher duties/responsibilities and higher pay.
You also know that transfers and reassignments are movements that do not involve higher positions or higher pay.
You have also learnt, bases for promotion and what importance to place on each.
5.0 Sum mary 52 In this unit you have covered quite a number of concepts - internal selection, promotion, transfers, reassignment.
You have also seen how some of these concepts are operated in the context of Nigeria.
6.0 Tutor Marked Assignm ent (1) Define and distinguish promotion from transfer (2) List all the measures or bases of promotion you have learnt here and give reasons for the one you recommend for Nigeria.
7.0 References and other resources References: - Omale.
I "Past Practices in Personnel Management in the Nigerian Civil service: Issues and Procedures in Ali D. Yahaya and Caleb I. Akinyele (eds) (1992), ASCON, Topo Badagry.
- O. Glenn Stahl (1992) Public Personnel Administration, fifth edition) Harper and Row, Publishers, New York.
UNIT 7 CAREER SYSTEMS Table of contents 53 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objectives 3.0 Main contents 3.1 Definition 3.2 Classification of career systems 3.2.1 Programme careers and Organization careers 3.2.2 Closed Careers and Open Careers 3.2.3 Job-Oriented Careers and Rank in the run 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutor Marked Assignment 7.0 Reference and other resources 1.0 Introduction When one enters into an organization or a service, one does so on the bases of an occupation.
Within the occupation, the employee moves from step to another on a ladder from the lower rungs to the highest.
This progression is what will be discussed in this unit.
This is a career.
Here we shall identify and discuss the various types.
2.0 Objectives By the end of this unit, you will be able to: - Identify what a career is - List various types of careers - Explain what each type of career is - List factors used to distinguish between one type of career from another - choose between careers 3.0 Main contents 3.1 Definition We shall avail you two definitions of this concept - career which O. Glenn Stahl is "an old" term.
According to him career has been widely used to denote: The progression of an individual in a field of work throughout tehme p loyable years of his lif e 54 In his own way, Edwin B. Flippo defines career as A sequence of separate but related work activities that provides continuity, order, and meaning in a person's life Two factors are common to the two definitions above.
Firstly, longevity.
Both definitions allude to life-long work experience.
Secondly, continuity.
The first definition which is more relevant to public service relates careerism to a given or chosen field of work.
The second definition speaks of separate, but related work activities.
Such phenomena are more common in the private sector.
Our preferred definition here is the first one which relates a career to one field of endeavor.
3.2 Classification of careers O. Glenn Stahl identifies three methods for the classification of careers.The first is the Closed Careers and the Open careers.
3.2.1 Closed career and Open careers A closed career system is one which utilizes the device of low maximum age limit for entrance and the filling of upper level positions almost entirely from within.
to keep other entrants out.
A closed career system does not permit entry at the middle or upper levels.
Such a system is based on the concept that substantial opportunity for advancement can be ensured only if the hierarchy is refueled in personnel from the base, preserving upper ranks for the completion of those already in the service.
A Nigerian example that can approximate a closed career is the military.
Virtually all military positions are entered into at the very base, in some cases at the Military School in Zaria at the age of 10 - 12 years.
It is from this tender age that one climbs the rungs to the top most position.
Even when there is entr y at 2nd lieutenant level of the officer corps, it is only at such a level and no other.
The Open career system on the other hand permits entrance at any or all grade levels (by rank or position) in the service.
In some instances and places, even this entrance is limited by entry qualifications and examinations.
In Nigeria however.
such limitations are usually flouted.
For example, although open, the administrative service had prerequisites for entry.
However, with the politisation as well as militarization of the service especially at state government levels, quite a number of people who have had nothing near administrative qualification or experience are brought to the very top of the 55 ladder.
Such were the times when professors in non management disciplines were taken into the civil service and made Heads of service.
Of course, the outcomes were disastrous.
3.2.2 Programme careers and Organization careers In a large organization with numerous activities and programmes, an employee may take a job that confines him to a section or a programme, whereas another employee may take a job that permits mobility from section to section.
The former is a programme career and the latter an organization career.
In the Nigerian context what ties an employee down in a pparortgicraumlamr e is also the nature of career or occupation to which the employee belongs.
Whereas, an agricultural officer for instance has to remain in the ministry soon finds himself in the ministry_ of' commerce and industry by process of "posting" or reassignment.
3.2.3 Job-oriented careers and Rank in the man This classification, also known as the position and personal rank concepts, is important but very complex.
Under the position concept,, individual career progression is a progression from one position of jobs sequentially' in an organization .For example, the career of a stenographer fits into this type of classification.
The jobs he does are sequenced into levels as for example, stenographer Grade l does a given type/level of jobs; a senior stenographer does a given type/higher level job, etc.
On the rank concept, let us give you a fairly long quote from Stahl to explain it: The rank idea says: `Hire broadly qualified people, and work out their assignments from time to time to suit the needs of the enterprise and the aptitudes of the individuals.
Let their progress and recognition be based on the length and overall quality of their service, regardless of the significance of individual assignments which they periodically assume.
An example which approximates the rank concept is the Nigerian administrative class positions.
Employees in the administrative service are hired on the bases of broad qualification and they are given vasasriyginnmg e nts.
For example, because the rank is in the man, not in the position, you find an Assistant Director, a Deputy Director, a Director, etc, all at certain times, doing the work of caretaker chair manship of local governments.
During the military era in civil administration in Nigeria, it was commonplace to find a major, a lieutenant colonel, a full colonel, a brigadier- general etc.
all holding the same position of Military governorships of states.
56 This is the rank concept of careers.It ensures greater flexibility and produces greater adaptability of human resources to organizational needs.
It may feature, to again quote Stahl, is that "... status (pay, prestige, rights, etc.)
resides in the individual regardless of the nature of his assignment".
Whereas in the position concept, "...status depends upon the work performed rather than upon the previous service of the individual".
4.0 Conclusion In this unit, the concept of career, which is the progression of the individual employee along a career ladder through his employable life span, has to be employed.
The various ways of classifying careers - based on two essential characteristics - one permitting and the other, restricting mobility, have also been discussed.
5.0 Sum mary This unit has covered the career concept from definition through to forms and methods of classification of careers.
6.0 Tutor Marked Assignm ent Question 1 State clearly, an acceptable definition of career.
List the three methods of career classification and fully explain one of them.
7.0 References and other resources Flippo.
Edwin B (1984) Personnel Management, (Sixth Edition) McGraw- Hill Book company, New York.
- Stahl, Glenn O.
(1962) Public Personnel Administration, (Fifth Edition_) Harper & Row Publishers, New York.
UNIT 8 COMPENSATION Table of Contents 57  1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objectives 3.0 Main Contents 3.1 Definition 3.2 Factors Determining the General pay level 3.2.1 Economic consideration 3.2.2 Social and Ethical considerations 3.3.1 Pay ceilings 3.3.2 Additional factors in salary determination 3.4 The Nigerian situation 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutor Marked Assignment 7.0 References and other Resources 1.0 Introduction Compensation is the payment an employee receives for the services he/she renders.
In this unit we shall explore how it is determined, i.e., the factors that go into determining salaries and wages.
We shall also look into minafljuoer n c es on the level of salaries and wages payable by various organizations and employer.
2.0 Objectives By the end of this unit you should be able to: • Define what compensation is • Explain the effects of economic, social, and ethical factors on salaries and wages • Identify reasons why some employers in organizations pay higher wages than others • Undertake a survey on how to gather facts to be used in establishing a pay scale a, 3.0 Main contents 3.1 Definition There is no terse definition of this concept.
Its meaning is deduced from its purpose and policy.
Edwin Flippo (1984) says that there are three purposes of employee compensation programmes, namely, (1) to attract capable employees to the organization, (2) to motivate them toward superior performance, and (3) to retain their services over an attended period of time.
58 A.G. Cole (1997) adds a fourth purpose, i.e that compensation is to reward employees for effort, loyalty, experience and achievement.
Putting all these together, we will provide you a definition of compensation: The money (salaries and wages) which an em ployer pays an em ployee for the services he the employee renders and which is meant to keep him rendering such services for an extended period of time.
Wages and salaries form the most single obligation an employer owes to employees and this usually is the biggest item of an organization's expenditure.
Cole notes that "typically, wages and salaries and related cost (pensions etc) make up about 60% of the total costs of running a major business.
This definition of compensation which talks about salaries and wages will not be complete if these two concepts i.e.
salaries and wages are not defined and distinguished one from the other.
James H. Donnelly Jr and his associates in their Fundamental of Management, do this by saying: The most com mon system by which non m anagerial employees acorem pensated is wages, which are based on time increm ents or tnhuem ber of units produced.
Non managerial employees traditionally have been paid at an hourly or daily rate, although some are now being paid biweekly or monthly.
Em ployees who are compensated on a weekly or longer schedule are paid salaries.
3.2 Factors in determining the general pay level 3.2.1 Economic considerations Even if you have not done economics before, you should not be discouraged by the economic concepts and ideas you will see here The first point to note here is that there is a vital relationship between the total amount spent for wages and the total productivity (i.e.
the total amount of goods and services produced).
The second truth is that there is a vital relationship between the amount spent on wages and the proportions of total income going to the other factors of production.
For example, if an organization has a total of Nlm (one million naira), and needs N1/2m to procure raw materials for making say, bicycle tyres, and spends N700,000 on wages, what is left cannot procure the raw materials for the labor force to use.
O. Glenn Stahl, putting all these economic factors together, concludes that "As society is economically organized at present, there is a practical 59 limitation upon the height to which the general level of all compensation can go - a limitation determined first by the total productivity of industry, and second by the irreducible requirements of the various other factors ipnr o duction.
A wage set with due regard to these considerations is regarded as an economic wage, and private establishments paying `uneconomic' wages are likely to be forced out of business".
Of course government is not bound by the economic factor above.
In theor y what sets a limit to what government can pay in wages and salaries is its income and the extent to which it has to compete in the labor mHoarwkeevt.e r , despite the fact that government is not bound by the economic argument, it behoves it to be guided by such arguments.
Gcoomvperentems ewnti th industry in the labor market.
If it pays far in excess of what industr y pays, labor will drain into public service and productivity of industry will suffer.
If, on the other hand, it pays far below economic way, it (the government) will find it difficult to attract labor.
3.2.2 Social and ethical considerations O. Glenn Stahl says that, "Although from an economic stand point tghoev e rnment is somewhat freer in setting its pay policy than are mcoomstp e titive private establishments, from the social and ethical stand points it is less free to do as it will'".
This is so because the government is the body which is saddled with the responsibility of ensuring that every citizen of a given country lives a life that is adjudged "adequate" and to ensure that this is attained means paying a wage that cannot go below a certain level.
The reason that Stahl advances for the social and ethical consideration is that the bargaining power of public employees is limited as a result of (1) the absence of effective organization among many civil servants (2) limitations upon the right to strike and to engage in political activities, and (3) the special character of much government work.
which makes it difficult for the civil servant to leave the service for private employment.
He sums up this factor and its effects thus:- "The weak bargaining position in which many public servants find themselves produces a situation conducive to arbitrary and dissemination.
The chief restraint against unfairness must be self imposed, on the ground that the government should be a model employer.
The social and ethical consideration is what gives rise to the idea of a living wage or what in the Nigeria of recent days you heard referred to as the minimum wage.
Stahl says that "most contemporary references to a minimum wage are, in reality references to a minimum living wage ...(and) that the 60 government should pay its employees a salary based upon what it costs them to maintain an appropriate standard of living".
This approach to tdheet e rmination of salary has nothing to do with economic consideration but purely an ethical consideration.
In the words of Stahl, "they are based upon the contention that ever y citizen of a civilized community should be assured the means to a reasonable sense of living according to the standard prevailing in the community"".
3.2.3 Determining the minimum living wage To determine the minimum living wage requires two steps.
Firstly, there is the need to deter mine the general living standard to be provided.
Secondly, there is need for a study of the cost-of-living budgets as a bdaesteisr m i nfoinrg t he amount necessary to maintain that standard.
Stahl adds yet another necessary requirement, i.e.
that "both of these are intimately related to the question of whether the minimum is to provide a living wage for a single man, a single woman, a married man, an average family or some other unit".
He added that "obviously, what might be a living wage for a man with no dependants would not provide a living for a family of five".
One way of solving the problem is what is known as the family allowance system, under which a minimum living wage is set for a single person and increments are added for dependants.
With this done, there still remains the problems of the standard of living to be accepted as the minimum, below which a citizen of a civilized community should not be expected to go.
Glenn Stahl says "various standards have been recognized - poverty level, minimum subsistence level, health and decency level, comfort level, cultural level, etc".
Whichever concept is used, there will always be the problem of lack of precision.
What should be guarded against is the fact that, whatever concept is adopted.
care should be taken that employees should be paid wages that enable them to live at least at the health and decency level.
Having determined a given standard as the minimum acceptable as a health and decency level, the next step is the determination through cost-of-living and theoretical budget studies of the average pay necessary to maintain the acceptable standard.
Here.
two methods are available for use.
The first is through actual investigation of expenditures of a sample of the individuals or families in the class chosen as the acceptable standard.
Under this method the amount of money spent by a sample of people living at the acceptable health and decency level is studied for a period of say, one month.
What this figure 61 gives will be a good estimate of a salary to be paid to employees to enable them live at such an acceptable level.
The second method is through setting up a minimum quantity bcoumdgpeitl,e d by including the goods and services comprising the living standard of a broad and representative group, and then investigating the current market prices of such commodities and services.
What this means is a compilation of goods and services that are needed to live at a level of health and decency for say a month.
This compiled.
the market prices are found.
The amount arrived at is equal to the minimum wage that an employee should be paid to enable him live at that level.
3.3.1 Pay ceilings Let us start the discussion by contrasting wages at the lower and higher levels in both government and private industry in the words of O. Glenn Stahl.
He says:- (A) characteristic of the government wage structure, .... Is the tendency for public wage levels to be somewhat above those prevailing outside so far as the lower brackets are concerned, and lower for professional and executive employment.
Thus, salaries and wages in the public service are confined within narrower limits than those outside.
The most serious aspect of this compression of pay scales is the lag in executive salaries in government as compared with those in the industry".
What this means is that, an account of the social and ethical considerations discussed above, government is constrained to pay a minimum wage which is usually higher than what private industry pays, the latter not obligated the way government is.
On the other hand, salaries at the top level of the services are higher in private industry than in government.
The economic fdaicsctours s e d earlier compels private industry to pay higher wages at the top or else it will not be able to attract adequate expertise.
Government on the other hand is not under the same compulsion.
Those at the higher rungs ogfo v ernment service have some altruistic satisfaction that keeps them on the job despite correspondingly lower salaries.
Also, whereas government salaries are pegged by government action, especially.
legislative action, salaries in private industry do not experience such inhibition but rather get propped up by union power which is virtually absent in the service of government.
3.3.2 Additional factors in salary determination The additional factors which might affect salary determination which we shall consider here are factors which give reason for salary differentials.
O. Glenn Stahl mentions two sorts of salary differentials, the first is geographic 62 and the second is special.
According to Stahl, geographic differential "is that which is added to or subtracted from the basic vote of all employees in all classes in a given locality for the purpose of equalizing real earnings between employees in various localities".
Stahl says further that geographic differentials in salary "arises only in those jurisdictions (i.e governmental bodies) employing a considerable field service and is based upon trheea li zation that equality of pay is really determined not by the number of dollars received but what they will buy in a given locality".
Sound as the case for geographic differentials may appear, their practical applications is beset with difficulties.
One basic difficulty is that there is no practical way of determining the geographical boundaries for particular rate areas.
With regard to special differentials, Stahl says that the factors which occasion them are "...the isolated character of a particular post, unusual hinavzoalrvde d in a particular assignment, and especially undesirable climatic conditions".
He says that "where these factors are present, it may bdee si rable, from the standpoint both of fair and equitable treatment to the employee and of recruitment necessities, to employ special differentials".
However, Stahl also says that special pay differential for hazardous work alone presents many perceiving problems.
There are governmental jobs such as manufacturing, inspection, testing, laboratory, hospital, etc which pose danger to life in one way or the other.
Rather than special pay differential, these factors should be taken into account when grading the job.
Alternatively, rather than trying to meet the hazard problem by extra pay, many people, according to Stahl, "contend that hazard should be controlled by safety engineering and training, by careful selection of employees where special skills are required to avoid harm, and by careful adjustment owfo r k ing time or conditions, and that more adequate injury compensation and family benefits as the result of death should be looked upon as economic protection for the individual and his family".
Exercise 1.
Define compensation.
How would you distinguish between salary and wages.
1.2 Why can the government not totally do without the economic consideration in fixing salaries of its workers?
3.4 The Nigerian situation When the opportunity come in 1974 for a major work to be done concerning salaries and wages, among other things, in the public service, i.e.
the work of the public service Review Commission, popularly referred to as the Udoji Commission, the salary policy was developed based upon the following premises: 63  (i) Public service salaries, if they are to have any economic base.
must be generally related to salaries for comparable work in the private sector, which reflect the economics of the market".
You will notice that the economic consideration is here.
(ii) In view of the super-abundance of labor at the lower level of skills, the market price of labor at these levels as reflected in private sector pay is likely to be below that which the public service should be willing to pay, and below that which will support a desirable standard of living for public servants".
You will notice here the abundant influence of the social and ethical considerations discussed above.
(iii) Similarly, at the highest levels of management, factors such as contributory pensions, security of tenure and psychic satisfaction contribute to salaries in the top management positions in the public sector being lower than those in the private sector".
Here you will notice that the Nigerian situation advances what we might call more cogent reasons to explain why salaries in the upper brackets of the public service are lower than those in the same bracket in the private sector.
(iv) The principle of equal pay for equal work militates against establishing regional or urban rural differentials between employees in the same grade".
Here you will notice that the reason given against the adoption of geographic salary differentials is ideological rather than the practical ones given earlier under this topic.
(v) Fringe benefits (see unit 9) such as pensions and allowances which are quantifiable should be taken into account in comparing compensation between the public and private sectors".
These are the salient and most relevant premises upon which compensation is based in Nigeria.
As you can see, no government can do without both the economic as well as social and ethical considerations in determining salaries and wages.
Also as it is in other countries and for the same reasons, salaries are found to be higher in the public sector for the lower rungs than in the private sector and higher for the upper echelons of the organization in the private sector than in the public sector.
4.0 Conclusion This unit has examined the topic - compensation.
It has given its meaning and factors used in deter mining it.
The most important factors being economic and social and ethical factors.
The former is more relevant in the private 64 sector whilst the latter is more relevant in the public sector although neither sector can do without them both.
5.0 Sum mary Compensation is one, if not, the most important incentives that makes an employee offer his services to an employer.
How it is determined has been the main concern of this unit.
6.0 Tutor Marked Assignm ent Q.1 Use the Nigerian case to discuss the considerations to go into the determination of salaries and wages.
7.0 References and other resources Cole, A.G (1997) Personnel Management - Theor y and Practice (Fourth Edition) ELST.
with Letts Educational, London.
Donnelly, James H. Jr, Gibson, James L, Ivancevich, John M., (1995) F u ndamentals of Management, (Ninth Edition) Federal Republic of Nigeria (1974) Report of the Public Service Review Commission, Federal Government Press, Lagos.
Stahl, Glenn O (1962), Public Personnel Administration (Fifth Edition), Harper and Row Publishers Inc. New York.
UNIT 9 FRINGE BENEFITS Table of Contents 65  1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objectives 3.0 Main contents 3.1 Definition and Scope 3.1.1 Definition 3.1.2 Scope 3.2 Philosophy and principles of employee benefits 3.2.1 Philosophy 3.2.2 Principles of employee benefit programmes 3.3 Economic protection against hazards (a) Generated Annual Wages (b) Life Insurance (c) Credit Union 3.4 Facilitative employee service 3.6.1 Recreational Programmes 3.6.2 Cafeterias 3.6.3 Vanpooling 3.6.4 Child care 3.6.5 Educational Tuition 1.0 Introduction Fringe benefits, also known as supplementar y compensation or allowances are payments made to employees in addition to salaries and wages.
Flippo sees its benefit as helping to ensure the retention of the employee in the organization on a long term basis.
Different organizations pay different fringe benefits.
In Nigeria, there is a marked difference between the fringe benefits paid in the private sector as compared with those paid by government - the private sector pays higher than government does.
2.0 Objectives By the end of this unit, you should be able to: - Define fringe benefit - Identify a number of fringe benefits - Recognize the philosophy and principles of fringe benefit programmes 66 3.0 Main contents 3.1 Definition and scope Edwin B. Flippo discussing the nature of fringe benefits says:- "Different forms of supplementary compensation have a variety of titles in industry.
Some refers to them as -service programs', others characterize them as `non wage payment' or `employee benefits', still others emphasize the costs and label them `hidden payroll'.
Typically, they have been most often referred to as fringe benefits.
Giving what looks like a definition, Flippo says: In the broadest sense, such `fringes' can be construed to include all expenditures designed to benefit employees over and above regular base pay and direct variable compensation related to output.
Flippo says that the “benefit” of fringe benefits is to retain the employee in the organization on a long term basis.
He further says that there is little or not evidence that it serves to motivate employees to higher productivity.
However, fringe benefits also known as "flexible benefits" by Stephen P. Robbins, now do have motivational value.
He talks about flexible benefits (fringe benefits) thus: "Flexible benefits allow employees to pick and choose from among a menu of benefit options.
The idea is to allow each employee to choose a benefit package that is individually tailored to his or her own needs and situations.
It replaces the traditional 'one-benefit-plan-fits-all' programs that have dominated organizations for more than 50 years".
Linking benefits to motivation, Robbins says: "Giving all employees the same benefits assumes that all employees have the same needs.
Of course, we know that this assumption is false.
Thus, flexible benefits turn the benefits' expenditure into a motivator.
Consistent with expectancy theory's thesis that organizational rewards should be linked to each individual employee's goals, flexible benefits individualize rewards by allowing each employee to choose the compensation package that best satisfies his or her current needs''.
3.1.2 Scope of fringe benefits Flippo gives the following as major categories of fringe benefits: 1.
Payment for time not worked.
Flippo says that "Examples in this area would include paid rest periods, paid lunch periods, wash-up time, clothes-change time, get ready time, vacations, holidays, sick leave, personal leave, voting time, and injury duty.
There is seemingly no 67 end to the innovative determination of new reasons for not working for pay.
Perhaps the ultimate is a newly negotiated 'to-hell-with-it' benefit: a certain number of days provided for the occasion when the employee simply doesn't feel like going to work".
2.
Hazard protection.
"There are a certain number of hazards that must be commonly faced by all.
Income maintenance during these periods is the purpose of fringes designed to protect against thhaez a rds of illness, injury, debt, unemployment, permanent disability, old age and death".
3.
Employee services.
"All people must have certain services available on a continuing basis, such as housing, food, advice, recreation, and so on.
The trend toward the organization's providing such routine and ordinary services in exemplified by such fringe benefit programs as cafeterias, paid legal services, career counseling, educational tuition, aid in housing, medical services, low-cost loans, use of organizations vehicles for personal reasons, day-care centers for children, and paid membership in certain organizations".
4.
Legally required payments.
An issue which is so far peculiar to the U.S.A. Flippo talks about it thus: "Our society, through its government, has cleared that certain minimum levels of company expenditures will be made in the area of protecting employees against the major hazards of life.
Thus, regardless of company policy, organizations covered by federal and state laws must pay for unemployment compensation, workers' compensation insurance, old age and survivors' insurance under social security, and Medicare".
With programmes as comprehensive as the listing above, no wonder the cost of fringes have become very large.
Robbins says.
"aTvehrea g e organization provides fringe benefits worth approximately 40 percent of an employee's salar y".
Flippo on the other hand s"a..y..,t o tal employee benefits as a percentage of payroll have moved from 18.7 percent in 1951, to 36.6 percent in 1979.
The fciognutrien u es to move upwards, with a reported 37.1 percent in 1980".
With the innovations coming into it, the cost of fringes will soar much higher in future.
Some of the new fringes for -workers are longer vacations, no employee expense for major medical coverage, cost of living adjustment of pensions after retirement, earlier retirement ages, possible training when severed from the organization, etc.
For executives, fringes such as the following are envisaged: facelifts for 68 executive and spouses, adoption fees, no-smoking pay, paternity leave, well pay, weight-loss pay.
self defense training, chauffeured limousines, company apartment or hotel room near the office, financial counseling, club membership, home entertainment expenses, and no-interest loans etc.
Exercise 1.1 Fringe benefits are cost-intensive.
Discuss.
3.2 Philosophy and principles of employee benefits As you have already noted, the growth of employee benefits has braemenp a nt.
Flippo gives as a reason for such a growth in the 1920s, the then managerial philosophy labeled paternalism.
The paternalistic approach occasioned such services as "company housing and company stores".
This philosophy went into disrepute for two reasons.
Firstly, the employees' desire for "industrial adulthood" and secondly, the depression of the 1930s which served to eliminate many employer-financed services.
Since world war 11, Flippo says "we have entered the era of the `pnaetewr n alism" The attitudes of workers and the general public have changed toward service progrmmes.
This coupled with massive government legislation in favor of services has made the fringes of 1920s "...pale into insignificance when compared with those of the present".
In face of the social legislations, many now believe that the private firm, in the words of Flippo, "....is morally responsible for the lives of its employees.
It is no longer a service initiated by a fatherly, benevolent employer, but a rimeqpuoirseemd ebnyt g overnment, competition, or the labor union".
In summary, Flippo said, "the rapid growth of such programs can be traced to sources as (1) a changed employee attitudes, (2) labor union demands, (3) governmental requirements, (4) competition that forces other employers to match benefits to attract and keep labor, and (5) period wage controls that freeze wages but permit the offering of services, since they can be bought with cheap dollars".
How can the manager rationalize the huge expenditure on employee services?
In light of the fact that provision of certain employee services are mandated by government.
the company has to bear them.
However, even if tchoem pany cannot recover its costs tangibly, it does so intangibly through 69 various forms, many of which are not subject to qualification.
Among such values are: (1) More effective recruitment - you may wish to recall that in unit 2 where we discussed recruitment we did say that it was the salesmanship that organizations do of themselves to make them attractive to would be employees.
Any organization that has aantt ra ctive employee service, makes itself attractive to prospective employees.
(2) Improved morale and loyalty (of its employees) (3) Lower turnover and absenteeism (4) Good public relations (5) Reduced threat of further government intervention (6) Increase in productivity arising from the fact of fringe benefits' conversion from mere services into motivators.
This point, made by Stephen P. Robbins and noted above, may be the strongest point in support of employee benefit programmes.
3.1.2 Principles of employee benef it programmes About the most important principle of employees benefit programmes is that the benefit must make a contribution to the organization at least equal in amount to the cost of it.
In addition to this Flippo states other principles as follows: 1.
The employee benefit should satisfy a real need.
With the point made above by Robbins, that employee services are now individually tailored to meet individual employees, this principle is no longer critical.
Otherwise, its import is that before a programme is embarked upon, care must be taken to ensure that it answers to the felt need of the generality,i~1 employees.
Flippo gives an example of an athletic service provided for the employees in an organization and when the whistle was blown to "play ball", no one turned out.
2.
Benefits should be confined to activities in which the group is more efficient than the individual.
This principle is valid for certain services only, e.g.
group insurance cover.
which is more cost effective than individual one, otherwise, individualized services are more effective.
70 3.
The benefit programme should be characterized by sufficient flexibility to enable adaptation to varying employee needs.
This, according to Flippo, "suggests that not all employees are alike in terms of age, family status, and financial requirements".
He cites the case that "whereas the typical benefit offering assumes that it is for a male who has a family with a non working wife, the continuing changes in our society make this concept obsolete.
Today, fewer males are the sole support of their families, and more couples are remaining childless.
In 1970, 70 percent of all households were maintained by married couples; today the figure is just about 60 percent.
Rather than one standard benefit program, it has been suggested that at least five are needed: (1) single workers (2) married workers with no children (3) married with young dependants (4) married with dependants in college and (5) `empty westers".
One technique, according to Flippo, that can be "...utilized to inject this needed flexibility is the `cafeteria' style program.
Though relatively few firms have undertaken this new approach.
The system adheres to the principle of individual differences in that it allows the employee to choose from a varied offering those benefits that are the most valuable to her or him".
4.
The cost of the benefit should be calculable, and provision should be made for sound financing.
This is particularly important in the matter of employee pensions.
With regard to this, Flippo advises that "sound actuarial estimates must be made, and adequate provisions for financing must be established before conceding the services over the collective bargaining table".
Exercise 1.2 Use the philosophy of the employee benefit service given by Edwin B. Flippo to defend it.
3.3 Economic protection against hazards A number of countries have schemes that offer a measure of pagroatiencstti o n h azards.
The U.S.A has the old age *survivors' insurance aunnde m ployment compensation required by the social security Act, Workers' compensations, etc; in Nigeria, we have the pensions and gratuity scheme.
In addition to these mandatory schemes, some organizations designed to help employees when faced with adversity.
Some of such schemes are discussed below.
(a) Guaranteed annual wage This is applicable in private organizations that do not offer full and tenure employments.
Most of such organizations have employment 71 schemes characterized by the following: (1) they guarantee only a certain number of weeks of employment and/or wages, (2) they restrict the number of employees who are covered, and (3) they suspend the operations of the plan under conditions of eexmtreermgeen c y, such as fire, flood, explosion and strikes.
When we speak of guaranteed annual wage, what we mean is that some organizations, despite situations calling for restrictions in employment,, have decided to guarantee a pay check for evey month of the year.
Some also ensure a'no layoff policy.'
The aims of this are to ensure stable operations for the organization and steady employee earnings.
(b) Lif e Insurance This is about the oldest form of employer sponsored ebmenpelfoity.e e T he return to the company of this particular economic service, in the words of Flippo, "...comes from relieving the employee of worry about the security of his or her dependants.
Relieve from worry should enable a person to devote greater attention to the job and the company .
(C) Credit union A credit union, according to Flippo, "...is an organized group of people who pool their money and agree to make loans to oannoe th er".
This relieves employees in credit unions of the worry over short term financial insecurity.
Loans taken from such unions are not only at affordable interest rates, they do not fall under loans which if taken by employees can amount to financial embarrassment punishable by employers.
3.4 Facilitative employee services Facilitative services are activities that employees must normally take care of themselves in their daily lives.
Organizations, in order to relieve employees of some of the burdens of these "cares" of life and thus free body and mind to concentrate on work, come in to provide relief services.
Some of these are as follows: (a) Recreational programmes There are two types or levels at which organizations do promote sports.
One is that in which a particular organization floats a sporting club and have a team that can compete in National and International 72 sporting events.
The use such a sporting activity to give publicity and perhaps nothing else by way of increased productivity.
The other level of sporting activity is intramural.
In this case the organization establishes sporting facilities for its employees to "enjoy".
Such sports are golf, tennis (lawn and table), swimming, etc.
Here again, the sporting activity hardly Contributes directly to productivity.
Perhaps it can be argued that sports contribute to the ''employee health and for sports lovers, may boost morale and thus indirectly contribute to productivity.
(b) Cafeterias The most important contribution of company cafeteria is improved nutrition.
Without it, employees are likely to settle for unsatisfactory snacks, or on the other eat very heavy food elsewhere which may reflect in greater fatigue and reduced productivity during the late afternoon.
For these and other reasons, it is a wise decision foorrg a n izations to run cafeteria services for their employees.
( c ) Child care Flippo says that "Approximately half of all women with children under the age six are in the workforce (and that) for families with both parents working, it is estimated that day care expenses for children average 10 percent of gross income...." For this reason a number of companies either assist employees by counseling as to where to find the services and helping to link up service providers with employees needing such service, or the company runs such child care services for its employees.
The relief from worry and the cost-saving nature of in- house childcare services serve as motivators which can contribute towards greater productivity on the part of employees.
(d) Employee purchase This is a practice under which the company allows the employees to purchase its own goods at a discount or under which the company buys the products of another company and sells them to its own employees at a reduced rate.
The effect it has is on morale which may lead to increased productivity.
73 (e) Educational tuition This is a process where the employer assists the employee to acquire education.
Except that, as Flippo states, there is low interest in it by employees, it is a weapon with a double edge - the employee gains additional knowledge and skills that contributes to personal development, the organization gains when these skills are put to work on the job.
These are some of the more common ones or ones used in tchoius n try.
There are more.
e.g.
vanpooling, and other employee service programmes, which can be used to increase morale and consequently productivity.
4.0 Conclusion Unit 9 has examined the topic - fringe benefits.
It is also ksunpopwlenm e natsa r y compensation and recently as flexible benefits.
Ordinarily, in its traditional conceptualization, it was not thought of as a motivator, but seen as flexible benefit.
and applied that way, has become a motivator.
We have also discussed the philosophy on which is hinged and principles guiding its adoption and implementation.
We have seen that fringe benefits are of two major types - one is that involving measures taken as economic protection against hazards, and the other has to do with facilitative services to make living more conducive for working.
5.0 Sum mary Fringe benefits are a part of general compensation.
It is part of what new entrants use in deciding whether to work for one organization rather than another.
As such.
organizations have to pay some attention to it.
6.0 Tutor Marked Assignm ent Q. l List all the principles of employee benefits.
Explain any two of them fully using examples in your experience to do so.
7.0 Reference and other resources References 74 - Flippo.
Edwin B (1984) Personnel Management (sixth edition), McGraw- Hill Book Company, New York.
- Robbins, Stephen P (2001) Organizational Behavior (Ninth Edition) Prentica Hall of India.
New Delhi.
I like to explain numbers 1 and 4 above.
The pointiest number says that the employee benefit to be instituted should serve a real need.
This make it compelling to study the situation existing in an organization before the adaptation of a plan.
In this modern situations where "things" exist and can be copied from one organization to another, care must be taken to adopt any existing systems.
The new approach to fringe benefits especially, that along the thoughts of Stephen P. Robbins, says that employee services should be tailor- made to suit individuals.
For example, there will be, little need to institute an employee service under which a room is equipped with toys for kids to play with in an organization of nursing mothers.
The idea oesf ta b lishing that a real need exists before instituting an employee benefit service is also in congruence with my experience of community development projects for rural dwellers.
Usually projects for rural dwellers are conceived and implemented by government officials who invariably live and work in urban areas for rural people.
In most cases such projects are not appropriate and hardly used by the rural people.
The second principle is that which says that the cost of the benefits should be calculable and that provision should be made for sound financing.
In Nigeria, especially at state levels the pension benefits of retired employees are hardly paid on time, and the cost-of living adjustments which are supposed to be made are hardly made.
This problem is a problem arising from lack of calculations ab initio, and making adequate financial provision for this vital employee benefit service.
MODULE TWO UNIT 10 EMPLOYEE PERFORMANCE APPRAISAL 75 Table of Contents 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objectives 3.0 Main Contents 3.1 Definition and scope 3.2 Reasons for appraisal 3.3 Difficulties with appraisal 3.3.1 Appraisal forms 3.3.2 Appraisal rating 3.3.3 Appraisal interviews 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutor marked Assignments 7.0 References and other resources 1.0 Introduction According to G. A. Cole, employee performance appraisal is one out of only 3 of the numerous personnel functions that evaluates the employee ainsd ividuals.
It is as a result.
,L% ~ important because it is sensitive.
In his words, this is "....a task that is delicate as well as complex".
In Nigeria, this task has been carried out at one time as a "confidential annual report" i.e.
done by the manager/supervisor without the knowledge or any input by the employee being appraised; and at another time as an "open performance appraisal" system.
Whatever it is or should be, is the concern of this unit.
2.0 Objectives By the end of this unit, you should be able to; • Define the concept of employee appraisal • List the reasons for which appraisals are done • Recognize an appraisal form • Construct a rating scales for employee appraisal • Conduct an appraisal interview 3.0 Main contents Definition and scope of employee performance appraisal 76 3.1.1 Definition In their book.
Human Resources Management, Theory and Practice, John Bratton and Jeffrey Gold (in the glossary of the book) define performance appraisal as an "Analysis of an employee's capabilities and potential drawn from assessment data of past and current work, behavior , and performance.
allowing decision to be m ade in relation to purpose - for example HRD needs" The say of HRD (Human Resource Development), among other things, as "A term used to indicate training and development ...." 3.1.2 Scope Seen in the light of the definition above, performance appraisal has quite a number of factors in it to be considered.
Firstly, it is an appraisal of the employee's capabilities and potential capabilities.
As will be seen later, it is in Part therefore a rating of an employee's traits.
Secondly, it is an assessment of data on work done.
Therefore, it is not alone an appraisal of an individual's trait, but an objective measure of work done, using facts and figures.
Taking these two factors together, performance appraisal can be seen to be concerned with assessment of both behavior and performance.
Thirdly, it has an aim, which is to allow decision to be made in relation to training, development, and as will be seen later, promotion, increase in salary etc.
We have isolated these factors and emphasized them because in the context of Nigeria, as noted by I. Omale in a chapter of a book - Planning and Budgeting in Nigeria - Institutional and Policy Reforms (1994) these factors are singled out and weighted in a performance appraisal policy in the civil service.
He enumerated the factors as follows: (a) actual performance compared with prescribed performance standards, (b) character traits, (c) attendance and punctuality at work (d) leadership performance.
Exercise 1.1 Define performance appraisal and list all the factors to be considered in an appraisal.
77 3.2 Reasons for performance appraisal Some of the reasons for employee performance appraisal are contained under the topic "Scope" above.
However, the reasons for it are numerous and G. A. Cole provides a list as follows: • to identify an individual's current level of job performance to identif y employee strengths and weaknesses • to enable employees to improve their performance • to provide a basis for rewarding employees in relation to their contribution to organization goals • to motivate individuals • to identify training and development needs • to identify potential performance • to provide information for succession planning Summing the reasons for appraisal, Cole says "The most likely reason for the adoption of staff appraisal is to draw attention to present performance in the job in order to (a) reward people fairly, and (b) to identify those wpoitthen tials for promotion or transfer".
3.3 Difficulties with appraisals As we noted earlier performance appraisal is an intricate and complex affair.
A. C. Cole cites three difficulties concerning both accuracy and fairness of appraisals.
They are: • the construction of the appraisal documents • the style in which the appraisal is approached • the culture of the organization 3.3.1 The appraisal document i.e.
the form) As seen above under scope, the target of appraisal can be either performance or behavior of an employee.
The instrument or form or document used for appraisal usually indicates what it is that is being appraised.
A. G. Cole gives the characteristics of forms which seek information about the person rather than about his performance as: (i) generalized criteria (ii) generalized ratings of performance 78 (iii) individual qualities rather than results (iv) box ticking as method of performance An appraisal form that seeks information about the employee rather than hpiesr f ormance is at fig.
1.1 below Fig 1.1 Appraisal form emphasizing individual qualities Personal attributes 1.
Always at the center of activity leadership 2. capable of leading smallish groups 3. has no real leadership qualities Initiative 1.
Always acts on own initiative 2.
Will act on own initiative in minor ways 3.
Never acts unless instructed Judgment 1.
Assesses a situation with cool discernment 2.
Sometimes confused by strong counter-arguments, but generally makes sound assessment 3.
Totally lacks any critical faculty Decision-making Ability 1.Makes sound decisions at all times 2.Cannot always foresee the outcome of his decisions 3,Decisions are more like guesses Customer Awareness 1.
Aware of need for quality, timeliness and price 2.
Only partially aware of the impor tance of the customer during the working day 3.
Customers' needs are seen as secondary to his own Self-disciple 1.
Has well-balanced attitude towards work and leisure 2.
Concentrates on work he prefers Appraisal styles Maier (1958) identified three basic approaches to the appraisal interview.
These were as follows: (1) TELL AND SELL approach, in which the manager tells his subordinate how he is doing, and endeavors to persuade him to accept what has been decided for him in terms of improvement.
(2) TELL AND LISTEN approach, where the manager tells his subordinate how he is doing, but then sits back and listens to the 79 individual's point of view both about the appraisal and about any follow- up action required.
(3) PROB LEM-SOLVING approach, in which the manager effectively puts aside the role of judge in order to join the subordinate in mutual reflection on progress and mutual discussion about required action.
Maier has in effect described a continuum of interviewer behavior ranging from a relatively autocratic style to one that is fully participative.
Tcohnet i nuum may be described graphically as below: Interview dominated By manager A continuum of appraisal interview styles (after Maier) 80 Interview shares between Manager and subordinate  Manager Manager Manager Manager TELLS TELLS& TELLS& SHARES SELLS LISTENS problems and Solution with subordinate A. G. Cole notes the following as being the difficulties with appraisals utilizing the above form, i.e individual qualities appraisal.
The first difficulty with this approach is that of measurement.
How can a manager fairly assess qualities of leadership or judgment, for example?
The second difficulty is that of relevance How central to success are diligence and cost consciousness, for example'?
Hard work is not synonymous with effective work; awareness of costs may be disadvantageous if it discourages initiative or decision-making.
The third difficulty is that the mcoamnpagleetrisn g the form have to rely on subjective impressions instead ocof'n crete evidence.
Fortunately, the senior management of the company concerned found it too difficult to operate such a generalized instrument and eventually substituted a results-oriented system.
On the other hand, all appraisal which focuses attention on performance could have a form as the one of fig.
1.2 below.
Fig.
1.2 Results-oriented appraisal form Company: Office Equipment Sales Position: Managing Director 81  Key Result Areas Targets Set for the Achieved Evidence Notes Period* Profitability Increase profit sales Yes Annual ration by 5% Accounts Maintain present Market Share market share at 15% No (13%) Industry Price-cutting statistics b yA achlli eve gross sales of competitors N150m Sales Reduce average No Annual delivery time to four (N 148m) Accounts weeks Delivery Ensure staff costs do yes Customer not exceed 55% of Accounts total expenditure *Financial year Staff Performance yes Annual Budget Summary An appraisal using the above form will find it possible to identify the relevant aspects of the job and to set measurable targets against which to assess the employee's performances in a fair and accurate manner.
What is bapeipnrga is ed is quality (how much?)
quality (how well?
), time (by what time?)
and cost (at what cost?)
In concluding this section however, it is advisable perhaps to adopt the Nigerian variant stated under scope above.
There the two factors of behavior and performance, are being appraised.
This is necessary because employee who deals with customers may have a very high quality job, accomplished in ver y good time, but delivers it in a ver y impolite manner.
Not only can such a service or a good be rejected, the organization that harbors such an impolite staff may also be rejected.
It may therefore be advisable to use the two forms above together for better result.
3.3.2 Rating scales in perf ormance appraisal 82 Whichever factor we are measuring - behavior or performance - appraisers still have to measure individual performance which they do by use of one or more scales.
Cole lists and explains them as follows: 1.
Linear or Graphic Rating Scales Initiative A B C D E 1 2 3 4 5 5 Initiative (Low) (High) Initiative Excellent..................Good..................Average................Poor 2.
Behavioral Scales -this is the type shown in fig.
1.1 above 3.
Results/Targets Set - this is the example in fig.
1.2 4.
Free Written Reports - in this, the appraiser writes essay type answers to questions set on the appraisal document.
3.3.3 Appraisal Interviews This is a face- to-face meeting the employee and his manager or supervisor.
Its"aim is to discuss the subject of each item on the appraisal form.
This is related to the open rather than the confidential appraisal method.
It has a number of objectives.
As listed by Cole these are: (1) to evaluate the subordinate's recent performance (2) to formulate job improvement plans (3) to identify problems and/or examine possible opportunities related to the job 83 (4) to improve communication between superior and subordinate (5) to provide feedback on job performance to the employee (6) to provide a rationale for salary reviews (7) to identify potential performance/possibilities for promotion or transfer (8) to identify training and development needs.
4.0 Conclusion This unit has dealt with a critical, sensitive personnel function.
From it you have learnt that appraisal rates both behavior and performance.
You have also learnt the role of appraisal interviews and how it helps to bring manager/supervisor in close collaboration with the employee for the good of the organization.
5.0 Sum mary In this unit, as much as possible, all that you need to know about performance appraisal have been discussed.
It covers definition, scope and the format of appraisal as well as style.
6.0 Tutor Marked Assignm ent Question.
In this unit allusion was made to the Nigerian situation.
How does it differ from the other examples discussed?
How would you reflect the Nigerian variant on a form?
7.0 References and other resources Bratton, John and Gold, Jeffrey (1999) Human Resource Management - Theory and Practice (Second Edition) Macmillan Press Ltd, London Cole, G.A (1997) Personnel Management Theory and Practice (Fourth Edition) ELST with Letts Educational, London 84 Omale, I "Complementary Institutional Reform Programme: The Civil Service Reform, in Obadan, Mike I, and Ogiogio, Gene O (1994) Planning, and budgeting in Nigeria Institutional and Policy Reforms, National Centre for Economic Management and Administration, (NCEMA), Ibadan.
MODULE TWO UNIT 11 TRAINING Table of Contents 85  1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objectives 3.0 Main content 3.1 Definition and scope 3.1.1 Definition 3.1.2 Scope 3.2 Pre-entry Training 3.2.1 The liberal Arts School of thought 3.2.2 The science oriented school of thought 3.2.3 Professionals with administrative training 3.3 In-service Training 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutor Marked Assignment 7.0 References and other resources 1.0 Introduction Training is a very impor tant personnel function to which every organization must pay special attention.
The contribution_ of individual workers depend on what knowledge of the work they have and the skills they possess to carry out the work.
These contributions will increase/improve with new knowledge and skill obtainable in most cases from training.
2.0 Objective By the end of this unit you should be able to: • Identify what training is • Define training Identify training needs • Device training plans • Conduct training needs surveys 3.0 Main contents 3.1 Definition and Scope 3.1.1 Definition As we embark on the definition of training, we want you to reflect ownh e ther the twin concept development is or is not the same as training; and whether both of them are or are not the same as education.
Let us now, give 86 the definition of training.
We shall leave that of development to its own unit which comes later.
G. A. Cole defines training as: Training [is].... any learning activity which is directed towards acquisition of specif ic knowledge and skills for the purpose of aoncc u pation or task.
The focus of training is the job or task.
3.1.2 Scope By scope here, we mean quantity and quality of training.
G.A.
Cole gives a long list of what determines the quantity and quality of training ionr g anizations.
They are: • Degree of change in the external environment (technological change, new legislation, etc) • Degree of internal change (new processes, new markets, etc) • Availability of suitable skills within the existing work force • Adaptability of existing work force • The extent to which the organization supports the idea of internal career development • The commitment of senior management to training as an essential part of economic success • The extent to which management sees training as a motivating factor in work • Knowledge and skills of those responsible for carrying out the training.
The quantity and quality of training an organization has depends on its policy toward training.
In some organizations, and this is common in government agencies in Nigeria, training is adhoc, unplanned and haphazard.
Oortghaenr iz a tions are careful about training and are systematic about identifying training needs, then designing training activities in a rational manner to meet the needs, afterwards evaluate the results.
This is how it ought to be.
The knowledge and skills that are or are not available in the public service as a result of training or lack of it are a function of two phenomena.
The first is pre- entry training and the second is in-service training.
We shall start by discussing pre-entry training.
3.2 Pre-entry training Pre-entry training is the training an employee has undergone before he joins a service or an organization.
You may be led into thinking that this being the case, it should not feature prominently in the discussion of training that goes 87 on in the service or in an organization.
There are a number of reasons why it should.
Firstly, in some countries or organizations, the training that takes place in institutions from which government or such organizations get their staff is influenced by government or such organizations.
Let us make this clearer by an example.
In the early 60s, and Institute of Public Administration was set up in Zaria, Nigeria.
Its aim, among others, was to prepare administrative officers for the government.
Although the training that took place there was "pre- entry" into service by those who attended it (and by the way not all who attended went into government service) was influenced by government needs.
The curriculum was drawn up to reflect the needs of government sSeercvoicned.l y , as noted above, the scope of training needed in an organization is determined, among other factors, by availability of suitable skills within the existing work force.
Much of this existing skill comes from ptrraei-neinntgr.y In order to ensure some appreciable level of pre-entry knowledge and skills two schools of thought h have guided in-take into public services of countries and/or organizations.
The first school of thought is associated with Britain.
3.2.1 The liberal arts school of thought O. Glenn Stahl states that: "In connection with the preparation of students for an administrative career, two schools of thought exist.
One follows the lead of the United Kingdom which has been successful in recruiting for administrative duties the pick 14W graduates from Oxford, Cambridge, the London School of Economics, and other established universities".
This is done on the assumption that: "..,the best administrators are those who have had a general liberal education, which makes for flexibility of miminagdi,n ation and breadth of outlook".
In the words of Lord Haldone (quoted by Stahl, in a learning before the Royal Commission of the Civil Service, he said "We still consider it worthwhile for our administrators to know their Aristotle and Plato".
To a large extent, in the initial years of the Nigeria Civil Service, it was guided by this school of thought, The requirement for entry into tahdem inistrative class of the Nigerian Civil Service was mainly a liberal arts degree of not lower than a second class.
And for many years, this entry qualification was sufficient (without any additional training/to take one through the career rungs to the topmost position - that of a Head of Service.
3.2.2 The Science Oriented School of Thought 88 In this school of thought it is maintained that administration is not all art but also science.
This being the case, principles can be deduced from its practice which can be taught and learnt.
This school believes that a student with a liberal arts degree can be given specialist training in the technicalities of administration.
Such teaching combined with internship opportunities can qualify young people for a career in administration.
This school of thought argues that it is possible to provide vocational training in administration - subjects covered in such a training being determined by what an administrator actually does.
Such courses will include according to Stahl, "administrative law, budgetary theory and practice, personnel administration, purchasing and handling of supplies, office procedures, reporting, statistics, research methods, and the like".
The aim of training in this way is to produce a generalist, one who "....should be acquainted with these various subjects, not as a practitioner or a specialist but one who should know how to utilize practitioners and specialists most effectively".
Stahl say, in this connection that "An honest analysis of the work of the administrator will show that he is called upon to know more and more but probably never enough about any of the many fields subject to his direction to qualify as a specialist".
The shortcoming of the training emanating from this school of thought is that the generalists it produces, fit only into government administr ative work and not much else i.e.
its products have a small job (opportunities) market within which to operate.
3.2.3 Professionals with administrative training What looks like a third school of though is the availing of graduates ivna r ious specialties with exposure to the art and science of leadership.
This is premised on the belief that, in the words of Stahl, "The bulk of the non- clerical public jobs necessarily calls for technical knowledge in some field or the other".
What this third school of thought aims at is to turn the expert in one field or the other to an administrator in order to rid him of what Stahl calls "the provincialism of the expert".
By character, experts view issues from a narrowness of their expertise.
Given some administrative training, the narrowness is minimized.
This is on the premise that, again in the words of Stahl, "....cannot escape administrative responsibility at some time in their careers if they are to rise above mediocrity....." He adds therefore that, "....chemists, and lawyers and doctors and statisticians and similar specialists should be expected to have in their pcurorrfiecsusliao ncaelr t ain minima of the social sciences, social psychology, literature, and English, as a liberal dose of administration or management science".
He ended this by saying that, "Few vocations are without the need for 89 executive capacity and an understanding of how to lead and to work with people".
In Nigeria of recent times, the second and third schools of thought discussed here are now the guide-posts for administrative training.
A part from the limited number of people who opt to read public administration as a first degree course, quite a number now come from the social sciences, the arts and the professions - engineering, law, the natural sciences, etc; to do post- graduate and higher_ degree courses in administration and management.
In public service, a medical officer with a diploma in administration is likely to function more effectively as a per manent secretary in the ministry of health than a liberal arts graduates, so is an engineer with a higher degree imna nagement, a more effective chief executive in the ministry of works, etc.
Exercise 1.1 State the characteristics of each of the three schools of thought giving rise to a pre-entry training into public service discussed in this unit so far.
3.3 In-service Training In-service training starts from the application of the knowledge which an employee brings into service on the job to which he is assigned.
It continues and includes making older employees more efficient in the performance of their present duties and even to equip them to qualif y for advancement in one or more direction.
In the words of Stahl.
"Viewed thus broadly, in-service training is never accomplished, it is always in process".
Here, we shall avail you of the forms and methods of in-service training, starting from: (a) Group training.
Most of the pre-entry training we have discussed above are done in groups.
However within the organization, conferences and seminars are held, field trips are undertaken.
These are all training sessions.
One that is, but not usually?
thought as training is a regular staff meetings.
If well handled, and not made an order- giving and order-taking period, it could be very profitable training for both subordinate and supervisor.
Initial induction courses where large numbers of people are involved take this format.
(b) One-the-job-instruction.
This is the commonest form of training especially for the new entrant.
The supervisor goes round to the work desk or bench and gives instruction on how the particular work is done.
90 ( c ) Manuals and Bulletins - Handbooks, procedure manuals, or periodic bulletins, made attractive and readable are a great method of training in an organization.
In Nigeria, the work of administration -the handling of personnel, of finances, of stores, of procedures are all taught mainly via manuals, the most important being the Civil Service Rules, the FRiengaunlcaitaiol n s, the Stores Regulations and the Civil Service Handbook.
No administrator, however long he has been in service has a table that lacks these documents - they are the administrator's companion.
(d) Correspondences Courses - This is similar to what you are doing right now.
When the circumstances is such that some employees are in the field, recourse is taken to the use of correspondence courses.
Young administrative officers who were in the Colonial Service of Britain were taught here in Nigeria by notes written and sent from Britain.
This was continued in independent Nigeria by circulars sent round Divisional Offices (now Local governments) by headquarters' staff.
Instructions in such circulars were training instructions.
(e) Use of Audiovisual Aids - You are also familiar with this in this Open University programme.
O. Glenn Stahl has this to say about this method; "Few training devices have quite the appeal and force of graphic or auditor y presentations.
They include such media as still pictures, models, specimens, posters, maps, charts, film strips, slides, and.
most important, motion pictures".
A final note on in-service training is the Nigerian understanding of it.
In Nigeria, any training undertaken whilst an employee is in service, whether done in an institution outside the organization is regarded as itnra-isneirnvgic.
e Thus when, in the early 60s to late 70s many Nigerian administrators were sent on course to the Graduate School of Public and Internal Affairs (GSPIA), in Pittsburgh, U.S.A they were on itnra-isneirnvgic.
e Exercise 2.1.
What is in-service training?
List any 3 methods of carrying it out and explain them fully.
4.0 Conclusion In this unit you have been given what training means.
You have known the importance and types of training which takes place before an employee joins a service or an organization.
Such training is the source of the reservoir of knowledge and skills available in an organization before in- service training 91 comes in to augment it and lend to greater efficiency and to a preparation for higher duties.
5.0 Sum mary This unit has dealt with the meaning of training, discussed pre-entry as well as in- service training.
It has also given the scope of training.
6.0 Tutor Marked Assignm ent Question 1.
Why is it necessary to require that an employee come into service of government with some knowledge and skill concerning the work for which he is employed; and which of the three schools of thought discussed in this unit influencing training, would you recommend for the Nigerian CSeivrvili c e and why?
7.0 References and other Resources References - Cole G. A (1997), Personnel Management: Theory and Practice (Fourth Edition), ELST.
Letts Educational, London.
- Stahl, Glenn O (1962) Public Personnel Administration (Fifth Edition) Harper & Row, Publishers, New York.
MODULE TWO UNIT 12 MANAGEMENT DEVELOPMENT Table of Contents 92  1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objectives 3.0 Main Contents 3.1 Definition and Scope 3.2 Management - knowledge and skills 3.3 Management development methods 3.3.1 Coaching/guided experience 3.3.2 Mentoring 3.3.3 Delegation 3.3.4 Doing the work of a superior officer in his absence 3.3.5 Projects and secondments 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutor Marked Assignment 7.0 References and other resources 1.0 Introduction You may wish to recall that in unit 11 where you learnt about training, we said it was the twin brother of management development.
In this unit, we shall show you what management development is, and the various ways to bring it about.
2.0 Objectives By the end of this unit you will be able to: • Define management development • Identify management knowledge and skills • List and explain various methods used in management development 3.0 Main contents 3.1 Definition and Scope 3.1.1 Definition As you must now be very much aware, almost all important concepts in our field of study have many definitions depending upon the perspective or focus of the writer.
A.G. Cole gives a number of definition of mdeavnealgoepmmeenntt , himself quoting from other colleagues.
Quoting Drucker, A.G. Cole, says; 93 .....management developm ent must embrace all m anagers in the enterprise.
It must aim at challenging all to growth and self developm ent.
It must focus on performance rather than on promise, and otonm orrow's requirem ents rather than those of today Also, quoting from an Msc policy paper on Management Development, Cole says that Management development is .....any attempt to improve managerial effectiveness through a planned and deliberate learning process Yet another definition, and this time A. G. Cole quoting Professor Morris, says of management development that: ....developm ent is a continuing improvement of effectiveness within a particular system, which may be a person, but in the case omf a n agement development is within the m anagem ent function of aonrg a nization.
3.1.2 Scope of Managem ent Development By Scope here we mean the field of managerial definition and expertise needing improvement so that the gap between present performance and expected performance may be bridged by management development.
The following is a list of such activities.
provided by Cole who adopted the list from Pedler etal: 1.
Command of basic facts 2.
Relevant professional knowledge 3.
Continuing sensitivity to events 4.
Analytical, problem-solving, decision-making, and judgment making skills 5.
Social skills and abilities 6.
Emotional resilience 7.
Pro-activity, i.e.
the inclination to respond purposefully 8.
Creativity 9.
Mental agility 10 Balanced learning habits and skills 11 Self- knowledge Management development is needed in order to keep the manager ipno s session of expertise so that he is not wanting in skills and knowledge in 94 any of the above activities.
This is how wide the scope of management development needs are.
3.3 Managem ent Development Methods A. G. Cole has identified three methods of management dBeevcealuospem e n t.t h e first two (a) Management education and (b) Mtraainnaingge,m loeonkt more like what we have already considered under unit 11, we shall concentrate effort here on the third, (c) Experiential learning which Cole talks about as "...learning by doing; on-the-job experience usually wguitihd a nce from superior or colleague".
In experiential learning he identifies and discusses the following: 3.3.1 Coaching/guided experience Taking his definition from the word "coach" he defines coaching in this context as "...intensive training of one or more persons by another who uses instruction, demonstration and practice as his or her prime methods".
He says, "unlike other forms of instruction which are often concerned with passing on facts or theoretical knowledge.
coaching is about helping others to learn how to do things.
"....it is centered around a skilled individual who passes on his or her skills in a fairly intimate way to an individual or small group".
The areas in which managers need to develop skills and competence are areas such as communication skills, group leadership, staff appraisal, handling grievances.
planning and budgeting.
It is in areas like this, in which cognitive knowledge - the learning of theories and facts will not do, that, in the words of Cole, "The presence of a skilled and valued colleague to help talk things through how to handle selected situations can avoid embarrassment and major errors of judgment..." 3.3.2 Mentoring The name "Mentor" is that of a trusted friend used by one of the Greek Illysses to train his son in the art of war fares.
A mentor, in Cole's words "....has come to mean someone mature and experienced who advises (and gives practical assistance where required) to a younger and less experienced person".
He then says "Mentoring is a learning relationship which is broader than that in coaching.
The latter is definitely skills or competency focused whereas the former is concerned with passing knowledge, insight and attitudes as well as skills".
A mentor is usually not one's line manager but one higher and a person who has qualities that he passes unto a younger person 95 without the stress of accountability or boss-subordinate relationship being present.
The following words of Cole capture the latter and spirit of the methods of coaching and mentoring very succinctly: Organizations that are using mentoring and coaching approaches itnh e ir Management development are attempting to gain added value from the Talents, experience and wisdom of their senior staff by encouraging them To pass their store of experience to junior colleagues, and to do so in the Workplace rather than at a business school, staff college or some other E xternal provider.
3.3.3 Delegation Cole defines delegation as "....essentially a power sharing process in which a manager transfers part of his or her authority to another, more junior person".
The aim is to encourage practice by doing.
In his words, Cole says "There are few better ways of assessing someone's suitability for a possible task than giving them a similar tasks and observing how well they perform".
Coles ends his discuss on delegation by saying that "when delegation is backed up by mentor ing and the support of the senior manager, it is likely to prove a powerful development tool".
3.3.4 Doing the work of a superior officer in his absence For a number of reasons, a superior officer may be absent from office for a fairly long period of time and his subordinate may be required to perform his duties.
Some of 'such reasons for absence may be annual leave, sickness, prolonged tour, etc.
Such "acting for" duties offers a good opportunity for management development.
In a number of instances a subordinate does the work that has been "pending" and defying solution on the desk of his superior officer during such absences.
3.3.5 Other forms A. G. Cole cites projects and secondments as opportunities for management development.
Concerning projects he says, staff could be sent as tmeaemm b ers of a special team put up to handle a special project.
Participation on such projects avails a staff of special knowledge and skills not available on a regular job schedule.
The same advantage can be derived from secondments, 96 i.e being put a job outside a regular job assignment.
Similar to reassignments under unit 11, the aim to give more knowledge and skill by making staff do varied assignments.
Concerning secondment, Cole concludes by saying "secondment is a good way of testing an individual's capacity for coping with a particular role".
4.0 Conclusion In this unit we have provided you a number of definitions of management development.
We have said that a number of reasons bordering on gbaeptw een knowledge and skills that managers possess and what they should possess make it imperative for undertaking management development initiatives.
In this unit we availed you of various methods of management development.
5.0 Sum mary This unit has covered the definition, scope and methods of management development.
6.0 Tutor Marked Assignm ent Q. l Define management development.
List the various methods used for management development and discuss one of them in detail.
A list of management development From 3.3.1 to 3.3.4 above Discuss one in detail.
Pick one out of the 4 discussed above e.g.
that of mentoring.
7.0 References and other resources - Cole, G.A (1997) Personnel Management: Theory and Practice (Fourth Edition), ELST, Letts Education, London.
ODULE THREE UNIT 13 MOTIVATION: THE MECHANISTIC THEORIES 97 Table of Contents 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objectives 3.0 Main Contents 3.1 Genesis of Scientific Management Theory 3.1.1 Genesis 3.1.2 Nature of Workers and how to motivate them the scientific management way Planning in Scientific Management 3.2 Scientific Management and Human Behavior 3.2.1 Others in the scientific management movement 3.2.3 Conclusion 4.0 Summary 5.0 Tutor Marked Assignment 6.0 References and other resources 7.0 1.0 Introduction From the time that work ceased to be individual and family- based concerns, i.e.
from the days the factory came into existence, the will to work began to decrease.
Motivation theories are efforts at getting worker to do equal work for equal pay and to make workers do more work for more pMaoyt.i v ation theory, like personnel management as well as general management, has undergone evolution.
In this unit, we shall start from the early theory of motivation, i.e.
Frederick Taylor's Scientific Management Theory.
2.0 Objectives By the end of the unit, you will be able to: • State Frederick Taylor's Scientific Management Theory • List out the various components of scientific management • Explain each component of scientific management theory 3.0 Main Contents 3.1 Genesis of Scientific Management Theory 98 3.1.1 Genesis Scientific Management is the brain- child of Frederick Taylor giving his early histor y. Henry Albers said: Taylor was born in German town, Pennsylvania in 1856.
He attended school in France and Germany and traveled extensively in Europe.
As a result of poor eyesight, this first-rate scholar was forced to take up appointment as a laborer rather than take up studies at HCoarllveagred, the entrance into which he had passed with "honors' although he started as a laborer, Taylor, according to McKinney and Howard, at different times, was a Mechanical Engineer, a production specialist, a business executive and a consultant.
Scientific Management meant quite a number of things.
For instance, McKinney and Howard identify three outstanding contributions of Taylor i.e.
(1) he applied the analytical and scientific approach to improving production methods; (2) he popularized the view that management could be systematically organized as a body of knowledge that could be taught and learnt; (3) he introduced the concept of functional supervision.
However, the aspect of Taylor's work that is of common purpose to us here is that which relates to motivation.
These are the ones which McKinney and Howard classify as (1) the scientific education and development of workers and managers; (2) the intimate friendly cooperation between management and workers.
Referring to this motivation aspect of Taylor's work, Bratton and Gold say that "Taylor was appalled by what he regarded as inefficient wproarcktiicnegs and the tendency of workers not to put in a full day's work - what Taylor called `natural soldering' Bratton and Gold further said that Taylor "...saw workers who do manual work to be motivated by money, the "greedy robot, and to be too stupid to develop the `one best way' of doing a task."
3.1.2 Nature of workers and how to motivate them the scientific management way McKinney and Howard say that "In Taylor's view, humans are rational economic beings; thus, the best way to motivate them is by einccoennotmiviecs " .
Also, they maintain that "In Taylor's view, people are malleable and can be manipulated by pay incentives and cooperative friendly 99 relationships into greater productivity".
These views of human beings were experimented upon and to a great extent, he was proved correct.
Before we report the result of some of his experiments, let us show you the ways he said human beings should be handled for greater productivity.
(l) Taylor suggested that each worker should be (scientifically) selected and trained for the job for which he or she is best suited.
(2) He suggested that a careful study should be made of the worker's body movements to discover the one best method for performing an activity in the shortest time possible.
(3) Workers should be paid according to their individual output.
The following two experiments and their results show the success of the motivation aspect in Taylor's scientific management theory.
(a) The Bethlehem Experiments.
"Pig Iron handling” Albers reports that at Bethlehem (Pennsylvania) steel company, a group of 75 men were involved in loading pig iron.
Before the intervention of Taylor's methods, each man loaded about 12 -' /2 long tons of pig iron per day.
He reported that "A fourfold increase in output resulted from a scientific study of pig iron handling, a better selection of workmen, and training workers in the improved methods".
After a series of experiments, Taylor arrived at the fact that a man should be able to handle 47 -' /2 long tons per day.
In order to do this much work, Taylor worked into his experiment a rest period of about 57% of the time.
With this done, he succeeded in getting a msuabns,e q u aenndtl y all men in the gag of workers to handle 47 -' /2 long tons of pig iron per day.
An economic incentive followed as rather than $1.15 per day, the average wage rose to $1.85 per day.
(b) Another experiment he performed was in connection with shoveling of coal.
Before Taylor's intervention, each worker brought his own shovel.
Taylor's experiment brought about the factory supplying shovels and the matching of men with appropriate shovel size and length.
The end result was in the words of Albers, "phenomenal".
As a result of the success of the Taylor's experiments: The number of yard laborers were reduced from between 400 and 600 to 140.
The average number of tons handled by each man per day increased from 16 to 59; handling cost per ton decreased from 7.2 to 3.3 cents .... and ainnc r ease in wages from $ 1.15 per day to $ 1.88.
3.2 Planning in Scientific Managements 100 Scientific management did separate the planning function for that of the doing function.
The former the responsibility of management and the latter that of the worker.
The rationale for this, Henry Albers recounts in Taylor's words thus: All of the planning which under the old system was done bwyo r k mthaen , as a result of his personal experience, m ust of necessity under the new system be done by the management in accordance with the laws of science; because even if the workman was well suited to tdheev e lopm ent and use of scientif ic data, it would be physically impossible for him to work at his m achine and at a desk at the same tim e. It is also clear that in most cases that one type of man is needed to plan ahead and an entirely different Type to execute the work.
3.2.1 Scientific Management and hum an behaviour According to Henry Albers, "Taylor's ideas on cooperation were predicated on the assumption that the primary interest of management and the worker is economic gain in the form of lower labor costs and higher wages".
In Taylor's view, once the worker became aware of the great advantages of scientific management, he would acquire "a friendly mental attitude towards hemis p loyers and his whole working conditions'".
As much as possible Taylor attempted to isolate worker from wbeolriekveirn, g that if they come together, they would unionize and create problem for management.
Scientific management was based solely on the individual worker who, in Taylor's vievti- was motivated by the love of money to work.
Thus, to him (Taylor) either unions (collective bargaining) nor negotiation should be allowed to determine working conditions or working hours.
These decisions were the prerogative of management.
The strength to lay behind the dynamics of human behavior in organizations were to await another set of experiment which would begin at Hawthorne in 1924 and which is the issue to be discussed in unit 13 that follows.
3.2.3 Others in the Scientific Management Movement Taylor was not alone in development of the scientific management theory.
He was the father of it all right but other joined him and some carried it on after him.
Prominent amongst these are their contributions are as follows: 101 (a) Henry L. Gantt.
He was an associate of Taylor.
His own contribution in the area of motivation was, in the words of Robert J. Thierauf et.al.
"he contributed to the scientific approach by considering the human aspect of management's attitude toward labor.
The creation of the personnel department was recommended by Gantt as an integral part of Taylor's scientific approach".
(b) The Gilbreths.
The contribution of Frank B. Gilbreth and Lillian E. Ginreth was in the area of motion and time studies which they did to an almost unbelievably high degree of minuteness and reliability.
(c ) Harrington Emerson.
He was best known for his "betterment work".
He did not contribute in the areas of motivation.
(d) Morris L. Cooke.
He is noted for introducing time and motion studies into the public sector i.e.
municipal government.
He is reputed to have instituted effective cost-reducing policies among the various government agencies.
In the area of motivation or personnel management in general, he is said to be responsible for introducing increased job security and workmen's benefits into government service.
(e) Concluding the contribution of the scientific management approach to motivation, Thierauf et-al, noted: By the mid twentieth century, Taylor's `scientific management revolution' had been accomplished.
Scientific management had come to include such diverse activities as industrial psychology, job evaluation, employee training, personnel administration, and the entire field of industrial relations.
Work simplification, by which a job and the required motions are analyzed to make the job easier to perform, is based in part on motion and time studies.
So are work study, work improvement, and work sampling.
All these activities have a common goal raising production standards by cutting costs and effort and by improving employer employee relations.
4.0 Conclusion This unit has examined the contents of the motivation aspect of the first mechanistic theory of management - the scientific management theory.
Most of what can be considered as motivation theories in this approach are 102 training, increased pay for increased output, time and motion studies which enhance greater productivity and thus greater pay.
5.0 Sum mary This unit has dealt with the work of Frederic Taylor, exploring only the aspects of motivation.
The detail to which we would have done if studying the whole concept has been skipped.
6.0 Tutor Marked Assignm ent Q.1 Scientific management has been classified as a mechanistic management approach, explain how, it can at the same time be considered a motivation theory.
Q.2 Why is it advantageous to separate "planning" from "doing" 7.0 References and other resources References Albers, Henry H (1974) Principles of Management - A Modern Approach (Four Edition).
John Wiley & Sons, N. York.
Bratton, John and Gold, Jeffrey, (1999) Human Resource Management - Theory and Practice (Second Edition) Macmillan Business McKinney, Jerome B. and Howard, Lawrence C. (1979) Public Administration: balancing power and accountability.
Moore Publishing C ompany, Inc Oak Park, Illinois.
Thieruf, Robert J. Klekomp Robert C. Geeding Daniel, E. (1977) Management Principles and Practices, John Wiley & Sons, Santa Barbara.
MODULE TWO UNIT 14 103 MOTIVATION: THE HUMAN RELATIONS MOVEMENT Table of Contents 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objectives 3.0 Main Contents 3.1 Elton Mayo and the Hawthorne Experiments 3.1.1 Illumination Studies 3.1.2 Experiment with rest breaks 3.1.3 The Bank Wiring Room Experiments 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutor Marked Assignment 7.0 References and other sources 1.0 Introduction In his book - Modern Organizations, Amitai Etzoni, opens discussion on the human relations movement in an unusual but graphic style.
We shall adopt his style here.
I-le started by noting that the human relations approach was borne out of a reaction to the classical, formal approach, amongst which our mechanistic approach of unit 12 is notable, He then graphically "unsays" what the former had said thus amongst others: " (1) the amount of work carried out by a worker (and hence the organizational level of efficiency and rationality) is not determined by his physical capacity but by his social `capacity': (2) non-economic rewards play a central role in determining the motivation and happiness of the worker" and so on and so forth.
In this unit, you will be shown how these new "facts" did emerge and why.
2.0 Objectives By the end of this unit you will be able to: • Recognize what the human relations movement or approach is 104 • Distinguish the human relations approach from the mechanistic approach • List and explain the various experiments that brought out these new "facts" 3.0 Main Contents 3.1 Elton Mayo and the Hawthorne Experiments.
You will recall that in unit 12 we did refer to Frederick Taylor as the father of the scientific management approach.
Elton Mayo is generally accepted as the father of this approach or this school of thought.
Amitai Etzioni says "John Dewey indirectly and Kurt Lewin most directly also contributed much to its initiation".
Also you will recall that most of the experiments of the mechanistic approach of Taylor's scientific management theor y took place in a steel works in Bethlehem, Pennsylvania.
The first of the studies of the human relations approach took place at the Western Electric Company's Hawthorne Works in Chicago, Illinois from 1927 to 1932, as a result of which they have come to be known as the Hawthorne studies.
To make it clear to you, we shall take one experiment after the other, state its hypothesis, say briefly how it was conducted and give its finding(s).
3.1.1 The Illumination Studies The aim of this experiment was to test the effect of increased (or decreased) illumination on workers performance.
You will recall that the mechanistic approach had said that the performance of workers depended on tchoen d uciveness of the physical environment in which they worked.
Indeed, this was why Taylor went into the details he did in designing shovels to fit each "size" of worker.Using the theories of scientific management.
The Hawthorne studies proposed a hypothesis, or made a prediction.
that better illumination would result in increased productivity -just as a more appropriate shovel was to increase productivity in a shoveling coal under unit 12.
The result of this experiment was that, the investigators were amazed to find that no relationship existed between these two variables, illumination and productivity.
In fact, in one of the studies, the results indicated tphraotd u ctivity continued to increase even when illumination was decreasing.It only dropped off after the light became so dim that workers could not see properly.
105 3.1.2 The experiment with rest breaks You may also recall that under scientific management, Taylor had said that a worker produced much more when he was given a rest break of 57% of the time.
At Hawthorne.
5 workers were taken out of a group of workers on the same job for the purpose of experiment.
They were put in a special room with a special working condition - this condition was that unlike the large work group, they (these 5) were given rest breaks.
It varied from 5 minutes to 10 to 15 minutes.
The result was in the words of Etzioni.
that "while the rate of production showed a fairly consistent and general increase, it was related to increases in the rest breaks and hence could not be attributed to them".
Further, "this fact was surprisingly demonstrated when after the rest breaks were abolished at the end of the experiments, and the longer "fatiguing" work day was restored, production continued higher in the experiment (5 worker group) than the general factory rate".
The conclusion was that "there was `..... no evidence in support of the hypothesis that the increased output rate ...was due to relief from fatigue".
These findings became the bases for another set of hypothesis for further study.
The new hypothesis was that "increased production was the result of the changed social situation of the workers, modification in their level of psychological satisfaction, and new patterns of social interaction, brought about by putting them into the experiment room and the special attention involved".
This new hypothesis led to the most involving of the Hawthorne studies: 3.1.3 The Bent Wiring Room Experiment You will recall that under scientific management (unit 12) all efforts were made to keep worker from worker.
At the time of this experiment, worker groups were already in existence and had made ineffectual the pay system which management had set up.
Etzioni says, "The workers were producing far less than they were physically capable of, they were following a social norm enforced by their co-workers which defined the proper amount opfr o d uction, rather than trying to fill the quota management thought they could achieve even though this quota allowed workers to earn as much a they physically could.
The phrase `artificial restriction of output' was coined by observers of this phenomenon, to contrast it with the `natural' output that was physically possible".
The bank wiring experiment consisted of 14 workers who worked for 6 weeks.
The condition set to guide their output was that the workers were paid individual hourly rates based on their individual average output plus a bonus that was determined by the average group output.
In line with Taylor's 106 theories on incentives, the managerial assumptions were that the workers would work as much as, people since that would bring the individual worker more money, and that the group would cooperate and produce more to earn more money.
In practice however, the men set a norm for what constituted the day's work and anyone who "broke" the rules was ridiculed for being a "speed king" or "rate buster" if he exceeded the group norm or labelled as a "chiseler" if he performed far below expectation.
3.1.4 At the end of the experiments, the following, in the words of Amitai Etzioni, are the findings and conclusions of the Hawthome; (1) The level of production is set by social norms, not by physiological capacities.
(2) Non-economic rewards and sanctions significantly affect the behaviour of the workers and largely limit the effect of economic incentive plans.
In the experiments above, two rewards and sanctions which are symbolic rather than material, were particularly powerful.
Workers who did confirm to the group norms lost the affection and respect of their co-workers and friends.
It was found in the wiring room experiment that all the workers preferred the amicable relations with their friends to making more money.
Although Amitai Etzioni reported that a later study by Melville Dalton point to the fact that it is not always the case, it did not debunk the Hawthorne findings.
Later studies by Dalton found that "those who were `rate busters' were individuals whose education and social experience taught them how to get along with less affection and respect, at least in the work context".
Dalton also found that Catholics were fewer rate busters than Protestants.
This is based on the belief that Catholics are more "sociable" and sensitive to affection and respect of others while Protestants are believed to be more self-oriented.
Dalton also found that the rate busters "often grew up on farms or in small towns, while the conformers came from big cities where they learnt loyalty to their peer groups in street gangs".
One other non-economic factor that influence the rate of production of the workers was their belief - that if they worked harder and thus produced more, their pay rates would be reduced, and that if they did not produce a given amount, they would be unfair to management and might be fired.
Meanwhile, management had not given optimum rate of production it expected from workers, although it desired increased production.
Thus, in the words of Etzioni they influenced, if not determined, the level of production in the factory".
107 (3) Often, workers do not act or react as individuals but as members of groups.
A group norm is set by the group and individuals wdehvoi a ted from it and are penalized by their workers l .
1 (4) The importance of Leadership for setting and enforcing group norms and the difference between informal and formal leadership constitutes another major modification of scientific management caused by these studies.
Scientific management placed the onus of getting things done on the foreman and supervisors.
In the wiring room experiment one of the workers emerged as an informal leader in the group.
He was the most liked.
It was he whose advised was solicited.
In the fainnaally s is, he helped the workers to function as a group.
This is the human relation approach.
It is in many ways diametrically opposed to the scientific management approach.
4.0 Conclusion This unit has shown that the human relations approach to motivation is.
It has cited and explained the experiments that gave it its existence.
The tenets on which the scientific management approach was built were used as hypotheses for the numerous studies and in the end the findings of the human relations approach say that non-economic factors are more important in influencing productivity than the economic ones.
5.0 Sum mary This unit has explored and explained all the bases of the human relations approach including all the experiments performed to establish it.
6.0 Tutor Marked Assignm ent Q.1 List all the non-economic factors that influence productivity.
Explain any one of them supported by an appropriate Hawthorne experiment.
7.0 References and other resources Etzioni, Amitai (1964) Modern organizations, Prentice - Hall, Inc, Englewood Cliffs, New Jersey.
MODULE THREE UNIT 15 108 MOTIVATION: THE BEHAVIORAL SCIENCES MOVEMENT Table of Contents s 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objectives 3.0 Main Contents 3.1 The Work of Douglas McGregor 3.1.1 The Conventional View - Theory X 3.1.2 Is the Conventional View Correct?
3.1.3 The Carrot-and-Stick Approach 3.2 A New Theory of Management - Theory Y 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutor Marked Assignment 7.0 References and other Sources 7.1 References 1.0 Introduction Unit 13 dealt with the mechanistic theory of motivation.
Unit 14, with the Human relations approach to motivation.
This unit - unit 15 deals with the behavioral science approach to motivation.
Its major thrust, as its nsuagmgee s ts, is on the behavior of the individual in the work place.
It is a natural follow-up of the human relations approach.
Whilst the human relations approach shifts attention to the human elements as a collectivity, the behavioral approach shifts attention to the individual.
2.0 Objectives By the end of this unit, you should be able to: • Identify the behavioral science approach to motivation • Identify the contributions of Abraham Maslow and Douglas McGregor to this approach • List and explain the various steps in Abraham Maslow's hierarchy of needs • Distinguish between McGregor's theory X and theory Y 3.0 Main Contents 109 3.1 The work of Douglas McGregor To put it in its proper context, the work of Douglas McGregor is classified under a movement called "industrial humanism" and it is a mstaonvdeimnge nbte t ween the human relations movement and that of the behavioral scientists.
As we shall see later in this unit, so closed was the industrial humanism movement to that of the behavioral scientists' that McGregor's theory Y was born as a result of the work of the behavioral scientists.
Robert J. Thierauf and his associates, giving account of the ihnudmuastnriisaml movement, regard Douglas McGregor as the father of the movement.
They said: Early in 1960, a movement called `industrial humanism arose ....The leader of this movement was Douglas McGregor.
Although he died in 1964 before his work as fully developed, his contributions - in particular those set forth in his well-known book, The Human side of Enterprise - were instrum ental in furthering the movement.
At the time McGregor postulated his theory X and theory Y, morogsatn i zations operated under the mechanistic theory contained in our unit 12 which as you may recall was propelled by Taylor's scientific management theory.
McGregor found, in addition to what was the main tenet of the mechanistic theory, that it operated with an underlying assumptions concerning man.
These are the assumptions which gave rise to McGregor's theory X.
Let us now show you what theory X is.
3.1.1 The Conventional View - Theory X The conventional conception of management's task in harnessing human energy to organizational requirements, McGregor says, can be stated broadly in terms of three propositions which for ease of reference be called theor y X.
Under this, (1) Management is responsible for organizing the elements of productive enterprise - money, materials, equipment.
people - in the interest of economic ends.
(2) With respect to people, this is a process of directing their efforts, motivating them, controlling their actions, modifying their behavior to fit the needs of the organization.
(3) Without this active intervention by management, people would be passive - even resistant - to organizational needs.
They must 110 therefore, be persuaded, rewarded, punished, controlled - their actions must be directed - this is the task of management of getting things done through other people.
Behind this theory, there are several assum ptions though less explicit, but widespread, nevertheless.
(1) The average man is by nature indolent - he works as little as possible.
(2) He lacks ambition, dislikes responsibility, prefers to be led.
(3) He is inherently self-centered, indifferent to organization needs.
(4) He is by nature resistant to change.
(5) He is gullible, not ver y bright.
Conventional organizational structures and management policies, practices, and programmes reflect these assumptions.
Using these assumptions as guides management has tried two options to control and direct human behavior - the hard and soft approaches.
The hard approach involves coercion and threat (usually distinguished), close supervision, and tight controls over behavior the modern day Nigeria, such hard approaches will be exemplified by such acts as locking out late-comers to office, getting subordinates to obtain permission every time they go out of the office and ensuring that they return at a given time, issuing query for every slip made, meting out punishments such as written warnings, cut in salaries.
suspensions reductions in rank etc, for every offence, according to law.
The soft approach is a method involving being permissive, satisfying people's demands, achieving harmony.
The soft approach is typified by listening to staff and waiving punishment particularly on compassionate grounds.
For example, an employee is absent from duty without leave and the law says he is to be disciplined in a given way, but the boss waives this punishment because the employee had to take his sick wife to hospital or the like.
The soft approach also entails listening to suggestions on work and work procedures made by subordinates and "giving in" to such suggestions if found workable.
In the final analysis the soft approach is all that gives tihmep r ession of weak leadership.
Both the hard and soft approaches have met with difficulties.
In the hard approach, it has been found that force breeds counter-force in form of restriction of output, antagonism, militant unionism subtle befufte c tive sabotage of management objectives.
The hard approach is especially difficult during times ol' Bill employment.
111 The soft approach leads frequently to the abdication of management, to indifferent performance.
People take advantage of it, constantly expecting more but giving less and less.
Some try to tread the middle course by preaching the doctrine of "firm and fair" in an attempt to take advantage of both the hard and soft approaches.
3.1.2 Is the Conventional View Correct It was discovered that social science findings challenged this whole set of beliefs about men and human nature and about the task of management.
The social scientist does not deny that human behavior in ionrdguasntirziaatli o n is approximately what management perceives it to be.
But he is pretty sure that this behavior is not a consequence of man's inherent nature.
It is a consequence rather of the nature of industrial organizations, of management philosophy, policy and practice.
The conventional approach of theory X is based on mistaken notions of “what is cause” and “what is effect.” To explain this, McGregor used the findings of Maslow on the hierarchy of needs, which summarized as thus: (1) Physiological Needs As is already too well known, these are needs for food and drink and even air to breath - which only become motivators of behavior when man is deprived of them.
(2) Safety Needs When the physiological needs are satisfied, the safety needs emerge.
They are needs for protection against danger, threat, deprivation.
They include need for secured jobs and steady income.
(3) Social Needs These are needs for belonging, for association, for acceptance by one's fellows.
for giving and receiving friendship and love.
They become important after the first two level needs have been fulfilled.
112 (4) Ego Needs Above the social needs - in that, they do not become motivators until lower needs are reasonably satisfied - are the needs of gsirgenaitfeiscta n ce to management and to man himself.
They are the egoistic needs, and they are of two kinds: (a) Those needs that relate to one's self esteem needs for self confidence for independence, for achievement, for competence, for knowledge.
(b) Those needs that relate to one's reputation - needs for status, for recognition, for appreciation, for the deserved respect of one's fellows.
Unlike lower needs, these are rarely satisfied; man seeks indefinitely for more satisfaction of these needs once they have become important to him.
However, the typical industrial organization offers few opportunities for the satisfaction of these needs to people at lower level in the hierarchy.
The conventional methods of organizing work, particularly in mass-production industries give little heed to these aspect of human motivation.
(5) Self -fulf illm ent Needs Finally, a capstone on the hierarchy of man's needs, are what we may call the needs for self fulfillment.
These are needs for realizing one's own potentialities, for continued self development, for being creative in the broadest sense of this term.
Modern life gives only limited opportunity for these relatively weak needs to obtain expression.
The deprivation most people experience with respect to other lower level needs diverts their energies into the struggle to satisfy these needs, and the needs for self-fulfillment remain dormant.
(6) Managem ent and Motivation McGregor notes that the man whose needs for safety, association, independence or status are thwarted is sick, and his sickness will have behavioral consequence.
We will be mistaken if we attribute his resultant passivity, his hostility, his refusal to accept responsibility, to his inherent "human nature".
These forms of behavior are systems of illness - of deprivation of his social and egoistic needs.
The man whose lower - level needs are satisfied is not motivated to satisf y these needs any longer.
Management often asks, "why aren't people more productive?
113 We pay good wages, provide good working conditions, have excellent fringe benefits and steady employment.
Yet people do not seem to be willing to put forth more than minimum effort".
The fact that management has provided for these physiological and safety needs has shifted the motivational emphasis to the social and perhaps to the egoistic needs.
Unless there are opportunities at work to satisfy these higher- level needs, people will be deprived; and their behavior will reflect this deprivation.
Under such conditions.
if management continues to focus its attention on physiological needs, its efforts are bound to be ineffective.
McGregor says that people will make insistent demands for more money under these conditions.
It becomes more important than ever to buy the material goods and services which can provide limited satisfaction of the thwarted needs.
Although money has only limited value in satisfying many higher- level needs it can become the focus of attention if it is the only means available.
3.1.3 The Carrot-and-Stick Approach The carrot-and-stick-theory of motivation, McGregor says, works reasonably well under certain circumstances.
The means for satisfying man's physiological and (within limits) his safety needs can be provided or withheld by management.
Employment itself is such a means, and so are wages, working conditions, and benefits.
By these means, the individual can be controlled so long as he is struggling for subsistence.
But the carrot-and-stick theory does not work at all once man has reached an adequate level of subsistence and is motivated primarily by higher needs.
Management cannot provide a man with self-respect, or with respect of his follows, or with the satisfaction of needs for self fulfillment.
It can create such conditions that he is encouraged and enabled to seek such satisfaction for himself, or it can thwart him by failing to create these conditions.
However, the creation of conditions is not in control.
It is not a good device for directing behavior.
And so management finds itself in an odd position, The high standard of living created by our modern technology provides quite adequately for the satisfaction of' physiological and safety needs.
But by making possible the satisfaction of low-level needs, management has deprived itself of the ability to use as motivators the devices on wcohnivchen tional theory has taught it to rely, i.e rewards; promises, incentives, or threats and other coercive devices.
114 The philosophy of management by direction and control, regardless owfh e ther it is hard or soft is inadequate to motivate because the human needs on which this approach relies are today unimportant motivators of behavior.
Direction and control are essentially useless in motivating people whose important needs are social and or egoistic.
Both the hard and soft approaches fail today because they are simply irrelevant to the situation.
People deprived of opportunities to satisfy at work the needs which are most important to them, behave exactly as we might predict - with indolence, passivity, resistance to change, lack of responsibility, unreasonably demands for economic benefits.
It would seem that management is caught in a web of its own weaving.
3.2 A New Theory of Management - Theory Y McGregor says that for these (above) and other reasons, we rdeiqffueirreen t at h eory of the task of managing people based on more adequate assumptions about human nature and human motivation.
The broad dimensions of such a theory is what McGregor played bold to call "Theory Y".
They are: (1) Management is responsible for organizing the elements of productive enterprise - money, materials, equipment, people - in the interest of economic ends.
(2) People are not by nature passive or resistant to organizational needs.
They have become so as a result of experience in organizations.
(3) The motivation, the potential for developing the capacity for assuming responsibility, the readiness to direct behavior toward organizational goals, are all present in people.
Management does not put them there.
It is a responsibility of management to make ipto ssible for people to recognize and develop these human characteristics for themselves.
4) The essential task of management is to arrange organizational conditions and methods of operation so that people can achieve their own goals best by directing their own efforts toward organizational objectives.
This is a process primarily of creating opportunities releasing potential, removing obstacles, encouraging growth, providing guidance.
It is, as McGregor noted, what Peter Drucker has called "Management B y Objectives", in contrast to "Management By Control".
It does not involve the 115 abdication of management, the absence of leadership.
the lowering of standards, or the other characteristics usually associated with the "soft'" approach under theory X.
4.0 Conclusion In this unit, you have been introduced to the works of two prominent scholars - Douglas McGregor and Abraham Maslow.
Their work is in the areas of motivation known as industrial humanism movement and behavioral scientist approach.
Whilst McGregor is well known for his theory X and theory Y, Maslow is known for his hierarchy of needs.
The conversion from theory X to theory Y as a result of the findings of social science - the human needs arranged in a hierarchy, shows the place of science in human life and human affairs.
This holds bright prospects for science and shows how science knowledge can be used to benefit mankind.
5.0 Sum mary This unit has dealt with one set out of the two to three sets of writers in the behavioral science approach to motivation theory.
Unit 16 will deal with yet another in the same behavioral science approach.
6.0 Tutor Marked Assignm ent Question.1 What is McGregor's theor y X.
How did he leave theory X to theory Y.
7.0 References and other resources McGregor, Douglas (1960) The Human Side of Enterprise, Company, New York.
McGraw-Hill Book Thierauf, Robert J, Klekamp, Robert C, Geading, Daniel Principles and Practice, John Wiley & Sons, Santa Barbara.
W. (1977) Management MODULE THREE UNIT 16 MOTIVATION: THE WORK OF MCCLELLAND 116 Table of Contents 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objectives 3.0 Main Contents 3.1 The works of McClelland and Hertzberg 3.1.1 McClelland's Need for Achievement Theory 3.1.2 Hertzberg's Two-factor Theory 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutor Marked Assignment 7.0 References and Other Sources 1.0 Introduction In unit 15 we examined the works of McGregor and Maslow among the behavioral science contributions to motivation theory.
Here we are going to examine the contribution of McClelland.
In his own case his theory was built on the concept of achievement.
Christened Need for Achievement Theory, it linked motivation to an inborn (a trait) desire to achieve which some people have and some others do not have.
The theor y does not leave those who do not have in their desperation, it propounds a method by which the need for achievement can be cultivated.
2.0 Objectives By the end of this unit you should be able to: • recognize McClelland's Need for "Achievement Theory • list the factors present in a person who has a high need for achievement • list what a person with a high need for achievement does and how to • identify method for creating a high need for achievement in one who does not have it 3.0 Main Contents 3.1 McClelland's need for achievem ent theory One thing makes this theory and therefore, this unit peculiar.
Out of all the units so far handled, this is the only one with a significant amount of research conducted in a developing area.
As a result, as we shall see later, there is a lot of reference made to Nigeria and India, among other developing countries.
117 Peter Blunt, in his book, Organizational Theory and Behavior, An African Perspective, put this point thus: "It has been argued that the theory oacf h ievement motivation can be applied with good results to generating entrepreneurial activity and economic growth in developing countries".
What is the need for achievement theory?
As reported by Peter BMlcuCntl,e l land's theory of motivation is based on three major motives - the need for achievement and fear of failure, the need for power, and the need for affiliation.
He said however that "most of McClelland's research and writing is based upon the first of these, the need for achievement (n-arch) The main tenet of n-arch is that, "it is said that there are two basic types of people: on the one hand, there are those who strive for success, acrhea l lenged by opportunity and are willing to spare no effort in order to attain a desired goal.
On the other hand, there are those who do not really care very much at all whether or not they are successful.
That is to say.
some people have an urge to achieve while others do not.
"So much has been the work on this that there exists a test used in assessing the achievement of need in people.
One such test is known as the Thematic Appreciation Test (TAT).
We shall not be going into what this is.
It is sufficient here for us to note what years of study have revealed.
Peter Blunt reports that "many years of researching achievement of motivation have shown that people who have high needs for achievement display certain common characteristics" which are: 3.1.1 Common Characteristics of high n-arch people (1) They set themselves goals which are moderately difficult to attain and pose a certain amount of challenge to their energy and resourcefulness.
If goals are too easily achieved, they feel little sense of accomplishment.
(2) People with high n-arch are attracted by work situations which allow them to take personal responsibility for goal achievement.
Peter Blunt says further that "they have high confidence in their own abilities to accomplish moderately complex tasks, and feel that their chances of success are greater than most other people’s.
This inclines them to avoid committees and other work situations where they may breeq u ired to work towards goals other have set.
Similarly, they are averse to gambling situations where they again have no personal control over outcomes" (3) Concrete feedback on performance is essential for people with high n- arch, so that they know how well they are doing.
Where concrete 118 feedback is not the outcome of an effort, money is used as a surrogate.
Thus people with high n-arch who go for money do so as a symbol of success not as a motivator, the motivator for high n-arch people is goal achievement.
(4) People with high n-arch are more inquisitive about their environments.
They search them more thoroughly; they travel more, and are generally more open to new experiences.
This behavior is interpreted as demonstrating their desire for new opportunities to test their achievement skills.
Peter Blunt, citing a study by Levine reports that they Igbo of Nigeria are more economically successful and hold a disproportionately higher number of senior positions in public and private enterprises than do the Hausa of Northern Nigeria.
He attributes this to the Igbo showing much more initiative and readiness to explore new places and methods than have other people facing similar problems.
(5) A final characteristic of individuals who have high needs for achievement is that they are more inclined to think spontaneously about how they might achieve this or that desired objective.
Peter Blunt says further that "They spend considerable time going over possible strategies in their minds, and even dream about achieving certain goals".
LeVine, scoring essays on the question "What is a successful man?
"for n- arch written by Hausa and Igbo students was able to arrive at the fact the Igbo students scored significantly higher on n-arch.
3.1.2 Need for achievem ent theory, and national development McClelland has extended this theory beyond individuals to nations.
The "readers" that school children use have been assessed for n-arch contents.
It was found that textbooks used by school children in India contain stories which are fatalistic and score very low on n-arch assessment, which accounts for that country's readers are rated high on n-arch assessments.
An interesting account is given of Britain at two different times in history by McClelland.
Using school children readers, Britain scored high on n-arch assessment in 1925 and that period coincided with a period when its economy did well.
In 1950, it rated very low on n-arch going by school children's readers.
This period also coincided with that of a loss in the sepnitreirtp ri soef in Britain.
119 A pertinent issue to which fits into this section is the issue of the type of fictions that a nation produces and reads; the stories that the young ones of a nation are exposed to.
We do not have too much information on this but we know vaguely that at a point in the United States of America, rather than tell (in writing or orally) folk-love on animals and birds etc, the nation's novelists went into "science fiction".
These are highly imaginative and creative stories of how things ought to be but are not and possible ways to bring them about.
There are writings like Alvin Toffler's Future Shock, .....'s The Age oAfq u arius, and so on.
There are movies in cartoon form like Star Trek, etc.
We are told that what is today the wonder machine - the computer was once the science fiction of an imaginative and creative writer.
We know that folk- lore like the "Tortoise and the Hair's" "Agude Ego", "How the Fly lost his Tongue", the "Washerman Donkey", etc will continue to have their place in our "Tales by Moon Light".
However, in order to hope to land a Nigerian on the moon or another celestial body some day, we have to go into imaginative and creative writing which by their nature score high on n-arch assessments.
This is how to build a nation of "goal getter".
Tomorrow's heroes are made of heroes about whom they read today, even in fiction.
3.1.3 How to increase n-Ach in people McClelland has been part of team which designed a course for the purpose of increasing n-arch in people.
The course had the following 4 aims: (1) The courses were designed to teach the participants how to think, talk and act like a person with high n-Ach.
(2) The courses stimulated the participants to set higher but carefully planned and realistic work goals for themselves.
(3) The courses utilized techniques for giving the participants knowledge about themselves (4) The courses created a group espirit-de -corps from learning about each other's hopes and fears, successes and failures and from going through an emotional experience together.
The need for training or for courses like this is that, as noted from tbheeg i nning of this unit, high n-Ach is there in a person or it is not there.
If there; the individual thinks and acts in line with its dictates.
If not there, the individual does not think and act in the way of high n-Ach man.
That there is a possibility of its being taught and learnt, there is the possibility to turn a low n-Ach individual or a collectivity to a high n-Ach man or notion.
4.0 Conclusion 120 Unit 16 has treated McClelland's need for achievement theory.
Unlike the other theories considered so far which are under the control of the individual or group, this is not so.
5.0 Sum mary This unit has handled yet another of the numerous theories of motivation - McClelland's need for achievement theory.
It is a theory which is built on the individual human being rather than on a group.
6.0 Tutor Marked Assignm ent Question.1 List out all the characteristics of high n-Ach people and explain fully, any two of Question .2 Since high n-Ach is in-born, how can we transfer it?
7.0 References and other resources Blunt, Peter (1985) Organizational Theory and Behaviors - An African Perspective.
Longman London & New York McClelland, David C. (1978) "That Urge to Achieve" in Natemeyer (ed) Classics of Organizational Behavior, Moore Publishing Company, Inc. Oak Park, Illinois.
UNIT 17 MOTIVATION - THE WORK OF FREDERICK HERTZBERG 121 Table of Contents 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objectives 3.0 Main Contents 3.1 Scope of Hertzberg's Theory 3.1.1 Motivating with KITA The Hygiene Factors 3.2 Hygiene vs Motivation 3.2.2 The Motion factors 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutor Marked Assignment 7.0 References and Other resources 1.0 Introduction The work of Frederick Hertzberg which we shall consider in this unit is yet another of the works of the behavioral scientists.
He is popular fporro p o unding a two factor theory of motivation - the hygiene factors and the motivator factors.
What these concepts mean and what the theory states using them is the concern of this unit.
2.0 Objectives By the end of this unit you should be able to: • Identify the basis of Hertzberg's theory • Get introduced to what he calls KITA • List the hygiene factors in his theory • List the motivation factors in his theory • Explain why hygiene factors do not motivate 3.0 Main Contents 3.1 Hertzberg's theory and its scope As if to say Hertzberg had given too much and fruitless attention to the concept of motivation, he wrote a piece titled "One More Time: How Do You Motivate Employees?
In an effort to answer his own question, Hertzberg 122 gives a number of methods.
We shall explore some of them.
Later, he then goes into his hygiene Vs Motivators idea and this is the aspect of his work that he is most widely known.
However, we shall introduce you to this as well as the less known one.
3.1.1 "Motivating with KITA" Hertzberg starts this section of his work with the question "What is the simplest.
Surest, and most direct way of getting someone to do something?
He goes through prospective answers and states the problems which each prospective answer faces.
A first answer might be that you "ask him" to do the work.
He, in turn might respond that he does not want to do it.
This gets up a "psychological consultation to determine the reason for his obstinacy, which is a long and complex process.
A second method might be that you "tell him".
You have a response that indicates that he does not understand you.
This calls for some expertise in the communications field to make him understand.
Finally.
Hertzberg says, "Every audience contains the `direct action' manager who shouts, `kick him!'
And this type of manager is right.
The surest and least circumlocuted way to getting someone to do something is to kick him in the pants - give him what might be called the KHIeTrtAzb.
e rg identifies various forms of KITA, as follows: (a) Negative Physical KITA This is a literal application of the term.
You want your driver to jump into the car and go somewhere smartly and he shows some rude reluctance, and you slap him.
Hertzberg notes that negative physical KITA has three drawbacks, namely, it is inelegant, it contrasts the image of benevolence that organizations cherish; since it is a physical attack, it directly stimulates the automatic nervous system, and this often results in negative feedback - the employee (your driver) may slap you in return.
(b) Negative Psychological KITA Rather than use physical force, psychologists have devised effective weapons.
For example, one who is being "forced" to comply, may bnee g atively psychologically "hurt"' by say, being denied what colleagues have, e.g.
a carpet, an air-conditioner, etc, for his office.
He may be given "bad" workers e.g.
; rude drivers, tardy messengers, poor typists, etc.
Negative psychological KITA has lots of advantages.
Firstly, because it is not a physical attack, it does not stand the danger of physical "Sbeaccoknldalsyh," t.h e person administering it stands aloof and the sufferer is made to look like a complainer about everything and made to look paranoid.
Thirdly, 123 those who practice it live like "saints" who would not physically "hurt" a fly but do more damage to the "ego" of the than physical hurt; etc.
Hertzberg concludes discussion of negative KITA by saying that if you make someone do a piece of work by kicking him, you have "motivated" but have "moved" him into doing something.
Negative KITA does not lead to motivation.
He thereafter turned attention to: (c ) Positive KITA Hertzberg starts discussion on this by asking the question: "If I say to you, 'do this for me or the company and in return I will give you a reward, ainnc e ntive {for example) more status, a promotion ..., am I motivating you?"
He says the overwhelming answer from management people is "yes, this is motivation" To Hertzberg, this is not motivation.
If you promise to give a worker some time off from work for agreeing to do something this cannot be motivation because, a motivated officer seeks (or should seek) more time at work and not less.
If you give an employee more pay, does this lead to his being motivated?
The experience of getting a salary rise today, and asking for another tomorrow shows that a salary increase is not a motivator.
And so are the various methods that have been tried, e.g human relations tsreanisniitnivgi,t y training, two way communication, job participation, employee counseling, etc.
NOT, motivators.
Hertzberg gives a beautiful analogy that demonstrates why KITA is not a motivation.
He says: "...I can charge a man's battery, and then recharge it, and recharge it again.
But it is only when he has his own generator that we can talk about motivation.
He then needs no outside stimulation.
He wants to do it".
Exercise 1.1 Compare negative physical KITA to negative psychological KITA.
Which of the two in your opinion and in your environment is more effective?
3.2 Hygiene Vs Motivators Hertzberg rephrased what he termed the "perennial question" of "how do you motivate employees to "how do you install a generator for an employee?
This comes from the battery charging analogy above.
Hertzberg undertook his studies of employees - accountants and engineers in the main, in tPhiett s burgh areas in the USA.
His study has been replicated over 16 times in var ying environments, some in the Communist countries.
The following are some of the findings and postulates.
124 (a) One of the most important and distinguishing finding of Hertzberg's was that "....the factors involved in producing job satisfaction (and motivation) are separate and distinct from the factors that lead to job dissatisfaction".
Hertzberg then says that "since separate factors need to be considered, depending on whether job satisfaction or job dissatisfaction is being examined, it follows that these two feelings are not opposite of each other".
According to him, the following are the opposites one of the other.
Words/phrases opposites (i) Job satisfaction no job satisfaction (ii) Job dissatisfaction no job dissatisfaction From this "construct", it follows that something that is not satisfying does not mean it is dissatisfying and vice-versa What this means is that satisfaction and dissatisfaction are addressing two different needs of man.
One set of needs stems from "his animal nature - the built-in drive to avoid pain from the environment, plus all the learned drives which become conditioned to the basic biological needs.
For example, hunger, a basic biological drive, makes it necessar y to earn money, and then money becomes a specific drive".
The other set of needs, Hertzberg says "...relates to that unique human characteristic, the ability to achieve any, through achievement, to experience psychological growth.
The stimuli for these are the job content whilst the stimuli for the former are found in the job environment.
He then sets out the growth or motivator factors that are also intrinsic to the job as: "achievement, recognition for achievement, the work itself, responsibility, and growth or advancement" what this means is that if an employee sees in his job an opportunity for all these factors, he will have satisfaction and the motivation to work.
On the other hand, the dissatisfaction avoidance, what Hertzberg chaylglsie n e factors and which are extrinsic to the job, include: "company policy and administration.
supervision, interpersonal relationships, working conditions, salary, status and security".
What this means is that however good and however appealing these factors are to the employee, they cannot lead to satisfaction that will motivate him to work.
The best they can do is to lead to a situation of "no dissatisfaction".
125 Peter Blunt states Hertzberg's theory "no dissatisfaction".
You will understand it easier.
He says that Hertzberg's theory consists of two general propositions as follows: (1) Individual motivation at work is a function of the intrinsic characteristics of the job which include: (a) Achievement, (b) Recognition, (c) Work itself, (d) Responsibility (e) Advancement (f) Personal development.
These factors are referred to as motivators" On the other hand, the second proposition is: (2) Dissatisfaction at work is a function of a set of job conditions called hygiene factors.
When operating to a sufficient degree, these factors prevent dissatisfaction, but they cannot act as motivators.
Such factors include: (a) Salary (b) Job security (c) Working conditions (d) Personal life (e) Relationship with supervisors (f) Relationship with fellow workers and subordinates (g) Company policies (h) Fringe benefits.
Peter Blunt says, inputting the theory down in its totality that, "The theory assets, then, that no matter how high a worker is paid or how good his working environment may be, this type of factor alone will not be sufficient to induce high levels of motivation or satisfaction.
By the same tiorrkeesnp,e c tive of how interesting or how challenging a job might be (ini.ter in sically motivating), there will be dissatisfaction if pay or wcoonrdkiitniogn s are inadequate".
We will add here that such dissatisfaction notwithstanding, the employee stays motivated and performs.
Exercise 1.2 List out the motivators and hygiene factors and explain how 3 each of motivators and hygiene factors (in practice) motivate or fail to do so.
4.0 Conclusion This unit has examined Hertzberg’s of theory of motivation.
Here you have seen his ideas which he calls KITA and how they are classified and operate.
126 Also, deviating from the common use of words, Hertzberg has differentiated motivators from non-motivators, under what is popularly referred to as his two-factor theory.
5.0 Sum mary Unit 17 has dealt with two sets of thought of Hertzberg's.
The most common is his two factor theory of motivation.
The KITA ideas are fairly uncommon but they present some real life problems and provide their solutions.
6.0 Tutor Marked Assignm ents Question 1: What is negative physical KITA and why will you not use it.
Question 2; State and explain the propositions of Hertzberg's motivation theory 7.0 References and Other resources Blunt, Peter (1985) Organizational Theory and Behavior: An African Perspective, Longman Inc. New York.
Hertzberg, Frederick "One More Time: How Do You Motivate Employees?"
in Natemeyer, Walter E (1978) Classics of Organizational Behavior, Moor Publishing Company Inc., Oak Park, Illinois.
MODULE FOUR UNIT 18 EMPLOYEE/INDUSTRIAL RELATIONS 127 Table of Contents 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objectives 3.0 Main Contents 3.1 Definition and origin in Nigeria 3.1.1 Definition 3.1.2 Origin of trade unions in Nigeria 3.2 Types of trade unions 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutor Marked Assignments 7.0 References and other resources 1.0 Introduction Employee relations or industrial relations are the links that exist between employers and employees, the latter not as single individuals but acso ll ectivities known as Labor Unions or trade unions.
This unit is concerned with such unions and examines what they are, how they are formed and how they operate.. 2.0 Objectives By the end of this unit you should be able to: • Define a trade or a labor union • Trace the origin and evolution of trade/labor unions in Nigeria • List the functions of trade unions 3.0 Main Contents 3.1 Definition and origin in Nigeria 3.1.1 Definition Labor unions and trade unions mean the same thing and the two terms are used interchangeably.
Thus defining this term, Edwin B. Flippo says: "A labor union or trade union is an association of workers form ed to promote, protect, and improve, through collective action, the social, econom ic, and political interests of its members".
128 Flippo adds that the "dominant interest with which the union is concerned is economic".
And that "in this area desires and demands, for improved wages, hours, and working conditions are foremost".
E. E. Uvieghara on his own part defines trade union, (quoting from the Trade Union Decree, 1973) as "any combination of workers or employers, whether temporary of permanent, the purpose of which is to regulate the terms and conditions of employment of workers..." According to him, "the definition has only two important criteria for determining a trade union - (1) tchoem bination must be of workers or employers; (2) it must have the proper purpose: that of regulating the terms and conditions of the employment of workers".
3.1.2 Origin of Trade Unions in Nigeria In his book, Trade Union Law in Nigeria, E.E Uvieghara says that, "There is no evidence that trade unionism, as it is known today existed in any part of present day Nigeria earlier than 1912 when the Nigerian Civil Service Union was formed".
As noted by Yesufu, and quoted by Uvieghara, numerous trade associations predated the Nigerian Civil Service Union, for example, organizations of hunters, blacksmiths, carvers and weavers.
These, like a longer list provided by Elias, who also said that they had "... been associating together from very early times in order to regulate admission and expulsion from their respective associations and to lay down conditions under which persons were allowed to practice these professions, "as well as the Nupe blacksmiths, brass asinldv e rsmiths, glass-makers, weavers, bead-workers, etc, were not the origins of the modern day trade unions.
Rather, the origin of the modern day trade union in Nigeria was the Southern Nigerian Civil Service Union, which later became the Nigerian Civil Service Union and which was formed "to promote the welfare and interests of native members of the civil service".
In 1931, the Railway Workers' Union and the Nigerian Union of Teachers were formed.
This was the origin of turnaidoen i sm in Nigeria.
Whereas, talking about the early Nigerian Civil Service Union, Mr. Wogu Ananaba, quoted by Uvieghara said, "The Nigerian Civil Service Union was `was hardly a trade union as trade unions are known today; it was more or less a petition-writing body heard only when a crisis was developing or an important official was retiring or proceeding on transfer or coming to assume duty", the Nigerian Union of Teachers was the best-run and well organized.
It had the following aims, among others: 129 (i) to study, promote and improve conditions affecting the teaching profession in Nigeria; (ii) to submit to government the opinions of teachers on matters directly or indirectly affecting the teaching profession in Nigeria.
(iii) to cooperate with the Education Department and various missionary bodies on matters relating to education.
As can be seen from these aims and what is said about trade unions in the definition above, modern trade unionism had started.
3.2 Types of trade unions Edwin B. Flippo notes that there are two types of labor unions, the industrial and the craft, and that these are often referred to as the vheorrtiizcoanl ta l ,a rneds p ectively.
Flippo says that the industrial union "is vertical in the sense that it includes all workers in a particular company or industry regardless of occupation".
Giving examples of such unions he cites the "United Automobile Workers and the United Steel Workers" - both of the USA.
Nigerian examples will include the United Textile Workers and the already much talked about, Nigerian Civil Service Union.
In the words of Flippo, "The horizontal or craft union is an organization that cuts across many companies and industries.
Its members belong to one craft or to a closely related group of occupations".
Examples of such are the Union of Typists, and the already mentioned Nigerian Union of Teachers, as well as Nigerian Union of Journalist.
Talking about types of trade union we would like to cap it up with the growth and existence of central labor organizations in Nigeria.
By 1942 when the first central labor organization came into existence there were already over 50 (fifty) unions.
In an introductory remark to the growth of a central labor organization, Uvieghara gives the reason for it as disunity and chaos that had pervaded the trade unions in the countr y.
He said: "The histor y of the growth and development of labor centers in the Nigerian trade union movement shows, more than any thing else, the disunity and utter chaos which have plagued the movement soon after what may be regarded as a healthy start".
He cites as concrete problems of the movement, the inability to "fashion for themselves a working man's creed; (and that) it was the story of constant allegations of greed and avarice, dishonesty and corruption, incompetence and indifference of a leadership clique and of an apathetic and inert rank and file".
These were the problems which led, in 1941 to "representatives of some unions - the Railway Workers' Union, the Nigerian Marine African Workers' Union and the Public Works Department Workers' Union - (meeting and 130 founding) the African Civil Servants Technical Workers' Union" which was the nucleus of the first central labor organization in Nigeria.
In 1942, it metamorphosed into the Federated Trades Onion of Nigeria, the first ever truly central labor body in Nigeria.
The following year, it became the Trade Union Congress (TUC) with the following aims, among others; (i) to unite all trade unions into one organized body (ii) to deal with general labor problems affecting workers in the country (iii) to protect the legal status of and rights of trade union organizations (iv) to help with the proper organization of trade unions.
Etc.
The T.U.C bedeviled by political ambitions got disunited into three different organizations - the Nigerian National Federation of Labor, the Federation of Government and Municipal Non-clerical Workers' Union, and the remnants of the T.U.C.
It is these 3 which, in the words of Uvieghara, in April, 1950 "...sank their identities" into the then new Nigeria Labor Congress (NLC) as we know it today.
3.3 Public Servants and Unionism Although as noted above, trade union in Nigeria started from the cseivrvili c e, not all civil or public servants are permitted to unionize or take part in trade union activities .
Writing on this, and using the then acvoanisltaibtuleti o n of the land, Akin Emiola said: "In spite of the provisions of section 37 of the Nigerian Constitution and section 12 of the Trade Unions Act, some categories of public officers are, however, denied either express statutory provisions or by necessary implications the right to join a trade union or participate in trade union activities".
The category of public officers so exclude persons employed in the police.
the prison and armed services; the customs preventive service, employees of the security section of the Nigerian Security Printing and Minting Company.
The same provision is extended to employees of the Central Bank of Nigeria as well as to workers of the Nigerian External Telecommunications Limited.
Emiola said, concerning this exclusion list that "In fact.
the staff of any service - be it of Federal or of state government - authorized to bear arms are all prohibited from being members of, or taking part in, the activities of a trade union".
Emiola says two more things touching.
the prohibition of certain members of the public service from unionism.
Firstly, he says: "The categories of workers prohibited in this way are not closed.
The minister of Labor is feumrtphoewr e r ed to specify by regulations, 'other establishments .....from time to 131 time' whose staff may be brought with In the provision prohibiting them from belonging to, or taking part in, the activities of a trade union".
Secondly, according to Emiola, "...the Trade Unions Act applies to a limited scale and job categories in the public service.
It follows that ...there are apparently certain scale or job grades within the enumerated services to which the Act does not apply and who are for the same reason outside the prohibition".
He says that.
"It is pertinent, of course, to say that ...the Act still preserves the right of the affected classes of workers to take part in the setting up of joint consultative bodies in the establishments concerned.
Such bodies cannot, however, be brought within the definition of 'trade union' and are in no way substitutes for trade unions".
3.4 Labor negotiations in the public service Emiola says that strikes or positive industrial actions are "far-fetched in the traditional public services".
When there has been need for negotiations, as there was following the strike by the railway workers in 1945, the method the government used was negotiation through Whitley councils.
Explaining what these councils are, Emiola said: "Whitleyism is a legacy inherited from the British system of industrial relations".
Discussing Whitley councils, O. Glenn Stahl said that they are "...an elaborate plan of joint industrial councils, named after J. H. Whitley, their founder, in 1919.
These are councils made up of equal representation of management and worker and providing the machinery through which in the words of Stahl, "virtually all phases of public personnel policy are discussed and the contending interest ameliorate' Giving an account of how well the Whitley councils in Britain, Glenn Stahl states: "In the early years its existence, the National {Whitley} Council made a number of significant achievements, including adoption of a plan froecr la s sifying the whole service, acceptance of a cost-of-living bonus system, the creation of promotion boards in the departments, and the facilitation of transfers".
Much later, Stahl says, emphasis shifted to the departmental (cWouhnictlielsy ) w hich concerned themselves with the day-to-day problems of administration.
In general, Whitleyism was a success in Britain as concluded by Stahl thus "Nevertheless, there seems to be a consensus among British and American authorities that Whitleyism has been a success in the British public service".
132 What could be said about Whitleyism in Britain could not however be said about its Nigerian counterpart.
Emiola, reviewing the performance of the Whitley Councils in Nlaimgeernitae d thus: "However, the system of negotiating wages and conditions of service through the Whitley Councils turned out to be a lame duck".
Quoting Professor Adeogun, Emiola says "It is clear that collective bargaining between the government and their employees through the Whitley Councils has hardly been effective ...
It seems very odd that despite the establishment of Whitley Councils since 1948 for negotiations between government and its employees, practically every major demand by workers for wage increase or review since the second world war has been settled, not through tchoilsl e c tive industrial machinery but by special committees, commissions or arbitrations".
When you hear of such commissions as the Gorsuch Commission, the Harragin Commission, the Mbanefo Commission, the Adebo Commission and the most popular, the Udoji Commission, they all were put in place to settle some labor issues, especially salary increases/reviews.
The ineffectiveness of the Whitley Councils gave birth not only to commissions, tribunals and committees but to some active bargaining mechanisms which are the issues we shall consider in the next unit.
4.0 Conclusion In this unit you have been introduced to the definition of labor or trade unions, their origin in Nigeria, the types of trade unions and the machinery for labor negotiations especially in the public sector.
The effectiveness of Whitleyism in its country of origin and its ineffectiveness in Nigeria have also been examined.
5.0 Sum mary This unit has dealt with one section of a two part subject - trade unionism.The next section deals with collective bargaining.
6.0 Tutor Marked Assignm ent Q. l Who may not belong to a trade union and why not?
7.0 References and other resources Emiola, Akin (1985) Public Servant and the Law, University of Ife Press 133 Flippo, Edwin B.
(1984) Personnel Management (Sixth Edition), McGraw- Hill Book Company, New York.
Stahl, Glenn O (1962) Public Personnel Administration (Fifth Edition) Harper & Row Publishers, New York MODULE FOUR UNIT 19 COLLECTIVE BARGAINING Table of Contents 134  1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objectives 3.0 Main Contents 3.1 Definition and Scope 3.2 The Processes of collective bargaining 3.3 Strategy of bargaining 3.4 Union bargaining pressures 3.4.1 Strikes 3.4.2 Picketing 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutor Marked Assignment 7.0 References and other resources 1.0 Introduction You will discover here that the traditional methods of doing business with one's workers in an organization in which management decides on what to do and merely informs worker is now out-of-date.
Writing on the subject of collective bargaining, Edwin B. Flippo notes that "The National LRaeblaotrio n s Act (of the USA) specifies that it is an unfair labor practice for the employer to refuse to bargain collectively with chosen representatives of a certified labor organization".
By the same token, "The Labor Management Relations Act specifies that it is an unfair practice for the representatives of a labor organization to refuse to bargain in good faith with the employer'".
This is now the mandatory nature of collective bargaining that we examine here.
2.0 Objectives By the end of this unit you should be able to: • Define collective bargaining • Identify the processes of collective bargaining • Identify and be able to apply the strategy of bargaining • Recognize and be able to apply the various union bargaining pressures 3.0 Main Contents 3.1 Definition and Scope 135 According to Edwin B. Flippo, collective bargaining is A process in which representatives of two groups meet and attempt to negotiate an agreement that specifies the nature of future relationships between the two.
Flippo emphasizes this definition by saying that "On subjects where bargaining is required by law, the employer is no longer free to make and enforce unilateral decisions.
And on matters not so legally mandated, the employer is influenced by such risks as strikes, slowdown, and withholding of cooperative efforts".
3.2 The processes of collective bargaining 3.2.1 The pre- negotiation phase To a labor organization, full time negotiation is its business.
On the contrar y. in the words of Flippo, "The company, whose major objective is tphreo d uction and distribution of an economic good can ill afford to consider collective bargaining as a fringe duty that merits little special attention.
Negotiations between unions and employers end up in contracts and contracts are valid for certain periods only.
Flippo notes that the signing of a particular contract signals the beginning of the preparation for the next.
This is the time to begin to assemble data e.g.
facts and figures on wages, hours, pensions, vacations, etc.
for use in the negotiation for the next contract.
3.2.2 Negotiating teams On the side of the employer, it is usual to have a team or a committee.
This broadens the base of participation.
It is also usual to have a lreegparel s entative.
In order to leave some room for reflections on point at issue, the chief executive of the organization is usually not included in tnheeg o tiating team.
On the side of the union, the team usually includes local officials of the union, some employees of the organization and "representatives of tihnete r national union".
Most of the union bargainers are full time specialists in the art of bargaining and negotiating with various managements.
3.2.3 Strategies for bargaining 136 Flippo opens discussion under this heading by making the following remark: "Because of the considerable importance of the labor agreement, it iess s ential for management to plan its strategy and tactics carefully ipnr e paration for the bargaining sessions'".
Strategy involves mapping out the plan and deciding on the policy which will guide the organization in the bargaining process.
The union on its own part also does the same thing - it maps out its plans and decides on guiding principles.
What follows at a real collective bargaining session is very similar to the bargaining that a buyer and seller engage in our markets.
For eOxyaimngpbleo m arket (Lagos), Owode market (Offa), Bosso market (Minna) Kawo market (Kaduna) and Terminal market (Jos).
Before management enters the conference room for bargaining its negotiators must agree on the maximum concessions that can be granted to tahnet ic ipated demands of the union.
Often the union files it demands in advance of the meeting.
The company must know the point above which it will not go, preferring to risk a strike instead.
As illustrated in figure 1.1 above, management will not go beyond a 10% wage offer and union will not accept a less than 8% wage increase.
But as can be seen, and similar to the bargains you must have been engaged in our markets, union, ready to settle for 8% wage increase in the final analysis, starts its bargain by demanding 16%.
Management on its own part, willing, in the final analysis to go as far as to accept a 10% wage increase for the workers, starts negotiation by offering only 4%.
The usual process of giving and taking then plays itself out until union settles for nothing less than 8% increase and management offers nothing more than 10% salary increase.
In collective bargaining, Flippo advises that on organization's strategic plan could include the following: 1.
Avoid mutual agreement clauses that would prevent management action.
Management should retain the right to manage the fsiurbmje, c t to challenges by the union under the contract.
2.
Keep one's eyes on the entire package.
A work procedure concession may eventually cost more than a substantial pay increase.
3.
Keep the company personnel infor med of the progress of bargaining sessions.
Supervisors must be involved, and union members are also employees.
137 4.
Develop agreements where the union leaders can always maintain that they "won".
Union leaders have to run for reduction on their record and management can more frequently afford the appearance of having "lost".
5.
Determine the point at which the organization is willing for the union to go on strike.
The union is fully aware of the fact that frequently used in its "threat" form.
Management must adopt a basic attitude of not being afraid of a strike.
Exercise Fully discuss collective bargaining strategy.
3.3 Union Bargaining Pressures On their own part, labor unions have strategies and tactics which they employ in extracting greater concessions from management.
The strategies used by management as discussed above are also used by unions.
In addition, there are certain stronger types of pressures available to unions.
These are strikes, picketing and boycotts, and they will be discussed briefly here.
3.3.1 Strikes Flippo defines a strike as "....a concerted and temporary withholding of employee services from the employer for the purpose of exacting greater concessions in the employment relationship than the employer is willing to grant at the bargaining table".
He says further that the possibility of a strike is the ultimate economic force that the union can bring to bear upon tehmep loyer.
Without the possibility of a strike in the background, there can be no true collective bargaining.
There are various types of strikes.
The most important to you here are listed and explained below' taken from Flippo: 1.
Recognition strike - this is a strike to force the employer to recognize and deal with the union.
2.
Economic strike - this is the typical strike, based on a demand for better wages.
hours, and working conditions than the employer is willing to give.
138 3.
Wildcat strike - these are the quick, sudden and unauthorized types of work stoppages.
Such strikes are not approved by union leadership and are contrary to the labor agreement.
They are sometimes viewed as a form of "fractional bargaining" by a subgroup of employees who have not achieved satisfaction through regular grievance processing or collective bargaining procedures.
4.
Sit- down strike - this is when the employees strike but remain at their jobs in the organization.
Such strikes are illegal since they constitute an invasion of private property.
Employees are free to strike for certain objectives but they must physically withdraw from the organization's premises.
3.3.2 Picketing Picketing is the patrolling of strikers in front of the entrance of aonrg a nization's premises in order to ensure total work stoppage.
If tehmep loyer accepts the strike and shuts down the organization, such picketing will be routine and peaceful.
However, if the employer attempts to use non- striking workers or any other to keep the organization "going" the picketing might turn violent as strikers seek to prevent work at the factory.
Picketing is legal.
Its’ only illegality is when it turns violent and so steps should be taken by the employer and the union to prevent this.
3.3.3 Boycotts Flippo discusses boycotts under the heading secondar y boycotts.
Perhaps, for their intentions, this is about the only way it makes sense to classify them.
According to him "secondary boycott takes place when a union, which is seeking a concession from employer A, places pressure on employer B to influence employer A to grant the concession".
This may entail the union attempting to make employer B and any others whose company has dealings with A refusing to deal with employer A until it grants the demand of its union.
This works this way:- Organization A produces fast food which is purchased and consumed by organizations B, C and D. If the union in organization A succeeds in getting organizations B, C and D to boycott the food produced by A, A will be forced to shut down.
To avoid this, A may be forced to "give in" to the demands of its union.
3.3.4 The public servant and strikes Citing certain provisions the Trade Disputes Act 1976, Akin Emiola states that "...it is illegal for any public servant ... to call out their men on strike.
Alluding to the same phenomenon in the USA, Flippo says "some have 139 decried the prohibition of strikes by public employees as affecting a type of second-class citizenship".
He gives a rationale for this ban by saying that "Others feel that public employment offers unusual degrees of job security, for which the employees should be willing to give up some other economic rights".
As noted earlier, the possibility of a strike is the ultimate economic force that the employee has in dealing with the employer.
This is perhaps the reason behind Emiola's apprehension to the effect that "whether the nporo-svtirsiikoen s can, in fact, be enforced in practice is an entirely dmiaffteterre"n.tH e then goes on to cite the breaches of the provisions by saying: It is relevant to note that in spite of the purported ban on the right of the worker to strike or the employer to impose a lockout, teachers throughout Nigeria did engage in a successful nationwide strike in December 1978 in the same way as the Lagos State Government ordered a lockout of teachers in its teaching service in 1977 following the teachers withdrawing of labor".Of course strikes in the core public service, i.e the civil service, here become so routine and so rampant that one has to completely agree with Emiola that "It will be seen that the provisions of the Act banning workers from positive industrial action are honored in the breach than in observance".
4.0 Conclusion This unit has examined the concept of collective bargaining.
It has provided you a definition of it and given you the processes of collective bargaining.
It has given the preparation necessary on the part of the management and union which leads to successful bargaining which is underscored by a process of giving-and-taking.
The pressures available to be applied by unions which give necessar y "bite" to bargaining, particularly, strikes were also examined in their various formats.
With these, you should be in a position to undertake collective bargaining on either side - management or labor.
5.0 Sum mary Unit 20 which is a follow-up of unit 19 which discussed trade unions, has taken a look at one of the most important functions of trade uconliloencst iv e i .
eb a rgaining.
It has examined this concept from its pre-negotiation stage throughout to the final contract stage.
The place of the public service in collective bargaining and strikes have been so examined.
6.0 Tutor Marked Assignm ent Question.
l Explain the following concepts: 140 (a) Economic strike (b) Wildcat strike (c ) Boycott Question .2 How would you, being part of management team, prepare for collective bargaining with a union?
7.0 References and other Resources Emiola, Akin (1985) Public Servant and the Law, University of Ife Press Flippo, Edwin B (1984) Personnel Management (Sixth Edition) McGraw-Hill Book Company, New York.
MODULE FIVE UNIT 20 ETHICS IN PUBLIC SERVICE Table of Contents 141  1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objectives 3.0 Main Contents 3.1 Definition and Scope 3.1.1 Definition 3.1.2 Scope 3.2 Elements of ethic in practice 3.2.1 Discipline 3.2.2 Good conduct 3.2.3 Courtesy, Cooperation, Tact, Industry, avoid area of delay 3.2.4 Attitude to public funds 3.2.5 Flexibility and decision making 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutor Marked Assignments 7.0 References and other resources 1.0 Introduction Ethics is inherent in man.
This is why/how it is the concern of personnel management.
It belongs to the evolutionary stage of the study of personnel management we have tagged the behavioural science movement.
Whether one is courteous at work or not, whether one handles one's position in trust for the public or as a personal property, etc.
are issues of ethical dimensions.
This unit deals with what ethics is and the methods employed to get it ingrained in public and also private servants.
2.0 Objectives By the end of this unit, you should be able to: • Define ethics • Identify its significance in organizations • List attitudes which can be termed as good conduct 3.0 Main contents 3.1 Definition and scope Ethics has been defined in the glossary at the end of the book by John Bratton and Jeffrey Gold as: 142  The code of moral principles and values that governs the behaviour of individual or group with respect to what is right or wrong.
The scope of ethics in organizations covers both management and leadership.
Writing on the management aspect under the heading "Managing Ethically" Joseph W. Weiss says: "Business ethics is the art and discipline of applying ethical principles to examine and solve complex moral dilemmas.
Business ethics asks, "what is right or wrong?
Good or bad?
in business transactions" Talking of scope of ethics in organizations, Weiss gives an interesting set of statistics of top ethical issues.
He says: "In an international survey, of 300 companies worldwide.
over 80% of Chief Executive Officers and senior managers listed the following as the top ethical issues facing businesses: employee conflicting interests (91%) inappropriate gifts (91%) sexual harassment (91%), unauthorized payments (85%) and affirmative action issues (84%)" He also cites another sets of figures in a national survey of 1,400 working women which showed that "....the most frequently occurring unethical practices in business include managers lying to employees; expense account abuses at high levels; nepotism and favoritism; and taking credit for other's work".
Discussing the "Ethical dimensions of leadership", Weiss says that "leading effectively also means leading ethically and morally.
He says that "While businesses expand over geographic and cultural boundaries, questions concerning the sense of right and wrong of leaders and followers in their business practices gain in importance".
Ethical decisions are not easy to take as the question of right or wrong is so much "person-dependent".
However, Weiss gives three criteria that define the limits of ethical reasoning, thus (1) Ethical reasoning should be logical; assumptions should be based on facts, and judgments made explicit.
(2) Facts and evidence should be accurate, relevant and complete.
And (3) Standards used in one's ethical reasoning should be consistent, if not, those standards should be modified".
143 3.1.2 Ethical principles Weiss gives a list of ethical principles which might be of help to test the right or wrong of decisions or policies.
They are: 1 Ethical relationship.
He says under this that "Moral authority is based on individual or cultural self-interests customs, or religious principles".
That, "An act is morally right if it serves the one's (or the culture's) self-interests, needs or standards".
Whilst one who is in Rome is enjoined to do as the Romans do, one also has to give regard to one's national laws and moves.
Weiss gives as an example, an intriguing case.
He says: "....at a cultural level, an American manager working in Mexico ...may be forced to choose between wining a contract illegally by not following U.S standards or winning the contract by following local practices.
2.
Utilitarianism.
A morally or ethically sound decision or policy is the one that, judged on the basis of cost-benefit analysis, the benefits exceed the cost for the majority of people.
3.
Rights.
The principle of utilitarianism above notwithstanding, moral and ethical authority is based on the "...inalienable rights and entitlements of individuals or groups guaranteed to all in their pursuit of freedom of speech, choice, happiness, and selfrespect".A manager who overlooks the rights of even one individual or group mjeoayp a rdize the implementation of a decision, policy or procedure.
4.
Universalism.
Weiss says that "Moral authority is based on the extent to which the intention of an act treats all persons as ends (not means) in themselves and with respect".
This rule enjoins managers to give individuals unique treatment if their cases so demand and that they be not treated as a statistic.
5.
Justice.
Weiss, on this principle says: "Moral authority is based on the extent to which opportunity, wealth, and burden are fairly distributed among all.
Here, fairness and equity govern the decision".
He then notes that "Justice has three components: procedural (how rules, procedures, and the means of distributing burden and wealth are deter mined).
compensatory (how fairly people are compensated for injustices done to them), and distributive (does the punishment fit the crime?)".
Weiss says that leaders can use these principles to understand their underlying ethics in their policies, procedures and decisions.
144 Exercise 1.1 Define ethics.
How would you test a decision for ethical soundness?
3.2 The Practice of Ethics In a chapter titled "Code of ethics on Government Service", the Civil Service Handbook, an official manner (issued by the Federal Ministry of Establishments and Service Matters.
a number of "how-to-do" things (ethically) is given.
We shall give you some of them here.
(1) Discipline Here it enjoins the civil services in the country to be disciplined, to obey rules and regulations and ensure that the interest of the service is paramount in whatever is done.
It calls on senior officers to prescribe codes of conduct which they themselves can and should comply with.
It says that "Those who wish to lead other people should always remember that effective leadership involves exemplary character, hard work and transparent integrity.
(2).
Good conduct and ideals Under this heading, the following issues are discussed, among others: (a) Loyalty - a civil servant is required to serve the government loyally and give adequate service in return for the salary or wage paid.
(b) Honesty - civil servants should be honest in their dealings with the public and "demand or receive nothing in money or kind from anyone in the performance of their duties".
(c ) Courage - the manual says that a civil servant should possess the courage to work hard.
Another type of courage it says, "involves doing what is morally right even though one does stand to gain personally from such action".
It says: "You should do the right thing especially if it will enhance the reputation of your service and the sate.
You should at all times resist temptation from whatever quarters.
Where the prior consent of a superior authority is necessary, bcoe u rteous in getting it.
(d) Courtesy - The civil service Hand book requires the public employee to be polite and courteous to both those in the service and the general public.
It says (to senior officers) that "polite instructions are usually more easily obeyed, (and that) courtesy in the office and to the 145 general public makes it easier to get on with other people, (and that) A heavy schedule of duties or any other circumstance cannot justif y bad temper by civil servants".
(e) Cooperation - The civil service or any section of it needs the cooperation of a lots of members to succeed.
When any member(s) isolate themselves in the belief that they are as good as the rest put together, success in jeopardized.
(f) Tact - The manual of the civil service says concerning this that "Tact means skillfulness in handling a difficult situation without giving offence to the people involved.
This is very necessary in the service".
(g) Industry - The civil service Handbook says that this means "...useful hard work" because, "some workers work furiously to get little or nothing done".
To be industrious is to know one's work.
well and to stay within bounds and establish schedules of when to start and to finish any given assignment.
(h) Avoidance of delay - To avoid delay is to work hard, to devote time to (only) official work during work and to take time off to get well, if sick.
(i) Tidiness - a tidy office is impressive to visitors and it also gives an idea of the state of mind of its user.
The Civil Service Handbook also enjoins civil servants to be properly dressed to .duty.
It says "It is a good idea to dress in a business - like manner, not as if one were going to a formal party or a beauty queen parade.
It does not cost much to dress simply with carefully chosen material.
It is useful to remember that how people dress tells keen observers a great deal of the general character and taste of such people".
(j) Helpfulness - It is enjoined in the Civil Service Handbook that help be offered without regard to kinships or friendships.
Also, the senior civil servants are enjoined to help junior ones, in particular encouraging them to apply themselves to study rather than waste time and resources on playing pools.
(k) Kindness - this, according to the Civil Service Handbook does not mean giving to what they are not entitled to.
Rather it involves "...respecting the privileges and rights of officers, employees and members of the public in respect of the fact that those concerned are unknown to you.
A civil servant ... should ... serve impartially".
146 This manual also says that kindness "involves having a humane approach in dealing with people indifferently.
This applies to staff as well as members of the public".
Doing this should however be without breach of the regulations.
Another set of ethical behaviors has to do with a very important and sensitive issue i.e.
attitude to public funds.
In this respect, the civil service Handbook requires civil servants to be frugal in spending and conscientious in revenue collecting.
Other sets of ethical attitudes that a civil servant should have e.g national consciousness, good image of the civil service as well as social problems and social justice is emphasized.
Exercise 1.2 What should the attitude of the civil servant be to such things as gift-giving and gift-taking; kindness, and courtesy?
4.0 Conclusion In this unit, we have explored the topic of ethics.
As you might have noted, this concept is a very personal issue.
The question of doing right adnedte s ting evil and the more basic one of knowing which is right and which is wrong of two things in a situation of competition, urgency and especially scarcity and inaccuracy of information can be very intriguing.
However, we hope the tips from literature given here as to how to know what is ethical and what not, as well as the principles governing ethics here provided some help.
Also the practical "dos" and "don'ts" from the Civil Service Handbook, we believe have aided a lot.
5.0 Sum mary This unit has done the following: given the definition of ethics, state the two broad types - management and leadership in ethics; it has given a "test" to be used in knowing if a decision, a policy, a procedure is a not ethical, it has given principles of ethics and using the Nigeria case, it has examined ethics in the practical realm.
6.0 Tutor Marked Assignm ent Question 1.
What is ethics?
How would you know if a decision made by a Chief Executive of an organization is not ethical?
147 7.0 References and other Resources Bratton, John and Gold, Jeffrey (1999) Human Resource Management - Theory and Practice (Second Edition) Macmillan Press Ltd, London Federal Republic of Nigeria, Civil Service Handbook, Federal Ministry of Establishment and Service Matters, Lagos.
Weiss, Joseph W. (1996) Organizational Behavior of Change - Managing Diversity, Cross-cultural Dynamics, and Ethics.
West Publishing Company, Minneapolis/St.
Paul.
MODULE FIVE UNIT 21 DECISION-MAKING Table of Contents 148 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objectives 3.0 Main Contents 3.1 Definition and Scope 3.2 Enlarging decision making capacity 3.3 Steps in decision-making 3.4 Improving decision-making ability of executives 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutor Marked Assignments 7.0 References and other resources 1.0 Introduction Decision-making, as you will see later on, is the responsibility of the man you scouted for in unit 2 and gave an appointment thereafter.
It is trheesp onsibility of the man you trained, the executive you appraised adnedv e loped.
Decision-making, at whatever level an employee is found, is one of his most important functions.
2.0 Objectives By the end of this unit you should be able to: • Define decision-making • Locate where decision-making capacity can be enlarged • List steps in the decision-making process • Recognize how decision-making ability can be improved 3.0 Main Contents 3.1 Definition and Scope Decision comes from the action word “deciding” which Harold F. Smiddy defines as implying "....freedom to choose from among alternatives without externally imposed coercion, freedom to conceive alternatives from which to choose".
He was quick to circumscribe this definition within the appropriate boundaries.
He said, "Decision are made within boundaries set up by many constraints" out of which he enumerated the following: 149  Prevailing and unalterable features of the social, political econom ic and technological environment.
The individual's interpretation of the legal, moral, ethical and religious limits to possible courses of action.
Ttohtae li ty of the `culture' that has been `inherited' and `learnt' by tinhde iv idual, at least to the extent that he cannot perceive that mpoasnsiyb l e course of action are unavailable to him as a result osuf b c ohniss c ious interpretation of `custom '.
Expatiating on the meaning of the concept of decision, he says decision making is both creative and judicial.
By creative he means ".....imagination in visualizing alternatives...." This entails "...imagination to consider more, different and better alternatives" (underlining in place of italics in original text).
The import of this is that whereas it is possible to be hemmed in by traditional limits in considering alternatives amongst which to make a choice, it is also possible and it is creative to do so, to expand the alternatives outside the traditional limits and thus to encapsulate better alternatives and make better decisions.
By judicial is meant that decision making juxtaposes values with facts and information available as well as the likely impact and consequences of what each alternative entails.
In the words of Smmidy, "Deciding is thus a matter of value judgment and of wisdom.
The quality of value judgment will be improved to the extent that they are influenced by factual rather than erroneous or inaccurate information....." If one accepts that the judgments used in deciding are value judgments, and that in the words of T. Ross Moore, decision making" .....depends too much upon the individual" then ".....effective `deciding' ...requires a well developed sense of values" inherent in the individual decision maker.
One way to develop the sense of values of the individual in order to improve his decision making ability and thus the quality of his decisions is to orient him toward the objectivities of the organization for which he works.
Now that we are reasonably settled on the issue of the definition odfe c i sion/decision making, let us turn attention to the nature and focus of decision making in organizations.
In the first place, we partially agree with one of Smiddy's propositions that "decisions are made only by individuals, not by groups".
From the way we have talked about decision thus far, for example, that (among other things) they are a product of value judgment, perhaps they cannot be much else than individual responsibilities.
Smiddy is so emphatic on this point that he says: 150 Each decision can be specifically defined as the responsibility of asp ecif ic Position.
The incumbent of this position is personally ainnddi v id ually Responsible and accountable for the results and the consequences of The decisions so designated as his responsibilities Much as one would want to agree with Smiddy, it is to be borne in mind that these days, lots of decisions are made, and the responsibilities of committees.
This is most visible in higher educational institutions e.g.
universities where practically every decision is made the responsibility of one committee or the other.
3.2 Enlarging decision-making capacity However, where a decision is made the sole responsibility of an individual much as it is advisable to tap the knowledge of others (colleagues asunbdo rdinates), it is crucial to bear in mind that the final decision is the responsibility of the one into whose hands it is entrusted.
A beneficial way to use the knowledge of subordinates and supervisors is to utilize any of steps 1-5 in the scheme on the figure below: Executive-centered Subordinate-centered Decision Decision 151 (1) (2) (3) (4) (5) (6) (7) Leader Leader Leader presents Leader Leader Leader defines Leader permits Makes “selles” idea & invites present presents limits, asks subordinates to Decision decision questions tentative problem group to function within And decisions gets make limits defined Announces subject suggestions decision by superior makes It to change decision Adapted from (Robert Tennenbaum, Irving R. Wechsler, Fred massarik ; Leadership and organization McGraw-Hill Book Company 1961.p.69 The operational interpretation of each of the point are follows; I .
Leader Makes Decision and Announces it In this case, the leader identified a problem or realizes the existence of a problem, he ponders over possible solutions and chooses one.
In doing this, he does not consult with or make use of any input from his subordinates.
2.
The Leader "Sells" his Decision Here, the leader keeps problems and decision making to himself.
However, rather than announce the decision he has made, he sells it or persuades his subordinates to accept it for fear of resistance.
3.
The Leader Presents his ideas, invites questions Here again, the decision is made, indeed, already made by the leader.
He invites questions on it as an avenue to make it clearer to his subordinates.
4.
The leader presents a tentative decision subject to change 152 This is a situation where as the one above, the leader has thought over the problem and found the solution.
In fact, he has earmarked a solution.
The problem and the tentative solution are tendered for debate but the final decision is the leader's.
5.
The leader presets the problem, gets suggestions and then makes his decision This time unlike others above, the leader comes to his group without a preconceived answer.
He uses his group as a resource base to obtain answers.
At the end however, he alone takes the decision.
6.
The leader defines the limits and request the groups to take a decision This time, the leader passes to the group usually with himself as a member, the right to make decision.
Before doing this, he defines the problem and the boundaries within which the decision must be made.
7.
The leader permits the group to make decision within prescribed limits Here the group has almost absolute freedom to identify and diagnose the problems, develop alternative procedures for solving it, and deciding on the alternative to use.
The executive, depending upon the urgency surrounding the issue and the knowledge his subordinates are likely to have on the issue may use any of numbers 1-5 above in making decision.
Involving his subordinates is a morale booster and is highly recommended.
On the issue of the level of organization at which decision making takes place, here we wholly agree with both Smiddy, and McKinney and Howard that it takes place virtually at all levels of tohreg a nization.
Whilst McKinney and Howard say: "Decision making falls within the province of all levels of management though it is generally assumed to be reserved essentially to individuals fairly high in the administrative hierarchy.
Smiddy proposes that: "All individuals rather than only managers, make decisions and need to do so responsibly.
What these authors mean is that there is need to decentralize decision making in organizations.
Smiddy was specific as to the locus (level) 153 of each decision.
He put it as comprehensively (and a little difficult to comprehend) as follows: The determinant position level for responsibility and authority to make a particular decision should be that organizational level nearest the work where both needed skills and com petence on the one hand and tnheee d ed inform ation embracing under standing of both direct and environm ental probable impacts of the decision - on the other hand can reasonably be brought to exist; so that such inform ation and understanding be brought to bear in choosing wisely from among possible alternatives, or risks as responsibility and need for decision, Smiddy recommends that not only m anagers (gie.en.e r alist) but specialists be assigned decision making responsibility.
This is an important point in Nigeria of today wherein emphasis is shifting from the generalist to the specialist (the professional) in the administration of public affairs.
In the past the specialist were unfortunately marginalized even in the decisions on professional issues.
The shift to professionalisation should open avenues for specialists to exert themselves in decision making.
3.4 Step to Decision Making Although time and space will not permit a detailed analysis of this, it behoves us to at least sketch out here the steps which lead to sound decision making.
The following five steps are as given by an eminent management scholar, Peter Drucker: l. Defining the problem 2.
Analyzing the problem 3.
Developing alternative solutions 4.
Deciding upon solution 5.
Converting the decision into effective action.
It is pertinent to state here that not all decisions have to go through these five steps in order to be made.
Management scholars have divided dmeackisiniogn into two broad categories - programmed and non - programmed decisions.
Programmed decisions are those which deal with problems permitting well defined search and choice procedures to be used each time they occur.
The problems giving rise to them are repetitive and so solutions can almost be prefabricated.
Non-programmed decisions on the other hand involve problems which "...are often new and highly ill-defined making it difficult to 154 tell what factors are applicable for obtaining a desired solution".
Normally for such problems, need arises to shift the focus of decision making "upstairs".
Improving Decision Making Ability of E xecutives Since we have said in clear terms that decision is a products of vjuadlugem e nt, that it depends too much on the individual; and since we know that individuals are gifted differently, how can decision making ability be improved?
Pondering over such issues, T. Ross Moore, gives the following response to his own question - "Can Decision Making be learnt?"
It would be very convenient and comfortable merely to say that decision making is something which springs from the intuition of certain types of people.
This would make our problem quite simple.
We could go back to the old saying that either a m an has it or he doesn't.
However, Moore believes that just like enterpreneurism which was thought irreplaceable has been replaced quite successfully by management, decision making can be learnt.
Time will not allow us to go into details on how this can be done but a few tips will be given.
One way in which it can be learnt is picking the brain of the successful decision maker to catalogue the process he utilizes in so doing.
Such a process can then be studied, adopted and taught.
However, this is not easy as many as.
good decision makers does not know how they were made Another way of improving decision making ability is making more of them.
Ross Moore says the following in this regard: "I have personally found one further ver y important thing about the decision making process winhdiiccha te s that it can be learnt.
The more decisions I make, the better is their quality".
Another way of improvement in the quality of decisions in organizations rather than decision making ability of individuals is to drop those who are incapable of making decisions from so doing.
Ross Moore puts this point thus: I have also observed that there are those who seem to be unable to m ake decision .....Others are actually afraid to take chance.
Still others simple do not want the responsibility of any form of decision m aking.
When I 155 run into these situations.
I try to peg the man immediately at the level to which he has risen.
There should be no further promotion for him.
A man unable to make decision merely adds a form of paralysis in any organizations.
4.0 Conclusion This unit has examined the topic - decision-making.
In it you have given the meaning and scope of decision- making in organizations.
You have told how it is not the responsibility of only those on top of organizational hierarchies.
You have also learnt how decision- making capacity can be enlarged by the "tapping" of the knowledge of colleagues and subordinates.
You have also learnt how to increase the ability of decision making in executives.
5.0 Sum mary Decision making is a critical function in organizations.
It is a personnel function because it is one of the important things the employee does ionr g anizations and in respect of which he is given additional training and which also forms the basis for his performance appraisal.
6.0 Tutor Marked Assignm ent Define decision-making.
How would you improve this process lr'an `executive?
7.0 References and other resources Moore, Ross T "Synthesizing Information" in H.B Maynard (ed) (1960) Top Management Handbook, McGraw-Hill Book Company, New York Smiddy, Harold F. "Deciding" in H. B. Maynard (ed) ibid Tennenbaum, Robert, Wechsler, Irving R, Massarik, Fred (1961) Leadership and Organization, McGraw-Hill Book Company, New York MODULE FIVE UNIT 22 CONFLICT MANAGEMENT 156 Table of Contents 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objectives 3.0 Main Contents 3.1 Definition 3.1.2 Discovery of conflicts of interest 3.1.3 Types of Conflicts 3.1.4 Conflict Resolution 3.1.5 Conclusion 4.0 Summary 5.0 Tutor Marked Assignment 6.0 References and other Resources 1.0 Introduction This unit treats a negative aspect of inter-personal and inter- group relations in organizations, i.e.
conflict and its management.
It defines what conflict is, says how dysfunctional it could be and how it can be managed arensdo/lovre d .
A number of management theorists see it as not ncoecmepslseatreillyy n egative.
What bad it constitutes and what good it could be, will be examined here.
2.0 Objectives By the end of this unit you should be able to: • Define conflict • List a number of conflict situations • Manage conflicting situation to prevent getting worse • Resolve conflicts 3.0 Main conf licts 3.1 Definition and scope In a glossary of management terms at the beginning of his book, G.A Cole defines conflict thus: 157 Conf lict is a condition that arises when two or more individuals ogrr o ups perceive their own interests as being challenged by the other(s), and when strong feelings can be aroused.
Whilst not giving a definition, Etzioni talks about conflict thus: Supervisors, organizational units, or staff divisions often come icnotnof l ict with one another either because of the principles that divide the labor among them and prescribe their relations are not clear, or because the prescribed rules are being adhered to by some but not by others, or because differences of interest, view point, or personalities need to be reconciled Flippo defines conflict as: ".....any discontent or dissatisfaction that af fects organizational perf ormance.
As such it can be either stated or unvoiced, written or oral, legitim ate or ridiculous.
The only major restriction in this definition is that the discontent m ust affect worker performance".
Also talking of conflicts, he further says: "Despite the best of management practices in acting and communicating, conflicts between employees and the organization will occur".
He further says that "A total absence of conflict would be unbelievable, boring.
and a strong indication that such conflicts are being suppressed".
3.1.2 The discovery of conflicts of interests For many reasons, there is now more communication in organizations than before.
The human relations movement as well as the activities of labor unions have led to this development.
The louder voice of employees in business is viewed by some as evidence that the amount of disagreement and trouble has been on the increase.
On the other hand, as observed by Flippo, "it may be that such trouble has always existed, but now it can rise to the top and be observed".
The following are some of the ways given by Flippo through which conflicts are discovered: (a) Direct observation: Flippo says that "A good supervisor knows the customary behavior of subordinates, and when significant changes in that behavior occur, he or she is concerned with possible motives.
Observations are also made on productivity which may show a decline.
Also such statistics as 158 grievance rates, accident rates, requests for transfer, resignations and disciplinary cases, etc may reveal that an unspoken conflict exists.
- (b) Suggestions box The type of suggestion box referred to have is what Flippo calls "a gripe box".
He says, concerning it, "The company that establishes an anonymous gripe system is concerned with the problem of bringing all conflicts of interest to light.
Anonymity may provide the courage to submit a dissatisfaction that will otherwise go unvoiced".
(c) Open door policy Flippo accurately describes this policy as "....commonly announced but seldom works".
The higher level executives usually say they operate an open-door policy by which they mean anyone could come in discuss any problems concerning them or the organization.
However, whoever tries to use this policy soon realizes that the open door ends at the secretary's office and for most people, at trheec e ptionist's.
If open-door policies work beyond window-dressing, they are capable of detecting and removing grievances even before they mature.
(d) Exit interview This an interview granted by a departing employee.
If the truth can be told, it is a good source of discovering the causes of dissatisfaction in organizations.
However, the departing employee owes no obligation to grant it and because he might be looking unto the organization for references for the next job.
Some organizations go around this difficulty by mailing exit interview questions three months after the employee's departure by which time he must have already settled in another job and can be now "tell it as it is".
(e) The Om budsman The ombudsman in an organization is an additional ear for the chief executive.
Although he is meant to receive and resolve grievances, the use he serves in this section of discovery of conflicts is to serve as a source of data.
Complaints taken to him which an employee is not 159 able to take to his direct boss serves as a source of data for types and prevalence of conflicts in organizations.
(f) Group meetings Some chief executives or supervisors do solicit for complaints publicly at group meetings.
At such meetings, individuals who cannot complain on their own pick courage and reveal hidden conflicts.
Some executives use this soliciting method in individual interviews with present employees to discover sources of difficulty.
These are some, but certainly not all methods used in unearthing difficulties or conflicts in organizations.
Our next effort will be on the processing of grievances.
Exercise 1.1 Define conflict.
List 4 ways which you would use to discover the existence of conflicts in an organization.
3.3 Types of Conflicts Joseph W. Weiss identifies 5 types of conflicts.
They are: structural, intrapersonal, interpersonal, inter- group and inter-organizational.
According to him (a) Structural conflict occurs because of cross functional departmental differences over goals, time horizons, rewards, authority, line and staff activities, status and resources.
The different parts of organizations, sales research and development (R&D) production, finance.
legal and personnel, etc, have in Weiss's words, "...different goals, different cultures, different approaches and resources, and conflicts can naturally be expected to arise between them''.
He gave examples of how structural conflicts can arise.
In one example he says: Production personnel have traditionally clashed with R&D people because production is sometimes given new but untested production designs by R&D.
If The design is faulty, both the product and sales people later feel the 'heat' from customers.
And Conf lict ensues.
In the second place; The legal, finance and human resources departments are classified as `staff positions; that is, they are not directly related to direct production operations.
Staff positions are usually appointed by the upper level managers.
Staff professionals' rewards, resources, status, 160 authority, goals, and specialization are usually not directly linked to market performance.
Conflict can occur between staff and line positions over status and authority differences.
(b) Intra-personal conflict According to Weiss, this occurs within an individual.
This type of conflict is divided into three, namely, intra-role conflict, inter-role conflict and person-role conflict.
The first refers to a situation where a person receives conflicting information from others concerning a particular role.
For example, a sale's person is given an award for good performance by his supervisor and shortly he is invited by the Chief Executive and confronted with a complaint from a major client that his method is aggressive.
This creates a conflict of confidence in the one and same individual.
The second of this type of conflict - inter-role - occurs, according to Weiss, "....when an individual experiences pressure over several roles in their job or life.
For example, a working mother (who may also be single) may experience conflict over the nurturing needs of hcheril d r en.
At the same time, she must also meet the same wstaonrkd a rds of her male counterparts".
The third of this type of conflict - the person-role conflict occurs finds his clashing with his job requirements.
Giving an example of this type, which is perhaps more common in life, Weiss says: "....an R&D professional who is a perfectionist is required to speed up nperowd u ct design and to over look the zero based defects policy.
This person may experience conflict over being pressured to follow standards other than his own'".
(c) Interpersonal Conf lict This type of conflict occurs between two or more individuals.
Weiss says that "...the nature (of it) in organizations can be emotional or content based and is caused by many factors: personality differences, values, judgments, perceptions, competencies and management styles".One of the causes of this type of conflict is, as noted by Weiss.
a "difficult" person.
Quoting Bremson, Weiss identifies seven types of "difficult" persons.
We do not intend to go into details by listing and discussing each type.
We shall discuss only two which are most common in organizations.
Firstly, the Hostile- aggressive.
This type "surprise and attack people at emotional and substantive levels".
When they attack, the attacked is advised to be assertive and to "stand 161 up" to them.
The second type is the "know it all" type which is subdivided into "bulldozers" and "balloons".
Bulldozers are people who do know a subject competently but use their competency to bully others.
The way to handle these is to prepare very well for them; to listen and paraphrase their main points and use questioning to raise problems.
Balloons on the other hand are people who do not know a subject well and bluff instead.
They should be confronted, but in private (to help them save face).
When they state perceptions as facts, they should be offered factual evidence.
(d) Inter-group conflict This according to Weiss, "occurs as a result of disagreement over any number of tongue or substantive issues.
Also basic differences in group structure ... can often be sources of pressure between groups".
(e) Inter-organizational conflict This occurs between enterprises and external stakeholders.
Large- scale strikes, e.g the ones known in Nigeria here between tAhses o ciation of Staff Union of Universities (ASUU) and the university system, is one such conflicts.
Exercise 1.2 List out the various types of conflicts and explain any two of them.
3.4 Conf lict- Resolution (Managem ent) Joseph W. Weiss, adapting from K. Thomas's Conflict Resolution Approach gives five styles of conflict management.
This is reproduced for you in table 1.1 below.
As can be seen, it suggests what can/should be done given certain conditions surrounding the conflict.
Table 1.1 Five Styles of Conflict Management Conflict-Handling Appropriate Conditions Style Competing 1.
When quick, decisive action is vital (e.g, emergencies) 2 On important issues where unpopular actions need implementing (cost cutting, enforcing unpopular rules, 162  discipline).
3.
On issues vital to company welfare when you know you are right.
4.
Against people who take advantage of noncompetitive behavior.
Collaborating l. To find an integrative solution when both sets of concerns are too important to be compromised.
2 When your objective is to learn.
3 To merge insights from people with different perspectives.
4.
To gain commitment by incorporating concerns into a consensus.
5.
To work through feelings that have interfered with a relationship.
Compromising 1.
When goals are important, but not worth the effort or potential Disruption of more assertive modes.
2.
When opponents with equal power are committed to mutually Exclusive goals.
3 To achieve tempor ary settlements to complex issues.
4 To arrive at expedient solutions under time pressure.
5.
As a backup when collaboration or competition is unsuccessful.
Avoiding l. When an issue is trivial, or more important issues are pressing.
2.
When you perceive no chance of satisfying your concerns.
3 When potential disruption outweighs the benefits of resolution.
4 To let people cool down and regain perspective.
5.
When gathering information supersedes immediate decision.
6 When others can resolve the conflict more effectively.
7 When issues seem tangential or symptomatic of other issues.
Accommodating 1.
When you find you are wrong - to allow a better position to be heard, to learn, and to show your reasonableness.
2.
When issues are more important to others than to yourself - to satisfy others and maintain cooperation.
3 To build social credits for later issues.
4 To minimize loss when you are outmatched and losing.
5 When harmony and stability are especially important.
6.
To allow employees to develop by learning from mistakes.
SOURCE: K. W. Thomas, "Toward Multi-Dimensional Values in Teaching: The Example of Conflict Behaviors," Academy of Management Review 2(1977) 484-490.
4.0 Conclusion This unit has given you a number of definitions of conflict; it has given you ways of detecting the existence of a conflict, the various types of conflict and a scheme for the management of conflicts.
It started by stating what might first seem to be a contradiction, i.e that conflict is not necessarily bad.
163 Some of the ways of discovering conflict are direct observation, suggestions box, open-door policy, etc.
some of the types of conflicts are structural conflict, intrapersonal conflict, interpersonal conflict, interorganisational conflict, etc.
Lastly, some of the styles used in managing conflict aarveo i ding, collaborating, compromising, competing, etc.
5.0 Sum mary This unit has taken a fairly comprehensive look at conflict and cmoannfaligcet m ent.
It has offered you definitions and methods/procedures in recognizing conflicts and managing them.
6.0 Tutor Marked Assignm ents Question .1 Explain two ways of discovering conflict; two types of conflicts and two ways of managing conflicts 7.0 References and other resources Cole, G.A (1997) Personnel Management, Theor y and Practice, (Fourth Edition) ELST with Letts Educational Etzioni, Amitai (1964) Modern Organizations, Prentice-Hall, Inc. Englewood Cliffs, New Jersey Flippo.
Edwin B (1984) Personnel Management (Sixth Edition MCGraw-I- lill Book Company, New York.
Weiss, Joseph W (1996) Organizational Behavior and Change- Managing Diversity, Cross-Cultural Dynamics, and Ethics, West Publishing Company, Minneapolis/St Paul.
MODULE SIX UNIT 23 LEADE RSHIP: STUDY AND THEORIES 164 Table of Contents 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objectives 3.0 Main Contents 3.1 Definition 3.2 Study of the concept of leadership and leadership theories 3.2.1 Trait theory 3.2.2 The group basis of leadership 3.2.3 The situational approach to leadership 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutor Marked Assignment 7.0 References and other Resources 7.1 References 1.0 Introduction Leadership is one of the most critical aspects of organizations.
Leonard D. White underscores its importance in 1950 when he wrote; and quoted by McKinney and Howard, thus:- "The life and spirit of an organization do not spring from its structure.
Quality depends on the motivations that energizes staff.
They derive in large measure from the character of the leadership."
A one time vibrant and very successful organization under one leader can become very dull and fail woefully under another.
This is the concept we shall examine in this unit.
2.0 Objectives By the end of this unit, you should be able to: • Define leadership • Identify and explain a number of theories of leadership 3.1 Definition Talking about leadership, McKinney and Howard did say what captures the essence of leadership beautifully and comprehensively, as: The person who can mesh divergent and conflicting forces, recognize and create opportunities, use the influence and moral basis of his or her 165 position, and employ the minimal amount of resources, and employ the minim al am ount of resources to maximally achieve publicly desired ends.....
Since we shall be giving another dimension to the definition of leadership later in unit 22, we shall stop at this for now.
3.2 Study of the concept of L eadership Despite the obvious importance of leadership, the concept has been difficult to understand and the skill even harder to develop.
When the average person thinks of leadership the most common association is usually to charisma - a Greek word meaning divine right.
In this view, leadership is regarded as a gift of influence over the behavior of others.
Some of us have this gift and others simply do not.
Generally, the discussion and practice of leadership has involved tahsrpeeec t s: (1) attributes related to or emanating directly from the leader, (2) conditions created from interpersonal and group influence, and (3) conditions determined largely by environmental and situational factors.
3.2.1 The Leader's attributes (Trait theory) Leadership was traditionally presented in terms of the traits that the leader possessed and how they influenced the achievements of organizational goals.
For centuries, writers examined the lineage of great personalities in search of the qualities that all successful leaders possessed in common.
A number of factors turned up: for example, that leaders were generally taller tfhoallno w ers; that they had greater retention ability than the average person; that saints lived longer than the average peasant during the Middle Ages.
In var ying degrees this approach was carried over into the writings of public administration.
Leonard D. White in the 1950s spoke of leaders' command of symbols, skills in inventing policies and plans, courage in deciding, and what he called the Leaders' "touch - and allusive quality initiative in nature".
Leadership in this mode involves: (1) Single-mindedness - (which) is sufficient to sustain striving for the fulfillment of' a goal.
166 (2) Basic intelligence - not necessarily esoteric intellectual gifts but a demonstrated ability to think.
One of the objectives of early public administration courses was to teach the student to "think administratively".
(3) Physical energy.
No one without an abundance of energy can ever be a leader.
(4) Personality balance.
Without sacrificing integrity of purpose, the leader must relate personal needs to the organization's goal.
(5) Self- confidence.
Without loosing sensitivity and empathy for others, the leader must present an image of assurance, the capacity to deal fairly with others, self control and decisiveness.
(6) Character and integrity.
Leadership is also associated with striving for higher purpose er the public interest.
- "Ask not what your country can do for you.
but what you can do for your country".
The theory of leadership that stresses personal characteristics has largely fallen into disuse.
"Fifty years of study," comments Eugene E. Jennings, "have failed to produce one personality trait or set of qualities that can be used to discriminate leaders from nonleaders" Nonetheless, the traitist theory remains important.
The absence of supporting research has not deterred the continual use of traits in the selection of leaders.
The most pexroammipnleen its elections, which often are "referendums on personality traits".
In the administration of organizations, the use of personality traits vary with the level of leadership as shown in the diagrams below Leadership in Public Management LEADERSHIP TRAITS Technical Human Relations Conceptual Supervisors skills Facility Capacity 167  LEADERSHIP TRAITS Executive MLM;s Supervision MLM = Middle Level Managers The Group Basis of Leadership While the traitists tended to look at the organization, in the wMocrKdisn n eoyf a nd Howard, "as consisting of leaders without people, the human relations theorists emphasized people almost without leaders".
This alternate look at leadership took cognizance of the worker's feelings, beliefs, perception, and ideas.
The major assumption at the outset was that greater leadership could bacec o mplished through fulfilling certain sociological needs of operators.
Ideas of efficiency, deeply embedded in the trait approach, were balanced with a new emphasis on organizational stability and the building of a sense ocof m munity at the work place.
In the middle 1950s, group theorists generally identified five key differences between the group and trait approaches as is shown in the table below: LEADERSHIP IN PUB LIC MANAGEMENT TRAIT VS. GROUP LEADERSHIP APPROACH 168  Trait Approach (1) decision-making centralized in an administrator (2) interactions reflect a person's position in the hierarchy (3) authority is the basis of integrative force in the organization (4) communication channeled through formal organization structure (5) control of operation for the sake of performance Group Approach (1) wide participation in decision-making (2) face-to-face group interactions (3) mutual confidence is the primary integration in the organization (4) inter-group and inter-group communication (5) growth for members of the organization is recognized as a priority objective As the group approach to leadership become acceptable in theory tlheaed er’s role become primarily one of helping the group to clarify aanchdi e ve it’s goals.
One important consequence of this change was s shift in emphasis or even displacement of organisiation goals for the group’s ( c p a tribal clique in an organisiation/instution the aim becomes to secure jobs for the clique rather than achieve original goals).
Another was an almost unnoticed shift of leadership from executive to managerial and supervisory levels.
The group approach also did the following: (a) produced a functional leadership that varied with group needs; (b) recognized the latent power-over time – of group norms to transform externally (from legislature from a higher level in the ohrieigrainrcahl y ) introduced rules: (c) transformed the leader into coordinator – partly leading and partly led.
169 The situational approach to leadership Following the traitist and human relations groups is the situational theory this approach maintains that the situation dictates the qualities of leadership and that ear for a different leadership capacity.
Rather than adjusting tohreg a nization to fit the leader, here the leader is adjusted to the organizational requirements.
Among the situational variables identified are: (1) expectations of following, (2) technology associated with the task to be performed, (3) pressures of schedules and the delivery environment, (4) required degrees of interpersonal contact, (5) various stages of the organization's development.
Gordon Lippitt and Warren Schmidt have identified six stages of organizational development that call for different kinds of leadership: (1) creation of a new organization (2) survival of a continuing system (3) attainment of stability (4) gaining reputation and prestige (5) achieving uniqueness and adaptability and (6) contributing to society.
It is obvious that each condition calls for different qualities.
The leader, in the situational approach, is at best a coordinator of internal and epxretesrsnuarel s .
It is believed that the Lippitt and Schmidt approach applies to executives dealing with the overall configuration of the organization rather than with its administrative dimensions.
Again, like in the other theories, the data of situational theories are more a priority than empirical.
4.0 Conclusion In this unit, we have dealt with leadership in the context of its traditional meaning and we have examined its study.
The three most common theories in which its study is carried out have been explored i.e, the trait, group and situational approaches to the study.
This unit has also shown you what leadership skills you need for what type of operation in an organization.
These are the issues discussed and presented in the schemes on page 5.
5.0 Sum mary 170 This unit covers the definition and theories of leadership as it is traditionally conceived.
The next unit takes a view of leadership that is subordinate based.
6.0 Tutor Marked Assignm ent Question .1Argue for and against the trait theory of Leadership.
7.0 References and other resources McKinney, Jorem B, and Howard, Lawrence C. (1979) Public Administration balancing power and accountability, Moore Publishing Company, Inc. Oak Park, Illinois.
MODULE SIX UNIT 24 171 LEADERSHIP: FROM THE PERSPECTIVE OF THE SUBORDINATE Table of Contents 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objectives 3.0 Main Contents 3.1 Definition 3.2 Forces in the subordinate 3.3 Range of leadership behavior 3.4 Key questions 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutor Marked Assignments 7.0 References and other resources 1.0 Introduction The preceding unit, i.e unit 21 examined the concept of leadership from somewhat I. traditional viewpoint.
In this unit you will be introduced to a fairly different definition and conceptualization of leadership.
Here you will see how leadership is "led" by subordinates, so to say.
2.0 Objectives By the end of this unit you should be able to; • Re- define leadership • Recognize various ranges of leadership behavior • Choose from the various styles of leadership which one you will need for which situation.
3.0 Main contents 3.1 Definition Offering what they term as a basic definition of leadership.
Tennenbaum and his associates in their book titled Leadership and Organization, dleeafdineers h ip as: 172 "Interpersonal influence, exercised in situation and directed, through the com munication process, toward the attainment of a specific goal ogro a ls" They further said that; Leadership always involves attempts on the part of a leader (influencer) to affect (influence) the behavior of a follower (influencee) or followers in situation This definition has the virtue of generality.
It does not limit the leadership to formally appointed functionaries or to individuals whose influence `potential rests ,upon the voluntary consent of others.
Rather, it is applicable to all interpersonal relationships in which influence attempts are involved.
Relationships as apparently diverse as the supersubordinate, the line-staff, the consultant-client, the teacher-student, the husband-wife, or the parent-child are all seen as involving leadership.
One way of characterizing this definition of leadership is to say that it treats leadership as a process or function rather than as an exclusive attribute of a prescribed role.
The subordinate often influences the superior, or members, the chairman, and of course the wife, the husband.
In any given relationship, the roles of the influencer and the influence often shift from one person to the other.
In the public service the Executive cadre as well as its technical counterpart is a vital bridge between the top and the bottom of the service.
As a result of this, functionaries in the Executive cadre are both subordinates and superiors at the same time.
To the top echelon, the Executive cadre is a vsuitbaol r dinate group, whilst to the clerical/secretarial and messengerial cadres, the Executive cadre is a vital super-ordinate group.
As subordinates you will be doing great service to your organization if you are aware of the fact that you are one of three vital forces that affect the way a manager may decide to manage.
The other forces (which do not concern us directly today), are forces in the manager himself and forces in the situation of management.
Let us therefore focus attention on: 3.2 Forces in the Subordinate Before deciding how to lead a certain group, the manager will also want to consider a number of forces affecting his subordinates' behavior.
He will want to remember that each employee, like himself, is influenced by many personality variables.
In addition, each subordinate has a set of expectations 173 about how the boss should act in relation to him (the phrase "expected behavior" is one we hear more and more often these days at discussions of leadership and teaching).
The better the manager understands these factors, the more accurately he can determine what kind of behavior on his part will enable his subordinates to act most effectively.
Generally speaking, the manager can permit his-subordinates greater freedom if the following essential conditions exist: 1.
If the subordinates have relatively high needs for independence.
(As we all know, people differ greatly in the amount of direction that they desire).
2.
If the subordinates have a readiness to assume responsibility for decision making.
(Some see additional responsibility as a tribute to their ability; others see it as "passing the buck").
3.
If they have a relatively high tolerance for ambiguity.
(Some employees prefer to have clear-cut directives given to them; others prefer a wider area of freedom).
4.
If they are interested in the problem and feel that it is important.
5.
If they understand and identify with the goals of the organization.
6.
If they have the necessary knowledge and experience to deal with the problem.
7.
If they have learnt to expect to share in decision making.
(Persons who have come to expect strong leadership and are then suddenly confronted with the request to share more fully in decision making are often upset by this new experience.
On the other hand, persons who have enjoyed a considerable amount of freedom resent the boss who begins to make all the decisions himself).
The restrictive effect of many of the forces will, of course, be gmroedatilfyie d by the general feeling of confidence which subordinates have in the boss.
Where they have learnt to respect and trust him, he is free to vary his behavior.
He will feel certain that he will not be perceived as an authoritarian boss on those occasions when he makes decisions by himself.
Similarly, he will not be seen as using staff meetings to avoid his decision- mreaspkoinngs ib ility.
In a climate of mutual confidence and respect, people tend to feel less threatened by deviations from normal practice, which in turn makes possible a higher degree of flexibility in the whole relationship.
174  3.3 Range of Leadership Behavior As a leaders the Executive cadre functionary has been aware of the existence of several ways in which to lead, depending upon age of organization and situation.
The figure below presents the continuum or range of pleoasdseibrsleh ip behaviors available to a manager.
Each type of action is related to the degree of authority used by the boss and to the amount of freedom, Boss Subordinate centered centered leadership leadership Use of authority By the manager 175 Area of freedom For subordinates Leader Leader Leader presents Leader Leader Leader defines Leader permits Makes “selles” idea & invites present presents limits, asks subordinates to Decision decision questions tentative problem group to function within And decisions gets make limits defined A nnounces subject suggestions decision by superior It to change makes decision Available to his subordinates in reaching decisions.
The actions seen on the extreme left characterize the manager who maintains a high degree ocof n t rol, while those seen on the extreme right characterize the manager who release a high degree of control.
Neither extreme is absolute; authority and freedom are never without their limitations.
Now let us look more closely at each of the behavior point occurring along this continuum: The Manager Makes the Decision and Announces It In this case the boss identifies a problem, considers alternative solutions, chooses on of them.
and then reports this decision to his subordinates for implementation.
He may or may not give consideration to what he believes his subordinates will think or feel about his decision; in any case, he provides no opportunity for them to participate directly in the decision-making process.
Coercion may or may not be used or implied.
The Manager "Sells" His Decision Here the manager, as before, takes responsibility for identifying the problem and arriving at a decision.
However, rather than simply announcing it, he takes the additional step of persuading his subordinates to accept it.
In doing so, he recognizes the possibility of some resistance among those who will be faced with the decision, and he seeks to reduce this resistance by indicating, for example, what the employees have to gain from his decision.
The Manager Presents His Ideas, Invites Questions Here the boss who has arrived at a decision and who seeks acceptance of his ideas provides an opportunity for his subordinates to get a fuller explanation of his thinking and his intentions.
After presenting the ideas, he invites questions so that his associates can better understand what he is trying to 176 accomplish.
This give and take also enables the manager and the subordinates to explore more fully the implications of the decision.
The Manager Presents a Tentative Decision Subject to Change This kind of behavior permits the subordinates to exert some influence on the decision.
The initiative for identifying and diagnosing the problem remains with the boss.
Before meeting with his staff, he has thought the problem through and arrived at a decision - but only a tentative one.
Before finalizing it, he presents his proposed solution for the reaction of those who will be affected by it.
He says in effect, "I'd like to hear what you have to say about this plan that I have developed.
I'll appreciate your frank reactions, but will reserve for myself the final decision".
The Manager Presents the Problem, Gets Suggestions and Then Makes His Decision Up to this point the boss has come before the group with a solution of his own.
Not so in this case.
The subordinates now get the first chance to suggest solutions.
The manager's initial role involves identifying the problem.
He might, for example, say something of this sort.
"We are faced with number of complaints from newspapers and the general public on our service policy.
What is wrong here?
What ideas do you have for coming to grips with this problem?
The function of the group becomes one of increasing the manager's repertory of possible solutions to the problem.
The purpose is to capitalize on the knowledge and experience of those who are on the "firing line".
From the expanded list of alternatives developed by the manager and his subordinates, the manager then selects the solution that he regards as most promising.
The Manager Defines the Limits and Requests the Group to Make a Decision At this point the manager passes to the group (possibly including himself as a member) the right to make decisions.
Before doing so, however, he defines the problem to be solved and the boundaries within which the decision must be made.
As example might be the handling of a parking problem at a plant.
The boss decides that this is something that should be worked on by the pinevoopllvee d , so he calls them together and points up the existence opfr o b ltehme .
Then he tells them: 177 There is the open field just north of the main plant which has been designated for additional employee parking.
We can build underground or surface multi- level facilities as long as the cost does not exceed $100,000.00.
Within these limits we are free to work out whatever solution makes sense to us.
After we decide on a specific plan.
the company will spend the available money in whatever way we indicate.
The Manager Permits the Group to Make Decision within prescribed limits This represents an extreme degree of group freedom only oencccaosuinotnearleldy in formal organizations, as, for instance, in many rgersoeuaprsc.h H ere the team of managers of engineers undertakes the identification and diagnosis of the problem, of develops alternative procedures for solving it, and decides on one or more these alternative solutions.
The only limits directly imposed on the group by the organization are those specified by the superior of the team's boss.
If the boss participates in the decision- making process, he attempts to do so with no more authority than any other member of the group.
He commits himself in advance to assist in implementing whatever decision the group makes.
3.4 Key Questions As the continuum in the figure above demonstrates, there are a number of alternative ways in which a manager can relate himself to the group or individuals he is supervising.
At the extreme left of the range, the emphasis is on the manager - on what he is interested in, how he feels about them.
As we move toward the subordinate centered end of the continuum.
however, the focus is increasingly on the subordinates - on what they are interested in.
how they look at things, how they feel about them.
When business leadership is regarded in this way, a number of questions arise.
Let us take four of special importance: (1) Can a boss ever relinquish his responsibility by delegating it to someone else`?
Our view is that the manager must expect to be held responsible by his superior for the quality of the decisions made, even though operationally these decisions may have been made on a group basis.
He should, therefore, be ready to accept whatever risk is involved whenever he delegates decision-making power to his subordinates.
Delegation is not a way of "passing the buck".
Also, it should be emphasized that the amount of freedom the boss gives to his 178 subordinates cannot be greater than the freedom which he himself has been given by his own superior.
(2.)
Should the manager participate with his subordinates once he has delegated responsibility to them?
The manager should carefully think over this question and decide on his role prior to involving tshueb o rdinate group.
He should ask if his presence will inhibit or facilitate the problem-solving process.
There may be some instances when he should leave the group to let it solve the problem for itself.
Typically, however, the boss has useful ideas to contribute, ashnodu ld function as an additional member of the group.
In the latter instance.
it is important that he indicate,,.clearly to the group that he sees himself in a member role rather than in an authority role.
(3.)
How important is it for the group to recognize what kind of leadership behavior the boss is using?
It makes a great deal of difference.Many relationship problems between boss and subordinate occur because the boss fails to make clear how he plans to use his authority.
If, for example, he actually intends to make a certain decision himself, but the subordinate group gets the impression that he has delegated this authority, considerable confusion and resentment are likely to follow.
Problems may also occur when the boss uses a "democratic" façade to conceal the fact that he has already made a decision which he hopes the group will accept as its own.
The attempt to "make them think it was their idea in the first place" is a risky one.
We believe that it is highly important for the manager to be honest and clear in describing what authority he is keeping and what role he is asking hsuisb o rdinates to assume in solving a particular problem.
4.
Can you tell how "democratic" a manager is by the number of decision; his subordinates make?
The sheer number of decisions is not an accurate index of the amount of freedom that a subordinate group enjoys.
More important is the significance of the decisions which the boss entrusts to his subordinates.
Obviously a decision on how to arrange desks is of an entirely different order from a dinevcoislivoinn g the introduction of new electronic data processing equipment.
Even though the widest possible limits are given idne a ling with the first issue, the group will sense no particular degree of responsibility.
For a boss to permit the group to decide equipment policy, even within rather narrow limits, would reflect a gdreegarteeer o f confidence in them on his part.
4.0 Conclusion 179 This unit has shown you another dimension of leadership this show the ability to influence.
Seen this way, the chief executive is not always leading but sometimes is `led' even by his messenger or driver.
It has also given you a range of leadership behavios or styles, to choose from, as is contained on a sevenscale continuum.
5.0 Sum mary This unit discusses only two issues - firstly, unlike the traditional approach, leadership here is fluid.
Secondly, depending upon the audience, one style or behavior rather than another is appropriate.
6.0 Tutor Marked Assignm ent Question.
l Choose three problem situations and identify a suitable leadership behavior 7.0 References and other Resources Tennenbaum, Robert, Wechsler, Irving R., Massarik, Fred (1961) Leadership and Organization, McGraw-Hill Book Company, New York.
UNIT 25 DISCIPLINARY ACTION 180 Table of Contents 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objectives 3.0 Main Contents 3.1 Definition and Scope 3.1.1 Definition 3.1.2 Scope and types of offences 3.2 Forms of disciplinary action 3.3 Guides to Disciplinary Action 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutor Marked Assignments 7.0 References and other resources 1.0 Introduction This course started at unit 1 with methods of getting people outside aonrg a nization interested enough in it to apply to join it, through all tphreo c esses you have seen involving examinations/interviews (for entry) compensation, fringe benefits, appraisal of performance, training, motivation etc; up until this point.
Unit 22 deals with disciplinary action.
As will be seen, this is an action taken to convert some malfunctions in the system and taken to ensure that employees are on course, promoting the interest of tohreg a nization as well as their.
2.0 Objectives By the end of this unit you should be able to: • Define disciplinary action • Identify various types of methods/processes employed in disciplinary action • Recognize different forms of indiscipline leading to disciplinary action • Relate an offence to any appropriate disciplinary action 3.0 Main Contents 3.1 Definition and Scope 3.1.1 Definition 181 Edwin B. Flippo defines disciplinary action thus: ".....disciplinary action is confined to the application of penalties that lead to an inhibition of undesired behavior.
G. A.
C ole on the other hand defines disciplinary action or procedure as: A set of rules or guidelines for dealing with instances of bad behavior or rule breaking am ongst em ployees; the m ost common sanctions awraer n ings, suspensions and dism issals.
On types of disciplinary actions, Flippo lists the following: (1) Oral reprimand (2) Written reprimand (3) Loss of privileges (4) Fines (5) Lay off (6) Demotion (7) Discharge 3.12.
Scope and types of offences The scope of disciplinary action is determined by the scope of offences subject to discipline.
The rules governing the Nigeria civil service known as the Public Service Rules, categorizes offences into 4 and defines ecaactehg o ry as follows: (1) General Inefficiency - this "consists of a series of omissions or incompetences the cumulative effect of which shows that the officer is not capable of discharging efficiently the duties of the office he holds".
(2) Misconduct - this is "......defined as a specific act of wrong-doing or improper behavior which can be investigated and proved".
It includes: (i) Willful act or omission or general misconduct to the scandal of the public or to the prejudice of discipline and proper administration of the Government e.g.
dishonesty, drunkenness, false claims against Government, foul language, insubordination, negligence, falsification or suppression of records, failure to keep records, sleeping on duty, loitering, unruly behavior, dereliction of duty, etc; (ii) engaging in trade or business without authority; (iii) improper dressing to office or while performing official duties; 182  (iv) hawking merchandise or engaging in any other form of trading on office premises during office hours.
(3) Serious Misconduct (gross misconduct) - this is a specific act of very serious wrongdoing and improper behavior which can be investigated and proved.
It includes: (i) Willful act or omission or general misconduct to the scandal of the public.
(ii) Conviction on a criminal charge (other than a minor traffic or sanitary offence or the like) (iii) absence from duty without leave (iv) disobedience of lawful orders, such as refusal to proceed on transfer or to accept posting, etc.
(v) negligence; (vi) suppression of records; (vii) false claims against Government (ix) engaging in political activities; (x) unauthorized disclosure of official information etc; (xi) corruption; (xii) embezzlement; (xiii) fighting while on duty (xiv) membership of secret societies; (xv) violation of section 14(3) of the 1979 Constitution of the Federal Republic of Nigeria; (xvi) contravention of any provision of the Public Service Rules and Financial Regulations; (xvi) dishonesty (xviii) drunkenness; (xix) insubordination; (xx) Falsification of records; (xxi) failure to keep records; (xxii) foul language; (4) Conduct prejudicial to the security of the state - the public service Rules say that where an officer has committed a misconduct involving the security of the state or prejudicial to it, the officer shall be subject to the normal disciplinary procedure but that the punishment shall be aggravated.
Exercise 1.1 Distinguish between misconduct and serious misconduct.
3.2 Forms of disciplinary action 183 As we have already listed above, oral reprimand is the wildest and most common of the disciplinary types available.
It is used when the offence is light and is a first offence.
Some e.g.
A. G. Cole says after an oral reprimand has been used, the fact that is oral notwithstanding, this action should be recorded i.e.
it should be indicated in the employees record that on such a date, he/she was orally warned.
Following the oral warning, in order of gravity, is the written warning.
In business as opposed to government organizations, what follows written warning could be loss of privileges.Flippo puts this form of disciplinar yac t ion thus: "For such offences as tardiness or leaving work wpeirthmoiusst io n, fines or loss of various privileges can be used.
The fines usually have some relationship to the work time actually lost.
The loss of privileges include such items as good job assignments, right to select machine or other equipment, and freedom of movement about the workplace or company".
Layoffs, which are known in public service as suspensions, in the words of Flippo "....can vary in severity from one to several days' loss of work without pay".
Demotion is a reduction in rank and usually accompanied by reduction in pay.
In the words of O. Glenn Stahl, "The employee who suffers ad e motion is subject to a continuing penalty, since his monthly earnings are permanently less than before the action was taken.
In addition, the stigma is greater, and the new duties to which he is assigned may be less agreeable".
Discharge in the words of Flippo "....is the most severe penalty that a business organization can give and constitutes `industrial capital punishment'.
In the Nigerian public service, there are two variants of discharge, it.eer.m ination of appointment and dismissal.
In Nigeria, dismissal is removal or discharge from service which involves not only loss of income and status but also, and in the words of Stahl, "loss of pension privileges (and) with continuing disability so far as re-entrance into the service is concerned" In Nigeria not only does a dismissed officer lose his ability to re-enter the organization or service from which he is dismissed, but from any government or other service.
The form of removal or discharge from service which does not involve loss of pension and re-entry rights is known in Nigeria as termination oapf p o intment.
Exercise 1.2 Distinguish between recorded oral warning and written warning.
termination of appointment and dismissal.
184 3.4 Guides to Disciplinary Action Edwin B. Flippo gives the following list as being among the most commonly cited concepts: (a) Disciplinary action should be taken in private.
The reasoning behind this is that disciplining is an act of conditioning behavior, and not to punish.
The harm done to pride and dignity by open disciplinar y action has the opposite effect of conditioning of behavior.
It ihso w ever worth noting that disciplinar y action also is meant to deter would-be offenders .
(b) An application of penalty should always carry with it a constructive element.
The way to do this is to tell the individual involved in clear and precise language the reasons for the punishment and be told how to avoid such penalties in future.
(c) Disciplinary action should be applied by the immediate supervisor.
This is very often violated especially in organizations with a central personnel unit.
In the university for example, the Dean of a faculty should be the one to apply penalty to all employees under him.
What happens however is that the Registry which is the central personnel office or unit, is charged with such a responsibility.
This delays the process and leads to inappropriate punishment for the offence., (d) Promptness is important in the taking of disciplinary action.
Flippo cautions that "The desire for promptness should not lead to quick but unfair punishments.
Yet on the other hand, if punishment is delayed too long, the relationship between the penalty and the offensive act becomes hazy.
The penalty not only tends to lose its positive effect on behavior but also seems to stimulate greater resentment than if it were applied earlier".
(e) Consistency in the administration of disciplinary action is highly essential.
This means, among other things, that two people who have committed the same offence should be given equal punishment assuming that neither has more offences in the past than the other.
.
(f) An immediate supervisor should never be disciplined in the presence of his own subordinates.
Concerning this, Flippo says: "the concept of privacy would forbid the disciplining of anyone in the presence of others.
It is doubly important in the case of managers, who must preserve a position of status and power in addition to the formal authority granted by the organization.
The importance of this 185 guide should be obvious but the author has observed more than one occasion when it was violated.
The grapevine will be active enough when managers are discipline, without their status being completely destroyed by public action".
(g) After the disciplinary action has been taken, the manager should attempt to assume a normal attitude toward the employee.
Flippo notes that this is an important but difficult guide to follow.
After a punishment, it is advisable to assume that the incident is closed.
Steps should be taken to effect healing and behavior correction.
The supervisor should not go about seeming to wait for the next offense.
4.0 Conclusion This unit has examined the concept of disciplinar y action - one of tnheeg a tive aspects in personnel management.
The reward that disciplinary action gives is penalty/punishment.
It is not a palatable reward but it is a necessary part of organization life.
Known to be bitter, the most un-offensive way it can be given will aid its acceptance and lead faster to its aim of behavior reformation.
5.0 Sum mary Unit 22 has explored the concept of disciplinary action.
It is availed you of a number of definitions of the concept, given you the scope of the concept judged by the scope of the offenses which lead to disciplinary action.
We have also seen various forms of disciplinary actions as well as explained the important guidelines in the process of administering disciplinary actions.
6.0 Tutor Marked Assignm ent Question.
I Select any three of the guides to disciplinary action and explain them using your experience in a work situation to enrich your answer.
7.0 References and other resources G. A. Cole (1997) Personnel Management - Theory and Practice (Fourth Edition), EL ST vv-ith Letts Educational, London.
186 Federal Republic of Nigeria (2000) Public Service Rules, Federal Government Press, Apapa Lagos.
Flippo, Edwin B (1984) Personnel Management (Sixth Edition) McGraw-Hill Book Company, New York Stahl, Glenn O (1962) Public Personnel Administration, Harper and Row, Publishers, New York.
UNIT 26 SEPARATION - 1 (TENURE & TURNOVER) 187 Table of Contents 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objectives 3.0 Main Contents 3.1 Definition and scope 3.1.1 Tenure 3.1.2 Turnover 3.2.3 The amount of turnover 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutor Marked Assignments 7.0 References and other resources 1.0 Introduction This unit deals with concepts which are virtually at opposite ends of ap e ndulum.
Tenure has to do with security of employment whilst turnover has to do with departure from employment.
This unit says what each concept means and how, being at opposite ends, they are nonetheless treated together.
2.0 Objectives By the end of this unit you should be able to: • Define tenure and turnover • Identify various types of tenure • List various reasons and types of turnover • Recognize the methods of controlling turnover 3.0 Main Contents 3.1 Definition and scope 3.1.1 Tenure 188 Writing under the caption of "Tenure and Turnover" O. Glenn Stahl, speaks of tenure as relating to "The desire to be secure, to be protected, to find equanimity, to fulfill one's desires...." Tenure we shall define here as: The job characteristic that spells out the conditions and length of time that an employee holds it, all else being equal The scope of tenure is decided by the number of types of appointment that are available in a particular service.
In the Nigerian Civil Service feoxra m ple, there are a number of types of appointments each with ictos n ditions and length of service or tenure.
Thus, under types of appointment, the Public Service Rules gives the following: (a) Trainee or pupil - "when a candidate for employment requires additional professional experience before he can be regarded as fully qualified for appointment to a specific post, he may be appointed as a trainee or pupil for a normal service of two years in the post".
In this respect, the tenure of the employee is two years and the employee is bound by a condition of additional professional qualification.
If this condition is not fulfilled, there will be a turnover (a departure from service) at the end of the second year.
(b) Probation - Except where transfers are involved, all new entrants to the service are on probation for the first two years.
Within this period, their performances are under observation and appraisal reports are being submitted on them.
If their performances are judged unsatisfactory, there would be a discharge (turnover) at the end of the second year.
In some cases, officers on probation are required to pass certain prescribed examinations; failure to pass which may lead to employee turnover.
(c) Contract appointment - this is an appointment for a given and stated period of time.
It does not attract pension.
Except it is extended, contract appointments ends on the period stated in the appointment.
(d) Pensionable appointments - these are the full-term appointments which employees have, which enable them to run a career system.
In Nigeria it is entered to at an age not less than 15 years and barring any causes for early turnover, it is for a period of not less than 35 years.
3.1.2 Turnover Edwin B. Flippo defines turnover "in the broad sense" as 189 Turnover ref ers to the movement into and out of an organization by the workforce.
From this definition of turnover, you can now see how and why turnover and tenure have to be taken together.
Whereas the "movement in" to a service is the beginning of tenure, and the "movement out" defines turnover, tdheifsi n i tion puts the two concepts together.
The other reason for taking them together is found in a correlation established between them by Stephen P. Robbins in his book - Organizational behavior.
However, before we go into that correlation, let us take note of his own definition of turnover which he says is: Turnover is the voluntary and involuntary permanent withdrawal from an organization.
Robbins establishes a relationship between tenure and turnover in the following words:"Tenure has consistently been found to be negatively related to turnover and has been suggested as one of the single best predictors of turnover".
Even if we do not go into depth to find reasons, we can see this relationship from the types of appointments discussed above.
For example the appointment as a trainee or pupil has it tenure,pegged at 2 years, so also has that of appointment on probation and many contract appointments.
3.1.3 The significance of turnover Flippo says that turnover is an index of stability of the workforce in an organization and that an excessive movement is undesirable and expensive.
When an employee leaves an organization, Flippo says the following costs are incurred: (1) Hiring costs, involving time and facilities for recruitment, interviewing, and examining and replacement.
(2) Training costs, involving the time of the supervisor, personnel department, and trainee.
(3) The pay of a learner is in excess of what is produced (4) Accident rate of new employees are always higher (5) Loss of production in the interval between separation of the old employee and the replacement by the new.
190 (6) Production equipment is not being fully utilized during the hiring interval and the training period.
(7) Scrap and waste rates climb when new employees are involved (8) Overtime pay may result from an excessive number of separations, causing trouble in meeting contract delivery dates.
Writing on the same issue as above, Robbins says "A high turnover rate results in increased recruiting, selection and training costs....A conservative estimate would be about $15,000 per employee.
A high rate of turnover can also disrupt the efficient running of an organization when knowledgeable and experienced personnel leave and replacements must be found and prepared to assume positions of responsibility".
One positive significance though is that stated by Robbins thus: "All organizations, of course, have some turnover.
In fact, if the "right" people are leaving the organization - the marginal and sub marginal employees - turnover can be positive.
It may create the opportunity to replace an underperforming individual with someone who has higher skills or motivation, open up increased opportunities for promotions, and add new and fresh ideas to the organization".
One other significance added by Flippo is that of lower salary bill as older, high-seniority persons are replaced by lower- paid entrants.
Another significance of turnover rates is the amount of it that exists in an organization and its causes.
Turnover rate is measured in a number of ways but the most used method is the comparison between the "movements out" as a percentage of the "movements in" within a given period - say a month or a year.
With this rate known, sub rates can also be known for each department or unit or for each cause of departure, e.g.
and according to O. Glenn Stahl, "death rate, retirement rate, voluntary quitting rate, lay-off, and removal rates, and so forth".
Finally, turnover rate is significant as a gauge.
Stahl says in this regard that: In general, the separation rate supplies a gauge of the gaettnrearcatli v eness of the service as a whole, in comparison with oemth erp l oym ent opportunities.
It is also an aid in analyzing dbieftfwereeennc veas r ious units within a given service and between various grades and classes of em ployees.
Furthermore, it throws light on the relations between em ployees of differing seniority, eff iciency, and so forth.
The turnover rate, according to Stahl, should provide a guide to tfhoell o w ing: 191 (1) Trouble areas in the organization (2) The relation of the various types of separation to: (a) Types of employment (b) Salary classes (c) Length of service (d) Performance (3) Compatibility of employment conditions in the several establishments or in the headquarters as compared with the field services.
(4) Detects in the whole employment process, but particularly in the policies affecting recruitment, selection, placement and compensation.
Exercise 1.1 Go through the significance of turnover given above by Robbins.
Note that he says among others, "if the `right' people are leaving the organization...." When does he mean by the "right" people?
3.2 The Control of turnover O. Glenn Stahl states that "the problem of controlling turnover may bdeiv i ded into two parts: first, determining the causes of the various types of separation; second, adjusting and developing the personnel program in the light of these causes".
Regarding the first problem, one of the methods for determining the causes of turnover is the exit interview.
This is the process of interviewing aenmyp l oyee to find out his reason for leaving the organization.
In addition to serving this purpose, Glenn Stahl says, the exit interview is also "...a means for smoothing out misunderstanding and preventing avoidable separations".
In specifics, the functions of an exit interview are the following: (1.)
To learn all pertinent facts about each employee and his reasons for seeking employment elsewhere.
(2).
To give information, whenever advisable, regarding opportunities in the organization and how the employee may best take advantage of them.
(3) To serve the employee, taking into consideration his own best interests and the interests of the organization and consequently to create good- will toward the organization.
It is to be noted however 192 that the first objective is not usually achievable as departing employees hardly disclose the true reasons for their action.
The point we are making here is that if the reason for departure is known, steps can be , taken to prevent it, For example, if an employee is quitting for lack of progress, he can be informed that it is in the pipe line an' d that a month hence, he is due to be promoted a zonal director of a new zone to be created.
Also, if the reason for departure is known, even if it is too late to dsoom ething about the departing employee, that reason can be worked on so that it ceases to be a reason for the departure of other employees in future.
This is the point made as part of the second problem below.
O. Glenn Stahl says: The second phase in the process of controlling turnover consists imna king adjustments in employment conditions and policies which have been suggested by the analysis of the reasons for turnover.
Such adjustments will vary as the number of reasons for departures from organizations vary.
In general however, Stahl says that employment dissatisfaction may be explained by either (1) failure to fit the man to the job, which implies unsatisfactory recruitment, selection, and placement procedures or (2) undesirable employment conditions".
Whichever is the cause should be traced and properly taken care of in order to prevent excessive turnover with its attendant high costs to the organization.
4.0 Conclusion Tenure and turnover are critical aspects of personnel management.
Tenure relates to the conditions of employment in an organization.
Such conditions make it conducive or unconducive for employees.
If conducive, they promote long tenure and reduce turnover rate, if unconducive they heighten the rate of turnover and increase cost of running the organization.
Turnover has numerous causes.
If the causes are known, the organization can take steps to nip them in the bud and ro prevent excessive turnover.
5.0 Sum mary 193 This unit has explored the various aspects of tenure and turnover.
It has given the definitions of the concepts and listed and explained the various types of employment, the various reasons for turnover and given methods for the control of turnover.
6.0 Tutor Marked Assignm ents Question.1 Tenure relates to entry into service, turnover is all about leaving service.
Why/how should they be treated together in one unit?
7.0 References and other resources Federal Republic of Nigeria, (2000) Public Services Rules, Federal Government Press, Apapa, Lagos Flippo, Edwin B (1984) Personnel Management, (Sixth Edition) McGraw- Hill Book Company, New York Robbins, Stephen P (2001) Organizational Behavior, (Ninth Edition), Prentice-BHall of India, New Delhi.
Stahl, Glenn O (1962) Public Personnel Administration (Fifth Edition), Harped Row, Publishers, New York.
MODULE SEVEN UNIT 27 SEPARAT ION - 2 (RETIREMENT) 194 Table of Contents 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objectives 3.0 Main Contents 3.1 Definition and Scope 3.1.1 Types of Retirement 3.1.2 Mandatory Retirement 3.2 Pension and Gratuities 3.2.1 Contributory versus non-contributory pensions 3.2.2 Qualifying period for pensions 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutor Marked Assignments 7.0 References and other resources 7.1 References 1.0 Introduction We have, in the preceding unit, examined the process of "movement in" and "movement out" of service.
This unit examines what to some, if not most people, is a terminal "movement out" of service whilst one leaves, because the final "movement out" is really, death.
Retirement is a terminal movement out because it is age-related, and as we shall see in this unit, age may be related to other factors such as ability, sickness, reduction in capacity etc.
2.0 Objectives By the end of this unit, you should be able to: • Define retirement • Distinguish retirement from other "movements out" of service • Explain causes that lead to retirement • Identify types of retirement • Identify programs instituted to benefit those in retirement 3.0 Main Contents 3.1 Definition and Scope G.A.
Cole gives a very short but complete def inition of retirement thus: 195 Retirement refers to the time when an employee reaches the end of his working life.
The most important factor in retirement and a factor that sets it apart from other movements out of organizations is the "time" factor.
So time dependent it is that Edwin B. Flippo opens discussion on it by dealing in chronologies and life expectancies.
He says for example: Around the beginning of this century, the average life expectancy of a Citizen of the United States was 49 years.
By 1981, this had risen to 70.3 years for males and 77.9 years for females.
On the basis of these figures, it is apparent that large numbers of employees will live beyond the usual working age, thereby requiring an event known as retirement.
Not only is retirement age-related or dependent, governments and other organizations have predetermined the span of a working life for employees.
According to G. A. Cole, this span covers the time a man enters work until the age of 65 years, and for a woman until the age of 60 years.
He refers to this as "statutory retirement age", i.e., it mandated by law that men and women attaining these ages must retire.
3.1.1 Types of retirement There are two main types of retirement - mandatory and voluntary retirement.
Discussing these types of retirement, Flippo says: "One of the key issues in modern times is whether the decision to retire should be made by the organization or left to the employee concerned".
He thereafter cited the results of a survey that showed that out of 460,000 workers retired, 30% said a compulsory retirement age had been established in their organizations.
He also noted that the most common age set was 65, "a practice that dates from the 1880s when the German Chancellor Otto Von Bismarck initiated a social security system and arbitrarily picked that particular age".
3.1.2 Mandatory retirement (age) As can be seen here, the mandatory age of 65 years which seems to have a wide- spread acceptance was arbitrarily picked and in a era where Flippo says "Of course in those days few workers lived long enough to hit the retirement age".
Therefore, in light of the life expectancy of modern times, amendments 196 have been made to this age stating movement positions Flippo states: "The 1978 amendment to this act raised the limit to 70 years.
Thus, it is currently illegal to require an employee to retire solely for reasons of chronological age prior to reaching 70 years".
Flippo say that "Many organizational managers have maintained that compulsory retirement at a fixed age for all is beneficial.
The following are the reasons given: (1) it is simple to administer with no implications to prove that the older employee no longer meets job requirements.
(2) openings are created to which younger employees can advance.
(3) human resource planning is facilitated when retirement schedules are known.
(4) graceful exists are provided for employees who are no longer qualified in as much as the firm will wait out the final few years of declining productivity.
it stimulates employees to make plans for retirement in advance of a known date.
Arguments against a fixed and compulsory retirement age are also plausible and rife.
The main one is that it deprives individuals of a right to choose and fails to realize that individuals vary in talents.
Also, in terms of productivity, energy and creativity, people age at different rates.
Flippo notes that "forced retirements would result in insignificant losses of real talents; consider the contributions after age 65 of such persons as Winston Churchill, Averill Hairman, Margaret Mead, and Arthur Fielder".
Perhaps the answer to the question of retirement tied to age, is to treat each case on its own merit.
Flippo says in this respect that "some people should be retired at the age of 60 while others can still make a valuable contribution beyond the age of 70".
This seems to be the line which the President and the Federal Executive Council of Nigeria took recently with respect to academic staff were required to mandatorily retire at age 65, but the new thinking is that each university is to decide when academics of the rank of Associate Professor and above are to retire.
The yardstick for retirement in case is now to be productivity rather than chronology.
A final advantage of workers continuing on the job beyond 65 years, as noted by Flippo, is that, "it will lessen the strain on our (America) social security system.
Twenty years ago, the ratio of employees working to those collecting benefits was 56 to 1.
It is currently down to 3 to I".
197 In Nigeria where the retirement age is low for civil servants (it is 60 years), the pension wage bill has become disturbingly high.
The knowledge, skills and talents outside the service are likely to be superior to and more numerous than what is in the service.
And rather than do for the civil service what is being done for academics, some governments in Nigeria are thinking of further lowering the retirement age to 55.
The implication of a low retirement age is that rather than retire at an advanced age into idleness, despondency and usually early death, today's retired people's corps is a vibrant, healthy and agile group that go in for other jobs and are virtually collecting double salary i.e.
a pension, now made as handsome as a whole salary, and another salary in a new work place.
Before we leave the issue of mandatory versus voluntar y retirement, let us note one more variant.
This is the one, which like the Nigerian case combines the voluntary and the mandatory systems.
In Nigeria an employee under the pensionable service has an option to retire voluntarily at any age from 45 years to 65.
At 60 years of age or 35 years of service however, he has to retire mandatory.
Exercise 1.2 Argue for and against a low retirement age.
3.2 Pensions and gratuities We shall consider two issues here.
Firstly, the contributory versus non- contributory pension schemes and secondly, the issue of qualifying year for pensions and gratuities.
3.2.1 Contributory Versus Non-contributory Pensions In some organizations employees are made to contribute to their pension scheme.
However even where they are not ostensibly made to contribute, it is not unconceivable that they do contribute.
Stahl says, concerning this, thus: "Even under the so-called noncontributory systems, although the employing agency presumably bears the entire burden, it may in part be borne by the employees through lower salaries'".
The contributory pension scheme, Stahl says, has the following advantages:- it is easier to establish because the burden is divided, it checks extravagant demands on the part of the employees since it is clear that a part of the cost would be borne by themselves.
The employee accepts a joint responsibility to fund a scheme which plans for the depletion of his faculty in the interest of the organization as well as himself.
In organizations where there exists a qualifying period for the enjoyment of a pension, a contributory scheme gives the employee his own portion of the contribution even if he has not attained 198 the qualifying year.
What this entails is that there is no period of departure of the employee which sends him out empty handed.
3.2.2 Qualifying period for pensions Some organizations stipulate the number of years an employee is expected to have served before he is entitled to a pension or gratuity.
This is mcoomstm on under the noncontributory scheme.
In Nigeria at one time aenm p loyee did not qualify for pension until he had served for 15 years and did not qualify for gratuity until he had served for 10 years.
Recently, tqhuea l ifying period for pensions and gratuities have been reduced to 10 and 5 years respectively.
The implications of this action is that it now facilitates earlier departure from service.
On the contrar y if the service or any particular organization desires to keep is employees longer in its employment, it could do so by increasing the qualifying period for pensions and gratuities for its staff.
4.0 Conclusion This unit has examined retirements and what follows them, i.e.
pensions and gratuities.
Retirements are meant to be periods of rest because they come after full expenditure of an employee's faculties and strength on the job.
However, depending upon the policy in operation in an organization or service employees may find themselves in retirement but with their faculties and strength intact because the retirement is on the low side.
Pensions and gratuities are scheme which provide for the finances for the upkeep of retired staff through out the rest of their lives after wDoeprke.n d ing upon the nature of the scheme and the policy governing ibte, n eficiary could be made to contribute to his pension or not; a pension policy may push an employee out early in his life and career or may retain him in employment longer.
5.0 Sum mary This unit has covered the topic of retirement in all its ramifications and has also covered the topic of pensions and gratuities.
6.0 Tutor Marked Assignm ent Question.
l Define retirement.
Discuss the provisions made to ensue that it is pleasurable.
199 7.0 References and other resources Cole, G.A (1997) Personnel Management: Theory and Practice (Fourth Edition) ELST with Letts Educational, London Federal Republic of Nigeria, (2000) Public Service Rules, Federal Government Printing Press, Apapa, Lagos Flippo, Edwin B (1984) Personnel Management (Sixth Edition), McGraw- Hill Book Company, New York Stahl, Glenn O.
(1962) Public Personnel Administration (Fifth Edition) Harper and Row Publishers, New York.
200
