NoneMPA 769 COURSE GUIDE COURSE GUIDE MPA 769 RURAL DEVELOPMENT AND MANAGEMENT Course Developer/Writer Prof E. E. Umebau Enugu State University of Science and Technology Enugu State Programme Leader O. J. Onwe National Open University of Nigeria Course Coordinator Martha Oruku National Open University of Nigeria NATIONAL OPEN UNIVERSITY OF NIGERIA iiMPA 769 COURSE GUIDE National Open University of Nigeria Headquarters 14/16 Ahmadu Bello Way Victoria Island Lagos Abuja Office No.
5 Dar es Salaam Street Off Aminu Kano Crescent Wuse II, Abuja Nigeria e-mail: centralinfo@nou.edu.ng URL: www.nou.edu.ng Published by National Open University of Nigeria Printed 2008 ISBN: 978-058-749-7 All Rights Reserved iiiMPA 769 COURSE GUIDE CONTENTS PAGE Introduction……………………………………………… 1 Course Aims……………………………………………... 1 Course Objectives………………………………………… 2 Working through this Course.............................................. 2 Course Material…………………………………………... 2 Study Units……………………………………………..… 2 Assignment File………………………………………..….
3 Assessment………………………………….…………..… 3 Final Examination and Grading………………………..… 4 ivIntroduction This is a core course of (2) credit unit with the master of public administration course.
Rural administration and management is designed to complement much of the information contained in the pre-requirement to be made known to you by the facilitator.
The course is made up of fifteen units.
Your study time for each units will vary from one to four weeks.
You will find more detailed information about the contents of this course guide entitled “Course Description”.
Each study unit contains a number of self-texts.
This allows you to cheek your progress as you work through each topic.
At the end of each self-text is a question about your own experience.
It is advisable that you think very hard about these questions.
You will also learn some new terms and expressions during the course study.
The study units, text books and exercise will help you master the topics over a period of about 18 weeks.
This course guide tells you about: • the aims and objectives of the course; • what the course covers; • the component of study time you need to cover the course successfully; • how your performance in assignments and the examination will be assessed; and • how the tutorial system works.
Course Aims Rural administration and management aims to acquaint you with the basic introduction to the problem of rural neglect especially the women folk, which has become a nagging issue of our time.
This includes how people in the rural areas live in absolute poverty, suffer from chronic malnutrition, illiteracy, shortened life spam, limited access to good drinking water, health facilities, of secured employment and decent livelihood.
An understanding of rural development will enable you to better appreciate and influence developmental policies and programmes in favour of the rural poor who constitute about 80% of Nigerians.
The course adopts an integrated approach to the study of rural administration and management in which both national and local specific aspects are examined.
Where possible, national local experience are highlighted.
MPA 769 RURAL DEVELOPMENT AND MANAGEMENT Course Objectives Upon the completion of the course you should be able to: • Explain themes and concepts, relevant to the management of rural development.
• Apply these theories and concepts when analysing, explaining and attempting to tackle rural development problems.
• Identify the critical areas of concern in the field of rural development and articulate their importance in addressing issues of rural neglect.
• Develop proficiency in systematically examining rural developmental problems.
Working through this Course Rural Administration and management provides a bridge between theory and practice in management and development strategies.
It studies development of the society at the grass root level.
The course aims to assist administrators and policy makers to understand the development needs of the rural people and to equip them with analytical skills and techniques to address the basic objectives of the rural developments in Nigeria.
Course Materials Apart from the course materials further refulgence’s are pounded for the end of each unit.
The text books however are your own responsibilities.
Study Units Each unit includes at least seven different ways to help you study your course-material.
• Reading the study units • Reading the text materials • Testing your comprehension and analytical skills by working through the self-text questions • Undertaking the activities in the text • Preparing for your tutor-marked Assignments There are 15 study units in this course: Module 1 iiMPA 769 RURAL DEVELOPMENT AND MANAGEMENT Unit 1 Rural Environment Unit 2 The Concept of Rural Development Unit 3 Growth Models and Rural Development Unit 4 Rural Development Strategies Unit 5 Leadership and Rural Development Module 2 Unit 1 Resources and Rural Development Unit 2 Co-operative Formation and Management to Enhance Rural Development Unit 3 Social Change in Rural Development Unit 4 Rural Finance and Real Development Unit 5 Rural Education and Rural Development Module 3 Unit 1 Your Union and Community Development Unit 2 Government Community Co-operation towards Rural Welfare Development Programmes Unit 3 Conflict Resolutions at Community Development Unit 4 Women in Rural Development Unit 5 Rural Development and Personnel Administration Assignment File Assignment questions for the units of this course are contained in the section of the course materials entitled assignment file.
You are required to complete your assignment and mail them together with a Tutor- Marked Assignment (TMA) form to your tutor Assessment Your assessment for this course is made up-of-two components: • Tutor-Marked Assignment (TMA) • Final Examination.
Final Examination and Grading iiiMPA 769 RURAL DEVELOPMENT AND MANAGEMENT There is a 3-hour examination at the end of the course.
The final examination for the course is drawn from all parts of the text.
TMA…….........40% EXAM………..60% TOTAL……….100%.
ivMPA 769 RURAL DEVELOPMENT AND MANAGEMENT MAIN COURSE Course Code MPA 769 Course Title Rural Development and Management Course Developer/Writer Prof E. E. Umebau Enugu State University of Science and Technology Enugu State Programme Leader O. J. Onwe National Open University of Nigeria Course Coordinator Martha Oruku National Open University of Nigeria NATIONAL OPEN UNIVERSITY OF NIGERIA vMPA 769 RURAL DEVELOPMENT AND MANAGEMENT National Open University of Nigeria Headquarters 14/16 Ahmadu Bello Way Victoria Island Lagos Abuja Office No.
5 Dar es Salaam Street Off Aminu Kano Crescent Wuse II, Abuja Nigeria e-mail: centralinfo@nou.edu.ng URL: www.nou.edu.ng Published by National Open University of Nigeria Printed 2008 ISBN: 978-058-749-7 All Rights Reserved viMPA 769 RURAL DEVELOPMENT AND MANAGEMENT CONTENTS PAGE Module 1 ……………………………………………… 1 Unit 1 Rural Environment………………………….. 1 Unit 2 The Concept of Rural Development………… 5 Unit 3 Growth Models and Rural Development…….
10 Unit 4 Rural Development Strategies……………….
15 Unit 5 Leadership and Rural Development………… 20 Module 2 ……………………………………………… 25 Unit 1 Resources and Rural Development………….. 25 Unit 2 Co-operative Formation and Management to Enhance Rural Development………….……… 36 Unit 3 Social Change in Rural Development………… 45 Unit 4 Rural Finance and Real Development………… 50 Unit 5 Rural Education and Rural Development..…… 55 Module 3 ………………………………………………… 61 Unit 1 Your Union and Community Development……61 Unit 2 Government Community Co-operation Towards Rural Welfare Development Programmes ………………………………….
67 Unit 3 Conflict Resolutions at Community Development………………………………….. 74 Unit 4 Women in Rural Development……………….. 81 Unit 5 Rural Development and Personnel Administration………………………………… 89 viiNoneMPA 769 RURAL DEVELOPMENT AND MANAGEMENT MODULE 1 Unit 1 Rural Environment Unit 2 The Concept of Rural Development Unit 3 Growth Models and Rural Development Unit 4 Rural Development Strategies Unit 5 Leadership and Rural Development UNIT 1 RURAL ENVIRONMENT CONTENTS 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objectives 3.0 Main Content 3.1 The Concept of Rural Economy 3.2 Urban Bias 3.3 Nature of Rural Environment 3.4 Integrated Rural Development 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutor-Marked Assignment 7.0 References/Further Readings 1.0 INTRODUCTION There is the need for the reader to understand the nature of rural environment before discussing rural development.
The nature of rural environment will throw more light on the need to improve on the rural environment.
Meanwhile, the rural environment plays a significant role in the national economy through the rural economy.
Notably enough, greater percentage of the total population lives within the rural environment and further much greater percentage of them are involved in rural economic activities, mostly agriculture.
2.0 OBJECTIVES At the end of this unit, you should be able to: • discuss the concept of rural economy • study the nature of rural environment • discuss the Integrated Rural Development.
1MPA 769 RURAL DEVELOPMENT AND MANAGEMENT 3.0 MAIN CONTENT 3.1 The Concept of Rural Economy Rural economy deals with the rural economic activities that yield income to the rural investors.
Rural economy focuses on optimal harnessing of rural resources for enhancement of the living conditions of the rural dwellers.
It therefore deals with agriculture, other enterprises and rural life as factors in nation building (Olayide et al (1981).
Rural economy, to a reasonable extent, sustains both the urban and national economy, hence the two major economic products come from the rural areas of Nigeria (oil and agricultural products).
Infact the abundant natural resources in the areas, serve as sources of cheap labour.
Nigeria is known as an agrarian country, for many decades ago her economy revolved on agriculture; and no doubt over 50 percent of the total labour force are engaged in agriculture.
However, in recent past, the revenue from the agricultural sector started dwindling to a level that revenue from the oil sector overshadowed that of agriculture.
As far as agricultural sector is concerned, the small scale farmers constitute the majority of the farming population and they have not effectively and efficiently tapped the numerous abundant rural resources.
They have remained in their culture and despite their rural character, those population have been increasingly affected by decisions and activities which occur in small but growing urban centres in the country.
3.2 Urban Bias Urban bias in Nigerian development policy is reflected in prices, institutional opportunities, availability and access to market, health, infrastructure, communication and transport linkage and many other structural characteristics of national economies.
The majority of urban residents rely directly or indirectly on government employment, which has been the major stimulus for urban growth, studies have revealed that government employees are purely overhead expenses and that they are non-productive; and that the rural production in Nigeria is what sustains this country.
Despite this pivotal role of rural production, the productivity of the rural masses are low because of lack of basic infrastructural facilities.
The infrastructural facilities needed for growth and functioning of any country, community, etc.
Obviously will stimulate rural development, encourage rural industrialisation and check rural-urban migration.
2MPA 769 RURAL DEVELOPMENT AND MANAGEMENT 3.3 Nature of Rural Environment Most Nigerian rural areas have the following characteristics (Olayide et al 1981) Low income – Income accruals are low.
Low savings – This is derived from low savings.
Low investment –This is derived from low savings.
Low capital formation – Low investment brings about low capital formation.
Poor infrastructural facilities, e.g.
health, road, electricity, etc., either absent or in a poor state.
High population density – There is no family planning hence population explosion.
Gross illiteracy – low educational background which affects decision making process.
Low social interaction – Some people live far from others.
Local politics – There is no assessment of who is qualified, rather, greed overrides.
Disguise or under employment – This is a manifestation of labour intensiveness.
Informal groups, eg.
age grade, social club, etc., are involved in development projects.
High rural-urban migration – They migrate in order to obtain executive jobs.
Low technological base – There is low rate of transformation and abundant untapped resources resulting from the lack of skilled manpower.
3.4 Integrated Rural Development Emphasis is placed on Integrated Rural Development (IRD) as a result of improved services to rural entrepreneurs in the form of an integrated packages which would ensure the evolution of appropriate infrastructural institution and administrative apparatus to facilitate rapid development of the country’s agriculture potential.
The aim is to significantly uplift the well being of rural people to such a level that there was a general enhancement in the quality of the majority.
The element of the integrated rural development includes rural incomes, reduction in rural poverty and unemployment, a more even distribution of rural wealth and incomes provision of basic needs and the integration of rural people into the nation’s political process.
IRD combines activities of an efficient institution and administrative facilities supplying effective communication at all levels.
3MPA 769 RURAL DEVELOPMENT AND MANAGEMENT 4.0 CONCLUSION The nature of the rural environment, to a reasonable extent, influence economic activities.
Rural environment ensures that food is provided, rural industries are sustained through the provision of raw materials, providing income, etc.
Government should encourage the rural people to remain there and be engaged with one economic activity of another.
Meanwhile, government should provide the necessary, infrastructure for life to be meaningful.
5.0 SUMMARY The unit has addressed the concept of rural economy, nature of rural environment and integrated rural development.
The entrepreneurs need to understand the environment in which they are operating.
This will help them to understand the needs of the people.
6.0 TUTOR-MARKED ASSIGNMENT Rural economy enhances the National economy.
Discuss.
7.0 REFERENCES/FURTHER READINGS Ijere, M.O (1992).
Leading Issues in Rural Development.
Enugu: Acana Publishers.
Lele U.
(1975).
The Design of Rural Development Lessons from African.
Baltimore: John Hopvins University Press.
4MPA 769 RURAL DEVELOPMENT AND MANAGEMENT UNIT 2 THE CONCEPT OF RURAL DEVELOPMENT CONTENTS 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objectives 3.0 Main Content 3.1 The Concept of Rural Environment 3.1.1 Vicious Cycle of Poverty 3.1.2 Poor Infrastructural Facilities 3.1.3 High Population Density and Gross Illiteracy 3.1.4 Low Technological Base and Underdevelopment 3.2 Concept of Development 3.3 Indices of Development 3.4 Steps in bring about Development in Rural Areas 3.5 Definition of Rural Development 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutor-Marked Assignment 7.0 References/Further Readings 1.0 INTRODUCTION In unit 1, we discussed the concept of rural development.
There is need to understand the concept of rural development before getting into other details.
Meanwhile, the author would like to explain ‘rural’ before the order development.
This will assist the reader to fully understand the whole concept.
Some decades ago, rural development was taken as agricultural development.
This was due to the fact that greater percentage of the total labour force is involved in agriculture and they live in rural areas.
The implication, therefore, was to develop agriculture, then the rural areas would have been developed.
2.0 OBJECTIVES By the end of this unit, you should be able to: • explain the concept of rural environment • explain the concept of development • discuss indices of development and steps to bring about development in rural areas • explain the concept of rural development.
5MPA 769 RURAL DEVELOPMENT AND MANAGEMENT 3.0 MAIN CONTENT 3.1 The Concept of Rural Environment The concept of “rural” can only be defined by looking at the characteristics of rural environment as enumerated below.
3.1.1 Vicious Cycle of Poverty The rural dwellers earn low income from their economic activities and as a result they save less.
Low savings brings about low investment which leads to low capital formation.
Based on the foregoing, the rural dwellers are poor.
3.1.2 Poor Infrastructural Facilities It is either there is complete absence of infrastructural facilities or they are in poor conditions.
Such facilities include, good road network, electricity, pipe borne water, health facilities, etc.
Although they are capital intensive, they are essential in bringing about economic development.
3.1.3 High Population Density and Gross Illiteracy Rural environment witnesses high population density.
They cluster within specific areas and thereby causing congestion.
There is no family planning.
Greater percentage of the rural people is not educated and this affects them in taking good decisions and managing their economic activities.
3.1.4 Low Technological Base and Underdevelopment Rural environment is characterized by low technology, which reduces output.
There is also under employment.
Labour intensive activities reduce output and thereby creating disguise unemployment.
3.2 Concept of Development Development could be defined as a process of sustained increases in total and per capita income accompanied by structural transformation and modernization of socio-economic environment.
It could be economic development or growth.
Economic growth does not present the sources of increase in per capita income or the character of factors of production and infrastructural facilities.
Economic development takes into account the distribution, sources of growth, development of infrastructure and administrative framework essential, to sustained 6MPA 769 RURAL DEVELOPMENT AND MANAGEMENT economic growth.
In particular, development implies not merely the growth of per capita or real income, but also its distribution, the sources of growth, the development of infrastructure, and administrative framework essential to sustained economic growth.
3.3 Indices of Development The indices include: • Increase in per capita income – income per head • More even distribution of income not in the hands of a few • Reduction in the level of unemployment – more employment opportunities • Diversification of the economy – investment into different businesses • Increase in the supply of high level manpower • Balanced development of both rural and urban centres.
3.4 Steps in bring about Development in Rural Areas • Carrying out informal survey on fact finding • Identifying small groups, leaders and interest groups • Identification of community problem • Sharing in problems identified • Securing citizens’ commitment • Appraisal of available resources • Articulating the plan • Carrying out the plan and evaluation • Making adjustments 3.5 Definition of Rural Development Rural development has been defined in various ways by different authors as follows: • As a process whereby concerted efforts are made in order to facilitate significant increases in rural resource productivity with the central objective of enhancing rural income and increasing employment opportunities in rural communities for rural dwellers to remain in the area.
• An integrated approach to food production, provision of physical, social and institutional infrastructures with an ultimate goal of 7MPA 769 RURAL DEVELOPMENT AND MANAGEMENT bringing about qualitative changes which culminate in improved standard of living of rural population.
• Rural development also involves effecting improvement in living standards of farmers and the rural populace in general.
• It is also seen as increased production and processing of export crops especially trees with a view to broadening the revenue base of the state.
Rural development, therefore, implies effecting improvement in living standards of farmers and the rural populace in general.
• The main concern in rural development is to bring about the modernisation of rural society through a transition from traditional isolation to integration with the nation.
It constitutes a process of planned change for which the one approach or the other is adopted for improvement and or transformation of the lot of the rural populace.
It is concerned with the improvement of the living in the rural areas on a self-sustaining basis through transforming the socio-spatial structures of their productive activities.
• According to Obinne (1991), it also involves creating and widening opportunities for individuals to realise full potential through education and share in the decision and action which affects their lives.
An effort to increase rural output creates employment opportunities and root out fundamental cases of poverty, diseases and ignorance.
4.0 CONCLUSION The unit explains the concept of rural development.
Rural development refers to any package designed to assist the rural people move forward.
The problems have been identified and notably enough, most Nigerians live in rural areas where they derive their livelihood.
Governments at various levels have developed programmes that could enhance rural development.
The private sector has major role to play in rural development.
5.0 SUMMARY Developing the rural area will enhance the national income as most of the resources are tapped in the rural areas.
Even oil, the major Nigerian product that yields the highest revenue, is derived from the rural areas.
Entrepreneurs should start thinking of establishing their businesses in rural areas.
8MPA 769 RURAL DEVELOPMENT AND MANAGEMENT 6.0 TUTOR-MARKED ASSIGNMENT As a rural development officer posted to a new community, how do you go about developing the area?
7.0 REFERENCES/FURTHER READINGS Umebali E.E (2004).
Rural Resources Farm Business and Rural Development.
9MPA 769 RURAL DEVELOPMENT AND MANAGEMENT UNIT 3 GROWTH MODELS AND RURAL DEVELOPMENT CONTENTS 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objective 3.0 Main Content 3.1 The Growth Models include 3.1.1 Classical and Neo Classical Model 3.1.2 Internal Combustion Theory 3.1.3 Basic Resource Theory 3.1.4 Dual Economy Model 3.1.5 Export-led Model 3.1.6 Urban Industrial Model 3.1.7 High Input Pay-off Model 3.1.8 Diffusion Model 3.1.9 Induced Model 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutor-Marked Assignment 7.0 References/Further Readings 1.0 INTRODUCTION The reader should be conversant with the growth models.
Models are abstractions from reality and therefore, are used in explaining rural growth.
Rural growth is necessary as it is used to demonstrate rural development.
Rural development assumes a wider view and therefore embraces all fields of human endeavour.
Growth models are used to explain rural growth which brings about rural development.
2.0 OBJECTIVE At the end of the unit, you should be able to: • discuss each of the models 3.0 MAIN CONTENT 3.1 The Growth Models include 10MPA 769 RURAL DEVELOPMENT AND MANAGEMENT • The classical and neo classical model • Basic resources theory • Internal combustion theory • Dual economic model • Export-led growth model • Urban-led growth model • Urban industrial impact model • High input pay-off model • Diffusion model • Induced development model 3.1.1 Classical and Neo Classical Model According to classical model, the growth of any economy whether rural or non-rural is a function of capital investment and employment of labour.
However, capital tends to flow into sectors characterised by high rate of return and high marginal productivity to promote economic growth in the rural areas.
It is necessary to undertake measures, which will raise the rate of the return without regulation and with no thought of conservation a situation which intensifies the operation of diminishing returns.
Another limitation is its abstraction from technological change.
In practice, the role of natural resources in promoting development is a function of technological change, for instance, the impact of agricultural technology.
In such an economy, capital accumulation plays the classic role of being the engine of growth but for steady growth, agriculture must be commercial, a process which requires considerable investment by the government in the agricultural sector as in Nigeria.
It implies that resources concentrated in the dynamic, commercial modern sector and withdrawing resources from the substance sector for this purpose.
This model does not give an accurate representation of the structure and performance of a typical underdeveloped country.
It was believed that this strategy would guarantee cumulative growth of incomes, employment and rapid structural transformation of underdeveloped economies.
Limitations • it may not be much skilled manpower to harness the resources • it does not sufficiently emphasize the operation of diminishing returns to labour or capital in the face of rapid population growth and essentially static population and technology • no regulation on harnessing of the resources 11MPA 769 RURAL DEVELOPMENT AND MANAGEMENT • optimal harnessment is a function of the level of technology 3.1.2 Internal Combustion theory Internal combustion theory attributes economic growth and development to forces within the region of country.
The internal sources of growth include: technology, specialisation, economies of scale and the existence of growth stimulating institutional, political and administrative arrangements.
These can be deliberately created or modified.
Limitations • It ignores the importance of improved quality of labour as a factor in economic development.
• It ignores the role of community service and infrastructure, which by generating external economies account for high rate of return to capital investments.
• It places an exaggerated emphasis on factor and input prices as a determinant of investment and growth thereby ignoring the role of institutional and organisational arrangements.
• It ignores the crucial role of technology, which, by shifting the production function to the right tends to reduce cost and increase the rate of return to capital investments.
3.1.3 Basic Resource Theory This theory states that economic growth depends on the presence, availability, good and reliable, magnitude of basic natural resources within a particular area or economic regions.
The development resources attract investment capital to these, areas, and increase income and employment.
The mere availability of resources in rural areas does not mean economic development, only when there is high technical manpower to harness them.
It argues that the development of these resources attracts investment capital to these areas and increases income and enhances employment.
It would be wrong to assume that the mere availability of basic natural resources in an area is a sufficient guarantee of repaid development.
Limitation It does not sufficiently emphasise the operation of diminishing returns.
Most natural resources are characterised by diminishing returns to labour or capital in face of rapid population growth and essentially static production technology.
Besides, in many countries, the exploitation of 12MPA 769 RURAL DEVELOPMENT AND MANAGEMENT basic resources fully encounters a bottles-neck by way of labour scarcity and higher wages.
To break this bottleneck will be by way of labour saving technology.
3.1.4 Dual Economy Model This model distinguishes between modern and rural sectors.
In rural sector, there is absence of savings and capital formation, no technology, use of family labour, produces for family consumption.
The modern sector is market oriented and uses capital equipment and only technology.
Based on the foregoing, therefore, resources are concentrated on the dynamic commercial sector for this purpose.
However, the implication is that all resources should be channeled to the modern sector.
Limitation • There are no savings and capital information • The idea that resources should be concentrated in already developed areas does not lead to development.
• It assigns very restrictive role to agriculture.
3.1.5 Export-led Model This explains economic development in term of emergence and expansion of markets for export production.
This achieves cumulative growth in income, employment, etc.
The opening of market in other parts of the world expanded the demand for export of which production was intensive in the use of the abundant land and labour resources of the less developed economies.
This led to a fuller utilisation of previously under-utilised land and labour.
The expansion of exports also increased investment in infrastructural facilities.
Limitation • The model assumes a perfectly elastic export demand for agricultural exports, the model ignores the crucial question of demand and market access for the agricultural exports of less developed countries.
• There is no mention as to strategy for promoting agricultural production.
• This model has not offered guide in an increasingly industrialised economy where there is competition for agricultural raw material between export market and domestic agro-allied industries.
3.1.6 Urban Industrial Model 13MPA 769 RURAL DEVELOPMENT AND MANAGEMENT This model explains the fact that the nearer the location of agricultural production to urban areas, the greater the probability of increased agricultural output, employment and incomes.
This is because nearness to urban area reduces transportation, cost of both output and input and creates an expanded market for agricultural products; thus encouraging specialisation.
3.1.7 High Input Pay-off Model This model assigns a strategy role to new high yielding input varieties and educated rural labour.
3.1.8 Diffusion Model This explains why the substantial productivity difference among farmers in the same economic and geographical areas.
Such differences are because of the differences in farmers adoption of new varieties of seeds and mechanical and chemical inputs.
3.1.9 Induced Model Problems arise in the course of economic development.
The problems are also handled.
The contribution of models include: identifying relevant, variables and carrying out research.
They are also part of the government policy.
The growth models explain ways and means of developing the rural areas.
4.0 CONCLUSION This unit has discussed the growth models which try to describe the various views of rural development.
The models are characterised by some limitations.
This models encourages enhanced rural output, and employment and income of the rural people.
The models demonstrate the various approaches to the rural development.
5.0 SUMMARY The growth models are nine and each has its own approach to rural development.
They range from classical to neo classical models.
They serve as guides to development.
The models have been well explained.
6.0 TUTOR-MARKED ASSIGNMENT Discuss the relevance of these models in rural development.
14MPA 769 RURAL DEVELOPMENT AND MANAGEMENT 7.0 REFERENCES/FURTHER READINGS Olayide, S.O et al (1981).
Elements of Rural Economics.
Ibadan: Ibadan University Press Publishing House, University.
UNIT 4 RURAL DEVELOPMENT STRATEGIES CONTENTS 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objectives 3.0 Main Content 3.1 The Concept of Rural Development 3.2 Rural Infrastructural Facilities 3.2.1 Need for Rural Infrastructures 3.3 Rural Agricultural Production 3.4 Rural Industrialisation 3.5 Rural Banking Programme 3.6 Mobilising the Masses 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutor-Marked Assignment 7.0 References/Further Readings 1.0 INTRODUCTION Greater percentage (about 70 percent) of the Nigerian total population lives in rural areas, and to a large extent depend on agriculture for food and income (Olayide et al (1979).
In fact, they have remained traditional in their culture and despite their rural character they have been increasingly affected by decisions and activities which occur in small but growing urban areas in the country.
Urban bias in Nigerian development policy is reflected in prices, institutional opportunities, availability and access to markets, health infrastructure, communication and transport linkage and industries.
Many other studies have revealed that the rural economic activities sustains the economic growth of the urban centres.
However, in recent times, the productivity of the rural masses has continued to decline.
This is partly attributed to the lack of infrastructural facilities.
The infrastructural facilities needed for growth and functioning of any country, community etc., obviously stimulate rural development.
2.0 OBJECTIVES 15MPA 769 RURAL DEVELOPMENT AND MANAGEMENT At the end of this unit, you should be able to: • discuss the concept of rural development • discuss the rural development strategies 3.0 MAIN CONTENT 3.1 The Concept of Rural Development No matter the level of a nation’s socio-economic, political and technological advancement, the rural sector still plays an important role in its total economy.
In supporting this view Williams (1978) is of the opinion that without sound rural development there can be no balanced national economic development.
This suffices to say that economic development of a nation requires the growth and modernisation of both the rural and urban sectors.
Furthermore, since a very large proportion of the total population lives in the rural areas, no national development effort can claim to be successful without improving the quality of life of the rural dwellers.
Rogers and Whiting (1976) have defined rural development not only as providing jobs and increased incomes to rural people but also improving the quality of rural living through increased and improved community services.
Olayide et al (1979), in their own contribution said that rural development is a process whereby concerted efforts are made in order to facilitate significant increases in rural resource productivity with the overall objectives of enhancing rural incomes and increasing employment opportunities in rural communities.
Indeed, the ambit of rural development is very wide.
It connotes efforts to increase production, and to root out fundamental causes of poverty, disease and ignorance.
The paramount objective of rural development is to ensure improved conditions of life and opportunity to remain there.
However, the goals/objectives pursued through rural development programmes can be itemised as follows: • enhanced incomes of rural people engaged in agriculture and rural non-farm activities, including agro-based industries; • a reduction in the level of rural poverty and rural unemployment; • a reduction in qualities in the distribution of wealth and personal income including a more even distribution of resources; • increase in rural value added products; • enhanced good health for rural people and the reduction of ignorance through mass literacy and education; • enhanced quality of life by provision of potable water, electricity and other basic needs; and 16MPA 769 RURAL DEVELOPMENT AND MANAGEMENT • integration of rural people into the nation’s political and economic process through enhanced political awareness and consciousness and the recognition of the rural resident first and foremost as an individual citizen is entitled, like his urban counterparts, to all good things of life.
3.2 Rural Infrastructural Facilities Rural infrastructures can be defined to include the system of physical, human and institutional forms of capital which enable rural residents to better perform their production, processing and distribution activities as well as helping to improve the overall quality of rural life.
Four types of rural infrastructures can be identified (Olayide et al, 1979).
These are i) rural physical infrastructures; ii) rural social infrastructures; iii) rural institutional infrastructures; and iv) rural farm infrastructures.
3.2.1 Need for Rural Infrastructures Provision of infrastructural facilities is necessary because it will help in achieving the following goals/objectives: • significantly increases living conditions of the rural people healthcare delivery; • restrains the growth of unplanned squatter settlement; • significantly improves employment opportunities and training of the rural inhabitants and brings to rural areas entertainment.
• enlightenment and communication facilities, thereby restraining migration into the already crowed urban centres; • ensures and maintains a continuing improvement in the rural environment; • broadens the mix of industrial establishment and commercial activities in the rural Nigeria; • increases the agricultural establishments and commercial activities in the rural Nigeria; • increases agricultural productivity by means of adequate irrigation and easy mechanisations; and • encourages processing of agricultural products and storage and preservation of primary crops.
17MPA 769 RURAL DEVELOPMENT AND MANAGEMENT 3.3 Rural Agricultural Production Greater percentage of the rural populace is involved in agriculture.
The agricultural sectors pursue the following objectives: • massive increase in food production to attain self-sufficiency; • modernisation of farm practices, techniques and technology for increased farm productivity, outputs and derivable income for farmers; • increase production and processing of export crops especially tree crops with a view to broadening the revenue base of the state; and • effecting improvement in living standards of farmers and the rural populace in general.
3.4 Rural Industrialisation Rural industries (small-scale) provide employment opportunities and subsequently income for the rural dwellers.
The Anambra with some other state governments have embarked on establishment of industries in its rural areas.
It also encourages private individuals to forge ahead in establishing industries especially those that utilise local raw materials.
Most of the small scale-industries handle processing of farm produce.
3.5 Rural Banking Programme In July 1977 rural banking scheme was launched by the Federal Military Government through the Central Bank of Nigeria.
The programme was also aimed at embracing the people in the rural area by: 1) encouraging banking habits among the rural population; 2) mobilising savings from the rural areas for the purpose of channeling same to profitable ventures; 3) Creating credit by way of equity and loans for small scale industries; 4) developing agriculture and agro-allied industries in the rural area with the aim of achieving the national objective of self- sufficiency in food production; and 5) reducing to a large extent, the drift of young men and women from the rural areas to the urban areas.
3.6 Mobilising the Masses 18MPA 769 RURAL DEVELOPMENT AND MANAGEMENT Mobilisation implies, to assemble, prepare or put into operation as for war or similar emergency.
In Nigeria’s case, it implies equipping the citizenry for the onerous task of rural development.
Therefore, in mobilising the ruralities, we should aim at influencing their consciousness, such that the opinion and behaviours of the target audience are directed towards the goal being pursued.
By so doing, they sensitise their needs, the path to achieving them and, available means of achieving them.
This partly accounts for the continuous reforms and transformation the third tier of government has undergone for some time now.
4.0 CONCLUSION This unit has focused on the concept of rural development as a strategy for improving the lots of rural dwellers.
The rural areas cannot be neglected for such time as the resources harnessed from the areas contribute significantly to the national income.
The rural development programmes will check the rural-urban migration.
Government should, therefore, on a sustainable basis, pursue all programmes that will enhance the welfare of the rural communities.
5.0 SUMMARY This unit has discussed the basic rural development strategies which include; rural agricultural production, rural industrialisation and rural infrastructures.
Most rural dwellers are involved in agriculture and they need the agro-industries for processing and this cannot be possible with the necessary infrastructures being in place.
These will constitute economic activities that will accelerate rural development.
6.0 TUTOR-MARKED ASSIGNMENT Discuss the three major strategies of rural development.
7.0 REFERENCES/FURTHER READINGS Anambra State Government (1980).
Focus on Rural Development.
Onakomaiya S.O (1986).
“Road Transportation and Environmental Degradation in Nigeria”, Development and the Environment.
Proceeding of a National Conference.
William S.K.T (1978).
Rural Development in Nigeria.
Ile Ife: University of Ife:.
19MPA 769 RURAL DEVELOPMENT AND MANAGEMENT UNIT 5 LEADERSHIP IN RURAL DEVELOPMENT CONTENTS 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objectives 3.0 Main Content 3.1 Concept of Leadership 3.2 Leadership in Rural Communities 3.3 Effective Leadership for Rural Development 3.4 Effective Leadership in Rural Areas 3.4.1 Cordial Relation 3.4.2 Open Door Policy 3.4.3 Equity and Fairness 3.4.4 Emotional Control 3.4.5 The Meaning of Effective Leadership 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutor-Marked Assignment 7.0 References/Further Readings 1.0 INTRODUCTION Leadership is very important in any organisation.
The leadership of any organisation will determine to a large extent the viability of the organisation.
Some communities have failed to perform because of bad leadership.
The reader should have a background knowledge of leadership.
2.0 OBJECTIVES At the end of this unit, you should be able to: • study the concept of leadership • study the theories and approaches to leadership • discuss effective leadership in rural development.
20MPA 769 RURAL DEVELOPMENT AND MANAGEMENT 3.0 MAIN CONTENT 3.1 Concept of Leadership Leadership has been either defined or explained in varied ways according to relevant experts.
It is important to understand what leadership is in terms of definition, nature and characteristics.
Leadership can be seen as an influenced process.
Areas of influence include official position, financial controls, organisational influence, knowledge, interpersonal contracts, personal and characteristics.
It involves one person trying to get others do something that he wants them to do.
This is influencing the activities of an organised group towards goal setting and goal achievement.
It further implies that a leader must be able to influence the followers towards setting appropriate goals and towards effective achievement.
Leadership can be seen as, to guide or director by persuasion or influence towards a cause of action or thought.
As a necessary corollary, therefore, a leader means somebody or a person that leads by guidance or direction to some well defined cause of action or thought.
This cause of action or thought co-terms with some well defined objectives.
Leadership, therefore, is a management practice, and a segment of organisational activity geared towards the achievement of a set goals and objective.
This is leadership in action; the ability to influence subordinates to willingly perform specific tasks associated with goals accomplishment.
However, Umebali (2004) asserted that leadership is initiation of new structures or procedures for the accomplishment of organisational goals and objectives.
According to him, if one cannot initiate new structures or process for goal setting, goal achievement and for general problem solving one is not an effective leader.
Gibbin Schien (1980) in his own view defined leadership as a function of the relationship between the leader, the followers and the task- situational characteristics.
He went further to say that effective leadership must maintain good relationship between the leader and the followers and must constantly bear in mind the task situational characteristics.
He added that a leader cannot lead in isolation, but must be sensitive to the needs of the followers and to the situational changes.
Given the foregoing, leadership is a process of influencing, directing, co-ordinating the activities of an organised group towards goal setting, goal achievement and problem solving; that it necessarily involves taking initiative or initiating new structures and new procedures; and that it is imperatively a function of a leader and the situational variable.
21MPA 769 RURAL DEVELOPMENT AND MANAGEMENT Based on the process of influencing on individual or group of individuals so that they will strive willingly and enthusiastically towards the achievement of desirable goals.
The essence of leadership is followership and it is the willingness of people to follow that makes a person a leader.
The functions of a leader include a guide, a group’s spokesman, harmonizer, an enabler and educator, a symbol of group ideals and an agent of control.
3.2 Leadership in Rural Communities Leadership is an integral part of management and in any system in which resources are poorly managed, no result will be recorded.
However, poor management can easily be traced to poor leadership.
Based on the recent publications and other literature, Nigerian problems are traced to poor leadership.
Given Nigerian democratic setting, effective leadership is one that allows free, initiation of programmes that at the same time is carried out to its logical end as the rural dwellers must have made their own inputs.
This, however, can be achieved through the “Igwe” in council, Town Union’s, Age Grade, Youth Clubs, Women Associations, etc.
The author recommends bottom- up approach rather than top down.
The leadership at any level must get the feelings of the local people for whom the programme is initiated and without which the programme may end up being a failure.
Leadership style may vary from one community to another and from one level to another depending on the understanding of the individuals in the system.
3.3 Effective Leadership for Rural Development Leadership effectiveness measures the extent to which the leader achieves the functions of his office or sets out goals.
Leaders should, therefore, have the following characteristics: intelligence, self-confidence, initiatives, capability, socio-economic status, etc.
Leadership characterised by mediocrity cannot achieve the set out goal.
The rural leadership has its statutory functions or its targets associated with them.
It is the responsibility of the leadership to achieve these targets.
Failure means slowing down progress, which reflects on output.
The problem this creates is ultimately traced to the leadership.
3.4 Effective Leadership in Rural Areas To achieve leadership effectiveness in rural areas, the following are important.
3.4.1 Cordial Relation 22MPA 769 RURAL DEVELOPMENT AND MANAGEMENT Cordial relationship should exist between the leader and the followers.
If otherwise, in decision-making or execution, not many people will be carried along.
3.4.2 Open Door Policy The open door policy here means that the leader or chairman is free with his followers.
Furthermore, it means being free with them and allowing people to air their views.
There should be free flow of information.
There should also be proper accountability of fund spent.
3.4.3 Equity and Fairness Effective leadership should give people their due rights or entitlement.
People should not be denied their opportunities.
3.4.4 Emotional Control The degree of emotional control is measured not only by how strongly a leader feels on any matter; not even by the justness and soundness of his feeling but by how he acts, by the extent to which his feelings are so restrained and directed.
3.4.5 The Meaning of Effective Leadership Effective Leadership involves the following: • leadership that enhances the welfare of those led • leadership that transfers manifestoes into concrete action • leadership that clearly defines viable programme and properly coordinates programme • leadership that motivates and ensures optimal utilisation of resources • leadership that relates well with the group being led and allows free expression • leadership that is not characterised by mediocrity • leadership that has firm control of the system • leadership that is able to transform the entire system • leadership that is prepared to maximise service and show the spirit of accountability.
4.0 CONCLUSION In any organization, business or otherwise, leadership plays a major role in the survival of such organisation.
Leadership takes the decisions and carries them out.
There is need, therefore, to influence the employees 23MPA 769 RURAL DEVELOPMENT AND MANAGEMENT positively to ensure that everybody concerned puts his/her best to achieve the objectives set out.
Rural people should be mobilised for action.
5.0 SUMMARY This unit discusses the concept of leadership, theories and approaches to leadership and how to achieve effective leadership.
Leadership characterised by mediocrity cannot stand.
Leadership should have vision and be committed to such visions.
6.0 TUTOR-MARKED ASSIGNMENT What does effective leadership imply?
7.0 REFERENCES/FURTHER READINGS Gibbin S. (1980).
Longman Organisational Psychology.
New Jersey: Prentice Hall Inc. Umebali E.E.
(2004).
Rural Resources, Farm Business and Rural Development.
Lagos: Computer Edge Publisher.
24MPA 769 RURAL DEVELOPMENT AND MANAGEMENT MODULE 2 Unit 1 Resources and Rural Development Unit 2 Co-operative Formation and Management to Enhance Rural Development Unit 3 Social Change in Rural Development Unit 4 Rural Finance and Rural Development Unit 5 Rural Education and Rural Development UNIT 1 RESOURCES AND RURAL DEVELOPMENT CONTENTS 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objectives 3.0 Main Content 3.1 Classes of Resources 3.1.1 Economic Resources 3.1.2 Free Good of Classical Economic Theory 3.1.3 Primary Resources 3.2 Rural Resources and Management Decision 3.2.1 Resources Association 3.2.2 Availability of Resources 3.2.3 Allocative Efficiency 3.3 Management of Rural Resources 3.3.1 Land Resource 3.3.2 Forestry Resources 3.3.3 Water Resource 3.3.4 Capital Resources 3.3.5 Labour Resource 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutor-Marked Assignment 7.0 References/Further Readings 1.0 INTRODUCTION 25MPA 769 RURAL DEVELOPMENT AND MANAGEMENT Rural resources are harnessed to achieve rural development, most rural communities have abundant natural resources and they are for the communities to fully harness them to their own advantage.
Therefore, the reader should be able to identify such resources and devise appropriate ways and means of harnessing them.
Often times the problem is not having the required technology for harnessing them.
2.0 OBJECTIVES At the end of this unit, you should be able to: • identify the classes of resources • study rural resources and management decisions • discuss management of rural resources.
3.0 MAIN CONTENT 3.1 Classes of Resources There are three classes of resources 3.1.1 Economic Resources Economic resources of classical (before Lord Kenys) theory include; land, labour, and capital in its many forms, and management or entrepreneurship.
3.1.2 Free Good of Classical Economic Theory Free good of classical economic theory which under modern conditions must be classed as “high–cost” resources.
This group includes; water, climate (in form of temperature, moisture and winds).
Biological (in form insects and pests), and insulation.
This group is called high cost because the cost of reducing their deleterious hazards on rural production is very exorbitant.
3.1.3 Primary Resources Primary resources: such as minerals, forestry, fisheries, wildlife which are valued for their own sake as well as employed in producing other goods and services for consumers.
3.2 Rural Resources and Management Decision 26MPA 769 RURAL DEVELOPMENT AND MANAGEMENT Resources inputs are limited and to this extent, there is need for discussion on resources allocation.
3.2.1 Resources Allocation However, resources allocation entails the following: i) What goods and services to produce ii) How the goods and services selected will be produced iii) Who and who will get the services produced iv) When will they be produced v) How much available resources will be produced that would be devoted to the future growth 3.2.2 Availability of Resources Availability of resources at the right time, place, quality in view of high cost of tapping and difficulty of water, pest and insects.
3.2.3 Allocative Efficiency Allocative efficiency is affected by such factors as government policy, customs, institutions or culture, configuration, cost structures, resources management, etc.
Resource inputs are, therefore, rates of resources used and outputs are rates of production per unit time, which must be short enough to avoid changes in technique.
Resources may be available and properly allocated without being efficiently utilised.
3.3 Management of Rural Resources 3.3.1 Land Resource Land as factor of production is an area of soil on which the farmer grows his crops, builds farms stead and establishes livestock.
It cannot be replaced when exhausted (supply is fixed) hence a gift of nature.
In a sparsely populated area where land is freely available to all resident families, its opportunity cost for cultivation does not diminish the output of other productive enterprises.
Use of land Land uses include the following: i) Natural grazing for livestock, i.e.
cattle, sheep and goat; 27MPA 769 RURAL DEVELOPMENT AND MANAGEMENT ii) Land for production of cereal crops like maize, rice, sorghum, tuber crops like yam cassava and tree crops like cocoa, coffee and oil palm, etc.
; iii) Land for the production of forest trees that are of economic value; iv) This forest trees produce timber, oil and drugs etc.
; v) For wildlife and game reserves; vi) For township and settlement development; vii) For development of roads, railways, airport etc.
; viii) For building industries; and ix) For markets, churches, mosques, schools, cemeteries recreational facilities, etc.
Advantages and Disadvantages of each type 1.
Grazing Advantages • Feeding livestock e.g.
cattle, etc., for growth and production.
• Increase in meat and/or protein supply for human consumption.
Disadvantages • Overgrazing might lead to flooding in some area and predisposes land to soil erosion.
• It excludes the use of the land for many other purposes.
2.
Crop Production Advantages • Fibre production.
• Aesthetics, i.e.
environmental beautification–horticulture, etc.
Disadvantage • Lead to loss of soil fertility.
• May predispose to erosion.
3.
Wildlife Advantages • Increase in meat supply in the country • Use of games and sports/recreation • Social and economic benefit 28MPA 769 RURAL DEVELOPMENT AND MANAGEMENT • Tourist attraction, thus leading to foreign exchange earnings.
Disadvantages • Fertile lands might not be easily accessible to farmers due to government regulations.
• Could constitute threats to human lives crops and property when the animal escapes to town and villages.
4.
Forestry Advantages • To check erosion • To increase soil fertility • Protects and maintains water sheds and table lands.
• Modification of climate Disadvantages • Forest reserves may deprive communities of other uses of land.
• May form reservoirs for pests and diseases of cultivated crops and farm animals.
5.
Settlement Development Advantages • For building houses and industrial layout • Provides other amenities necessary for modern living Disadvantages • Rapid population growth might force farmers off the fertile lands • Might lead to rapid spread of epidemics, etc.
Land Tenure Ownership or acquisition is either by individual, family, community or government agency either for temporary or permanent use.
Example includes: • Communal • Freehold (purchase) 29MPA 769 RURAL DEVELOPMENT AND MANAGEMENT • Rent • Borrowing • Lease Government laws e.g.
land use Decree of 1978.
The Decree says that: 1.
All land in the country are vested in the Federal Government of Nigeria and to be held in trust for the people .i e, the acquisition and use of land for whatever purpose are to be controlled by the Federal Government The Decree empowers each state to act on behalf of the Federal Government in all matters related to land in the state.
Before anybody could be legally recognised as owing any piece of land, such a person must have applied to government, paid for the land and thereafter be issued with a certificate of occupancy on the acquired land.
Advantages • The Decree makes it easier to acquire large parcels of land for agriculture.
• It encourages commercial agriculture • It makes it possible for anybody to acquire land • Curbs the excesses of land speculators Disadvantages • It makes land held by inheritance insecure • Privileged individuals in the society and government exploit the Decree to acquire large portions of land • Because of serious bureaucratic/administrative bottlenecks often makes it difficult to obtain land from the government sources.
Communal Land Tenure • The land is owned by the community.
Land is allocated to members by the head of the family or the community • Every member of the Community is opportuned to farm each season to grow annual/biannual crops Effect • The land cannot be used as a collateral security for procuring agricultural loan for development by members of the community.
30MPA 769 RURAL DEVELOPMENT AND MANAGEMENT • Mechanisation is difficult to introduce because the farmlands are scattered and small too.
• Permanent crops like cocoa and rubber (tree crops) cannot be established because of possible re-allocation of land for another season.
• Discourages permanent land improvement such as building of structures and farming.
• Leads to fragmentation of land into small and scattered units • Co-operative efforts of the farmers are discouraged, thereby, leading to the retardation of the adoption of modern agricultural techniques.
Freehold –Features Give owners complete freedom on the land and may decide to sell it, leave it fallow, farm the land or rent it out.
It can be used as collateral for agricultural loans.
Effects • It leads to land improvement.
• Mechanical agriculture can be profitably introduced.
• Land may be fragmented among children of freeholders.
• Tenant tenancy.
Features The farmers have partial freedom on land.
It cannot be used as security for agricultural loans.
Moderate land improvement can be effected on the land.
Mechanisation can be introduced if the size of the land is large enough.
Effect • Land can be put to more uses than agricultural production Diminishing returns Land for agriculture is subject to law of diminishing returns.
Law of diminishing returns stipulates that in production practices, there are usually fixed and variable sources/inputs.
When variable resources are being increased against fixed resources, there is usually increase in the yield, e.g.
fertilizer application rates being increased against the plot of land.
There is a point which additional application of the variable resources against the fixed asset, lead to maximum returns, after which further increases in the variable factor will lead to decline in the returns.
31MPA 769 RURAL DEVELOPMENT AND MANAGEMENT The point at which this net return brings a decline is usually referred to as the point of diminishing returns.
This law is very important in agricultural production because there is a maximum level of application of resources which may lead, to a net loss.
This should be avoided as agricultural production can be increased either by intensifying production on land which is already farmed or by intending production unto land which previously was not farmed.
Land that is required for industry is smaller than the required for farming.
Population has exploded, thereby mounting more pressure on land.
A portion of land is cultivated seasonally, thereby creating room for the use of artificial manure fertilizer or organic manure.
3.3.2 Forestry Resources The forest provides a living place for the wildlife, besides the production of timber.
Some forestry zones are transformed into tourist centres.
Below are the advantages and disadvantages of deforestation and the benefits of regeneration, afforestation, selective exploitation and ‘taugya” systems.
i. Deforestation This is the felling of trees for specific purpose.
• Uncontrolled deforestation should never be allowed.
• The rate of deforestation should be reduced to the barest minimum because it leads to adverse effects on the soil.
• It leads to loss of organic matter resulting in the loss of soil fertility.
• It leads to destruction of soil structure.
• It decreases soil moisture retention.
• Increases leaching of plant nutrients.
• Government usually controls the rate of deforestation.
• To conserve the nation’s forest species.
• Forest fauna (wildlife) are also reduced.
• It encourages erosion.
• It leads to desert encroachment.
• It depletes the supply of forest produce (raw materials) to industry.
32MPA 769 RURAL DEVELOPMENT AND MANAGEMENT ii.
Regeneration This is a process of forest regrowth after it has been exploited.
Regeneration can occur either by regrowth from old stumps or deliberate natural planting of new forest seedlings in a deforested area.
It can be a deliberate government policy in the restoration of deforested area after exploitation to balance the ecosystem.
Afforestation • It is a process of establishing forest plantation in any area.
• It involves the complete removal of natural vegetation’s before planting new forest species.
• It can also be done in some areas to reduce desert encroachment/ wind erosion.
• Early stages of afforstation may include: taungya farming to maximize the use of land and protect seedling.
• It provides habitat for wildlife.
iii.
Selective Exploitation 33MPA 769 RURAL DEVELOPMENT AND MANAGEMENT • Protect the soil from erosion • Ensures continuous supply of timber • Serves as revenue base for the government • Forests are allocated to licensed sawmiller by state forestry division • It is a way to concentrate certain selected species of timber forest reserve • Undesirable species of timber are eliminated by this method 3.3.3 Water Resource Water is very important in every living thing.
Water is available through ocean, percolation, infiltration, irrigation and rainfall.
It is given out through respiration, evaporation and transpiration.
In the southern part of Nigeria rainfall almost all the year round but in the northern part rainfall is very scanty.
As a result, different types of crops, even animals are produced in different ecological zones.
However, most of the northern farms are irrigated to ensure production all year round.
The Sahel, Sudan and Guinea Savannah produce food crops such as groundnut, millet and cotton respectively and they need irrigation.
This is bound in Maidugari, Kano and Kaduna state respectively.
Derived Savannah is found in Nsukka and Ibadan areas and they produce food crops such as: yam, cassava, etc.
Forest vegetation is found around Edo State and produces timber.
The coastal swamp is found around Calabar, Rivers States, producing coconuts.
3.3.4 Capital Resources Capital resources can be defined as goods employed but not necessarily used up in the course of production, together with money credit which gives power to buy such good.
Capital may be classified into groups.
The first is physical capital in the form of machinery and various forms of farm tools as well as farm buildings and processing equipment.
This is the mechanisation aspect of capital resources.
The second is biological capital in form of fertilizer, pesticides, herbicides, weed killets, fungicides, insecticides, improved and certified seeds, etc.
The third group is capital that enters the production process in form of mixed feed, feed additives, capsules and other livestock mediciants.
The fourth type is improved stock breeds.
Capital attracts interest and can depreciate or appreciate.
3.3.5 Labour Resource 34MPA 769 RURAL DEVELOPMENT AND MANAGEMENT Labour refers to human effort employed in production but cannot be used anyhow.
Labour can move from area of surplus to area of deficiency.
Ownership and use of labour can be separated.
Labour can be hired for immediate and current uses.
It may be full or part time but full time does attract a higher wage.
Men, women and children are valued differently wage wise.
Labour can be skilled or unskilled seasonality, peak and relaxed period.
It can, therefore, be diverted to other areas during off farm season.
Productivity of labour can be increased through: a) Payment of incentives b) Improving work methods and skill (method study) and c) Mechanisation.
Greater percentage of the labour force is in the rural area, engaged in farm enterprise.
Farm production in Nigeria labour is intensive, in as much as it has developed from subsistence to modern and commercial level.
The new technology will help in performing some of the farm operations.
4.0 CONCLUSION In order to accelerate rural development the rural dwellers should fully harness the available resources.
The nature of the resources will determine pattern of harnessment.
5.0 SUMMARY This unit has considered the nature of available resources and how they can be managed in order to maximise their potential.
The resources provide the needed revenue used in developing the rural area.
6.0 TUTOR-MARKED ASSIGNMENT Discuss how the rural resources can be harnessed to the advantage of the rural dwellers.
7.0 REFERENCES/FURTHER READINGS Adegeye, A.J and Ditto, J.S.
Essentials of Agricultural Economics.
Ibadan Duru Press Ltd. 35MPA 769 RURAL DEVELOPMENT AND MANAGEMENT Olayide, S.O et al (1981).
Elements of Rural Economics.
Ibadan: University Press Publishing House Ibadan.
UNIT 2 COOPERATIVE FORMATION AND MANAGEMENT TO ENHANCE RURAL DEVELOPMENT CONTENTS 36MPA 769 RURAL DEVELOPMENT AND MANAGEMENT 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objectives 3.0 Main Content 3.1 The Concept of Cooperatives 3.2 Reasons for Establishing Cooperatives 3.3 Aims of Cooperatives 3.4 Brief Historical Development of Cooperatives 3.5 Cooperative Movement in Nigeria 3.6 Procedures/Steps in Forming Cooperative 3.7 Organizational Structure of Cooperative 3.8 Single and Multipurpose of Cooperative 3.8.1 Single Purpose 3.8.2 Multipurpose 3.9 Management of Cooperatives 3.9.1 In Managing Cooperatives for Rural Development, the Following are Important 3.10 Problems of Cooperatives 3.11 Prospects of Cooperatives in Nigeria 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutor-Marked Assignment 7.0 References/Further Readings 1.0 INTRODUCTION Cooperatives are veritable instruments for achieving rural development.
The various types have their roles and they assist their members in improving their economic well-being.
They undertake projects in communities that will enhance the welfare of the communities.
They are business organisations that maximize service instead of profit.
2.0 OBJECTIVES At the end of this unit, you should be able to: • explain the concept of cooperative • discuss reasons for establishing cooperatives • discuss the historical development of cooperatives • discuss the cooperative movement in Nigeria • discuss the procedures/steps in forming cooperative • discuss organization and structure of cooperative • discuss the management of cooperative • discuss the prospects of cooperatives in Nigeria.
3.0 MAIN CONTENT 37MPA 769 RURAL DEVELOPMENT AND MANAGEMENT 3.1 The Concept of Cooperatives Cooperative organisation can be defined as a group of persons, who have pooled themselves and their resources on self-help, mutual, equitable and democratic basis to form a business enterprise which seeks to solve the socio-economic problems of its members by directly providing them with goods and services in their double capacity as either owners/customers or owner/workers of the cooperative enterprises Umebali and Mgbada, (1997:214).
Cooperatives could be single or multipurpose; primary, secondary or Apex.
It can be joint business or partial.
3.2 Reasons for Establishing Cooperatives The need for cooperative enterprise arises because individual small scale farmers and industrialists are: • too small to acquire and use efficiently the means of production; • too small to bargain for discounts in the inputs/factor market and also to ensure a steady supply of these inputs; • too small to apply for loans individually and so may be constrained to resort to the informal sources where they may be exported; • too small and scattered all over, to attract governments, attention installed infrastructures eg.
water, good road network, etc.
; • too small to produce efficiently because of lack of specialisation; • too small to take advantage of economies of scale hence production units are not fully utilised.
• too small to organise to collect the market information that is essential for efficient planning and without planning management becomes inefficient There is virtually no areas of human endeavour that cooperative cannot be formed unless the members decide otherwise, (Abdullahi: 1986).
3.3 Aims of Cooperatives The aims include • Providing goods and services at minimal cost.
This is selling at prices a little above purchase prices.
• Elimination of some middlemen, especially those who are not performing any economic functions.
Most of them exploit and hold 38MPA 769 RURAL DEVELOPMENT AND MANAGEMENT the public to ransom.
Cooperatives, therefore, offer protection to those who are economically weak in terms of doing business.
• Members understand one another more and can resolve issues amicably.
3.4 Brief Historical Development of Cooperatives A study of cooperative development throughout the world is useful for understanding the success and failure of modern problems of Cooperatives.
It has been noted that cooperatives were formed where there is a felt-need but government especially in developing countries often give active support to cooperative because they promise to help the poor and to remove or reduce unfair treatment or injustice or uneven distribution of welfare.
Some of the earlier cooperatives were formed for spiritual and materials purposes.
The Ancient Greek formed cooperative in order to perform proper burial of the dead, they gradually acquired business shape by helping members in their economic activities.
In Ancient Egypt and Babylon, Cooperatives were formed by Edict and farm tenant were allowed to manage their large estate for their own benefit.
In Ancient China, a rich influential merchant named Kong Koog initiated a saving society similar to a present day “Isusu”.
The Romans established Cooperative College called Collegia (mainly made of craftsmen) but Roman emperors were regarded as cradles for resistance to empirical authority.
Also in Rome, heavy ‘burial expenses led to burial funeral cooperative’, which pooled their resources to help each of the needy in turns.
They eventually became consumer societies.
In Britain, during the era of lawlessness, plunder, pilferage, followed by the collapse of Roman rule, worked under the protection of minor masters who later exploited them.
The protection of minor masters who later exploits led to the formation of guilds which were the forerunners of the present day trade union and modern consumers cooperative owe their origin to some of these guilds.
The technological advancement which followed (18th century) industrial revolution in Great Britain made life abundant for a few through ownership of wealth.
Through political power, through business ownership and as a result of having a good job.
But for other people (masses), it meant disasters, chaos, unemployment, injustice, and abject poverty.
As a result of ensuring debate on the economic quality of environment, two schools of thoughts were established.
First one was championed by Karl Marx and Fredrick Angle.
They suggested a complete take over of the states of all economic activities and this led to the present name Russian Communism.
Second one followed a middle 39MPA 769 RURAL DEVELOPMENT AND MANAGEMENT course laissez faire, preserving the capitalist structure but trying to correct the ills in it, such a school of thought belonged to the Rochdale Pineers.
After several unsuccessful attempts which were due to lack of clear guiding principles, the Rochdale society of equitable pioneers was formed in 1844 with carefully formulated set of principles, some of which have survived up till today.
The Rochdale idea grew out of the need of poor quality of consumer goods.
The first reaction of British society was to antagonise the society but over times it gave its support and permitted the incorporation of such societies.
Since then cooperatives had spread all over the world – North America, East Africa and West Africa.
3.5 Cooperative Movement in Nigeria Cooperative movement in Nigeria started with the colonial masters, with the formulation and enactment of cooperative legislation in 1935.
During this period, the cocoa farmers in Western Region formed marketing societies with the sole aim of checking the excesses of middlemen and ensuring the marketing of pure and unadulterated cocoa.
The initiative was taken after submission of Mr. F.F.
Strickland’s report.
His positive report, which stated that cooperative will thrive in Nigeria, brought about the enactment of the cooperative law in 1935.
The basis of cooperative organisation is membership.
Legally the minimum number of persons that can form a farmers’ cooperative is 10, while that of industrial cooperative is 6.
The minimum age is 18 years and only persons of a sound mind can be admitted.
To become a member of a cooperative society, the person has to apply by filling out a form and being recommended by an older member of a society.
In a completely new society all the foundation members must have agreed to, form the society and to adhere to the provisions of the bye laws.
Cooperative has a legal basis.
In Nigeria this could be found in the cooperative ordinance of 1935 and the subsequent amendments since then.
The law spells out in detail the requirements, which the cooperative must meet, for example: a) Societies that can be registered are only those which have the object of promoting the economic interests of members in accordance with the bye laws of such a society with or without limited liability as the registrar may decide.
b) No primary society shall be registered if it does not consist of at least 10 individuals for farmers and 6 for industrialists.
c) No secondary society shall be registered unless at least two registered societies are members thereof.
d) A society when registered shall become a body corporate, having its name in which it is registered.
It shall have a perpetual 40MPA 769 RURAL DEVELOPMENT AND MANAGEMENT succession and a common seal and with power to hold movable property of every description, to enter into contract, to sue and be sued and to do all things necessary for the purpose of its constitution.
Each modified region or state of the federation is empowered to have its modified cooperative laws, making any necessary amendments, depending on the needs of the people and area.
3.6 Procedures/Steps in Forming a Cooperative The society submits the following a) 3 copies of Economic Survey report b) 3 copies of bye law/constitution c) 2 copies of sketch map d) Application for registration –coop form 1 The society is finally and formally registered by the Director of cooperatives, ministry of commerce and industry.
Therefore the original certificate of registration and bye law is presented to the group’s president or secretary.
They can now go out to source loan.
3.7 Organisational Structure of Cooperatives The organisation structure of cooperatives in a state is a simple and straight forward one.
The primary cooperatives in the rural areas are made up of members.
The affairs of each primary societies are handled by the elected members or executives – Chairman, Secretary and Treasure.
The primary societies come together to form the divisional cooperative council (secondary) located at local government headquarters.
The secondary and the primary societies come together to form the state apex organisation.
Apex (state level) Secondary society (At LG Level) Primary society (At village Level) Individual members 3.8 Single and Multipurpose of Cooperative 3.8.1 Single Purpose When cooperatives were newly introduced in Nigeria, they were single purpose types.
This is based on the fact that there were rooms for specialization.
Much was not achieved and it widened the risk margin.
The single function include: productions, input procurement, processing marketing, consumer purchases or credit.
41MPA 769 RURAL DEVELOPMENT AND MANAGEMENT 3.8.2 Multipurpose As time went on, the need for multipurpose type arose.
In recent times all the societies are formed and registered as multipurpose.
This is based on the fact that multiple functions are performed.
This helps the societies to achieve more.
Many of them now start with thrift and credit and thereafter mobilize their savings.
It also spread the risk and hence avert a total collapse of investments and hence for sustainability purpose.
Integration Integration is nothing but the coming together of cooperatives.
It can also be from multipurpose point of view.
Integration could be horizontal or vertical.
Horizontal integration involves societies with similar interests.
Example of societies with similar interest, is farmer cooperative linking up with feed mill cooperative, linking up with poultry cooperatives, linking up with restaurant.
3.9 Management of Cooperatives Management perse refers to all the activities carried out in order to attain the stated objectives.
Management is quite important otherwise the business cannot be sustained.
Management is also seen from its functional view.
Cooperatives set up management and supervisory committee and their functions are spelt out which constitute management practices.
The cooperative principles also provide management practices.
Management, to a large extent, is determined by the nature of operation.
3.9.1 In Managing Cooperatives for Rural Development, the following are Important: • Identifying viable and profitable ventures • Raising enough fund from internal sources and sourcing credit at cheap rates • Supply of best quality products and expansion of market, with high turnover 42MPA 769 RURAL DEVELOPMENT AND MANAGEMENT • Distribution of dividend and patronage refund based on capital contribution and volume of business done with the organisation respectively.
• Cash trading and selling at market rates • Expansion of business scale from time to time • Occasional training of members • Good record keeping and accounting • Auditing of accounts on a regular basis • Competent management and leadership • Encouraging cooperation internally • Ensuring that the necessary facilities are in place • Making bulk purchase to receive discount.
3.10 Problems of Cooperatives There are numerous problems facing cooperatives in Nigeria and they include the following; • Lack of infrastructure e.g.
good road, network, light, etc.
• Lack of finance • Poor leadership • Ignorance/illiteracy • Pseudo/disguised cooperative • Poor management • Policy inconsistency/economic problem • Poor record-keeping and account.
3.11 Prospects of Cooperatives in Nigeria In Nigeria, as far as cooperatives are concerned, there are prospects.
This is more significant now that there are universities awarding degree in cooperatives (Enugu State University of Science and Technology and Nnamdi Azikiwe University).
Other universities have cooperative as an area in a programme (such as Agriculture).
Polytechnics are not left out.
Institute of Management and Technology award OND and HND in Cooperative.
No doubt, all these will go a long way in enhancing manpower development for cooperative development.
In Nigeria cooperative is required for rural development programmes which is a core government programme.
This has to do with the enhancement of socio-political economic base of the rural dwellers.
Through cooperatives, farm inputs are distributed.
Cooperative is, therefore, required for nation building in terms of; food production, employment, income, raw materials for industries and foreign exchange.
Women, through cooperatives are now displaying their economic empowerment.
They are now involved in various 43MPA 769 RURAL DEVELOPMENT AND MANAGEMENT economic activities for the over all benefit of the country.
Cooperative enjoys economies of scale as resources are pooled for investment, expansion and also starting new investments.
Given that Nigeria is to a large extent, an agricultural country, and moreso predominantly small- scale farmers and again small-scale industrial production.
Cooperatives, therefore, will continue to play major roles in the Nigerian economy.
Both the government and the private sector are conscious of this and should, therefore, support the operations of cooperatives in Nigeria.
Through these activities, rural development objectives are achieved.
4.0 CONCLUSION In spite of the problems facing the Nigerian cooperatives, they will continue to wax stronger.
A look at the number of cooperatives and membership in each state, one observes that both the number and membership are on the increase.
However, care must be taken to avoid ghost cooperative or those who form with ulterior motive.
Government and the private sector should continue to support cooperative, as many individuals can be reached through it, in terms of input distribution.
5.0 SUMMARY Cooperatives are engaged with multi-economic activities that yield extra income to the members.
Members benefit economically and socially.
In essence, what an individual cannot do, a group of people can do it.
They raise fund which individuals benefit from as loan to expand their investment.
People are encouraged to join societies in order to maximise benefits.
6.0 TUTOR-MARKED ASSIGNMENT Cooperatives are veritable instruments for achieving rural development.
Discuss.
7.0 REFERENCES/FURTHER READINGS Umebali E.E (2000).
“Cooperative Formation and Management to Enhance Poverty Alleviation at Community Level” in Umbali E.E, Chukwuemeka, E.E.O and Njoku, A.O (eds.)
Contemporary Issues in Local Government Administration and Rural Development in Nigeria.
44MPA 769 RURAL DEVELOPMENT AND MANAGEMENT UNIT 3 SOCIAL CHANGE IN RURAL AREA CONTENTS 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objectives 3.0 Main Content 45MPA 769 RURAL DEVELOPMENT AND MANAGEMENT 3.1 Nature of Social Changes in Rural Areas 3.2 Forms of Social Change 3.3 Two Schools of Thoughts 3.4 Sources of Social Changes 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutor-Marked Assignment 7.0 References/Further Readings 1.0 INTRODUCTION Rural areas are characterised by social changes, some may be positive and some may be negative.
As is expected in a dynamic environment, that changes will continue to take place.
However, such changes should be such that they will enhance rural development.
The social changes permeate every facet of the rural environment.
2.0 OBJECTIVES At the end of this unit, you should be able to: • the nature of social changes • explain the forms of social changes • discuss the two school of thoughts • enumerate the sources of social changes.
3.0 MAIN CONTENT 3.1 Nature of Social Changes in Rural Areas Social change is a process by which alterations occurs in the structure and functions of a social system (social group, community, etc).
Any change that occurs either in ideas, norms, values, role and social habits of a group or in the composition or organisation of their society could be referred to as social change.
3.2 Forms of Social Change a) Modifications in human attitudes and behaviour pattern as a result of education e.g.
farmers developing favourable activities and therefore decide to change their farming system by incorporating that innovation.
46MPA 769 RURAL DEVELOPMENT AND MANAGEMENT b) Alteration in social conditions resulting from changes in policies of social organisation e.g.
instituting UPE (UBE).
This will result into loss of part of the family’s labour supplied by the children.
c) Effecting reforms in major legal and functional systems of a society e.g.
passing of law (VAT).
Whenever law is passed, it will call for a change in the way of life of people and this further call for adjustment.
d) Changes in the materials culture i.e.
in the arts and artifacts of the culture.
This is often the outward manifestation of changes in the non-material aspects of culture.
Social changes pervade all aspects of societal life and may manifest as: a) Economic Change: This occurred in the mode of production, economic relations and statuses of people in the society e.g.
industrialisation, production of crops for sale rather than domestic consumption.
It could be the location of mineral in commercial quantities that will enhance income, employment etc.
b) Political Change: This deals with the change in the distributions and operating mechnanism of social and political power within the social system, for instance, power concentration in the hands of chiefs.
c) Technological Change: Technology entails ways of applying scientific and other organised knowledge to practical task.
Technological changes that are evident in our areas are (i) transportation (ii) communication (iii) health (iv) education, (v) housing (vi) leisure.
d) Cultural Change: Refers to the changes in the non-material aspects of culture e.g.
religion.
e) Behavioural Change: This is a part of cultural change but it specifically embraces changes arising from the influence of reduction on the attitude and overt reactions of people.
Social change may be planned or unplanned.
Planned social change has to do with human intervention in the shaping and direction of change towards some predefined goals.
Unplanned social change is the type that occurs suddenly usually through the act of nature, thereby affording human beings no chance to plan before it occurs.
Change may also be total or segmental in its coverage.
Total change is that which covers a wide range of activities, which may lead to a complete transformation of a people’s way of life or their social institutions.
Segmented change as the name implies covers only a particular portion and may not call for a total transformation of the system.
A change can be either coercive, compulsory, voluntary or democratic.
Coercive change is one that is forced on members of the society.
A community that decides to embark upon self help projects plans for voluntary and democratic change so 47MPA 769 RURAL DEVELOPMENT AND MANAGEMENT also is a nation which, after a referendum, decides to switch from a parliamentary to a presidential form of government.
Change could be imminent, referring to internally generated change – that which occurs without any external influence.
Contact change refers to change introduced into the system from sources external to that contact change or direct contact change.
Selective contact change occurs when an outsider unintentionally communicates an innovation into a social system.
Direct contact change deliberately introduces a new idea into the social system with the aim of bringing about change in specific aspect of the system’s activities.
Theories of change have generally been concerned with: a) The sources of social change.
b) The time of span of change.
c) The effect of change on the changing units.
3.3 Two Schools of Thoughts 1.
The Diffusion School: It views social change as an educational process.
It places less stress on the internal state of individuals but hold that the world society could be divided into two campuses on the basis of the relative modernity or primitivity of each segment.
2.
The Conflict Camps: It views man in the totality of his social relations and maintains that gathering small bits of facts about the part and aspects of the society can never yield the big truths about the social order itself.
3.4 Sources of Social Changes a) Invention involves the recombination of existing cultural traits to fashion out new things and the rate at which this takes place is directly related to the existing cultural base.
b) Discovery is the sharing with others of a perception of a fact, object or relationship which has always existed but was not known.
Discovery can enhance the cultural base in a society and therefore the rate of invention.
c) Diffusion involves the spread of cultural traits from one group to another.
The following have enhanced cultural diffusion (a) Increased and more efficient communication facilities; (b) The speed with which people can now travel from one part of the 48MPA 769 RURAL DEVELOPMENT AND MANAGEMENT world to another; and (c) The existence of specifically trained personnel for the diffusion of innovation.
Other sources of social change include: formal educational institution, urbanisation, governmental policies, application of science and technology, etc.
d) Culture and structure of society: This is when specific cultural traits become tightly interwoven with others in mutually interdependent manner, change in that direction becomes almost impossible e.g.
the rearing of cows and the religion of the Fulanis.
e) Occurrence of great men: Occasionally great men appear in some societies, men with mission and vision leading the societies to greater attainments.
Such men may cause a change to take place.
f) Prevailing attitude and values: A society that change rapidly is one in which its members are critical and skeptical of parts of its traditional culture and are ready to accommodate and experiment with new ideas of technology originating externally and suppresses all those that do not confirm to its internal norms and values with change more slowly than one which is liberal.
g) Perceived need: Here the society emphasis is determined by the need it perceives.
Emphasis are placed on food or raw materials.
h) Relative isolation and contact: Societies that have close contact with other societies change more rapidly than those that are isolated.
i) Cultural base: This is accumulated knowledge, techniques and traits in a culture.
This brings about increasing number of inventions within the society.
j) Physical environmental factors e.g.
climates, earthquakes, winds and soil erosion, flood, land slides, etc.
These can change the way of life of a people or can even reduce the population.
k) Migration and population changes: This is movement of people from one place to another; that brings them in contact with new cultural traits prevalent in other areas.
This social and cultural change is greater in societies where there is constant emigration and immigration.
4.0 CONCLUSION 49MPA 769 RURAL DEVELOPMENT AND MANAGEMENT There is the need for the readers to acquaint themselves with the rural social changes as they bring about rural development.
It is expected that the inhabitants of the rural areas will contribute maximally to those social changes that will enhance rural development.
Meanwhile, it has to be taken into consideration that high illiteracy level of the rural people retards positive changes.
5.0 SUMMARY This unit has considered rural social change as a means of accelerating rural development.
It has discussed the nature of social change, forms of social change, schools of thought and the sources.
The positive social changes will enhance the welfare of the rural dwellers.
6.0 TUTOR-MARKED ASSIGNMENT Identify those social changes that contribute to rural development.
7.0 REFERENCES/FURTHER READINGS Umebali E. E. (2004).
Rural Resource Farm Business and Rural Development.
Lagos: Computer Edge Publishers.
UNIT 4 RURAL FINANCE AND RURAL DEVELOPMENT CONTENTS 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objectives 3.0 Main Content 50MPA 769 RURAL DEVELOPMENT AND MANAGEMENT 3.1 Nature of Rural Finance 3.2 Rural Banking 3.3 Financing Rural Development 3.4 Sources of Rural Finance 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutor-Marked Assignment 7.0 References/Further Readings 1.0 INTRODUCTION Finance is an important factor of production.
Rural development cannot progress, particularly the programmes and strategies cannot be implemented in the absence of finance.
Given the poverty level of the rural dwellers the need then arises for finance/capital to be mobilised to achieve rural development.
The rural dwellers, including the various rural organisations and the government, should be involved in financing rural projects.
Rural finances can be obtained from both informal/ non-institutional and formal institutional sources.
2.0 OBJECTIVES At the end of this unit, the following objectives should be achieved: • to discuss the nature of rural finance • to discuss rural banking • to explain financing of rural development • to discuss sources of rural finance.
3.0 MAIN CONTENT 3.1 Nature of Rural Finance Most third world countries have suffered repeated set-back in their efforts to induce sustained economic development.
Since 1974, they have experienced a seemingly endless series economic shock, emanating primarily from world markets.
In the light of the debt problem – the total debts of developing countries amounted to more than 1,000 billion U.S. dollars in 1986.
It is unlikely the attempts to maintain economic growth, especially urban areas, through the external financing of industrialisation and of the imports required for industrialisation will succeed.
Corrections in the economic policies of many Third World nations are inevitable.
51MPA 769 RURAL DEVELOPMENT AND MANAGEMENT In this situation, these nations must rely on their own resources and potentials to further their development.
This is particularly true of rural regions.
The mobilisation of local resources and their efficient use through a strategy of “bottom development” has become the central problem.
Self-sustaining economic and social development require a renewed emphasis on and reinforcement of labour –intensive traditional economic sectors.
This applies especially to agriculture and small scale enterprise, the integrative element of regional rural development.
Only a strategy that proceeds from the rural economic base ultimately secure the supply of food stuffs, ensure that basic needs will be met over the long term, and prevent further impoverishment of the population.
The factors in the context must be the initiative of the inhabitants of rural areas, their organisations and their institutions.
The contribution of the local population in the form of labour and monetary inputs must replace the over used practice of “spoon feeding” with loans from government agencies, which has stiffled grassroots initiative and induced a “charity mentality”.
For the advancement of their own initiative and for the utilisation and expansion of their resources and potentials, the small scale farmers and entrepreneurs in the rural population, including their self-help groups and the municipalities must be provided with the basic prerequisites for economic independence and flexibility.
In addition, a rural financial infrastructure must be created, that is, suited to their needs and to the local situation.
In ways similar to those of rural cooperative banks and savings and loans association in Europe, this infrastructure must: • Mobilise the financial resources in their economic region and reserve these funds for the provision of credit to the enterprise in their various sectors of their regions economy, such as agriculture, village craftsmen, the processing of raw materials, transportation, etc.
• Contribute to the creation and expansion of local financial and product markets, e.g., an increase in demand and employment and to an improvement in the supply of goods available in the local areas.
• Provide the owners of the mobilised funds with additional income in the form of interest earning.
• Link saving with the supply of credit and make both subject to the social control of savers and borrowers.
52MPA 769 RURAL DEVELOPMENT AND MANAGEMENT Rural financial institutions that perform these functions and whose programmes focus on the poor target group, private business, self-help organisation struggling for economic survival provide a basic prerequisites, and thus a crucial instruments, for the necessary “bottom- up development”.
3.2 Rural Banking The rural banking programme aims at: 1) Encouraging banking habits among the rural population.
To provide services such as the use of cheques as instrument for payment, opening of letters of credit, money transfers advisory services, issue of draft and collection of bills will help directly in fostering productivity, by offering borrowers a variety of technical services.
These might include financial advise, assistance with the formulation of loan proposals, guidance in setting up a system of accounts, help in the supply of equipment, and help in the establishment of marketing facilities, and increase the banking density in the country.
2) Mobilising saving from the rural areas for the purpose of channeling some to profitable ventures.
3) Creating credit by way of equity and loans for small-scale industries.
4) Developing agriculture and agro-allied industries in the rural areas with a view to achieving the national objective of self-sufficiency in food production.
5) Reducing, to comfortable extent, the drift of young men and women from the rural areas to the urban areas.
3.3 Financing Rural Development Rural development (sector) can be financed through the following ways: 1) Establishment of Rural Development Bank.
This will be a specialized bank targeted at rural projects.
2) The rural development financing policies for commercial banks.
These are policies that will direct the commercial banks to disburse fund to the rural investors for rural projects.
53MPA 769 RURAL DEVELOPMENT AND MANAGEMENT 3) The rural development financing policies for other banks, directing them to finance rural investments 4) Intensification of government efforts in rural project financing 5) Private sector financing (informal) 6) Foreign investment in rural areas 7) Rural community cooperation.
3.4 Sources of Rural Finance There are two major sources namely: formal/institutional and informal non-institutional.
The formal sources include Banks of all types, government agencies, registered cooperatives; while informal sources include Isusu, friends/ relatives, rural associations etc.
Meanwhile the communities organise various programmes to raise fund.
It is however, more convenient for the communities to raise fund from informal sources given the difficulties in obtaining fund from the formal sources.
4.0 CONCLUSION The planners for rural development should take into consideration the sources of finance.
There is need to use the various rural associations to raise fund for mobilisation to enhance rural development.
Meanwhile, the rural dwellers should not embark on those projects that are capital intensive, when the finance is not available.
They should always seek the assistance of the government.
5.0 SUMMARY This unit has considered the nature of rural finance, rural banking, financing rural development and source of rural finance.
Government as much as possible should ensure that infrastructural facilities are provided to serve as incentive for people to remain in rural areas and contribute to rural development.
6.0 TUTOR-MARKED ASSIGNMENT Discuss why most rural investors patronise the informal sources in obtaining loan/credit.
7.0 REFERENCES/FURTHER READINGS Ikwuechegh A.
(1987).
“Rural Development”, The Great Match begins Imo State, Sunday Statesman Feb 22.
54MPA 769 RURAL DEVELOPMENT AND MANAGEMENT Ijere, M.O.
(1992).
Leading Issues in Rural Development.
Enugu: Acana Publishers.
UNIT 5 RURAL EDUCATION AND RURAL DEVELOPMENT CONTENTS 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objectives 3.0 Main Content 3.1 The Concept of Rural Education 55MPA 769 RURAL DEVELOPMENT AND MANAGEMENT 3.2 Functions of Rural Education 3.2.1 The Transmission of Cultural from one Generation to Another 3.2.2 The Training of People for Specialised Adult Roles 3.2.3 Social Change 3.2.4 Differentiation of People in the Society and the Validation of their Social Statuses 3.2.5 Provision of a Setting for Social Interaction 3.3 Education in Rural Areas 3.4 Features 3.4.1 Extension Education 3.4.2 Adult Education 3.4.3 Implication for Rural Development 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutor-Marked Assignment 7.0 References/Further Readings 1.0 INTRODUCTION Education plays a significant role in rural development.
Education which has to do with all forms of learning has three forms, namely: formal, non-formal and informal education.
Formal has to do with mostly the young ones that are taught in the classrooms and are examined at the end of the study period.
Non-formal is the type that is associated with adults, such as trade skills.
The informal type is unconsciously learnt.
2.0 OBJECTIVES At the end of this unit, you should be able to: • discuss the functions of education • discuss education in rural areas and features • draw implication for rural development.
3.0 MAIN CONTENT 3.1 The Concept of Rural Education Education, like other social institutions, can be seen as a system of social practices revolves around a valued function of the society, in which those who participate, the patterns of interaction, the means adopted and the manifest ends are all culturally specified and sanctioned.
Education as an activity is the process of transmitting and 56MPA 769 RURAL DEVELOPMENT AND MANAGEMENT acquiring the socially approved aspects of cultural heritage.
The school is the social organisation where culture learning actually takes place.
The process of socialisation or culture learning actually starts informally in the family, in churches and mosques, the community and then formally in schools.
Education in the formal sense has come to mean systematic training by specialists within the formal organisation of the school.
It differs from socialisation per se in that (a) education is formal, direct and less generalized than socialisation, (b) it does not only continue knowledge but stimulate discovery and extension of knowledge, (c) it is more attuned to change and directs research into new areas, (d) it is the single most important element in social mobility whereas socialisation merely fits the individual into the status quo.
3.2 Functions of Rural Education Based on the foregoing, the functions of the educational institution can be discerned.
These are: 3.2.1 The Transmission of Culture from one Generation to Another This is the normal socialization function which entails the teaching of societal values, norms, taboos, roles, folklore etc to the new entrants into the society.
This function can be carried out within the family, by peer groups and other primary groups in a community.
3.2.2 The Training of People for Specialized Adult Roles This involves learning of new skills through apprenticeship, acquisition of knowledge through tutorship or indoctrination, or by formal educational institutions.
Most of this level of education is often obtained the in family and in formal school settings with expert teachers.
3.2.3 Social Change This involves bringing about social change through the modification of cultural heritage and development of new knowledge, skills, arts and artifacts.
Education should create a personality which, with contact with the outside world, will assimilate critically the ideas and experience of other cultures and thereby shift the relevant ones to be adapted for the modification of his own environment.
The extent to which a people is ready to modify its cultural heritage through seeking and adaptation of new ideas determine the rate of advancement of the society.
New 57MPA 769 RURAL DEVELOPMENT AND MANAGEMENT knowledge is acquired through research and current experience has shown that technologically advanced nations invest more on research than developing nations.
Education also serves other functions in the society although some of these functions are merely consequential.
Among these are: 3.2.4 Differentiation of People in the Society and Validation of their Social Statuses In most contemporary societies, the acquisition of formal education and possession of some certificates ensure the individual entry into prestigious jobs.
The higher the certificate, the more highly placed the individual within the profession.
Thus, the proliferation of professions and skills and the gradation of diplomas help to slot people into different categories.
Education has therefore become a source of class formation as well as social mobility.
3.2.5 Provision of a Setting for Social Interaction The school brings persons from diverse back-grounds into constant interaction thereby fostering the formation of peer groups and associations which help in moulding the character and future of the individuals involved.
In this senses it is a potent instrument of societal interaction.
3.3 Education in Rural Areas Types: There are various forms of formal educational facilities in rural Nigeria.
These include (a) informal out-of-school education offered to rural families by experts in agriculture, home economics, health, small scale industries, etc.
This type of education is often known as extension education.
(b) Semi-formal literacy education organised for adults who had no opportunity to acquire formal education at earlier age.
This is known as adult education.
(c) Formal education offered at the primary and secondary levels to rural children and adolescents.
At the primary level, two main types of education can be identified in Nigeria.
These are the Western type of education and the Koranic type of education with the later being more prevalent in the Moslem areas of the country.
Since Nigeria had grown up under the influence of the Western world, there has been the tendency for people to underrate Koranic education generally.
Thus for instance, 4 years of Western education is equated with 15 years of Koranic education.
Until quite recently, most parts of rural northern Nigeria had only Koranic schools, whereas Western-type schools have always predominated in the south.
58MPA 769 RURAL DEVELOPMENT AND MANAGEMENT 3.4 Features 3.4.1 Extension Education This is an informal non-school based education.
It is often directed to rural people with the aim of upgrading their competence or skills in specific areas such as agriculture, health or home management.
In Nigeria, the Ministry of Agriculture hires and trains agricultural extension agents to carry out agricultural extension work with farmers.
Ideally, it is expected that farmer-extension agents work with farmers.
Ideally, it is expected that farmer-extension work agent’s ratio in the country should be 750 farm families or less to 1 dull-time extension agent.
However, this ratio remained at an average of 2500:1 as at 1980.
This compares unfavourably with 200:1 in India or 250:1 in Kenya.
As a result of this insufficiency of extension education in rural Nigeria, the country does not have a continuously sustained programme which could have generally upgraded farmers’ knowledge, skills and productivity.
Studies, in fact, reveal that the extension agents tend to render more services to farmers rather than educate the farmers during their few and sporadic contacts.
Other forms of extension education are in the areas of health care, home management and the establishment and management of small-scale industries are faced with the same problems of insufficiency of specialist staff, sporadic contact and emphasis on rendering specific services rather than on general education.
3.4.2 Adult Education What is sometimes known as ‘adult literacy’ is often a programme based in the Adult Education Division in the various states of the country.
Although some Nigerian universities do run continuing and adult education programmes; these are often directed at urban dwellers who are already literate but who may need the opportunity to acquire higher education.
It is, therefore, only the adult literacy programme of the Ministry of Education that is directed towards rural dwellers.
The aim of this programme is to teach rural people how to read and write.
In some cases, the curriculum may include basic arithmetic.
While some State ministries of education have established permanent centres in local government headquarters for this programme, other conduct it on an adhoc basis in mutually agreed locations including open spaces under trees, while some do not in fact have an operational programme for adult education yet as a result of lack of facilities and personnel.
The programme generally attracts very negligible proportion of the rural population.
59MPA 769 RURAL DEVELOPMENT AND MANAGEMENT 3.4.3 Implication for Rural Development First, there is tremendous, popular demand for education particularly for schooling, in virtually all countries, developing and developed alike.
Often in LDCS, the number of people seeking admission to schools far exceeds the number of places available.
Obviously, people everywhere believe that education is beneficial to them and their children.
A second reason for believing that education is important is the frequently observed correlations between education and income at both the individual and societal level.
Obviously, when there is a change or increase in one’s income, other aspects of life changes too.
Aspects such as technological change, political change, social change and behavioural change will collectively enhance the living standard of the individual.
Education has also been promoted because it can socialise people.
Finally, education is also taught to confer civic benefits.
Some political scientists believe that at least a minimal level of schooling is prerequisite for political democracy.
4.0 CONCLUSION Any modernisation of rural sector should be rooted in an increase in the general level of education so that the rural populace can understand and handle new and more complex farm practices and/or technologies which come with the modernisation of rural sector.
Education both general and specialised, will induce economic motivation, widen rural investors, social and economic horizon and predisposes them to greater receptivity of new ideas.
5.0 SUMMARY Rural education is targeted at the adult rural investors, who contribute their quotas towards rural development.
They are expected to utilise the services of the extension agents who expose them to new methods and ideas, deemed efficient to enhance both output and income.
This will go a long way in enhancing their well being and ultimately disposed to contribute meaningfully to rural development.
6.0 TUTOR-MARKED ASSIGNMENT Inspite of the efforts made by the government to educate the rural investors, not only that the illiteracy level is still high, outputs have continued to decline.
Discuss your view.
60MPA 769 RURAL DEVELOPMENT AND MANAGEMENT 7.0 REFERENCES/FURTHER READINGS Ekong, E.E (1988).
An Introduction to Rural Sociology.
Ibadan: Jumatic Publishers Ltd. Rowat R. (1964).
The Development of Education and Training in the Field of Agriculture and Related Subjects, Rome FAO.
MODULE 3 Unit 1 Town Union and Community Development Unit 2 Government Community Co-operation towards Rural Welfare Development Programmes Unit 3 Conflict Resolutions at Community Development Unit 4 Women in Rural Development Unit 5 Rural Development and Personnel Administration 61MPA 769 RURAL DEVELOPMENT AND MANAGEMENT UNIT 1 TOWN UNIONS AND COMMUNITY DEVELOPMENT CONTENTS 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objectives 3.0 Main Content 3.1 Conceptualization of Town Union and Community Development 3.2 Community Development 3.3 Principles of Community Development 3.4 Role of Town Unions in Community Development 3.5 Prospects for Town Unions Nigeria 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutor-Marked Assignment 7.0 References/Further Readings 1.0 INTRODUCTION Town unions are perceived as veritable instrument and catalyst for community development.
They are seen as an agency through which a community could facilitate and achieve socio-economic, cultural and political objectives.
While they have been useful in some communities, in some other communities they have suffered the problem of under utilisation.
In recent times, most town unions have championed rural development.
Interestingly enough every community has a town union, referred to as Development Union.
2.0 OBJECTIVES At the end of this unit, you should be able to: • discuss the concept of town union and relate its activities to community development • discuss the principles of community development • explain the role of town union in community development 62MPA 769 RURAL DEVELOPMENT AND MANAGEMENT • highlight prospects for town unions in Nigeria.
3.0 MAIN CONTENT 3.1 Conceptualisation of Town Union and Community Development Town Union: This is an agency of the community through which innovations and development purposes are achieved for the community.
The term “Town Union” dates back to antiquity.
Town unions are organisations of people from the same town or community formed for the purposes of developing their various towns socially, culturally, physically, economically, and politically.
The town unions embrace people from all works of life in the community such as civil servants, businessmen, farmers, academics, politicians, etc.
It is made up of the executive body that deliberates, presides and oversees the activities of the unions (Okeke 1988:34).
Town unions have been existing in Nigeria before 1940s.
For example, Awka Town Union was formed in 1948, Obollo Progressive Union came into existence in the 1950s, Mgbowo Progressive Union was established in 1938, and Ikem Improvement Union was formed in 1952.
3.2 Community Development Battern (1962:1) aptly states that “there is no precise and generally accepted definition” of community development.
He rather opines that community development is “any action taken by any agency and primarily designed to benefit the community”.
Desautot (1958:2), in line with this view, sees community development as “a movement designed to promote better living for the whole community or town with the active participation on the initiative of the community.” The United Nation’s Economic and Social Council defined community development generally as A process by which the efforts of the people themselves are united with those of government authorities to improve the economic, social and cultural conditions of communities into the life of the nation and enable them contribute fully in national progress (cited in Ibekwe: 1989:5).
However, a more comprehensive definition of community development has been expressed in the “Community Development” of the International Cooperation Administration of the United States.
63MPA 769 RURAL DEVELOPMENT AND MANAGEMENT According to the agency, community development is a process of social action in which the people of a community organise themselves for planning and action, define their common and individual needs and problems, make group and individual plans to meet their problems, execute these plans with a maximum reliance upon local/community resources, and supplement these from government and non government agencies outside the community.
From the above analysis, we can deduce that community development involves the totality of community life and needs.
3.3 Principles of Community Development There are certain fundamental principles which underline the processes and procedures for community development effort to produce rewarding and expected results.
These principles are as follows: Mass Participation: This means mobilisation of the members of the community to achieve an accelerated pace of development.
This is where the town union plays a vital role in mobilising the people through credible, and genuinely embarking on practical projects.
The people should participate fully in planning, execution, decision making and project evaluation.
They should feel that they are involved.
People Initiative: It is the responsibility of the people to initiate their own projects through the leaders of the town union, age grades, women group, etc.
Programme of Activities: This is an integrative activity which seeks to provide a framework of activities through which there is massive commitment of resources of the community in the most effective manner as to satisfying the needs of the community.
It is also a programme of inter-related activities, targets and strategies systematically arranged and designed to effect positive changes.
Effective Leadership: The leader of the town union should have a clear agenda to ensure that the targets and strategies yield positive results.
3.4 Role of Town Unions in Community Development Development unions in Nigeria have done well.
Some of their achievements include: a) General Returns: This is one of the contributions of Development union.
The general return provides the citizens of the communities who are living in different parts of the country 64MPA 769 RURAL DEVELOPMENT AND MANAGEMENT and outside, the opportunity to interact and rub minds.
They also appraise, assess and develop strategies for improvement.
b) Rural Electrification: The community development committee which is an agency of the town union.
Plays a prominent role in the provision of electricity to the various quarters of our rural communities.
This is a very important landmark and a feature of development unions.
c) Interest Articulation: Development unions have always articulated the communities’ interest and demands to relevant authorities.
This has been done through visits to authorities or those in power, visitation to governors or other political and public office holders and elected representatives.
d) Relative Peace: The relative peace in the rural communities could be attributed to the activities of the town unions and their leaders.
They have waded into some disputes in the rural communities to ensure peaceful co-existence.
e) Social Welfare: The town unions and its branches throughout the federation do not take the welfare of its members for granted.
They visit members who are in hospitals, members who have cases and paid last respects to their fallen members.
However, the Town Unions have not lived up its billing when compared to other community-based associations.
It has been inundated by a plethora of problems.
Some of these problems include: 1) Lack of Purposeful Leadership: The town unions have lacked committed and purposeful leadership.
Most development unions existed without a home base.
You can imagine how a tree can stand without a root.
It will fall when the wind blows.
This is what is happening in most development unions.
2) Disunity: Whether we like it or not, there is disunity among the various villages that make up most towns.
This has directly or indirectly affected the leadership of the union.
These villages disagree with one another.
In most communities, there are no established institutions for interaction.
Also in some communities, the age grade system is decentralised thereby making them definitional.
3) Poverty: when people are poor financially.
They find it difficult to have a strong union that can finance projects.
This is a serious set back in most communities.
65MPA 769 RURAL DEVELOPMENT AND MANAGEMENT 4) Poor Mobilisation Process: There are not functional means of mobilising the people of most rural communities.
5) Inherent Difficulty in Managing People: An average man is difficult to govern.
This is an innate quality which makes him put up non-challant attitude towards issues which affect him.
He tells you nobody feeds him and his family.
This poor attitude affects his zeal, interest and view on issues which affect the town and its development in general.
6) There is this constant conflict between some segments of the Christian community and the traditional people.
The two should learn how to co-exist.
After all, Nigeria is a secular state.
None should strive to exterminate the other.
7) The above problems and others not mentioned here constitute serious obstacles to the developmental role town unions play in Nigeria.
3.5 Prospects for Town Unions in Nigeria Like I said earlier, the town union is strategically positioned to play vital and lasting roles in the development of the rural areas, if the following suggestions are found useful: 1) There should be a written constitution for the town unions with clearly stated responsibilities and methods of generating funds for financing projects.
The constitution should state clearly how election should be conducted and their functions.
2) There should also be a visionary leadership committed to the sacrifice of their time and resources for the communities.
3) The non-existence of functional bank account scares many people from making contributions towards projects.
4) Election should be conducted to select new persons into the national body of the town union on a regular basis.
5) There should also be formation of the home branch of development unions that should meet regularly.
6) The age grade system should be streamlined and unified.
This will make for a more united and strong community development unions.
7) There is also need for a change of attitude of citizens.
They should be more disposed positively towards issues and matters that concern their community.
66MPA 769 RURAL DEVELOPMENT AND MANAGEMENT 8) There is also the need to develop the women folks through providing them opportunities to go to schools.
4.0 CONCLUSION In the foregoing discussion, we have looked at the role of town unions.
We can categorically state that our rural communities can improve if there is a functional and committed town union.
Comparatively, we have not faired well when references are made to low life expectancy and abnormality in our communities.
If the above mentioned suggestions could be adhered to, we may have cause to rejoice in future.
5.0 SUMMARY This unit has discussed the concept of town unions and their role in rural development.
It also looked at the prospects of the union.
Studies have shown that town unions have played significant role in rural development.
The union assists the leadership of the community in carrying out rural development programmes.
6.0 TUTOR-MARKED ASSIGNMENT Discuss the structure of town union and the role in bringing about rural development.
7.0 REFERENCES/FURTHER READINGS Ahe O.D (1986).
“Overcoming Rural Underdevelopment in Nigeria”, The Quarterly Journal of Administration, Vol x Nos 3 & 4.
Okeke N. (1998).
“Town Unions and Rural Development”, A Case Study of Azia Progressive Union.
“Unpublished Project” Enugu: Department of Political Science, ESUT.
UNIT 2 GOVERNMENT COMMUNITY COOPERATION TOWARDS RURAL WELFARE DEVELOPMENT PROGRAMMES 67MPA 769 RURAL DEVELOPMENT AND MANAGEMENT CONTENTS 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objectives 3.0 Main Content 3.1 Specific Objectives of Enhancing Community Welfare 3.2 Steps in Bringing about Development 3.3 Status of Nigerian Women in the Society 3.4 Rationales for Government Involvement 3.5 Government-Community Cooperation 3.5.1 Agriculture 3.5.2 Credit Facilities 3.5.3 Infrastructure 3.5.4 Healthcare Delivery 3.5.5 Education/Training 3.5.6 Processing Facilities 3.5.7 Export Promotion 3.5.8 Transportation 3.5.9 Siting Industries 3.5.10 Acquisition of Land and Resettlement 3.5.11 Security Services 3.6 Mobilisation 3.6.1 Mobilisation through Cooperative 3.6.2 Mobilisation through Women Association 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutor-Marked Assignment 7.0 References/Further Readings 1.0 INTRODUCTION In most parts of Nigeria, there are significant efforts by the various communities to initiate welfare programmes towards the development of their areas.
In multitude of cases, this is done by community-based organisations such organisations as the Age-Grade, Town Unions, etc., have made remarkable impacts in the development of the rural communities.
However, these efforts, in most cases, lack co-ordination and effective funding, leading to poor execution of some of the projects and the eventual abandonment of some of them.
To bridge the gap, the local government authorities therefore have enormous roles to play.
2.0 OBJECTIVES At the end of this unit, you should be able to: • list the specific objectives of enhancing community welfare 68MPA 769 RURAL DEVELOPMENT AND MANAGEMENT • highlight steps in bringing about development • discuss status of Nigeria women in the society • discus the rationale for government involvement • discuss areas of Government-community cooperation.
3.0 MAIN CONTENT 3.1 Specific Objectives of Enhancing Community Welfare • Enhancing income of rural people engaged in agriculture and rural non-farm activities, including agro-based industry • Reduction of inequalities in the distribution of wealth and personal incomes including a more even distribution of human capital • Increase in rural value added products • Enhance good health for rural people and the reduction of ignorance • Enhance quality of life through provision of potable water, electricity and other basic needs and the integration of rural people into the nation politics.
3.2 Steps in Bringing about Development • Identification of a small group of leaders and or interest groups who can serve as the initiating sets • Identification of immediate community problem • Sharing of problem identified with community leaders for legitimation • Diffusion of problems and definition of needs • Securing citizen’s commitment to act and identification of needed resources • Appraisal of available internal resources and invitation of external aid (when necessary).
• Formulation of detailed plan of action including a time table • Carrying out the action and evaluating the entire process and the results (Umebali 1998).
Through the above steps government is bound to achieve bottom up approach rather than top down approach.
3.3 Status of Nigerian Women in the Society In the past, Nigeria women were relegated to the background and were looked upon as the weaker sex.
However, in recent times, it has been observed that women, especially rural women, in addition to family upbringing, embark on some economic activities such as agricultural production, small scale industries, processing industries, marketing, 69MPA 769 RURAL DEVELOPMENT AND MANAGEMENT nursery schools, etc.
They are compelled to assist as the men cannot produce all the household needs.
Given the roles of women in rural farms and rural economy as a whole, there is need to ensure increasing efficiency in the performance of such roles.
Therefore, the continuing roles and usefulness of the rural women need to be planned and programmed.
3.4 Rationales for Government Involvement There is need for government-community cooperation in order to achieve the foregoing.
This can be seen from the fact that:- • Certain projects are capital intensive, so individuals cannot carry them out, yet they are needed for the welfare of the people.
• Some projects have long gestation period that the individual will not be willing to carry them through.
• Government’s presence will improve the quality of some services they render which private individuals may not worry about.
• A project may involve resettlement of people, of which individuals cannot handle.
• Full exploitation of nation’s mineral and other resources to the overall benefit of the economy.
• Creation of new jobs for the unemployed ones.
3.5 Government-Community Cooperation Government community cooperation can be in the following manner: the programme may be government sole ownership or jointly owned and may not also be pure business out-fit or social services.
Cooperation can therefore be in the following areas.
3.5.1 Agriculture Agriculture is a major economic activity carried out by the women, (Women in agriculture), therefore, any programme developed along this line will enhance the welfare of the women.
Government can subsidise cost of input.
Again, government should provide extension service to widen the knowledge of women.
Government, through the community leaders, can make land available for farming and other uses.
3.5.2 Credit Facilities Various studies have shown that capital is a limiting factor in carrying out a project, especially in the rural areas.
This gives rise to 70MPA 769 RURAL DEVELOPMENT AND MANAGEMENT procurement of credit from both formal and informal sources.
The rural women, do not have collateral to obtain credit from formal sources and the informal operators charge high interest rates.
Notably, women have social barriers in sourcing credit.
It is therefore, difficult to procure credit.
Government can design a special package for the women, a system whereby credit is made available to them to start one business or another or even expand the scale of the existing business, example FUSSI, NACRDB, etc.
Government can operate a bank with the community.
3.5.3 Infrastructure Infrastructures are physical items that enhance the well being of community members.
Such infrastructures include: good road network, water supply, electricity, postal service, civic centres, markets, etc.
They enhance the rural economy as they attract small-scale industries.
Good road net-work ensures easy transportation of goods and services.
Incidentally, infrastructure is capital intensive, and cannot be provided by communities.
It is easier to provide the infrastructure on joint basis, so that the community will always feel the impact.
The presence of infrastructure will check rural-urban migration.
3.5.4 Healthcare Delivery Most rural communities lack health facilities and in areas where they are present they lack the required facilities and personnel.
Some women, have lost their lives while giving birth to babies because of lack of maternity and qualified doctor/nurse.
Government should assist in providing such facilities.
3.5.5 Education/Training Education is defined as the aggregate of all processes by means of which a person develops abilities, attitudes and other forms of behaviour which are of positive value in the society in which they live (Olisa and Obiukwu 1973:215).
Through education/training the scope of one’s knowledge is widened.
In the area of education, government should provide informal education for women.
They should be exposed to household needs, different skills, their rights in the society, etc.
This will place them in a status to know what to do at any point in time and also how to organise their business.
3.5.6 Processing Facilities Agricultural produce are subjected to some level or processing in order to add value to them.
They attract little value when sold raw.
71MPA 769 RURAL DEVELOPMENT AND MANAGEMENT Government can cooperate with the community to install processing machines and other facilities needed.
This will enhance the processing of the produce which will yield extra income to the women.
3.5.7 Export Promotion Export promotion provided incentive to the procedures, especially farmers, to sustain production.
Government can cooperate with the community through its agents in ensuring that market is created for the products.
The purchases are made for onward export to outside markets.
3.5.8 Transportation Many rural areas do not have motorable roads, how much more having vehicles plying on them.
No doubt transportation is a serious problem in most parts of the rural areas.
Therefore, government can cooperate with the community in providing mass transit vehicles to assist the private transportation.
3.8.9 Siting Industries Most rural areas do not have industries; community can cooperate with the government in the area of siting industries.
The industries will provide employment and income respectively to members of the community.
3.5.10 Acquisition of land and Resettlement Government may have the intention to acquire land for a project.
Notwithstanding that the Land Use Decree empowers the government to acquire land, the owners may put up resistance.
However, the community is expected to cooperate with the government as it may involve resettling the people.
Government should explain to the community the needs of the people.
In those areas, where government has projects, community should cooperate with the government and government in turn should provide employment and infrastructure for the community to make the area habitable.
3.5.11 Security Services Security is another crucial area.
Both life and property have to be safe guarded.
In doing this, it requires the cooperation of the government and the community.
For development of welfare of women to take place, 72MPA 769 RURAL DEVELOPMENT AND MANAGEMENT there should be peace, law and order.
Communities cannot handle it alone.
It requires the cooperation of the security agents.
3.6 Mobilisation Mobilisation involves bringing the women together for action.
3.6.1 Mobilization through Cooperative It will be difficult for the government to deal with the individual women rather than in groups.
Government can use women cooperatives to deliver any programme package for the community.
Cooperatives have numerous advantages and members can always cooperate with the government.
3.6.2 Mobilisation through Women Association Women association, which is a strong organization (made up of women), is another formal body government can cooperate with in providing some facilities or carrying out a project.
They meet on a regular basis and they carry out some developmental projects.
4.0 CONCLUSION Government-community cooperation will create an enabling environment for development programmes to be carried out.
In carrying out the programmes, government should approach it from bottom up and not top down.
In carrying out development programmes, women should be mobilised through cooperatives and other formal associations.
5.0 SUMMARY This units, has discussed how communities can cooperate with government to ensure the welfare of the community members.
In most cases, communities are expected to provide a matching grant.
However government can design programmes that will enhance the welfare of the communities.
Specific areas of government intervention were discussed.
6.0 TUTOR-MARKED ASSIGNMENT How can women be mobilised at grass-root level.
7.0 REFERENCES/FURTHER READINGS 73MPA 769 RURAL DEVELOPMENT AND MANAGEMENT Umebali E. E., Chukwuemeka, E.E.O and Njoku A.O (ed) (2000).
Contemporary Issues in Local Government Administration and Rural Development.
Enugu: Computer Edge Publishers.
Umebali E. E., (1998).
Management of Informal Sector Investment and Rural Resources, Enugu: AP Associate Press.
UNIT 3 CONFLICT RESOLUTION AT COMMUNITY LEVEL AND RURAL DEVELOPMENT CONTENTS 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objectives 3.0 Main Content 74MPA 769 RURAL DEVELOPMENT AND MANAGEMENT 3.1 The Concept of Community and its Characteristics 3.2 Causes of Conflicts at Community Level 3.2.1 Unhealthy Rivalry among Community Leaders 3.2.2 Struggle for Supremacy and Recognition 3.2.3 Embezzlement of Fund 3.2.4 Embezzlement of Fund 3.2.5 Class Conflict 3.2.6 Maladministration 3.3 Prevention of Conflicts at Community Level 3.3.1 Conflict Resolutions as a Necessity for Effective Implementation of Community Welfare Programme 3.3.2 Conflict Management for Effective Implementation of Community Welfare Programme 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutor-Marked Assignment 7.0 References/Further Readings 1.0 INTRODUCTION It is not out place to observe that communities experience conflicts from time to time and this can retard the pace of rural development.
Conflicts occur in different ways and if not properly managed can cause serious problems in the community.
If there are conflicts, people will not cooperate and will not show any interest in the rural development programmes.
There must be ways and means of managing or resolving the conflicts.
2.0 OBJECTIVES At the end of this unit, you should be able to: • discuss the concept of community and its characteristics • enumerate causes of conflicts at community level • suggest areas conflict could be prevented at community level • resolve and manage conflict at community level.
3.0 MAIN CONTENT 3.1 The Concept of Community and its Characteristics A community is referred to as a social group occupying a defined geographical area and whose members share common interests.
The common “interests” may be historical background, cultural values, economic activities, as well as basic social institutions.
75MPA 769 RURAL DEVELOPMENT AND MANAGEMENT A community is primarily noted by its basic characteristics.
These include the development of an awareness or a common sentiment based on the members’ common share of a recognised way of life.
This basic characteristic makes a community a distinct group.
Other principal characteristics of a community include: • A shared territory, in which its members live and develop a unique way of life.
• Common belief system and ideals nurtured and cherished by its people • Common bonds of fellowship often supported by intimate relationship.
• The development of a standard of beheaviour of which its members are easily organised • The possession of a common culture usually jealously protected by its members.
These include: distinct language or dialect, tradition, custom passed from one generation to another.
• The establishment of common administration for their being (Anyanwu, 1981:158).
The establishment of common administration in a community is necessitated by the need to protect the life and interest of the community, and to galvanise its members towards community development.
Administration ensures that rules and regulations are made and enforced for an orderly development of the community (Anyanwu, 1981:161).
It also ensures that an effective government with necessary power in existence to enforce the will of the government.
In modern Nigerian society, the chief-in-council (Igwe-in-council) and the town union represent the administrative machinery at the community level.
They often referred to as the grass root administration which liaises with the local government council and the state government and welfare of the community.
3.2 Causes of Conflicts at Community Level Conflict is a common feature of all human societies and organisations.
It is, therefore, not peculiar at the community level or among those charged with the responsibility of community development.
However, there is the need for those managing human affairs, especially at the community level, to endeavour to minimise conflict, to eliminate it completely, so as to ensure the success of their development efforts 76MPA 769 RURAL DEVELOPMENT AND MANAGEMENT The common causes of conflict at the community level include the following points: 3.2.1 Unhealthy Rivalry among Community Leaders This has been identified as one of the major causes of conflict in many communities.
In some cases, trouble ensues between the traditional ruler and the executive members of his cabinet, or among the executive members of the town union.
Jealousy, power tussle, gang-up and class conflict are common unacceptable behaviour among some community leaders.
They are inimical to the progress of a community.
3.2.2.
Struggle for Supremacy and Recognition The struggle for supremacy and recognition often results in conflict among community leaders.
This is common among some traditional rulers and town union leaders.
In the 1980s, there were constant clashes either between town unions and traditional rulers or among executive body of town unions.
The conflicts among leaders were so common then, especially during Akonobi administration in Anambra State that the government adopted a policy of “prompt dissolution of crisis-torn unions or dethronement of autocratic rulers while replacing them with purposeful leadership or caretaker committees” (Anambra State.
1989:35).
The struggle for supremacy among community leaders often creates serious problems for community development and may even endanger social stability.
3.2.3 Embezzlement of Fund The embezzlement of fund targeted for community development brings conflict at the community level.
However, there are some cases where unsubstantiated accusations have been made against some community development projects.
There is the need for community leaders to exhibit transparent honesty in discharging their duties, especially when handling public or community finance.
3.2.4 High Handedness Some traditional rulers or members of the executive body of town unions exhibit acts of highhandness in the administration of their communities.
This often results in conflict of power which is not an acceptable way of governing a people.
For, it tends to alienate the leadership from the followership and thus officials, especially the chairman, and vice chairman should ensure that leadership at 77MPA 769 RURAL DEVELOPMENT AND MANAGEMENT community levels, adopts happiness of all the members of the community.
3.2.5 Class Conflict The segregation of members of a community into various socio-economic groups is one of the common causes of conflict.
Community leaders should strive to represent a symbol of unity and togetherness of the people.
The local government officials encourage traditional leaders and town union executive to find a lasting solution to disputes in their respective communities, in this way, the objectives of community development can easily be realised.
Some local government officers pay lip service to the welfare of communities under their authority.
This often results in strained relationship between them and community leaders.
3.2.6 Maladministration Bad leadership at the local government level is often a source of conflict at both local government and community levels.
Lack of vision and commitment towards people’s welfare by those entrusted with power often results in conflict between them and the governed.
Moreover, the conflict which, more often than not, exists between the political executive and the senior administrative officers over who controls what, tends to retard efforts towards implementation of community development program.
Degri (1999:18) observed that because of ignorance of bureaucratic process, inexperience or naked display of power, some chairmen of local government councils tried to bye-pass their secretaries while carrying out certain political or administrative decision and actions.
This, according to him, often results in conflict capable of jeopardizing their functions.
This is one of the reasons why development in many newly created local government areas is still at snail-like speed.
3.3 Prevention of Conflicts at Community Level As already stated, conflict is a common occurrence in most human societies and organisations.
But there is always the need to prevent conflicts and to promote peace and mutual understanding among people for the realisation of common goals or for community development.
It is necessary that all those concerned with community leadership (including the chairman, vice chairman, supervisors, and community development 78MPA 769 RURAL DEVELOPMENT AND MANAGEMENT Officers) should evolve strategies for conflict prevention and harmonious inter-personal and inter-group relationship.
They can prevent conflict at community level by: 1) Demonstrating sincerity of purpose 2) Adopting democratic style of leadership whereby they consult with the followers on matters relating to community development 3) Demonstrating transparent honesty in the discharge of their duties 4) Avoiding misuse of funds targeted for community development project(s) 5) Seeking expert advice for proper implementation of community development project(s) 6) Liaising with necessary government authorities and agencies for the portion of peace and progress in the community 7) Seeking the support and assistance of law enforcement agencies in the maintenance of law and order at community level.
8) Equitable distribution of social and economic benefits for the welfare of various communities and groups.
3.3.1 Conflict Resolutions as a Necessity for Effective Implementation Of Community Welfare Programme Conflict resolution is necessary in every human society or organisation.
This is because the resolution of conflicts helps to ensure peace, orderliness and effective implementation of community welfare programme.
The resolution of conflicts resulting from misunderstanding in implementing community welfare programs is very necessary because of the following reasons: 1) Conflict or disagreement among them results in quarrel and dissipation of energy.
2) Conflict leads to distraction and loss of focus towards the achievement of intended goals.
3) It gives rise to bickering and enmity, which destroy mutual understanding and spirit of team-work.
4) It dampens enthusiasm and spirit of cooperation necessary for successful implementation of community welfare.
5) Conflict may give rise to apathy and non-challant attitude of some officers towards community welfare programme.
6) Conflict may alienate the intended beneficiaries of community welfare programme.
There is the need that the chairman of local government council, the vice chairman, supervisors and community development offices work as a team towards successful implementation of community welfare 79MPA 769 RURAL DEVELOPMENT AND MANAGEMENT programme.
They should maintain cordial relationship with the traditional rulers and executive body to town union, to ensure successful implementation of community welfare programme.
3.3.2 Conflict Management for Effective Implementation of Community Welfare Programme There is the need for chairman and vice chairman of various local governments to use their privileged positions to promote peace and harmonious co-existence among people in their council areas.
This requires good sense of judgment, impartiality and ability to make mature decisions on the part of the chairman and vice chairman.
Besides, the supervisors and community development officers and community leaders should cooperate in the task of improving the welfare of people in their various rural communities.
There is need for chairman and vice chairman to evolve a mechanism for conflict management.
Such strategies should cover both local government and community levels.
The chairman, vice chairman as an essential prerequisite for community development.
No community can develop in a situation of anarchy, lawlessness and bickering among its people.
Lack of cooperation among people often frustrates effort towards community development.
The management of conflict is, therefore, a necessity for effective implementation of community welfare programs for the general well-being of the people.
4.0 CONCLUSION The welfare of communities is the basis of the progress of the nation.
This is why the federal, states as well as local governments initiate and implement community development welfare programmes for the well-being of people in rural communities.
These include the provision of social amenities such as roads, electricity, healthcare delivery, mass literacy programme and establishment of agro-allied industries for the benefit of rural communities.
The officers who are responsible for the implementation of community welfare programmes should eschew bitterness among rural people.
In conclusion: 1) Local government leaders should help traditional rulers and town unions maintain peace and order in their respective committees.
2) The chairman, vice chairman, community development officers and supervisors should evolve mechanism for conflict resolution in their council areas.
80MPA 769 RURAL DEVELOPMENT AND MANAGEMENT 3) Issues that may precipitate conflict either at the local government or community level should be amicably resolved.
4) Local Government Officials should seek the support and cooperation of community leaders in the task of implementing community welfare programmes.
5) Officers charged with the responsibility of implementing community welfare programmes should exhibit transparent honesty, integrity and fair-play.
This is necessary to ensure peace, progress and successful implementation of programmes.
5.0 SUMMARY In any community that conflicts are experienced, it is difficult to mobilise the people to achieve rural development.
It, therefore, implies that the following should be observed: • Officers should exhibit transparency, honesty, integrity and fair play.
• Community leaders should always seek the support and cooperation of the local Government council.
• Issues that will precipitate conflict should be amicably resolved.
6.0 TUTOR-MARKED ASSIGNMENT Identify areas of conflict in rural communities and proffer solutions to them.
7.0 REFERENCES/FURTHER READINGS Umebali E. E., Chukwuemeka, E.E.O and Njoku A.O.
(ed) (2000).
Contemporary Issues in Local Government Administration and Rural Development.
Enugu: Computer Edge Publishers.
UNIT 4 WOMEN IN RURAL DEVELOPMENT CONTENTS 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objectives 3.0 Main Content 3.1 Obstacles to Women Empowerment 3.1.1 Marital Age 3.1.2 Social Contributions 3.1.3 Lack of Post-Harvest Storage 81MPA 769 RURAL DEVELOPMENT AND MANAGEMENT 3.1.4 Education 3.1.5 Widowhood 3.2 The Need for Small Scale Women Ventures 3.3 Role of Women in Community-based Projects 3.3.1 Garri Processing Engine 3.3.2 Entertainment Programmes 3.4 Individual-based Projects 3.5 Obstacles to Women Education 3.5.1 Poverty 3.5.2 Lack of Economic Facilities 3.5.3 Gender Discrimination 3.5.4 Early Marriage 3.5.5 Child-Labour 3.5.6 Environmental Factors 3.5.7 Unemployment 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutor-Marked Assignment 7.0 References/Further Readings 1.0 INTRODUCTION Women have a big role to play in rural development.
Studies have shown that women constitute greater percentage of the population.
In most communities, particular in the South Eastern Nigeria, women are involved in one rural development programmes or another.
They form an association of change and carry out pogrammes that accelerate rural development.
They are deeply involved in various aspects of agriculture.
2.0 OBJECTIVES At the end of this unit, you should be able to: • highlight the obstacles to women empowerment • state the need for small scale women ventures • highlight the role of women in community based projects • discuss the individual-based projects • identify obstacles to women Education.
3.0 MAIN CONTENT The National Population Commission of Nigeria in 1996 estimated that about 50% of the total population of Nigeria is women.
Furthermore, about 70% of this population including some 31 million of these 82MPA 769 RURAL DEVELOPMENT AND MANAGEMENT dwellers lives below poverty level.
Several factors contribute to the continuous poverty and deprivation of rural women.
3.1 Obstacles to Women Empowerment a) Discrimination by Men: In many Nigerian ethnic groups, women occupy the lowest social strata.
They are not entitled to own land.
Although they are farmers, the portion of land they farm on is usually not enough to provide the family with enough income for its basic needs.
b) High Cost of Labour: The cost of labour in Nigeria has increased tremendously over the last five years.
It has the greatest impact in rural communities where increase in the cost of farm labour has made it difficult for man widows to cultivate large pieces of land.
This has reduced their farm output and consequently, their meager income is further reduced, thus increasing their level of poverty.
3.1.1 Marital Age Many women who live in the villages are widows because they marry early and to much older men.
For a reasonable period of their lives, they spend most of their times caring for these old men.
This gives them little time to engage in other things that may provide them extra income.
When these men die, they are faced with raising the children alone.
Most of these young widows are denied any right to their husbands’ property, by older children of the husband.
Since women in the village have very little freedom of speech, they suffer without due process.
3.1.2 Social Contributions There are lots of indirect income taxes in the rural communities particularly.
In Igboland most Igbo communities undertake many community based development projects.
To execute these projects rural women contribute a lot of labour which is not paid for or even regarded as high as monetary contribution by men or community health centres, women devote a day in the week to fetch water for the workers.
They also devote a day to weed and clear the project site.
These two days would have been used to perform income yielding jobs for their families.
In addition to their contributions in labour, they are expected to be members of many village organisations.
These organisation make a lot of demands on both time and money.
For example, women clean the churches and provide substantial financial support for the churches.
83MPA 769 RURAL DEVELOPMENT AND MANAGEMENT They also contribute garri, yams, chickens and even money to maintain the priest who is predominately men.
3.1.3 Lack of Post-harvest Storage Most communities lack good roads which make evacuation of food difficult.
Also because storage facilities are not available, much of the food produced during the growing season deteriorate.
To avoid loss of food in this way, a lot of the produce is disposed off at very low prices.
This means that although food prices at urban centres are high the percentage of this money that goes to the producer, the rural woman, is very low.
3.1.4 Education A high percentage of rural dwellers including women do not have formal education.
Most of them are illiterates and as a result, they are not qualified for even the little jobs that are available at local government level.
Due to their being uneducated, most of them are cut off from communication with the outside world.
As a result they do not fully participate in projects that are designed to help the poor, for example, government fertilizer programmes.
Many a times, information for these programmes reach them after the deadline for submission of applications had passed.
Consequently, programmes designed to help the poor never get to them due to their inability to read, or even understand the language or symbols used for the advertisements.
3.1.5 Widowhood Some widowhood practices help to increase the poor state of many rural women.
In some communities widows are not permitted to move around unit l after a period of time following their husbands’ death.
Also some cultural demands imposed on the widow during the funeral and burial of her husband often help to increase the poverty level of the widow.
For some widows, it makes a long time before they can recover their confidence and ability to get on with their lives.
3.2 The Need for Small Scale Women Ventures There is every need for the formation and establishment of small scale ventures by rural women.
The small scale ventures can be in the following areas.
Agriculture and food production processing, preservation, packaging, marketing, etc.
Some women cooperatives have embarked on ventures such as; pottery, fashion design, hair dressing, textile, weaving, dyeing, catering, printing, etc.
These ventures, no doubt, have a multiplier impact within the economy.
Incomes, employment, needed products, foreign exchange overall 84MPA 769 RURAL DEVELOPMENT AND MANAGEMENT standard of living, etc., are enhanced.
Furthermore, the overall effect is the enhancement of rural development which is the ultimate.
Rural development has to do with the enhancement of socio-economic status of the rural dwellers.
However, for these ventures to be carried out, the women need some credit and skill through training.
Extension education and mass literacy are quite important.
This will not only widen their scope of knowledge but also will enhance management of the ventures.
It is necessary to note that the ventures to be embarked on must be economically viable, technically feasible and culturally compatible.
Marketing analysis has to be carried out to ensure effective disposal of the products.
3.3 Role of Women in Community-based Projects 3.3.1 Garri Processing Engine Garri processing engines are now common in rural communities, most of palm oil processing are owned by men or women who live outside the communities, in the urban areas.
These investors take the money generated to the cities and spend them there.
Some close up these processing outfits after some time because of poor management.
To solve these problems, the investors encounter; and also provide the service that is required.
Some women in one community collectively bought a garri and palm oil processing engines.
The women take turns in managing the investments.
With income from these, other mills were set up.
When women are asked to contribute for community projects, instead of sharing the money to individual women, the profit from investments is used for the contributions.
The garri and palm oil mills were bought from contribution.
The garri and palm oil mills were bought with profit from investment on chairs and canopies also.
3.3.2 Entertainment Programmes The usual method of raising funds for community projects is to send cards to people and appeal to them to come and donate some money.
Over the years, this method has lost its appeal as every community adopted it and the same individuals were invited all the time.
Two years ago women in one community imitated a programme of entertainment at Christmas time.
These include dances and plays that depicted cultural events among other things.
These were so popular that 85MPA 769 RURAL DEVELOPMENT AND MANAGEMENT the money the women received from commendations was enough to offset any contributions that were needed for health centre project.
The Christmas programme executed by the women has become so popular that everyone looks forward to it.
Besides raising free money, it has provided a much needed leisure time for the women.
The excitement of preparing for the Christmas programme has taken away some of the monotony and drudgery of village life.
By working together, practising for the dances some new friendship have been formed, and new relationship have been formed, and better understanding have developed.
3.4 Individual-based Projects For many rural communities, farming period starts in March or April depending on when the rains start.
Because of this, crops that are produced are limited to traditional crops like cassava, yam, corn, cocoa yam, etc.
However if new farming methods are introduced, so that non- traditional crops are cultivated, the income of the rural women can be increased.
One of the methods that can be adopted to increase income of the rural women is off-season or dry season farming.
In Nigeria, temperature supports plant growth throughout the year, but at certain times of the year particularly in the rainforest zone, water limits plant growth.
Also there are many popular crops that are produced in the Northern Nigeria which do not produce good yield in the south because of too much rain during the growing season.
These crops can be produced in the south if they are grown during the dry season.
There are other crops such as corn, and melon, which can be grown twice during the year.
Dry season framing has great advantages, e.g., the menace of weed is greatly reduced and incidence of plant diseases is also low.
Dry Season Farming i) Green Vegetables: Green vegetables are usually very expensive during the dry season, so those people who can grow a few stands of Ugwu (Triferia occidentals) or greens (Amaranthus sp) can increase their income.
To grow these vegetable in the rural communities where there is no pipe-borne water, the crops should be planted from middle September to early October.
This gives the plant enough time to get properly started before the rains ceases.
For Ugwu which has long growing period, all that is needed is for the crop to be watered every other day.
However, to ensure that the plant has enough organic manure and that it is also properly mulched.
Greens may require to be watered more regularly.
After the first crop of greens are harvested in January, it is more expensive to 86MPA 769 RURAL DEVELOPMENT AND MANAGEMENT start a new crop, except if you live in areas where the rains comes early in the year.
2) Tomatoes and Melons: Tomatoes do not grow well during the rainy season.
A good harvest of tomatoes can be obtained in the south if they are planted in mid-August.
Start the crop in container pots or basins in late June to middle July.
Transplant the seedlings to well-prepared beds when they are seven to eight weeks old.
The crops can be fertilised with organic (poultry, refuse) or mineral fertilizers.
These crops usually ripen before very dry weather sets in.
tomatoes may be difficult to grow between December and March, because although the crop does not do well during the wet weather, it requires water to produce good yield.
So if you want to grow tomatoes in January, you must invest in water.
Melons (egusi) are one of the crops that produce abundant harvest during second planting.
The crops are sown in September and by December the fruits are mature and no watering is required.
3) Orchards: Setting up of fruit orchards can also provide a reasonable income to the rural women.
Pineapples are very popular and are sold at good prices.
These can be grown very easily at the backyard or small plots.
The farm requires being weeded regularly and mulched too.
They should be spaced at least, four feet apart to make weeding easier.
4) Citrus Fruits: Orchards, oranges, grape fruits, lemon and lime are in higher demand throughout the year.
So a rural woman can make investment in these fruits very early in her life.
These orchards are not very difficult to maintain but the returns are worth the efforts.
Other fruit trees worth planting that can provide reasonable income include coconuts, avocado pears and bananas.
Rural women can plant these near their homes or in farms.
5) Small Poultry Farms: Rural women can increase their income by setting up poultry farms.
This should be at very small scale, not more than 15 to 20 chickens at a time.
Usually, broilers are preferred as they mature faster and are in high demand.
3.5 Obstacles to Women Education 3.5.1 Poverty 87MPA 769 RURAL DEVELOPMENT AND MANAGEMENT As highlighted earlier, when parents are poor, they tend to train their male children first and ask female ones to go and marry so that the money realised from their bride price would be used even to train the male children.
3.5.2 Lack of Economic Facilities Due to tradition, women are not allowed to own land and other valuable properties.
They also even lack the ability to obtain loans.
As a result of these the women become poorer and cannot help the situation when the men could not pay for both the male and female children.
3.5.3 Gender Discrimination Naturally women are discriminated against men because it is the belief that the boy replaces the father and perpetuates the family’s name, while females marry out and bear other family’s names.
3.5.4 Early Marriage Girls most of time are married out so early in age that they do not have opportunities to attend schools.
Once the girl-child marries, she starts bearing children and gets so much involved in children and house care that she would not have time to go to school.
3.5.5 Child Labour This is another crucial reason why girls do not go to school.
This is a situation where the parents send out the girl-child to become house- helps in other homes and misses her school period.
3.5.6 Environmental Factors When children come from such families that have very low ambition and no person there goes to school, in this instance, there will be no person for the children (girls) to look up to and identify with.
3.5.7 Unemployment This is another serious obstacle toward girl-child education.
Most time, when girls finish their school career, there will be no employment to engage them.
At this point, the girl will lose at both sides i.e., not being married while her age-mates had all married when she was in school and when she completes her study, there is no job.
At that age, she would be considered too old for the unmarried men in the village, even when most of them are still elderly to her.
88MPA 769 RURAL DEVELOPMENT AND MANAGEMENT 4.0 CONCLUSION Women are committed to rural development through their efforts in the area of investment.
Some of them form cooperatives in order to attract the attention of government.
In some families, women constitute the bread winners and they struggle to ensure that their families forge ahead.
Interestingly enough, women are now occupying good positions that guarantee their commitment to rural development.
5.0 SUMMARY Leadership of every community should get the women committed to the cause of rural development.
Women organise launching, other programmes, etc., from where they carry out rural development programmes.
Previously, women were not committed but in recent times they occupy sensitive positions, therefore, empowered to finance rural development programmes.
6.0 TUTOR-MARKED ASSIGNMENT Discuss various ways women can contribute to rural development.
7.0 REFERENCES/FURTHER READINGS Umebali E. E., Chukwuemeka, E.E.O and Njoku, A.O (2000).
(eds) Contemporary Issues in Local Government Administration and Development in Nigeria.
UNIT 5 RURAL DEVELOPMENT AND PERSONNEL ADMINISTRATION CONTENTS 1.0 Introduction 89MPA 769 RURAL DEVELOPMENT AND MANAGEMENT 2.0 Objectives 3.0 Main Content 3.1 The Concept of Personnel Administration 3.2 Function of Personnel Management 3.2.1 Major Personnel Functions 3.2.2 Forms of Recruitment of Rural Development Officers 3.2.2.1 Appointment as Trainee 3.2.2.2 Rules for Appointment on Non-pensionable Position 3.2.2.3 Transfer of Service 3.3 Sources of Recruitment 3.4 Procedure Followed for Completing Appointment of Candidates Selected 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutor-Marked Assignment 7.0 References/Further Readings 1.0 INTRODUCTION In order to accelerate rural development, personnel officers are needed as professionals.
They ensure that plans and programmes for rural development are implemented.
They also ensure the mobilisation of the rural dwellers so as to contribute their own quota to rural development.
In essence, the personnel officers administer the programmes, and involve rural dwellers in the implementation process.
2.0 OBJECTIVES At the end of this unit, you should be able to: • explain the concept of personnel administration • identify the functions of personnel management • highlight the sources of recruitment • enumerate procedures followed in the selection and appointments of candidates selected.
3.0 MAIN CONTENT 3.1 The Concept of Personnel Administration In an attempt to explain, the concept, “personnel administration”, several definitions have been put forward.
Flippo says that it is the 90MPA 769 RURAL DEVELOPMENT AND MANAGEMENT planning, organising, directing and controlling of the procurements, development, compensation, integration, maintenance, and separation of human resources to the end that individual, organisation, and societal objectives are accomplished.
Personnel administration is specifically concerned with the management of the human component in an organisation.
These definitions mean the same thing.
None has ignored the human resources element of an enterprise.
Thus, we can simply define personnel administration as the integration and management of human resources towards the achievement of an organisational goal.
Personnel management is one of our most complex and challenging fields of endeavour.
Not only must the organisation’s requirements for an effective workforce be met, the public personnel manager must be greatly concerned with the expectations of both employees and society in general.
Society at large has proclaimed its human resources to have vital needs that move beyond a “workforce” status.
The employee is simultaneously an instrument of the firm, human being and a citizen.
The role of the public personnel manager has thus changed over time.
At first the dominant role was to satisfy top management and the policy in procuring and maintaining a workforce that would be instrumental to organisational productivity.
As was the experience in the bureaucracy in the past, most line mangers will not deal with anything which they consider to be the responsibility of the personnel department.
An employee who comes late to work is sent to the personnel department to explain, and a recalcitrant employee must be reported to the public personnel manager for a query.
In all this, the officer concerned does not get involved.
To Ubeka, this approach towards personnel management is totally wrong.
There is now a general agreement that the job of a personnel manager entails getting results through people.
“A public personnel manager is therefore, a person who through guidance, leadership, encouragement and motivation makes the men who form his team gets the desired result.
3.2 Function of Personnel Management The public personnel manager usually applies his/her technical skills in dealing with issues that arises in the following broad areas.
• Recruitment • Human resources development 91MPA 769 RURAL DEVELOPMENT AND MANAGEMENT • Transfer, promotion an lay off • Wage and salary administration • Health and safety • Industrial and labour relation • Employee benefit and services • Motivation 3.2.1 Major Personnel Functions Recruitment: the term “recruitment” has been variously defined and extensively explained by different scholars.
The result, therefore, is that there are as many definitions of the concepts as there are authorities in the subject.
Orga and Ugwu define it as the process of seeking and attracting qualified persons to fill vacant positions in an organisation.
The civil service Rule No.
02201 defines recruitment as: The filling of vacancies by the appointment of persons not already in the public service of the Federal Republic of Nigeria.
But lateral-transfer of employees from one state public service to another.
Michael Armstrong argues that recruitment and selection process consists of the following three stages: 1) Defining requirements – preparing job description and personnel specifications; deciding terms and conditions of employment.
2) Attracting candidates, identifying alternative services of candidates inside and outside the organization, advertising using agencies and consultants.
3) Selecting candidates, sifting application, interviewing, testing and assessing.
It is worthy of note, that the above explanation is essentially the practice in the public service.
At any rate recruitment should always be done in close liaison with the manager or supervisor concerned.
The public personnel manager’s role here is to ensure that the manager or supervisor concerned made his choice from only those candidates who are likely to fit into the organisation and those he can work with.
3.2.2 Forms of Recruitment of Rural Development Officers Direct appointments to the public service may be in any of the following categories: a) As trainees 92MPA 769 RURAL DEVELOPMENT AND MANAGEMENT b) On probation in a pensionable spot c) On contract as against pensionable post for specified periods d) On month-to-month terms against personable post e) On temporary basis other than (c) and (d) above.
3.2.2.1 Appointment as Trainee When a prospective candidate is not experienced to be regarded as fully qualified for a particular post, such a candidate may be appointed as trainee to a specified period in the post, in most cases two years is deemed ideal.
After the completion of the training period, the staff therefore is appointed on probation.
Confirmation of the appointment is made after the individual has satisfactorily fulfilled all conditions laid down in Civil Service Rule 02302.
3.2.2.2 Rules for Appointment on Non-pensionable Position A contract appointment is a form of temporary appointment, which is normally not pensionable.
It normally spans a specific period of time.
The agreement must be resolved in a formal document.
The conditions of service and duration to the employment are normally enshrined in the contract paper.
An appointment on contract may be terminated by either the government or the contract staff in keeping with provision of the contract agreement.
In cases where a retired staff is recruited on contract, he normally loses a grade level on retirement.
3.2.2.3 Transfer of Service Transfer of service is the process of substantive employees in other sectors of the government transferring to other government organisations of their choice.
The need for this is obvious, for the rules guiding the various forms of transfer have been greatly misunderstood and largely abused.
There are various forms of transfer available in the public service.
They are inter alia: i) Transfer of service (ordinary) ii) Lateral transfer iii) Transfer on promotion i Transfer of Service (ordinary) 93MPA 769 RURAL DEVELOPMENT AND MANAGEMENT This comes in a situation where the earlier post and duty of the transferee is not cognate or similar to the post and duties on which transfer is sought.
Such offices are meant to drop at least a grade level from the person’s earlier substantive position.
Furthermore, the effective date of his/her first appointment is the date such person assumed the position on transfer.
ii Lateral Transfer Lateral transfer is normally granted only when the duties and post of transferee in his/her earlier established appointment, is adjudged cognate or similar to the post and duties on which such person is transferring.
Seniority is normally carried along with the transfer.
iii Transfer of Promotion This is a situation where a public officer is granted transfer on one or more grade/level higher than the officer’s substantive grade level.
In the same vein, certain special circumstances have been shown to necessitate such transfers normally: - Officer’s year of graduation - Officer’s cognate experience - Vacancy and the need to fill it.
Secondment Secondments are not retirement per se though its grant is usually on vacancy and the need of a department.
While secondment is a temporary release of an officer, transfer is a permanent release.
3.3 Sources of Recruitment There are two classifications of recruitment internal and external sources.
Filling a job opening from within an organisation has the advantage of stimulating preparation for possible transfer or promotion, increasing the general level of morale an providing more information about “job candidates” through analysis of work histories with the organisation.
Internal job posting should take place, at least, 1 to 2 weeks prior to external recruitment.
It is pertinent to hammer here that where an organisation decides on a policy of recruitment from within, then the method of recruitment will include job posting on public boards in order to inform all employees and to allow open competition.
94MPA 769 RURAL DEVELOPMENT AND MANAGEMENT External source of recruitment: Some organisations prefer to fill top positions from external sources.
This must be subject to a staff competition.
Other organisations have an open-door policy, which is equal opportunity to both internal and external competition.
In the public service, the Civil Service Commission has the exclusive preserve to recruit and appoint senior officers into the various ministries.
This power and function of the commission, among others, as conferred on it, by section 2 (1), part II of the Third Schedule of the 1979 Constitution of the Federal Republic of Nigeria.
The number and types of employees recruited by the public service is normally determined by: • employee turn-over • the nature of workforce at present and • the rate of organisational growth Method of Recruitment/Selection in the Public Organization On receipt of vacant positions from the respective controlling public managers of various ministries and departments, the Civil Service Commission issues an advertisement (only for officers from Grade level 07 and above) while respective ministries and departments can advertise and recruit officers form Grade level 01 to 06.
All positions, as a matter of employment rules, must be advertised.
Anyone who reads a newspaper is familiar with “vacancies”, “situation vacant” and “situation wanted” advertisements.
For many employers, where in public or private service advertisements may be the only source that is considered when seeking staff position vacancies.
Radio, television, posters, hand-bill as a well as magazines and newspaper therefore, may be utilised as advertising aid in attempting to reach interested applicants that might not otherwise be contacted.
The use of advertising is inherent with the advantages of permitting a large audience to be reached and of providing another source of applicants.
For the purpose of the public service, the following information must be contained in the advertisement: • the vacant posts or positions • qualification for entry • requirement of the application • closing data for receipt of applications • probable date of interview and 95MPA 769 RURAL DEVELOPMENT AND MANAGEMENT • to whom the application shall be addressed.
Short-listing of Candidates Either before or after the expiration date for receipt of application forms, a competent schedule public officer is assigned with the responsibility of short-listing the eligible and qualified candidate adhering strictly to entry qualification and other requirements.
Eligibility for Appointment To be eligible for appointment in most private and public organisations candidate must meet the following requirements: • be at least 15 years of age; • possess the prescribed minimum qualification as may be specified from time to time, depending circumstances; • Be certified medically fit by a qualified medical doctor (civil service insist on government medical officer); • Possess a testimonial of good conduct from the candidate’s last employer, but if not previously employed, from the last educational institutional attended; and • Last educational institution attended.
Other conditions that apply to those seeking employment in government service include: • whether the candidate has been convicted of a criminal offence; • State all employments he/she has engaged in; • Must state reasons for leaving such employment(s); • If he/she is still in any employment whether he/she is under any obligation to remain in it; and • Whether he/she is free from pecuniary embarrassment.
Employment Interview The short-listed applicant must be interviewed and for this, a number of interview methods are available.
The interview may be held more than once.
The criteria for assessment are normally determined by the interview panel.
Marks are awarded to candidates according to each criterium.
Some of the criteria are as follows: • qualification • additional or extra qualification (for serving candidate) 96MPA 769 RURAL DEVELOPMENT AND MANAGEMENT • experience • interview performance • appearance • comportment • political factors (very popular in the public service).
Types of Interview Employment or selections for interviews are classified primarily according to the methods or approaches that used to obtain information and to elicit attitudes and feeling from an applicant.
These interviews are typologies under the following headings: Non-direct Interview Here, the interviewer carefully refrains from influencing the applicants’ remarks.
He allows the applicant the maximum amount of freedom in determining the course of the discussion.
This is achieved by the interviewer asking broad, general questions, such as “Tell me more about your experience in your last job”.
And by permitting the applicant to express himself fully with a minimum of interruption.
Generally, non- directive approach is characterised by such interviewer’s behaviour as listening carefully, not arguing, using questions sparingly, not interrupted or changing the subject abruptly, phrasing responses briefly, and allowing pauses in the conversation.
The greater freedom accorded to the applicant in the non-directive interview provide an opportunity for him/her to discuss at length, any points that he/she would like to talk about.
This may be particularly valuable in bringing to the interviewer attention any information, attitudes, or feelings that are often concealed by more rapid questioning of the applicant.
Depth Interview The depth interview provides additional structure in the form of questions that cover different areas of the applicants’ life that are related to employment.
A depth interview provides question covering work, education, social relationship, economic and personality to be responded to by the applicant, to say as much as he/she wishes in response to them.
The applicant is encouraged to answer each question in depth, enough so as to permit the interviewer to obtain sufficient information to make an evaluation.
Patterned Interview This is the most highly structured type of interview.
It adheres closely to a highly detailed set of questions on specially prepared forms.
The interviewee is asked question like the following: “What is most 97MPA 769 RURAL DEVELOPMENT AND MANAGEMENT important to you in a job?” “Why should we hire you?” A summary sheet is used for rating the applicant on “can do” and will do” factors and for summarising the rating into an overall rating.
Group Interview Group interview is mainly used for the selection of executive trainees.
When the group interview approach is used, a half dozen or so candidate assembles for a group discussion.
Seated to the side or behind the group will be the top notchers in the organisation who observe and evaluate the candidate as they engage in a round table discussion with or without a leader.
This method not only saves top executives” time but also seems to result in better selection decision.
While the group interview is generally used along with other selection techniques, it has been found to facilitate observations of such factors as initiative aggressiveness, adaptability to new situation, tact, ability to get along with people, and similar qualities.
Written Examinations and Selection Test The recruitment interview has to be supplemented with selection test when the candidates are fairly large; a written examination has to be administered as a hurdle to eliminate candidates.
Only those who surmount the hurdle are interviewed.
In situations where professional selection lists have to be combined, it may be done separately after or before the interview.
It could, however, be combined with the main interview.
Preliminary and Final Selection Having obtained sample information about the applicant, the employment department usually makes the preliminary selection of those applicants who appear to be most promising.
Physical or Medical Examination The medical examination often is one of the final steps in the selection process because it can be costly, it should be given immediately prior to leaving.
The pre-employment medical examination has some importance: • To assume the fitness of the applicant to work in the organisation • To provide a basis against which subsequent physical examinations may be compared and interpreted; • To prevent the spread of infectious and contagious disease among employees; and 98MPA 769 RURAL DEVELOPMENT AND MANAGEMENT • To know the condition of health of applicant before employment so as to provide the appropriate compensation in times of indisposition after employment.
3.4 Procedure Followed for Completing Appointment of Candidates Selected 1) Candidate should be required to complete a letter of application (in the Civil Service Form No.
Gen. 69B is normally used).
Any false statement made therein will be regarded as sufficient ground for non-employment or dismissal if such falsehood is detected after engagement or appointment.
2) If in the light of the information so supplied, the candidate is still considered eligible and suitable, he/she should be made an offer of appointment on form No.
Gen. 69 (for public service personable appointments) or form No.
Gen. 69A (for temporary appointment) and provide with blank form No.
Gen. 85 on which to signify his acceptance of the offer.
Numbers for these Gen. Forms may differ from State to State Niger.
3) If the candidates accept the offer by returning the forms within the specified time limit (usually a period of six weeks), Form No.
Gen. 75 completed in particular, he/she should be issued with a letter of appointment on Form No.
Gen. 69C, copies of which should be endorsed to: Director-General (now rechristened Permanent Secretary), establishment, the Account-General (now rechristended Permanent Secretary), establishment, the Accountant-General and the Auditor-General.
4) Placement: Placement consists in actually matching the newly recruited employee with the job for which he/she has been employed.
Such new employee is placed on probation for a specified period to ensure that the new officer adapts to the organisation.
The facilitation is done through the following sub-processes: i. Orientation: In-house training, which helps the new employee find his/her way about the organisation and with the work groups ii.
Induction: This consists placing the requirements of the job before the employee as well as giving the employee all the information and tools necessary to perform the job.
iii.
immediately the new employee assumes office his/her name and particulars is entered on Form Gen. 39 ( peculiar to Enugu Civil Service) and it is the duty of the Head of Department to ensure 99MPA 769 RURAL DEVELOPMENT AND MANAGEMENT that all officers in his/her department have signed an oath of security and the oath so signed is carefully preserved.
4.0 CONCLUSION Considering the various tiers of government, there are units that handle rural development matters.
In some States, Ministry of Rural Development has been created to oversee rural development programmes.
The Local Government has officers referred to as Development officers.
These officers play major role in accelerating rural development.
5.0 SUMMARY This, unit has actually discussed the administration of rural development.
It made reference to the process of selecting staff that will carry out government programmes in rural areas 6.0TUTOR-MARKED ASSIGNMENT Discuss rural development administration.
7.0 REFERENCES/FURTHER READINGS Umebali E.E (ed) Readings in Cooperative Economics and Management Lagos: Computer Edge Publishers.
100
