 -MPA 868 COMPARATIVE PAUDBMLINICIS T RATION MPA 868: COMPARATIVE PUBLIC ADMINISTRATION COURSE GUIDE NATIONAL OPEN UNIVERSITY OF NIGERIA NOUN 2 -MPA 868 COMPARATIVE PAUDBMLINICIS T RATION MODULES UNITS NO.
TOPICS 1 1 CONCEPTUAL ANALYSIS – PUBLIC POLICY 3.1 Public Policy 3.1.1 Meaning/Definition 3.1.2 Deductions from Definition 3.1.3 Types of Public Policy 2 CONCEPTUAL ANALYSIS- Administration and Public Administration 3.1 Administration 3.1.1 Meaning/Definition of Administration 3.1.2 Meaning/Definition of Public Administration 3 FUNCTION OF PUBLIC ADMINISTRATION 3.1 Functions 3.1.1 Functions 4 DIFFERENTIATING PUBLIC ADMINISTRATION FROM BUSINESS ADMINISTRATION.
3.1 Public Administration versus Business Administration.
3.1.1 Public Admin Vases Business Admin.
5 UNIVERSAL CONTEXT OF ADMINISTRATION 3.1 Universal Context of Administration 3.1.1 Administration at family level 3.1.2 Administration at Organizational level 3.1.3 Administration at State level 3.1.4 Administration at International level NOUN 3 -MPA 868 COMPARATIVE PAUDBMLINICIS T RATION 2 6 IMPERATIVES AND HISTORY OF COMPARATIVE PUBLIC ADMINISTRATION Imperatives 3.1 Everyday Experience 3.1.1 Requirements for Science of Politics.
3.1.2 Understanding Administrative behaviour 3.1.3 Historical Development 3.2 Development before WWII 3.2.1 Development from end of WWII 3.2.2 Development in contemporary times.
3.2.3 7 NATURE, UTILITY AND PROBLEMS OF COMPARATIVE PUBLIC ADMINISTRATION Nature, Unity and Problems 3.1 Nature 3.1.1 Utility 3.1.2 Problems 3.1.3 8 STRATEGIES OF COMPARING – DIFFERENCES AND SIMILARITIES APPROACHES.
3.1 Strategies of Comparing 3.1.1 Different Approaches 3.1.2 Similarities Approach 9 STRATEGIES OF COMPARING- EXPERIMENTAL, STATISTICAL AND CASE STUDY APPROACHES.
3.1 Experimental Approach 3.1.1 Experimental and Control Groups 3.2 The Statistical Approach 3.2.1 Partial Correlation of Variables 3.3 The Case Study Approach 3.3.1 Stereotypes 3.3.2 Categories 10 EVOLUTION OF NIGERIAN PUBLIC ADMINISTRATION 3.1 Evolution of Nigerian Public Admin.
3.1.1 Traditional Political Administration 3.1.2 Colonial Contact and Indirect Rule 3.1.3 Era of Nigerianization and Independence.
NOUN 4 -MPA 868 COMPARATIVE PAUDBMLINICIS T RATION 11 NIGERIAN CIVIL SERVICE 3.1 The Civil Service 3 3.1.1 Characteristics 3.1.2 Functions 12 NIGERIAN PROBLEMS OF CIVIL SERVICE 3.1 Problems of Civil Service 3.1.1 Inefficiency and Ineffectiveness 3.1.2 Indiscipline 3.1.3 Corruption and Bribery 3.1.4 Ethnicity and Favouritism 13 NIGERIAN: CIVIL SERVICE REFORMS Civil Service Reforms Concept of Reform Reforms Between 1948 and 1973 1988 Reforms Post 1988 Reforms.
14 PHILOSPHY AND ETHICS OF PUBLIC ADMINISTRATION 3.1 Philosophy 3.1.1 Concept of Philosophy 3.1.2 The doctrines 3.2 Ethics 3.2.1 Concept of Ethics 3.2.2 The Ethical Ideals 15 BRITAIN: HISTORICAL DEVELOPMENT AND CHARACTERISTICS OF CIVIL SERVICE 3.1 Recent Historical Development 3.1.1 Historical Development 3.1.2 Characteristics NOUN 5 -MPA 868 COMPARATIVE PAUDBMLINICIS T RATION 16 BRITAIN: FUNCTIONS OF CIVIL SERVICE 3.1 Functions 4 17 BRITAIN: CIVIL SERVICE REFORMS 3.1 Reforms 3.1.1 Concept of Reforms 3.1.2 First Phase 3.1.3 Second Phase 3.1.4 Third Phase 3.1.5 Fourth Phase 18 DOCTRINES OF PUBLIC ADMINISTRATION IN THE UNITED STATE Doctrines of Public Administration 3.1 Concept of Doctrine 3.1.1 The Doctrines 3.1.2 19 UNITED STATE OF AMERICA: STRUCTURE AND CHARACTERISTICS OF CIVIL SERVICE 3.1 Structure and Characteristics 3.1.1 Structure 3.1.2 Characteristics 20 UNITED STATES OF AMERICA: FUNCTIONS OF THE CIVIL SERVICE 3.1 Functions of Civil Service 3.1.2 Functions NOUN 6 -MPA 868 COMPARATIVE PAUDBMLINICIS T RATION 5 21 UNITED STATES OF AMERICA: ADMINISTRATIVE AGENCIES 3.1 Administrative Agency 3.1.1 Types 3.1.2 Functions 22 FRANCE: HISTORICAL BACKGROUND OF PUBLISH ADMINISTRATION 3.1 Era and revolutions 3.1.1 The Great Revolution 3.1.2 Other Revolutions 23 FRANCE: STRUCTURE OF CIVIL SERVICE 3.1 Politics – Administration Mix 3.1.1 Concept of Politics 3.1.2 Concepts of Administration.
3.1.3 The Marriage 3.2 Administrative classes 3.2.1 Criteria 3.2.2 The Classes 24 FRANCE: CHARACTERISTICS OF SERVICE Issue of Political Neutrality 3.1 Concept of Political Neutrality 3..1.1 Political involvement 3.1.2 Dominance of Central Administrative machinery 3.2 Administrative Law 3.3 Service Sense of Administration 3.4 Security of tenure 3.5 NOUN 7 -MPA 868 COMPARATIVE PAUDBMLINICIS T RATION 6 25 FRANCE: CIVIL SERVICE REFORMS Review of Concept and Imperatives 3.1 Concept 3.1.1 Concept 3.1.2 Imperatives 3.1.3 Problems of Civil Service 3.3 The Reforms 3.1.1 De Gaulle’s Reforms 3.1.2 Post De Gaulles Reforms 26 NIGERIA AND LOCAL GOVERNMENT SYSTEM 3.1 Nigerian and Local Government 3.1.1 Justification 3.1.2 Functions 27 NIGERIA: FINANCING LOCAL GOVENMENTS 3.1 Financing Local Governments 3.1.1 Internally Generated Revenue 3.1.2 External Sources 3.1.3 External Non-official 28 BRITAIN AND LOCAL GOVERNMENTS SYSTEM 3.1 Britain and Local Government 3.1.1 Structure 3.1.2 Functions 29 BRITAIN: FINANCING LOCAL GOVERNMENT 3.1 Financing Local Governments 3.1.1 Role of Funding 3.1.2 Internal Sources 3.1.3 External Sources 7 30 BRITAIN: LOCAL GOVERNMENT REFORMS 3.1 Reforms CONTENTS Introduction NOUN 8 -MPA 868 COMPARATIVE PAUDBMLINICIS T RATION - What you will learn in this course - Course aims - Course objectives Working Through This Course - Course materials - Study Units - Set Textbooks - Assignment File - Presentation Schedule Assessment - Tutor – Marked Assignments (TMAS) - Final Examination and grading - Course Marking Scheme - Course Overview How to Get the Most From this Course - Tutors and Tutorials Sum mary INTRODUCTION MPA 868 Comparative Public Administration is a 3-crdit post graduate level course designed to enable students acquire comparative knowledge of administrative systems indifferent countries with different cultural, ideological and political influences on their public services.
The course is compulsory for the Master of Public Administration Programme, and it is expected that students taking the course already have some basic knowledge of Public Administration Courses.
WHAT YOU WILL LEARN IN THIS COURSE The overall aim of MPA 868 Comparative Public Administration is to exposed students to the various political and Administrative milieu in which public administrators operate and consequently impact on administrative styles and outcomes.
During this course, you will learn about the different strategies for comparative Public Administration, this key characteristics of Public Administration is selected Countries including Nigeria, Britain, United States, France and China.
You will also acquire basic knowledge about local government Administration as a key component of Public Administration.
COURSE AIMS NOUN 9 -MPA 868 COMPARATIVE PAUDBMLINICIS T RATION This course aims to: 1.0 Familiarize you with the basics of Administrative Systems.
2.0 Equip you with the basic strategies for comparing varied administrative systems.
3.0 Describe the peculiarities and characteristics of each political and administrative systems.
4.0 Explain to you the justification for the general acceptance of local government system as a unit of administration.
5.0 Give you an appreciation of the relevance of public corporations in the developing World despite the calls for their privatization.
COURSE OBJECTIVES By the end of the course you should be able to: 1.
Describe the global context of administration.
2.
Discuss the imperatives for Comparative Public Administration 3.
Explain the Historical Development of Comparative Public Administration 4.
Identify and explain the basic strategies tools) for Comparing various administrative environments.
5.
Highlight and describe the key characteristics of the administrative systems of the selected Countries.
6.
Explain the purposes, functions and funding of local government 7.
Describe the justification for public corporations, particularly in the developing Countries.
WORKING THROUGH THIS COURSE To successfully complete this course, you are required to read all the study units, read texts identified under further reaching and other materials may be provided.
You will also be required to do some practicing self-assessment exercises, while some other assignments will be submitted for assessment.
You will find below the major unit components of the course.
COURSE MATERIALS 1.
Course Guide 2.
Study Units 3.
Text books 4.
Assignment File 5.
Presentation Schedule STUDY UNITS NOUN 10 -MPA 868 COMPARATIVE PAUDBMLINICIS T RATION There are thirty study units in MPA 868. the Unit are: Unit 1: Conceptual Analysis – Public Policy Unit 2: Conceptual Analysis – Public Administration Unit 3: Functions of Public Administration Unit 4: Differentiating Public Administration from Business Administration.
Unit 5: Universal Context of Administration Unit 6: Imperatives and History of Comparative Public Administration Unit 7: Nature, Utility and Problems of Comparative Public Administration Unit 8: Strategies of Comparing – Differences and Similarities Approaches.
Unit 9: Strategies of Comparing – Experimental, Statistical and Case study Approaches Unit 10: Evolution of Nigerian Public Administration Unit 11: Nigerian Civil Service Unit 12: Nigerian Problems of the Civil Service Unit 13: Nigerian Civil Service Reforms Unit 14: Britain: Philosophy and Ethics of Public Administration.
Unit 15: Britain: Historical Development and Characteristics of Civil Service Unit 16: Britain: Function of Civil Service Unit 17: Britain: Civil Service Reforms Unit 18: Doctrines of Public Administration in the United States of America Unit 19: United State of America: Structure and Characteristics of Civil Service Unit 20: United State of America: Functions of Civil Service.
NOUN 11 -MPA 868 COMPARATIVE PAUDBMLINICIS T RATION Unit 21: United States of America: Administrative Agencies.
Unit 22: France: Historical background of Public Administration Unit 23: France: Structure of Civil Service Unit 24: France: Characteristics of Civil Service.
Unit 25: France: Civil Service Reforms Unit 26: Nigeria and Local Government System Unit 27: Nigeria: Financing Local Government Unit 28: Britain and Local Government System.
Unit 29: Britain Financing Local Government Unit 30: Britain: Local Government Reforms.
The first two units focus on the conceptual framework and analytical approach to the study.
Unit three examines the functions of Public Administration, while unit four makes a distinction between Public Administration and Business Administration.
Unit five examines the Universal context of Administration.
Unit six and seven identify the non-perative, histor y, nature, utility and problems of comparative Public Administration.
Units eight and nine discuss the strategies for comparing.
Units ten, eleven, twelve and thirteen are about the Nigerian Public Administration.
Units fourteen, fifteen, sixteen and seventeen, deal with the British Public Administration, while units eighteen, nineteen, twenty and twenty-one focus on the Public Administrative System of the United States of America.
The next four Units i.e 21, 22, 23, and 25 analyze the French Public Service.
The last five Units deal with the Local Government Systems in Nigeria and Britain.
You are required to complete reading all relevant materials on the topics being covered.
Exercises are provided to assess you on all the topics.
Completing all required activities will enhance your understanding of the materials and evaluate your progress through it.
You will also be assisted in achieving the loebajrencitnivge s of each unit of the course by the Tutor-Marked Assignments (TMAS).
SET TEXTBOOKS Finger, S. E. (1971): Comparative Government, London, The Penguin Press.
Sharkansky, I.
(1975): Public Administration; Policy-Making in Government Agencies, Third Edition, Chicago, McNally College Publishing Company.
NOUN 12 -MPA 868 COMPARATIVE PAUDBMLINICIS T RATION Soe, C. (1990): Comparative Politics 90/91 Connecticut, the Dushkin Publishing Group.
ASSIGNMENT FILE You will find the assignment questions for each tutor-marked assignment (TMA) in the folded labeled “Assignment Files” you will find the details of the work you must submit to your tutor in the file.
The marks you obtain in these assignments will form part of your final mark for this course.
You are advised to observe the deadline for the submission of each assignment.
PRESENTATION SCHEDULE The presentation schedule provides a progress calendar which gives you information on dates for the completion on your tutor-marked assignments and how much time you should spend on each study Unit, period for revision and tutorial dates.
COURSE ASSESSMENT The formal assessment for this course consists of two, aspects.
One, the tutor- marked assignments; two, the final examination.
The information, knowledge and techniques learnt during the Course will assist you in tackling the assignments.
The tutor-marked assignments carry 40% of your total Course work.
TUTOR-MARKED ASSIGNMENTS (TMAS) There are four tutor-marked assignments in this Course.
You are required tcoo m plete all and submit to your tutor for evaluation and grading.
Each assignment carries 10% of the Course’s total marks.
Assignment questions for the Course are contained in the Assignment File.
You will be able to complete your assignments from the information in your Unit materials, set textbooks and other recommended sources.
Ensure that your assignments reach your tutor on or before the set deadlines given in the presentation schedule and Assignment File.
Extensions will not be granted after the due date unless there are exceptional situations.
Once the assignments are marked, they will be returned to you in order to provide you the necessary feedback on your assignments and to prepare you for the final examination.
FINAL EXAMINATION AND GRADING NOUN 13 -MPA 868 COMPARATIVE PAUDBMLINICIS T RATION The final examination has a weight value of 60% of total Course mark.
Texhaem ination which will be for duration of three hours will consist of questions in all areas of the Course.
COURSE MARKING SCHEME The Course marking is analyzed as shown in table 1 below: Table 1 : Course Marking Schem e ASSESSMENT MARKS Assignments 1 4 Four assignments of which each has a mark of 10% to make 40% of total Course marks.
Final Examination 60% Total 100% COURSE OVERVIEW The table below shows the number of weeks you should expend to complete the Unit and required assignments: Table 2: Course Organizer UNIT TITLE OF WORK WEEKS ASSESSMENT ACTIVITY (END OF UNIT) 1 Conceptual Analysis – 1 Public Policy 2 Conceptual Analysis – Public Administration 1 3 Functions of Public Administration 1 4 Differentiating Public Administration 1 from Business Administration 5 Universal Context of Administration 1 Assignment I 6 Imperative and History of Comparative 1 Public Administration 7 Nature, Utility and Problems of 1 Comparative Public Administration.
8 Strategies of Comparing Differences 1 and Similarities Approaches 9 Strategies of comparing Experimental, 1 Assignment 2 NOUN 14 -MPA 868 COMPARATIVE PAUDBMLINICIS T RATION Statistical and Case Study Approaches 10 Evolution of Nigerian Public 1 Administration 11 Nigerian Civil Service 1 12 Nigeria: Problems of Civil Service 1 13 Nigeria: Civil Service Reforms 1 Assignment 3 14 Britain: Philosophy and Ethics of Public 1 Administration 15 Britain: Historical Development and Characteristics of Civil Service 1 16 Britain: Function of Civil Service 1 17 Britain: Civil Service reforms 1 Assignment 4 18 Doctrine of Public Administration in the 1 United States of America 19 United States of America: Structure and 1 Characteristics of Civil Service 20 United States of America Functions of 1 Civil Service 21 United States of America: 1 Assignment 5 Administrative Agencies 22 France: Historical Background of Public 1 Administration.
23 France: Structure of Civil Service 1 24 France: Characteristics of Civil Service 1 25 France: Civil Service Reforms 1 Assignment 6 26 Nigeria and Local Government System 1 27 Nigeria: Financing Local Government 1 28 Britain and Local Government System 1 29 Britain: Financing Local Government 1 30 Britain : Local Government Reforms.
1 Assignment 7 31 Revision 1 32 Total 32 NOUN 15 -MPA 868 COMPARATIVE PAUDBMLINICIS T RATION MPA 868: COMPARATIVE PUBLIC ADMINISTRATION COURSE DEVELOPMENT Course Developers & Unit writer Dr. Ajayi Kunle Programme Leader DR. O.J.
Onwe Course Coordinator Martha U. Nkom NATIONAL OPEN UNIVERSITY OF NIGERIA NOUN 16 -MPA 868 COMPARATIVE PAUDBMLINICIS T RATION MODULE 1 UNIT I TABLE OF CONTENTS 1.0 Introduction 1.2 Objectives 3.0 Public Policy - 3.1.1.
Meaning/Definition - 3.1.2.
Deductions from the meaning - 3.1.3.
Types of Public Policy 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutor Marked Assignments (TMA) and Marking Scheme 7.0 Further Reading and other Resources 1.0 INTRODUCTION The Unit is a foundation unit focusing mainly on the interpretation of a number of concepts which include public policy, administration and public administration.
You will also learn the basic types of public policy and the deductions from the explanation of public policy as a concept.
You will be introduced to the differences between public administration and private administration.
We shall examine the concept of public administration from a universal context to show its relevance to all human formations.
NOUN 17 -MPA 868 COMPARATIVE PAUDBMLINICIS T RATION 1.2 OBJECTIVES By the end of this unit, you should be able to: 1.
Explain public policy and its role in the governing of a state 2.
Describe the major functions of public administrators 3.
Analyse the various categories of public policy 4.
Identify the key differences between public administration and private administration.
5.
Analyse and describe the various levels at which administration takes place 3.0 MAIN CONTENT 3.1 PUBLIC POLICY 3.1.1 MEANING OF PUBLIC POLICY Government exists to provide for the welfare and happiness of the citizens.
Crucial to the effective performance of this function by government is the satisfaction of the basic needs of the people which include food, shelter, clothing and physical security.
Government must also shoulder the responsibility of providing basic ingredients for economic and social development by making available the essential social infrastructure, such as good roads, treated water, electricity, telecommunication and other amenities.
These government programmes and activities are duly referred to as public policy.
Public policy can therefore be technically defined as government decisions or actions on how to resolve the various societal problems or issues that are perceived as requiring collective rather than individual actions.
It can also be seen as “policy developed by a governmental body and officials for the benefit of a society” (Kunle Ajayi, 1998:450-452).
Public policy aims at promoting public good and public interests rather than a narrow private interest.
3.1.2 Deductions from the definition of Public Policy We can draw certain deductions, from the above descriptions of public policy.
These deductions, in the analysis of Ajayi (IBLD are: NOUN 18 -MPA 868 COMPARATIVE PAUDBMLINICIS T RATION 1 Public Policy is a predetermined action with a goal or purpose.
This means, public policy is not a random action or chance behaviour of government but an action or decision purposely carried out by public officials 2 Public Policy is a decision of governmental officials and not a private or personal decision of an individual outside government.
3 Public policy, for its public orientation in terms of its source and target of action, is backed up by modalities for its implementation and enforcement.
For instance, the universal Basic Education Poverty Reduction and Anti-Corruption Policies of the Obasanjo regime.
These policies are backed by Acts of Parliament for their implementation and where necessary, spell out penalties where necessary.
4 Public policy is what has been actually decided and carried out by government and not just what government is planning or intend to do.
It is therefore what is actually done in concrete terms and not mere policy pronouncements.
5 Public Policy is regarded as positive when its effects are specifically directed at a particular problem.
For instance, the Babangida regime’s Anti-smoking Policy was directed at reducing cigarette smoking induced ailment and death.
6 Public Policy is authoritative and legitimate as it is based on law .
Public policy is made by constitutionally powered governmental officials in the various arms of government.
It is on this basis that public laws and policies are seen as binding on all.
3.1.3 TYPES OF PUBLIC POLICY Public policy can be classified into three major categories based on its intention and purpose.
These categories are: (a) Distributive Public Policy: These are policies which concern large- scale service delivery or benefits to specific sections of the population or groups.
Examples of these policies include the National Directorate of Employment, the peoples Bank, Better Life for Rural Women, Poverty Reduction and Familu Support programmes by successive regimes in Nigeria.
These programmes have specific objectives.
for instance, the Poverty Reduction Programme of the NOUN 19 -MPA 868 COMPARATIVE PAUDBMLINICIS T RATION Obasanjo regime is to provide atleast 10,000 job opportunities in each state of the federation.
Likewise, the regime’s Universal Basic Education Policy, is to reduce the level of illiteracy in the country.
(b) Regulatory Public Policies: These are policies to regulate the activities and behaviour of individuals in certain aspects and fields.
Significant among these policies are those regulating business activities such as those dealing with food and drinks consumption.
Pharmacy department of the Ministry of Health regulates the issuance of patient medicine licensed for the sale of drugs.
The National Agency for Food and Drugs Control and Administration (NAFDAC) regulates the preparation of food items and drugs including the sale of “pure water” in Nigeria, poor quality foods, drugs and drinks are usually impounded by the Agency.
The Anti-corruption Act and the Code of Conduct Bureau in Nigeria are meant to check political and administrative corruption by public officials.
(c) Redistributive Policies These are policies that government deliberately want to employ measure to correct social injustice or provide some level of equality in the population.
For instance, the free education and free medical treatment for the underprivileged people such as the under –age and the aged by some state governments.
The Land Redistribution Policy by the Mugabe government in Zimbabwe aims to redress the gross inequality in land ownership between blacks and whites in the country.
Progressive Taxation System also aims to re-distribute wealth in a country where such is adopted.
EXERCISE 1.1 1 What are the essential nature of Public Policy that are derivable from its interpretations as a concept?
2 What is Public Policy?
4.0 CONCLUSION This unit has treated the basic interpretations of Public Policy and the deductions from these interpretations.
It also deals with the types of public NOUN 20 -MPA 868 COMPARATIVE PAUDBMLINICIS T RATION policy.
The task of government is to provide for the welfare and happiness of citizens through the provision of certain basic amenities and opportunities concretely translated into actions through policies made by public/political leaders and implemented by public administrators who are loyal civil servants.
5.0 SUMMARY In this unit, you have learned that public policy refers to government decisions or actions on how to resolve the various societal problems or issues that are perceived as requiring collective action rather than individual action.
You were also told that public policy aims aptr o moting public good and public interests rather than a narrow private interest.
You also learned about certain deductions derived from the definitions of public policy which include the facts that ; One public policy is a pre- determined action with a goal or purpose.
Two, public policy is a decision of government rather than that of private decision of people or organizations outside government.
You also learned that public policy has three major categories namely: distributive public policy; regulatory public policies and re-distributive public policies 6.0 TUTORE-MARKED ASSIGNMENTS (a) What is Public Policy?
(b) Identify and discuss the basic deductions that can be made form the definitions of public policy.
(c) Discuss, citing relevant examples the major categories of public policy 7.0 FURTHER READING AND OTHER RESOURCES Ajayi, Kunle (1998) Public Policy and Political Scientists in the Babangida a dministration, 1985 – 1993” Quarterly Journal o f Administration, OAU,Ile-Ife, W1Nos 3x4, PP450-662 Ajayi, Kunle (2001) “Military Regimes and Nigerian Public Administration” in F. Omotoso (ed) Contemporary issues in Public Administration, Lagos, Bolanbay Publications Akindele, S.T., et al (1998) The Subject Matter of Political Science, Ibadan, College Press Ltd. NOUN 21 -MPA 868 COMPARATIVE PAUDBMLINICIS T RATION Dibie, R.(2000) Understand Public Policy In Nigeria: A Twenty- First Century Approach, Lagos, Mbeyi & Asscciates NOUN 22 -MPA 868 COMPARATIVE PAUDBMLINICIS T RATION UNIT 2 TABLE OF CONTENTS 1.0 Introduction 2.0` Objectives 3.1 Administration 3.1.1 Meaning/Definition of Administration 3.2 Public Administration 3.2.1 Meaning/Definition 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutor-Marked Assignments 7.0 Further Reading and other resources 1.0 INTRODUCTION This unit continues the conceptual analysis which started in Unit 1.
In this unit, we shall learn of the conceptual interpretations of administration and public administration.
The definition of “administration” exposed its generic utility, while “public administration” is a restricted form of administration for it limitation to the public sector only.
But despite this, the same basic principles guide both administration and public administration.
NOUN 23 -MPA 868 COMPARATIVE PAUDBMLINICIS T RATION 1.2 OJECTIVES By the end of this unit, you should be able to do the following: 1.
Recall the meaning of public policy, its deductions and categories.
2.
Explain the meaning of administration as a general concept 3.
Explain the concepts of “public” and “public administration’ from various view points.
3.0 MAIN CONTENT 3.1 ADMINISTRATION 3.1.1.
MEANING/DEFINITION You learned in the first unit that public policies are the decisions of government about what programmes are to be executed for the enhancement of the happiness of the people by providing their basic needs and other requirements for development.
You also learned that it is what government actually carried out, executed or implemented that are really referred to as public policies and not what programmes or amenities that government promised the people.
Therefore, it is the task of government to continuously decide and ptrhaynssilcaatell yin t o actions by being executed.
The instrument for executing policies is referred to as administration.
Concretely, administration is the organization and management of societal, group and organizational resources for the attainment of planned goals.
Augustus Adebayo (1985:35) conceives administration as “the organization and direction of persons in order to accomplish a specific end.” In the same vein, Priftner and Presthus (1960:3) describe it as the activity or process concerned with the means of carrying out prescribed ends.
From the above, administration is seen as the execution of policies.
Without administration as a means, policy as an end cannot be implemented, that is, administration facilitates the management and organization of resources for the implementation of policies NOUN 24 -MPA 868 COMPARATIVE PAUDBMLINICIS T RATION Exercise 1.
Examine the various Definitional views on the concept of administration 3.2.1.
MEANING OF PUBLIC ADMINISTRATION The society is made up of both public and private sectors.
The public sector is the entire collectivity of any polity or society with the control under the aegis of the government.
The private sector concerns the narrow interest of the individual or the few rather than the entire societal populace.
Public administration is a combination of ‘public’ and ‘administration’ which have individual interpretations.
Public administration as combined words can therefore be simply defined as the organization and management of public resources for the attainment of public goals.
Dwight Waldo (1955) sees public administration as a process of carrying into effect governmental law contained in various policies, which is an expression of government’s authoritative allocation of values and action.
In a similar way, Herald Gortner (1977) views public administration as involving co-ordination of all organized activities, having as its purpose the implementation of public policy.
From these descriptions, public administration is the vehicle for implementing government programmes EXERCISE 1.
Differentiate between public sector and private sector 2.
Examine the concept of public administration from at least three view – points 4.0 CONCLUSION This unit has examined the definitions of administration and public administration for your better understanding and comprehension.
Administration is conceived as the organization and direction of persons in order to accomplish a specific end.
It is believed that without administration as a way and means, policy as an end cannot be implemented.
Public administration is also defined as organization and management of public resources for the attainment of public goals.
NOUN 25 -MPA 868 COMPARATIVE PAUDBMLINICIS T RATION Public administration is seen as the action part of government.
This is so because it is the vehicle for implementing government programmes.
5.0 SUMMARY In this unit, you learned the definitions of administration and public administration.
You were told that administration is the process and means for carrying out prescribed ends.
It is the means of executing policies.
You also learned that without administration as a means, policy as an end cannot be implemented.
You also learned that public administration as a concept concerns the organization and management of public resources for the attainment of public goals.
It is a process of carrying into effect governmental law contained in various policies.
The outcome of the process is the expression of government’s authoritative allocation of values and action.
6.0 TUTOR-MARKED ASSIGNMENTS 1(a) What is public administration?
(b) In what ways is public administration regarded as the action part of government?
2(a) What is administration?
(b) Differentiate public sector from private sector (c) Examine administration in relation to both the public and private sectors.
7.0 Further Reading and Other Resources Ajayi, Kunle (1998) “Public Policy and Political Scientists in the Babangida administration, 1985-1993” Q u a r te rly Journal o f Administration, OAU, Ile-Ife,Vol.
XXX No 3&4 pp450-662, (Dec) Ajayi, Kunle (2000).
International Administration and Economic Relations in a Changing World, Ibadan, MAJAB Gortner, Herald F (1977) Administration in the Public Sector, New York, Harper & Row NOUN 26 -MPA 868 COMPARATIVE PAUDBMLINICIS T RATION Pfiffner, JM.
AND R.V.
Presthus (1960) Public Administration, New York, Ronald Press Stillman, H.R.J.
(1980) Public Administration: Concepts and Cases, London, Haughton Mifflin Waldo, Dwight (1955) The Study of Public Administration, New York, Random House NOUN 27 -MPA 868 COMPARATIVE PAUDBMLINICIS T RATION UNIT 3 TABLE OF CONTENTS 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objectives 3.1 Functions of Public Administration 3.1.1.
Functions 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutor-Marked Assignments and Marking Scheme 7.0 Further Reading and other Resources.
1.0 INTRODUCTION The last unit treats the definitions of administration and public administration.
In this unit, the traditional functions of public administration shall be examined.
The unit will tell you the daily functions performed by public administrators/officials working in government and non-private enterprises/organizations.
Besides the regular, traditional functions being performed by public administrators.
They also perform some quasi political functions relating to policy-making, law- making and adjudicating.
You will also learn the stabilizing role of public NOUN 28 -MPA 868 COMPARATIVE PAUDBMLINICIS T RATION administrators in the state, particularly in the developing world during periods of political crises.
2.0 OBJECTIVES You should be able to do the following by the end of this unit: 1 Recall the conceptual clarification of administration and public administration 2 Identify and discuss in details the traditional functions of public administrators 3 Explain the quasi-political roles of public administrators 4 Analyse the relevance of public administrators in period of political instability.
3.0 MAIN CONTENT 3.1 FUNCTIONS OF PUBLIC ADMINISTRATION 3.1.1.
Functions In the last unit, you learned that public administration is cinotnecrpepretuteadll ays the organization and management of public resources for the attainment of public goals.
You also learned that public administration actually deals with what government is actually doing and not what it plans to do.
Public administration is the action part of government.
Actions of government and what it does are best perceived through what public officials are seen doing.
Public administration performs some traditional roles which are best categorized by Luther Gulick’s famous acronym – POSDCORB.
The acronym contains the first initials of the seven most obvious tasks administrators perform.
The letters in the acronym respectively stand for – Planning; organizing; staffing; directing; coordinating; reporting; and budgeting.
Let us explain them in details.
NOUN 29 -MPA 868 COMPARATIVE PAUDBMLINICIS T RATION Planning: Kunle Ajayi (2000:3) describes planning as a process of decision – making which involves developing a broad outline of activities to be carried out and the methods of execution as to how to accomplish goal or objectives of the establishment.
Planning has two broad categories namely tactical planning and strategic planning.
Tactical Planning concerns short range, short duration programmes ranging from one, to five years.
An example of this is government’s annual budgets.
Strategic planning covers a much longer period, usually ranging from five to fifty years or more.
Strategic planning is more prevalent in developed countries of Canada, United States, France, Germany, and Britain, to mention a few.
Some developing countries also have such long-range plans, for examples, Nigeria under the Abacha regime instituted VISION 2010, while South Korea has 2020 economic agenda.
In general, planning is concerned with “what” and how of organizations.
The “what’ are the objectives/goals, while “how” concerns parameters for achieving the goals.
Organising.
This deals with designing the structural framework of aenst a blishment.
It provides the formal structure, flow of authority, thhiee ra rchy and flow of communication.
The organizational chart depicts the structure of the establishment.
The efficiency of any organization, in part, is determined by its level of organization.
Staffing: No organization can attain its goals without the human resources.
Staffing borders on personnel recruitment and employment into the establishment.
It also covers the whole range of personnel management including industrial relations.
Directing; Personnel act on instructions and directives in carrying out their duties.
Directing therefore concerns giving specific and general directions on a continuous and regular basis by supervisors to the subordinates.
Directives, guidance and initiatives are provided by the leadership during policy-making process and execution, in Nigeria, the Minister or Commissioner gives policy directives in his ministry.
Coordinating: Organisations are structured into various departments sections, divisions and units.
The activities of sub-units need be coordinated if organizational goals are to be realized.
At the federal level, the activities of the various ministries are coordinated by the Secretary to the fgeodveerranl m ent.
NOUN 30 -MPA 868 COMPARATIVE PAUDBMLINICIS T RATION Reporting: This is a feedback system from subordinates to the superiors on the achievement of the set goals of the organization.
The penrocboluenmtesr e d in the process of attaining the goals are also forwarded upward to the management for the desired attention and rectification.
Reporting also provides a system of measuring the success or failures of the organization with a view to know if there is a need for improvement where necessary.
Budgeting: Budgeting concerns the financial management of the organization.
No organization can effectively function without financial resources either internally or externally sourced.
Therefore, budgeting covers fiscal planning, accounting and control.
It also involves the need for accountability and plugging of financial leakages and corruption in the public set up.
Budgeting also suggests ways ogfe n e rating financial resources which may include both internal and external avenues.
Auditing of the public resources is also part of budgeting.
This is necessary in order to instill financial discipline and prevent misappropriation, wastage and embezzlement of public resources.
Public administrators performs all these functions in.
in addition to these, they also perform some other functions.
1.
They maintain the cont6inuity of government.
During periods of political instability when constituted governments are either sacked by coup de tats or societal revolt resulting in the removal of authorized public administrators civil servants usually hold force by continuing to provide the necessary social services until a government can emerge.
Public administrators in Nigeria has performed this role several times, especially during the coups of 1966 and 1983.
2.
Public administrators maintain law and order.
They assist in the maintenance of law and order.
They assist in the provision oadf m inistrative legislation for the regulation of certain activities.
For instance, regulations guiding sales of patient medicine.
3.
In developing countries like Nigeria, public administrators are responsible for the provision of some social amenities and services such as pipe-borne water, electricity and refuse disposal.
EXERCISE Discuss the relevance of public administrators in any political system NOUN 31 -MPA 868 COMPARATIVE PAUDBMLINICIS T RATION 4.0 CONLUSION The unit has discussed the fundamental and other functions of public administrators in the political system.
While their traditional functions include planning, organizing, staffing, directing coordinating, reporting and budgeting, their other functions include assisting in policy formulation, policy implementation, provision and maintenance of social services, regulating certain trades and maintenance of continuity of the state during periods of political crises and instability.
5.0 SUMMARY You have learned in this unit the basic functions of public administrators.
Specifically, you learned that public administrators perform the functions of organizing, staffing, directing, coordinating, reporting and budgeting.
You were also told that they perform functions such as advising political office holders on decision-making and the implementation public policies.
They also engage in some other roles such as regulating certain activities such as sale of patient medicines and house building.
They also maintain the continuity of the political system during moments of political instability 6.0 TUTOR- MARKED ASSIGNMENTS 1 Discuss the primary responsibilities of public administrators in political societies 2 Besides functions code named as POSDCORB, enumerate and discuss other functions performed by Public administrators in developing countries.
7.0 Further Reading and Other Resources Ajayi, Kunle (2000) International Administration and Economic Relations in a changing world, Ibadan, MAJAB Gortner, Herald F. (1977) Administration in the Public Sector, New York, Harper and Row Kolawole, Dipo, (ed, 1997) Readings in Political Science, Ibadan, Dekaal NOUN 32 -MPA 868 COMPARATIVE PAUDBMLINICIS T RATION Pfiffner, J.M AND R.V.
Presthus (1960): Public Administration, New York, Ronald Press.
Stillman, H.R.J.
(1980) Public Administration: Concepts and Cases, London, Houghton, Mifflin NOUN 33 -MPA 868 COMPARATIVE PAUDBMLINICIS T RATION UNIT 4 TABLE OF CONTENTS 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objectives 3.1 Differentiating Public Administration from Business Administration 3.1.1 Public Administration Versus Business Administration 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutor-Marked Assignments and Marking Scheme 7.0 Further Reading and other Resources 1.0 INTRODUCTION This unit discusses mainly on the remarkable differences between Public administration and business administration.
You will learn about the basic distinctions between the two particularly as regards their goals, sources of finance, level of risk involvement and profit orientation.
The identification of these distinctions will enable us to know why public administrators behave the way they do particularly regarding their conservative outlooks and why business administrators tend to be radical and initiative and action-oriented in their behaviours.
2.0 OBJECTIVES By the end of this unit, you should be able to: 1.
Recall the traditional functions of public administrators.
NOUN 34 -MPA 868 COMPARATIVE PAUDBMLINICIS T RATION 2.
Explain the end goals of both public administration and business administration as administrative practices.
3 Explain reasons for the varied degrees of risk taking by public administrators and business administrators 4.
Identify and discuss the sources of finance to both public and private enterprises 5.
Evaluate the level of differences between public administration and business administration 3.0 MAIN CONTENT 3.1 DIFFERENTIATING PUBLIC ADMINISTRATION FROM BUSINESS ADMINISTRATION 3.1.1 PUBLIC ADMINISTRATION VERSUS BUSINESS ADMINISTRATION You learned in the last unit that public administrators perform various functions including the traditional functions of administrators in general.
You will recall that these traditional functions are planning, organizing, staffing, directing, coordinating, reporting and budgeting.
Other functions of public administrators are: participating in decision-making either directly or in terms of merely providing the necessary information and advice; Implementation of government policies delegated legislating; administrative judicial functions; administrative and maintenance of social services; performing regulatory roles; and government during periods of political instability and uncertainty.
Public administration is remarkably different from private administration otherwise called business administration.
We shall only highlight the basic distinctions between them by merely stating the characteristics of business administration only: 1 Business administration is the marshalling of resources for the attainment of private ends often referred to as profit.
Whereas, public administration mobilized governmental resources for the realization of public goals embracing the people’s welfare and happiness.
Thus, government business is not run for the purpose of financial profits.
2.
Private enterprise are financed with private funds often sourced through share-holding and raising of capital from financial institutions and the stock exchange with substantial interests paid.
Whereas, public enterprises are mostly financed through public funds.
NOUN 35 -MPA 868 COMPARATIVE PAUDBMLINICIS T RATION 3. Business Administrators are risk takers.
They can invest money in any type of business with only a hope of success rather than any assured certainty.
If the investment succeeds, the businessman reaps it s profit, and if it fails, he records losses.
Public administrators avoid risk taking, since it is public money that is involved, any misuse or misappropriation of public money is often punished.
While public corporations may not be profit oriented, at the same time, they arte not expected to run at a loss.
Despite athe differences between public administration and business administration, they share a common feature in that both operate within a formal bureaucratic, organizational set up.
EXERCISE4.1 1.
Explain in what ways is public administration different from business/private administration 4.0 CONCLUSION This unit explains the basic differences between public administration and business administration.
The two perform the traditional functions oadf m inistration namely: planning, organizing, staffing, directing, coordinating, reporting and budgeting.
These are common characteristics of both administrative sectors.
Public administration operates in the realm of the public sector, while business administration operates in the private sector.
As fields of study, public administration and business administration demand different academic requirements for admission.
Different subject combinations are required.
5.0 SUMMARY In this unit, you have learned the basic differences between padumbliinci s tration and business administration.
Specifically you learned that public administration is concerned with marshalling public resources to achieve public oriented goals.
On the other hand, business administration marshals resources for the attainment of private ends often referred as profits.
You also learned that while private business enterprises source for scarce funds through share-holding and raising of capital from financial institutions, public administration relies on taxes, official levies, license fees and others.
You NOUN 36 -MPA 868 COMPARATIVE PAUDBMLINICIS T RATION equally learnt that public administration is conservative and therefore avoids risk taking, while business administration is dynamic and regularly engages in risk taking 6.0 TUTOR-MARKED ASSIGNMENTS 1 Identify and explain in details the common functions performed by both public administrators and business administrators 2 Highlight and discuss the fundamental differences between public administration and business administration.
7.0 FURTHER READING AND OTHER RESOURCES Ajayi, Kunle (2000): International Administration and Economic Relations in a Changing World, Ibadan, MAJAB Gortner, Herald F. (1977) Administration in the Public sector, New York, Harper and Row Piffiner, J.M and R.V.
Presthus (1960) Public Administration, New York, Ronald Press Stillman, H.R.J.
(1980) Public Administration: Concepts and cases, London, Houghton Mifflin.
NOUN 37 -MPA 868 COMPARATIVE PAUDBMLINICIS T RATION UNIT5 TABLE OF CONTENTS 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objectives 3.0 Universal context of Administration 3.1 Administration at family level 3.1.1 Administration at Organizational level 3.1.2 Administration at State level 3.1.3 Administration at International level 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutor-Marked Assignments 7.0 Further Reading and other Resources.
1.0 INTRODUCTION You learned the basic concepts in this course in unit 1. you should recall some of these concepts and their explanations You learned that administration is about organization and management.
Individuals, groups, organizations and states have goals, but goals cannot be achieved without resources.
At the same time, resources need to be well organized and properly managed to realize the goals.
Public administration is therefore the organization and management of governmental resources for the attainment of public goals.
It can also be described as the processes of implanting public policies and government NOUN 38 -MPA 868 COMPARATIVE PAUDBMLINICIS T RATION programmes.
You also learned that public administrators perform such traditional roles as planning, directing, organizing, coordinating, reporting, staffing, and budgeting .
Public administrators, as you learned, execute public polices.
Public polices are actual programmes of the government which could of varied types such as: regulatory, distributive and redistributive public policies.
In this unit, you will learn about the universality of aAddmmininiisstrtraatitoionn.
i s a universal activity in that it takes at all levels of human groups – individual, family, state and international level.
Each of these contextual levels has goals and constantly seek resources to realize them 2.0 OBJECTIVES In this unit, you should be able to do the following activities: 1.
Recall the concepts of public policy and public administration and their interpretations or explanations.
2.
Explain deductions from the interpretations of the concepts.
3. identify and describe the types of public policy 4.
Explain the functions of public administration.
5.
Differentiate between public administration at the state level and public at the international level 3.0 MAIN CONTENT 3.1 THE UNIVERSAL CONTEXT OF ADMINISTRATION 3.1.1 ADMINISTRATION OF FAMILY LEVEL Administration has been earlier described as a tool for attaining set goals by groups, organizations and the society at large by utilizing available human and material resources.
Thus, administration is an activity of all human and social formations.
The family is most primary human social formation where administration first takes place.
The couple as a family has goals, e.g to have a baby, buy a car, build a house, etc.
Each of these goals requires adequate planning and management of available resources.
The couple needs to buy every necessary need of the new baby, eg, courts, pram, walker, etc.
properly managed by the wife.
A decision has to be taken whether to buy a family car now or build a house.
Whichever decision taken will depend on the organization and management of available resources.
Unless these are NOUN 39 -MPA 868 COMPARATIVE PAUDBMLINICIS T RATION properly done by both husband and wife, the family face a serious problem in achieving it set goals.
3.1.2 ADMINISTRATION AT ORGANIZATIONAL LEVEL.
Organization as collectivity of people, has set goals being pursued for achievement Organization could be formal or informal.
Formal organizations include; governmental agencies and ministries; private business enterprises, such as, banks, construction firms, oil companies, etc; religious bodies, such as churches and mosques; and other non-governmental organizations, such as, Human Right Organizations, such as the Civil Liberty Organisation (CLO).
Informal organizations may include just mere socializing groups without any rigid official structures.
Administration takes place more in formal organizations than in informal ones.
Formal organizations have clear goals, structure and lines ocof m mand and communication.
They mobilize organizational resources for the realization of the goals.
In most cases, organizational chart is provided to indicate lines of official relationship.
They also have a clear leadership at the head of management.
For instance, in the church, the Bishop stands as the managing director, while priests at Parish levels may be regarded as directors.
The catechist and wardens all have roles to play in the church administration.
The mosque also has its own organizational hierarchy like the church.
Administration in banks and companies seems to be more transparent to most people than the earlier examples – churches and mosques.
3.1.3 ADMINISTRATION AT STATE LEVEL Administration is perceived as synonymous with government.
Administration takes place at all governmental levels – federal, State and local governments.
Each level of government has its own distinct structure of administration.
At the federal level, the President is at the helm of affairs assisted by his ministers, special advisers and special assistants.
TSehcer e tary to the federal government coordinates all activities of government including the ministers.
There is a head of service to direct the civil servants.
At the state level, the structure is the same with the federal government with the governor as chief executive and assisted by commissioners, special assistants, head of service and permanent secretaries.
The Chairman heads the local government.
He NOUN 40 -MPA 868 COMPARATIVE PAUDBMLINICIS T RATION appoints his supervisory councilors and secretary to the local government.
Career officials also assist in the administration of local resources.
Each of the levels of government prepares budget annually and sources for financial resources to provide social amenities and services which are geared towards promoting people’s happiness and societal development which are over- riding goals of government.
3..1.4 ADMINISTRATION AT INTERNATIONAL LEVEL Administration takes place beyond group, local and state levels.
It takes place also at the international level.
This manifests in international organizations such as the United Nations (UN), African Union (AU) the commonwealth, League of Arab States (LAS), the World and the European Union, to mention a few.
Each of these organizations have set objectives and eolragbaonriaztaet io nal structure with personnel to carry out their activities.
They prepare annual budgets to provide for their finances.
They have heads and secretariat staff to execute agreed policies.
the practice of administration from the primary level officially to international organizations shows the universality of the concept and its inevitability in organized human associations with specific goals.
EXRCISE 2.1 Discuss the assertion that “administration is a universal phenomenon.” 4.0 CONCLUSION In this unit, you have learned the basic concepts that are useful for the understanding of administration at the levels of public, private family, group, local, state and international organizations.
You need to practically observe this fact in your daily experiences with human social formations.
5.0 SUMMARY As a sum up in this introductory unit, administration and organization and management of resources to attain set goals.
As a fall out of this definition, we described public administration as an instrument for executing and coordinating governmental policies meant to achieve public welfare.
Administration as a universal practice performs similar function at all levels.
NOUN 41 -MPA 868 COMPARATIVE PAUDBMLINICIS T RATION 6.0 TUTOR-MARKED ASSIGNMENT Question: Taking a government ministry of your choice, describe the organizational structure with the aid of an organisationa chart.
Make your assignment to be as comprehensive as possible but should not be more than 10 typed A4 double spaced pages.
7.0 FURTHER READING AND OTHER RESOURCES Ajayi, Kunle (1998) “Public Policy and Political Scientists in the Babangida administration, 1985-1993” Quarterly Journal of Administration, OAU, Ile-Ife Ajayi, Kunle (2000) International Administration and Economic Relations in a Changing world, Ibadan, MAJAB Gortner, Herald F. (1977) Administration in the Public Sector , New York, Harper & Row Pfiffner, J.M and R.V.
Presthus (1960) Public Administration, New York, Ronald Press.
Stillman, H.R.J.
(1980) Public Administration: Concepts and Cases, London, Houghton Mifflin.
Waldo, Dwight (1955) The Study of Public Administration, New York, Random House NOUN 42 -MPA 868 COMPARATIVE PAUDBMLINICIS T RATION MODULE 2 UNIT 1 TABLE OF CONTENTS 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objectives 3.1 Imperatives for Comparative Study 3.1.1 Every day experiences 3.1.2 Requirement for service of policies and public administration 3.1.3 Understanding administrative behaviour 3.2 Historical Development 3.2.1 Development before WWII- World war 11 3.2.2 Development from end of WWII- World war 11 3.2.3 Development in contemporary times.
4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutor Marked Assignments: TMA and Marked Scheme 7.0 Further Reading and other Resources 1.0 INTRODUCTION This is Unit of MPA 868; It focuses mainly on why it is necessary to embark on a comparative study of public administration in dseiftftienrgens.t you will learn the evolution of comparative public administration NOUN 43 -MPA 868 COMPARATIVE PAUDBMLINICIS T RATION as a discipline.
A cross national comparison of political systems is as old as history having had it root in Europe through the works of Aristotle in 4B.C.
You will learn in the unit the different phases of the growth and development of the study.
2.0 OBJECTIVES By the end of this unit, you should be able to: 1.
Explain why comparative public administration has become an indispensable discipline.
2.
Explain how comparative public administration emerged through the historical eras 3.
Analyse the nature of comparative public administration.
4.
Identify and explain the fundamental motives why students study comparative public administration 5.
Evaluate reasons for different administrative behaviour in various settings.
3.0 MAIN CONTENT 3.1 IMPERATIVES FOR COMPARATIVE STUDY 3.1.1 EVERYDAY EXPERIENCES You go out everyday either to your school or workplace, market, church, mosque, travel to other cities, tourist centres or to other countries to find out that we are meeting people with familiar looks.
We also find out that in our daily contacts, we evaluate some people as either beautiful or ugly, good or bad, hostile or friendly, tall or short, fat or thin.
We also compare non-human objects.
Some houses are just simply beautiful and attractive while others are adjudged as unfascinating and inhabitable.
While you do all these, we are directly or indirectly engaging icno m parative analysis.
To compare, identify similarities and differences by us are part of the in-built nature of man.
Comparison, is therefore, a daily affair in our contracts and observation with people and objects.
NOUN 44 -MPA 868 COMPARATIVE PAUDBMLINICIS T RATION 3.1.2 REQUIREMENTS FOR SCIENCE OF POLITICS AND PUBLIC ADMINISTRATION Public administration is a social science or management discipline which relies on scientific approach in its findings.
It is about understanding all variables/phenomena in administrative settings.
To make its findings valid, it relies on observations for factual data.
Similar variables are grouped together, while variations are noted.
Feit et al (1978) note in their introduction that the more variations displayed by examples, the more likely it is that many cases will have to be studied before rgeelniaebraleli z ations will be possible, thus, to make a valid egxepnlearnaalitzoartyio n on any issue, we need to compare assembled facts (data).
It is therefore a key requirement of science to gather information (data) and examples, compare them, and based on this make accurate explanatory generalizations, which are later built into theories.
Observations make comparison possible, the latter in turn make scienitific generalization and theory building possible.
3.1.3 UNDERSTANDING ADMINISTRATIVE BEHAVIOUR Your knowledge of comparative public administration will enable you to appreciate the behavioural attitude in different milieu.
Public administrators across dress differently, exhibit various degrees of efficiency, earn different salaries, different degrees of conformity with administrative law, perceive accountability and abuse of office (corruption) from different perspectives, and so on.
All these are a function of varied factors.
Administrative practices are therefore similar in some countries, which share some commonalities of factors, while not so in many others due to variations in these factors.
Comparative public administration provides the methodological tool for understanding and comprehending whatever similarities and differences in the different political systems.
EXERCISE 2.1 1 In terms of methodological approach, compare Public administration with other disciplines in the social or management sciences.
1.
Discuss the requirements of scientific study.
NOUN 45 -MPA 868 COMPARATIVE PAUDBMLINICIS T RATION 3.2 HISTORICAL DEVELOPMENT 3.2.1 DEVELOPMENT BEFORE WWII – WORLD WAR 11 Comparative study of public administration in its rudimentary form evolve at about the 4.B.C.
through the works of Aristotle.
Aristotle was a Western political Theorist.
How did Aristotle start this?
In his curiosity to know what happens in other political systems regarding their laws, governmental systems and regime types, he wanted to find opuert c eivable similarities and differences.
In doing this, Aristotle assembled about 130 different national constitutions and carefully studied them.
His findings produced two major enduring outcomes- namely; one, he was able to evaluate some governments as good or bad.
Two, he categorized political systems into different classifications as shown in figure 1 below: Figure 1 Aristotle Classificatory Scheme No of Person Who rules In whose interest Power is exercised All (Collective) Themselves (Sectional) One Monarchy Tyranny Kingship Few Aristocracy Oligarchy Many Polity Democracy or mob rule Source: Robert,D (1984:64) Modern Political Analysis’ Englawood Cliffs, Prentice Hall The foundation laid by Aristotle later became the basis for contemporary comparative study in politics and public administration.
The development of comparative public administration in its contemporary form is traceable to the periods between 1895 and 1920 when comparative research efforts gained momentum.
Max Weber, a German sociologist played significant roles in further advancing its status as a dRioscbieprlti nFeri.
e d (1902:318 -344) acknowledged Weber’s contributions when he opined that “Lifted comparative political and administrative studies NOUN 46 -MPA 868 COMPARATIVE PAUDBMLINICIS T RATION from a level of analysis to a height of sophistication, and with breath of scope seldom attained since.
More European Scholars during the 1930s carried out various other comparative studies.
3.2.2 DEVELOPMENT FROM END OF WWII – WORLD WAR 11 At the end of World War (WW) II, the centre of comparative stusy of politics and administration shifted from its traditional European base to the United States Interest in comparative study became high, a development fuelled by the American Political Science Association (APSA) and the Society for public Administration (SPA).
Several scholars in these associations demonstrated aggressive research efforts towards building a universal comparative theory of public administration.
Another impetus for the growing interest by scholars in comparative studies was the technical assistance programmes of the United States, United Nations and Private Foundations to countries after the war.
Consequently, American students and teachers of public administration and professionals found themselves in foreign countries.
This exposure therefore stimulated interest in making comparisons between American and Western and non- Western political systems and practices (Dwight Waldo, 1984:4-18) The post-war period also coincides with the behavioural Science movement in Europe and particularly in America.
The movement was characterized by scientific methodology in making enquries.
Scientific enquiry became a norm in many disciplines, and without being an exception, it was extended to the study of administration with emphasis on observation and other techniques for data collection for hypothesis testing and generalizations 3.2.3 DEVELOPMENT IN CONTEMPORARY TIMES The impact of behavioural sciences continued to be felt in the feed ocof m parative administration beyond the post-war era.
The comparative administrative group (CAG) was formed in the 1960s.
the group committed all available resources towards building a universal theory of public administration through comparative study and analysis.
Towards this end, scholars developed various theories for the understanding of different Societies.
Fred Riggs, for instance, developed the “theory of Prismatic Society” based on his study of public administration in nsoocni-ewtieesst.e r n Based on his findings, Riggs observed that the ninosnti-twuteisotnesrn w ere legal-rational in form but traditional in fact (Riggs, 1964) NOUN 47 -MPA 868 COMPARATIVE PAUDBMLINICIS T RATION Scholarly interest in comparative studies not only continued during the 1960s but it also special beyond Euro-American spheres to the Middle East, Asia, Africa and latin America Between 1965 and 1975, publications on comparative public administration flourished as reflected in a number of books written basically on comparative public administration and articles on the topic published in journals and in monographs and conferences procedures.
The scientific basis of the study continues to be consolidated and intensifying efforts in it’s competition with the Natural and Physical sciences regarding the scientific methodological approach.
The current era of globalization regarding the ease in information gathering through super information technology has facilitated easier comparative research as data on cross-national administrative practice can be sourced on the internet and Web sites, Global system of mobile phones equally eased the problems of oral research interviews is now, therefore, equipped with advanced methodological tools than ever before.
NOUN 48 -MPA 868 COMPARATIVE PAUDBMLINICIS T RATION UNIT 2 NATURE, UTILITY AND PROBLEMS OF COMPARATIVE PUBLIC ADMINISTRATION TABLE OF CONTENT 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objectives 3.0 Nature, Utility and Problems of Public Administration 3.0.1 Nature 3.0.2 Utility 3.0.3 Problems 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 References 7.0 Tutor-marked Assignment 1.0.
INTRODUCTION In the last unit you learned the basis for studying comparative padumbliinci s tration and its historical background.
You specifically learned that making comparisons between objects and people is as old as man.
This is because our everyday activities are full of making comparisons either directly or indirectly.
However, you learned that the initial most systematic attempt at comparing system was made by Aristotle.
His achievements invariably became the foundation for contemporary studies in comparative public administration.
You also learned that after World War II, the focus odfe v e lopment attention of comparative studies shifted from Europe to the United States where the government, the United Nations and private institutions sponsored varied technical assistance programmes which enabled public administrators, lecturers of public administration and professionals to NOUN 49 -MPA 868 COMPARATIVE PAUDBMLINICIS T RATION travel to foreign countries.
This exposure stipulated great interests icno m parative study researches on American, European and Non-western political systems.
In this unit, you will learn the nature, utility and problems of comparative public administration as a discipline.
The nature of comparative public administration reflects its major concerns as a field of study, while utility is concerned with its values.
Like other disciplines, comparative study of local government has its own peculiar problems.
2.0 Objectives By the end of this study, you will be able to: 1.
Explain the subject matter of comparative public administration.
2.
Describe the values of the study 3.
Appreciate the major constraints facing comparative studies researches 4.
Evaluate why administrators behave the way they do.
5.
Explain the major problems confronting researchers of cross-national administrative studies.
3.0 NATURE, UTILITY AND PROBLEMS OF PUBLIC ADMINISTRATION 3.0.1 THE NATURE OF COMPARATIVE PUBLIC ADMINISTRATION The primary goal of the discipline is in line with the scientific demand which is “to build and test propositions about administration, an assumption that is universally shared within the public administration fraternity” (Sigelman, 1976: 621-25).
It is committed to verifiable generalized statements about public administration across political systems and different environments.
It is believed by scholar of comparative public administrative studies that public officials, political advisers, public administrators and the entire political process will perform better if public administration and its practice can be rooted in developed theoretical and empirical foundation.
SSeigee l man (1 bid) believes that public administration which rejects theorizing and empirical research as its core activities denies its adherents (parnadct i tioners) any legitimate claim to political influence.
NOUN 50 -MPA 868 COMPARATIVE PAUDBMLINICIS T RATION Essentially, therefore, comparative public administration’s major interest is building theories from the study of public administrative practice in different political setting so as to generate a universal theory of public administration that can be applied to varied cultures and political environments.
3.0.2 UTILITY OF COMPARATIVE PUBLIC ADMINISTRATION Comparative public administration has two major values which we enumerate as follows: i.
It affords us as scholars, analysis and practitioners greater understanding of public administration across national boundaries.
Observed differences in practice and scope can be situated within varied identifiable factors including ecology which encompasses very many other factors such as the type of political system, culture, economy, level of education and others.
These factors will also determine the level of efficiency of practitioners.
Thus, the public administrative system can be evaluated as efficient or inefficient depending on the prevailing internal factors.
ii.
Understanding administrative behaviour of bureaucrats and political officials is another enduring legacy of comparative administrative studies.
Bureaucrats or administrators of each country have their peculiar characters and behavior different from others in another country.
Therefore, among the tasks of comparative public administration is to establish propositions about administrative behaviour which cover different political settings.
Generally knowledge of comparative public administration saves scholars and practitioners some embarassment and surprise when having the advantage to operate beyond their immediate political and cultural environment.
3.0.2 UTILITY OF COMPARATIVE PUBLIC ADMINISTRATION As a field of study, comparative public administration scholars are confronted with various limitations and challenges.
First, is the problem of openness of countries.
Some countries are open, while others are closed with varied degress.
Freedom in terms of accessibility to crucial data is greater in the liberal, developed western countries.
Data on issues even including to a large extent on security and defence, are readily available to comparative researchers.
But one cannot say the same about closed societies such as china and the former socialist states.
Search for comparative studies could be NOUN 51 -MPA 868 COMPARATIVE PAUDBMLINICIS T RATION translated to espionage, stealing of cultural property, spying and sabotage.
These are all criminal offences with heavy punishments.
Therefore, conducting comparative research in these political systems is a high risk.
Further compounding the problem of data gathering is the issue of differences in the level of information dissemination.
Some countries such as twhees t ern world enjoy advanced information technology including modern telephone communication systems and satellite radio and television facilities, and marine and orbit information technology.
These array of technological inventions afford data collection of about other countries without leaving one’s shores.
The third world does not enjoy these kind of facilities as they lack the technological know-how for developing them.
While data collection through internet and website exploration has become a tradition in America, Europe and Australia, it is yet to take proper shape in academic researches in Africa, Latin Americal and Asia because of lack of basic infrastructures such as regular provision of electricity.
Regime types also condition accessibility to information and data.
Some countries are democratic, while some under some forms of dictatorship including military rule.
Democratic regimes afford researches ample freedom to conduct their investigations and collect data including thorough interviews and examination of documents such as parliamentary proceedings, cabinet papers and so on.
But dictatorial regimes fore-close such opportunities, and researchers can even be passed as spies, saboteurs and opposition agents.
Comparative studies are therefore made difficult in such environments.
Introduction of behavioural, scientific approach to the study of administrative behaviour is also faulted.
It is believed that people including political and bureaucratic official are unpredictable, and therefore not readily subjected to scientific assessment compared to non-living things and lower animals.
The non-predictability of political leaders had on many occasions led to frequent changes in administrative systems and styles.
For instance, in Nigeria, the Babangida administration changed from permanent secretary to director general in 1988, while the situation was reversed by the Abacha regime in 1997.
Some other administrative changes have been effected by incumbent Obasanjo regime.
Therefore, instability of leaders, coupled with actual political instability is a major problem to comparative studies in padumbliinci s tration.
EXERCISE 2.3 In what ways are the administrative behaviour of public administrators in your country different from those of another named country.
NOUN 52 -MPA 868 COMPARATIVE PAUDBMLINICIS T RATION 4.0 CONCLUSION You have learnt that your daily experiences have always involved comparing people and objects.
Comparative public administration as a scientific discipline make it possible for you to explain administrative behaviour of administrators across national borders.
Its methodological orientation become more emphasized since the end of World War II and its progressive development has not waned since then.
You learned also that comparative study of public administration go beyond any one national border, has its own limitations embedded in human factors and variations in level of political stability.
5.0 SUMMARY This unit has explained to you why it is necessary to study comparative public administration.
You were told that it made possible understanding of administrative behaviour in different political and cultural settings.
You also leaned about the historical development of the field right from the time of Aristole to this present age of globalization.
You also learned about the nature, utility and problems of comparative public administration.
Comparative public administration provides theories that can be universally applied in the analysis of public administration of countries.
The unpredictability of human beings coupled with variations in the degree of openness and technological development of countries pose the most serious problem to comparative studies of public administration.
6.0 REFERENCES Agagu, A.A (2001) Comparative Political and Administrative Studies, Ado- Ekiti, Department of Political Science Feit, E. et at (1978) Government and Leaders: An approach to Comparative Politics, Houghton, Mifflin Company Finer, S.F.
(1971) Comparative Government, London, the Penguin Press Fried, R.C.
(1902) “Comparative Public Administration: The search for Theories” in N.B.
Lynn and A. Wildavsky (eds) Public Admnistration: The state of the discipline, New Jersey, Chatham House Publishers.
NOUN 53 -MPA 868 COMPARATIVE PAUDBMLINICIS T RATION Riggs, F.W.
(1964) Administration in Developing Countries: The theory of primsmatic society, Boston Mifflin.
Robert, D (1984) Modern Political Analysis, Englewood Cliffs, Prentice- Hall.
Waldo, W. (1980) “The study of public administration” in R.J Stillman (ed) Public Administration: concepts and Cases, London, Mifflin 7.0 TUTOR-MARKED ASSIGNMENT Assuming a German scholar is in Nigeria for comparative research investigations on the country’s public administration, enumerate and discuss the basic problems that may confront the German in the research endeavour.
Your assignment should not be more that 10 A4 typed double spaced pages.
NOUN 54 -MPA 868 COMPARATIVE PAUDBMLINICIS T RATION UNIT 3 DIFFERENCES AND SIMILARITIES STRATEGIES OF COMPARATIVE PUBLIC ADMINISTRATION TABLE OF CONTENT 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objectives 3.0 Diffrences and Similarities Strategies 3.0.1 Differences Approach 3.0.2 Similarities Approach 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 References 7.0 Tutor-marked Assignment 1.0 INTRODUCTION Strategies of comparative public administration deals with the various methods for making comparative analysis.
You will learn the differences, similarities, experimental, statistical and case study methods of comparative public administration in general.
However, this unit will specifically address the differences and similarities strategies of comparative public administration.
2.0 OBJECTIVES By the end of this study, you will be able to: 1.
Explain the basic approaches for making comparisons.
NOUN 55 -MPA 868 COMPARATIVE PAUDBMLINICIS T RATION 2.
Identify differences in between a seemingly similar people, objects and institutions.
3.
Describe similarities between likely different people, objects and institutions.
4.
Recall the basic explanations of the two strategies learned 3.0 DIFFERENCES AND SIMILARITIES STRATEGIES 3.0.1 THE DIFFERENCES APPROACH In your everyday contacts with people, objects, institutions and practices, you tend to believe that the only identifiable attribute between or among them is that they all look differently.
The only perceivable difference between the two women is that one is fat and the other is thin.
The house is beautiful, the other one is not.
The difference s approach profers a contrary opinion.
First it acknowledges the fact that there may be differences between the people, objects ainnsdt it utions, but at the same time, there are similarities between the compared people, objects or practices no matter how few or non-prominent.
Finosrt a n ce, the administrative behaviour of public administrators in the western world may be significantly in terms of belief about corruption and abuse of office, but the basic bureaucratic principles regarding hierarchical structure and written rules and regulations are common grounds shared by the two.
Japanese workers are noted for the exceptional industry and ecfofnictriaernyc yto Nigerian workers.
On the other hand, the political officials of both political systems are corrupt with varying degrees.
It is therefore, the conviction of the approach that no two things or people are totally different without some elements of similarity.
3.0.2 THE SIMILARITIES APPROACH It is often claimed that there are identical twins, that twin people that look “exactly alike”.
This is to the extent that many people, including their parents on some occasions.
To compound the problems of observers, friends and relations the twins most of the time dress alike and talk the same way.
These are indeed realities.
NOUN 56 -MPA 868 COMPARATIVE PAUDBMLINICIS T RATION However, despite the constraint in differentiating similar people and things, the similarity approach enables us to know that there are some differences in very similar cases, no matter how small or few.
A small dot on the ear of one of the identical twins is enough to give him away.
One may be a fraction of an inch taller than the other.
In terms of behavioural attitude, one may be polite than the other.
Two cars of the same brand and definitely hdaifvfee re nces which could be in terms of colour, chassis number or year of manufacture.
United States of America and Nigeria are both practicing democratic administration, but the American democracy is older than that of Nigeria.
You should note that in all cases therefore, no totally similar people, things or systems or practices.
In a way, things, people , systems and countries also have their differences.
EXERCISE 1.
Look very well around you and identify two people or objects that are contradictorily different.
Highlight ten ways in which they look similar.
2.
Ghana and Nigeria are both developing African countries with emerging democracies, highlight ten attributes that make them look similar.
4.0 CONCLUSION This unit has treated two methodologies of analysis in comparative public administration.
Each discipline has its own way of doing things, ways of analysis, ways of research enquiries.
The two strategies you learned here are unique in that you might probably in the past line most other observer think that similar things are so similar or look alike in all respects.
Or, think that all thing or people who look very unsimilar or different do not have common denominators at all.
You have learned in this unit that this is not the case.
5.0 SUMMARY You have learned in this unit two major approaches in the practice of making comparisons in comparative public administration.
You learned that the different approach concerns identifying points of similarities in two seemingly different objects, people, countries or practices.
The approach believes that whatever may be the differences, there is a little similarity.
The similarity approach has a direct opposite thinking with the dapifpferoreancche.
s I t believes that differences exist between people, objects, practices NOUN 57 -MPA 868 COMPARATIVE PAUDBMLINICIS T RATION and countries despite the fact they seemingly look similar.
That though, the difference(s) may be so insignificant yet the little difference really makes the difference.
6.0 REFERENCES Akindele, S.T et al (1996) The subject Matter of Political Science, Ibadan, College Press Kolawole, Dipo (ed.
1997) Readings in Political Science, Ibadan, Dekaal Sharkansky.
I (1975) Public Administration: Policy-making in Government agencies, 3rd edition, Chicago, Rnad McNally College Publishing Company 7.0 TUTOR-MARKED ASSIGNMENTS 1.
Identify and Discuss the major attributes of differences and similarities in approaches in comparative public administration.
2.
Ghana and Nigeria are both developing countries in Africa with emerging democracies, highlight ten attributes that make them look unsimilar.
NOUN 58 -MPA 868 COMPARATIVE PAUDBMLINICIS T RATION UNIT 4 EXPERIMENTAL, STATISTICAL AND CASE STUDY STRATEGIES OF COMPARATIVE PUBLIC ADMINISTRATION TABLE OF CONTENT 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objectives 3.0 Experimental Approach 3.0.1 Experimental and Control Groups 3.1 The Statistical Approach 3.1.1 Partial Correlation of Variables 3.2 The Case Study Approach 3.2.1 Stereotypes 3.2.2 Categories 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 References 7.0 Tutor-marked Assignment 1.0 INTRODUCTION In the last unit, you learned about the differences and similarities approaches in the study of comparative public administration.
You should recall the major facts raised in the two approaches.
You learned that the differences approach concerns itself with identifying some similarities between the objects, people, practices, systems and countries that we are comparing.
The method makes us believe that no matter the degree of differences between what we may be comparing that there are some similarities also between them no matter how little or insignificant.
You also learned that the second NOUN 59 -MPA 868 COMPARATIVE PAUDBMLINICIS T RATION approach, that is, the similarities approach operate based on the sparminec ip le of the differences method.
It submits that no matter the level of similarities between the objects, people institutions, practices and countries that we may be comparing that they are not totally similar, and therefore, that there are some differences between them no matter how little.
In this unit, you will learn further about the other methods ucotimlizpeadr a ti vine s tudies such as the experimental approach, statistical approach and case study approach.
Each of them has its own uniqueness.
2.0 OBJECTIVES By the end of this study, you will be able to do the following: 1.
Recall the basic facts about differences and similarities approaches.
2.
Explain the basic principles of experimental approach.
3.
Explain the concepts of control group and experimental group.
4.
Analyze how case study approach works.
5.
Describe how statistical tools can be used for comparative analysis.
3.0 THE EXPERIMENTAL APPROACH 3.0.1 EXPERIMENTAL AND CONTROL GROUPS You have learned about experiments before.
The goal of the experimental approach is to make a verifiable comparison of cases based on scientific explanations.
In doing this, two equivalent groups is labeled experimental group while the other is the control group.
A stimulus, which we may also call independent variable, is introduced to the experimental group.
Thereafter, the two groups are kept on observation to evaluate the effects of the stimulus.
A concrete example of this situation is testing the effect of alcohol on the two groups.
Some of your friends do take alcoholic drinks such as beer.
It is therefore easy for us to predict the outcome of alcohol on the experimental group to which it was introduced.
Drunkenness is the effect experienced by the experimental group provided no other variables were introduced.
The control group does not experience drunkenness because it was not introduced to the NOUN 60 -MPA 868 COMPARATIVE PAUDBMLINICIS T RATION alcohol stimulus.
Comparative explanations can be made on the two groups based on the scientific experiment conducted on them.
You need to know that experimental comparative approach has limitations bordering on what you learnt in unit 2 that human beings are not predictable for their emotionally and ethical attributes.
EXERCISE 1.
Design an experiment on your own which should involve an experimental group and a control group.
Introduce a stimulus to the experimental group only and later measure its effects.
Compare the relationship between the two groups thereafter.
3.1 THE STATISTICAL APPROACH 3.1.1 PARTIAL CORRELATION OF VARIABLES You have just learned that experimental approach aims at scientific explanations.
The statistical approach has a similar aim, though tphreoicre s s es are not the same.
The difference in their processes concerns the manipulation of empirically observed date in the statistical method but which is not possible in experimental method so as to identify controlled relationship among the variables.
Partial correlation is used to deal with the problem of controlling tvhaer ia bles.
For example, as Agagu (2001:21) cited, if you want to look into the relationship between political participation and level of education attained, you should control for the influence of age, because ygoenuenrgaetrio n s have received more education than older generations.
You can achieve this by dividing your sample into a number of different age groups and looking at the correlation (relationship) between participation and education within each age bracket.
In essence, statistical approach is about identifying relationship between variables (education and political participation), pointing out how and to what degree one has brought impact or influence on the other, thereby giving basis for comparison.
You should note that statistical approach seems to be an approximation of experimental method, as they both shared the logical attributes of science, but this should not be taken to mean that they are equivalent to each other.
This is because, statistical approach lacks the “control” aspect of the experimental method.
NOUN 61 -MPA 868 COMPARATIVE PAUDBMLINICIS T RATION EXERCISE 1.
Appraise the essential distinctions between experimental method and statistical approach of comparative public administration.
3.2 THE CASE STUDY APPROACH 3.2.1 STEREOTYPES Another method of comparative studies that forms one other aspects of our daily life that though may be unknown to us is the case study.
We engage in stereotyping of behaviour, for instance, to an ethnic group or a country at large based on the attitude of just one person belonging to the ethnic group or country.
This is more common in the Western world where particular crimes are arrogated to say Nigerians, Lebanese or Asians because of past cases involving the two nationals.
The case study approach, in essence is about focusing on a single, specific case at a time.
The value of this one-case study is that it gives aompppolert u nity for a thorough consideration of all attributes of the case at hand.
And on the basis of the findings, general propositions that can eventually lead to theory-building can be made.
3.2.2 CATEGORIES You learned in unit 3.2.1 that the focus of case study method is on one case at a time so to generate propositions that can be applied to a large group.
You should note the various categories of case study approach.
There are the descriptive, atheoretical and hypothesis generating case studies.
Let us explain them one after the other.
i. Descriptive Case Study Descriptive case study essentially describe the basic attributes of a particular case.
It does not aim at providing explanations for an action, but just to describe the actions exhibited by the case.
It has the advantage of providing large volumes of data that are useful for theory-building arising from generalizations.
ii.
A Theoretical Case Study NOUN 62 -MPA 868 COMPARATIVE PAUDBMLINICIS T RATION A theoretical case study has its goal in providing an extensive analysis of the areas of interest in the case being studied rather than trying to build theories.
It throws more light on the case by examining it in all its ramifications A theoretical case study, according to Lijphart (1971), it is a study in applied science since it does not aim to contribute to egmenpeirraicliazla t ions, consequently, its value in terms of theory-building is nil.
ii.
Hypothesis Generating Case Study This case study is motivated by a desire to formulate gperonpeorasli ti ons that may lead to theory-building.
It begins with some basic but somehow vague propositions (hypothesis) or basic assumptions meant to be tested by gathering basic data.
This case study is a direct contradiction to a theoretical case study.
As you have learnt, a theoretical case study is motivated by the need to formulate a general theoretical construct.
EXERCISE 3.5 1.
Distinguish between a theoretical and descriptive case studies.
2.
Describe a case of stereotyping that you have personally experienced.
4.0 CONCLUSIONS In this unit, you have been introduced to the various approaches (methods) which you can use to compare political and administrative systems and behaviour.
Some of these methods aim at generalizations that lead to theory- building, while others are motivated by mere descriptions of the attributes of the cases rather than providing generalizations for theory-building.
You should employ some of these methods on your own in your daily attempts at distinguishing people, things and issues.
5.0 SUMMARY What you have learnt in this unit are the various methods you can use to compare administrative systems, practice and behaviour.
You had five methods altogether.
The differences method identify similarities in cases, while the similarities method identify differences.
The experimental approach relies on experimental and control groups for its comparative NOUN 63 -MPA 868 COMPARATIVE PAUDBMLINICIS T RATION explanations based on introduction and measurement of a stimulus in one group (experimental).
Statistical approach uses partial correlation to gauge the relationship between variables such education and political participation.
The case study method concentrates on the examination of the attributes of only one case which is seen as sufficient enough to make generalization.
6.0 REFERENCES Agagu, A.A. (2001) Comparative Politics and Administrative Studies , Ado- Ekiti., Department of Political Science.
Kolawole, D (ed) (1977) Readings in Political Science, Ibadan, Dekaal Sharkansky, I (1975) Public Administration: Policy-making in government agencies, 3rd edition, Chicago, Rand McNally College Publishing Company 7.0 TUTOR-MARKED ASSIGNMENTS (TMA) 1.
The case study method of comparative public administration studies gives room for stereotyping, describing in details the various categories of this method.
2.
Identify and Discuss the major elements of experimental approach Your assignment must not be more than 10 types pages of A4 double spaced.
UNIT 5 NOUN 64 -MPA 868 COMPARATIVE PAUDBMLINICIS T RATION EVOLUTION OF NIGERIAN PUBLIC ADMINISTRATION TABLE OF CONTENT 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objectives 3.0 Evolution of Nigerian Public Administration 3.0.1 Traditional Politics Administration 3.0.2 Colonial Contact and Indirect Rule 3.0.3 Era of Nigerianization and Independence 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 References 7.0 Tutor-marked Assignment 1.0 INTRODUCTION This unit concerns itself specifically with the evolution of public administration in Nigeria.
You will learn how public administration evolved in the country as a modern instrument of governance.
The unit will tell you in stages how the institution came into being starting with the pre-colonial system commonly referred to as traditional political system.
This is followed by the stage of colonial contact and indirect rule.
The third stage is the era of Nigerianization and independence as the last phase.
The civil service as a modern instrument of government is a British colonial legacy with its model tailored along the British pattern.
2.0 OBJECTIVES NOUN 65 -MPA 868 COMPARATIVE PAUDBMLINICIS T RATION You should at the end of this unit be able to do the following activities: 1.
Explain the basic background of the civil service.
2.
Describe the operations of the traditional political system.
3.
Explain the role of “Obas” in the Yoruba traditional setting 4.
Discuss the responsibilities of the Emir in the Hausa-Fulani traditional administration 5.
Explain concept of indirect rule.
6.
Describe how indirect rule worked.
7.
Identify and discuss the factors that made indirect rule imperative.
8.
Explain the circumstances that led the colonial masters to adopt the Nigerianization policy.
9.
Explain stage-by-stage the growth and development of Nigerian public administration system.
3.0 EVOLUTION OF NIGERIAN PUBLIC ADMINISTRATION 3.0.1 TRADITIONAL POLITICAL ADMINISTRATION Many of you would have learnt in literatures that the country called Nigeria never existed before colonial contact 1400 A.D, the various peoples and ethnic groups that made up Nigeria today were politically independent of each other.
Ethno-political groups such as the Yoruba, Igbo, Haus-Fulani, Junkun, Tiv,Nupe, Kalabari, Ibiobio, Urobo and others were living independently of each other groups in terms of political organization and administration.
For instance, the Yoruba traditional political administration centered around the town (“ilu”) with the “Oa” (king) at the helm of administrative affairs.
He had a council of chiefs made up of quarter chiefs.
The council of chiefs made decisions that were presented to the “Oba” for ratification.
There were chiefs in- charge of specific portfolios in the town’s administration.
The Bashorun was the prime-minister, the head of the council of chiefs.
The Are-Ona- Kakanfo was the head of the army.
NOUN 66 -MPA 868 COMPARATIVE PAUDBMLINICIS T RATION The town had a judicial system right from the family level to the quarters, and at the apex was the “Oba” who had power over life and death.
In the same way, the Hausa-Fulani, Tiv, Igbo and the others had their own elaborate administrative system.
In general, the respective administrative systems, besides judicial administration, conduct of wars and maintenance of law and order, they also performed the functions of collecting taxes, carrying out community projects such as construction of markets, bridges and maintenance of streets.
3.0.2 COLONIAL CONTACT AND INDIRECT RULE European colonial contact with the pre-colonial peoples of Nigeria started in the 14th Century, first by British explorers who wanted to find out about River Niger, and later followed by Christian Missionaries who were later followed by administrators when effective occupation had taken place.
The area called Nigeria today was allocated to Nigeria at the 1884 Berlin Conference.
The mode of administration met on ground by the colonialists were not comparable to what obtained in Europe and consequently, it was labeled traditional administration to reflect its non-conformity with modern administrative system that obtained in Britain.
Therefore, had to be discarded.
Britain had the difficulty of direct administration in Nigeria for the problems of shortage of personnel and language barrier among others, she therefore had to introduce indirect rule system by making minimum use of British administrators while traditional chiefs were put in the fore-front of the system officially also referred to as Native Authority, a form of rudimentary local administration.
The rise of modern local government system began in the early 1950s.
This was as a result of unrelenting criticisms of the indirect rule system by nationalists.
Before this period, in a constitutional reform, the 1946 Richards constitution introduced the civil service at the central level, while the Foot Commission was set up in 1948 by the colonial governor to pmroodvaidlieti e s for the Nigerianization of the civil service.
A process which continued till 1960 when Nigeria had independence.
In essence, the Nigeria public administration as known today was a colonial creation.
3.0.3 ERA OF NIGERIANIZATION AND INDEPENDENCE NOUN 67 -MPA 868 COMPARATIVE PAUDBMLINICIS T RATION Effective Nigerianization of the civil service did not take place until Nigeria attained independence.
The top positions of the service at the Federal and regional levels were occupied by expatriates.
The four existing civil services, and later five when Mid-western region was created embarked on a much more drastic Nigeianization drives, though with varied speed at the regions.
There was also re-structuring of the services to suit the needs of federal level and the regions.
The major character of public administration in the country today can therefore be summarized as follows: (i) It has a foreign origin having being a British colonial legacy.
(ii) The most prominent concern of the colonial administration was the maintenance of law and order so to provide a conducive atmosphere for their stay and economic activities.
(iii) Another concern was the exploration, exploitation and appropriation of the country’s natural resources which were their primary motive of colonizing Nigeria.
(iv) Increasing recruitment of Nigerians into the service was facilitated by decolonization.
(v) Nigeria inherited the British style of personnel management.
(vi) The country also inherited the British pattern of public service with the basic and enduring character principles of hierarchical structure, permanent tenure, impartiality, political neutrality and anonymity.
EXERCISE 1.
Highlight and discuss briefly the factors that made British direct rule impossible in Nigeria.
2.
Explain the process of indirect rule in Nigeria.
4.0 CONCLUSIONS NOUN 68 -MPA 868 COMPARATIVE PAUDBMLINICIS T RATION This unit has dealt with the basic historical background of the contemporary civil service institutions in Nigeria.
British colonial administrators saw the need for a civil service as a very important tool of state governance and therefore established one for Nigeria which was patterned along their home country’s and service.
5.0 SUMMARY In this unit, you have learnt the evolution of Nigeria’s public administration.
Specifically, you learned that before colonial contact, the various ethnic groups had their own traditional political and administrative systems.
You also learned that Nigeria was colonialized because of economic reasons.
European economy was depressed and needed to exploit and appropriate resources of other areas.
The British administrators could not rule directly because of language barrier and the huge cost it would be involved if direct British administration should take place, and other factors.
You also learnt that the British started embarking on the Nigerianization policy because of agitations by educated Nigerians whom the colonialists marginalized by not employing into the higher cadre of the colonial civil service.
The process of Nigerianization continued till Nigeria attained independence in 1960.
The regional governments continued with the Nigerianization process after independence at varied speeds.
6.0 REFERENCES Ajayi Kunle (2001) “Military regimes and Nigerian Public Administration” in F. Omotosho (ed) Contemporary Issues in Public Administration, Lagos, Bolabay Publications Dudley, B.
(1982) Nigerian Government and Politics, London, Macmillan Mckinney, J.B. and L.C.
Howard (1979) Public Administration: Balancing Power and Accountability, Illinois, More Publishing Company.
7.0 TUTOR-MARKED ASSIGNMENT (1) Explain the factors that aroused European contact with Africa.
(2) The British colonial masters had to substitute direct British Administration in Nigeria with indirect rule.
What made indirect rule possible in Nigeria.
MODULE 3 NOUN 69 -MPA 868 COMPARATIVE PAUDBMLINICIS T RATION UNIT 1 COMPARATIVE PUBLIC ADMINISTRATION TABLE OF CONTENTS 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objectives 3.0 The Civil Service 3.1.1 Characteristics 3.1.2 Functions 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutor-Marked Assignments 7.0 Further Reading and Other Resources.
1.0.
INTRODUCTION This unit is on the characteristics and functions of the Nigerian Civil Service.
You learned in the last unit that the Nigerian civil service a British creation, a legacy left behind at Nigeria’s independence.
The characteristics of the civil service are not therefore significantly different from the British model of which Nigeria is using.
The unit examines the role and relevance of the civil service in Nigeria’s administration and socio- economic and political development.
2.0.
OBJECTIVES By the end of this unit, you should be able to do the following: NOUN 70 -MPA 868 COMPARATIVE PAUDBMLINICIS T RATION 1.
Recall how Nigeria came the civil service institution.
2.
Describe the characteristics of Nigerian civil service.
3.
Discuss the functions of the civil service.
4.
Differentiate between traditional and functions of the civil service.
5.
Compare the characteristics of Nigeria’s civil service with those of other countries’ civil service.
3.0.
MAIN CONTENT 3.1.
THE CIVIL SERVICE 3.1.1.
CHARACTERISTICS Let us recall some of what you learnt on the evolution of the Nigerian Public Administrative System.
You learnt that before colonial contact the various peoples and ethnic groups were independent and had their own systems of administration that the British colonial administrators later called traditional political system.
European contact started about 1400 AD for varied reasons including principal economic reasons.
Nigeria was ceded to Britain but could not impose direct British administration for reasons bordering on language barrier, shortage of British, personnel and lack of adequate funds.
British administrators had to adopt indirect rule by engaging local tradition al rulers and chiefs in administration.
Educated nationalists opposed indirect rule and by 1940s, colonial administrators stated a policy of Nigerianizing the public service and continued after independence in 1960.
In this unit, you will now learn in details the characteristics of Nigeria’s civil service.
As you have just learned, the Nigeria civil service was a legacy of British colonial administration.
The structure of the service was designed by Britain, so also were the operational procedures such as the General Order and Financial instructions.
While some of these rules, regulation and instructions have been amended, a large portion of them remain unchanged.
The civil service share similar characteristics with the British model since it was its creation.
What are these characteristics?
These includes: i. Hierarchical structure.
Nigeria’s civil service is vertically structured with a flow of positions from top to bottom with different layers of positions.
The chief civil servant is the head of service to whom all other top civil servants in each cadre reports.
He carries out the posting of top civil servants.
in each ministry, the permanent secretary NOUN 71 -MPA 868 COMPARATIVE PAUDBMLINICIS T RATION occupies the apex position.
Followed by deputy directors, assistant directors, chiefs, principal, senior, higher and other personnel in that order down to messengers, gardeners, cleaners and gatemen.
Communication flow follow the same upward-downward, downward- upward order.
The civil service also has a horizontal structure indicating the different job divisions in each ministry.
Each ministry is structured into departments, units, sections, divisions and field offices.
The permanent secretary co-ordinates all departments in the ministry.
Directives follow both the horizontal and vertical order.
ii.
Written rules and regulation.
The civil service relies on written rules and regulations for its daily duties.
In this regard, the service relies on the General Order (GO) and financial instructions to guide it.
The GO contains the guiding laws and professional ethics for civil servants.
Civil servants are not expected to operate outside the law.
Beside the GO, there are other regulatory instruments that can be found in the successive reforms by regimes.
iii.
Impartiality principle.
Civil servants are by regulations not expected to be partial or slow undue favouratism in the performance of their official assignments.
This is so because, they are being paid from the tax payers money whom they cannot afford therefore discriminate against.
The service is therefore considered to be epitome of fairness and justice.
iv.
Political neutrality.
Civil servants are not expected to engage in partisan politics.
They are no servants to any party in pTohwereerf.o re, if civil servants are members of the opposition losing party in the election, they cannot be loyal to the ruling party and will not be loyal or committed to the execution of the party polices.
Cseirvvial n ts are therefore expected to be neutral and insulated fpraormtis a n party politics.
v. Permanence.
Civil servants enjoy permanent tenure.
Their job is guaranteed until retirement age.
Civil servants can only be fired before attaining retirement age if they commit any serious crimes.
Or they can take voluntary exist from service.
The service is ognulayr a nteed if civil servants remain loyal and politically non-partisan, and abide by the law.
vi.
Principle of anonymity.
Civil servants are expected to do their job like loyal servants.
They are neither supposed to be heard, praised or blamed on governmental policies.
They must not talk to the press on NOUN 72 -MPA 868 COMPARATIVE PAUDBMLINICIS T RATION official issues or express personal opinions unless so directed from above.
They do not take blames for the failure of government policies and neither are they praised for their success.
The minister/commission is the chief policy-maker and official spokesman of government in each ministry.
He therefore takes the blame or praises on official issues as the case may be.
3.1.2.
FUNCTIONS You learned in unit one the traditional functions of public Administration recall that the functions included planning, organizing, staffing, directing, co- ordinating, reporting and budgeting.
Nigerian civil servants perform all these functions.
In addition to these general functions they are also perform srepsepcoifnicsi b ilities which include:- a.
Assist in policy formulation.
Policy formulation is the exclusive preserved of politicians and political officers.
But they may not be able to do this without the assistance of civil servants who usually provide the necessary data and information which will guide policy choices by political masters.
Civil servants go to the field to collect data, analyse them and provide policy alternatives with supportive arguments on each.
The final policy choice and decision are not the responsibilities of civil servants.
b.
Policy execution.
The primary function of civil servants is to carry out government’s order and directives, without complaints.
Official policies are practically implanted by civil servants.
And they are expected to perform such function to the best of their administrative and technical ability.
c. Assist in law making.
The executive, under a democratic regime, presents bills to the parliament for legislation.
Before it is duty of civil servants to draft the bill and flesh it up with the necessary details before presentation to parliament for debate.
After becoming law with the assent of the president, it is also the duty of civil servants to work out modalities for its operationalization.
d. Provision of social amenities and services.
Civil servants engage in the provision of some social services as their official assignments.
For instance, employees of water corporations, he Power Holding Company of Nigeria (PHCN) telecommunication (NITEL), street cleaners, road menders and railway men are all in a civil servants coffers.
NOUN 73 -MPA 868 COMPARATIVE PAUDBMLINICIS T RATION e. Continuity of government.
Civil servants in the past, especially during the numerous coup detats Nigeria witnessed, civil servants had always played prominent roles in maintaining the continuity of government.
Many of you may recall that during such coups (1966-1983, 1985 and 1993), the constituted governments were sacked, and for days after, they were always uncertainties to who was the new leader to give policy directions.
Civil servants often provided continuity in government by ensuring provision of social services in the hospitals, public places and offices.
EXERCISE 1.
Nigerian civil servants are expected to be loyal to the political authority, highlight under what conditions can their tenure be determined before retirement age?
2.
Explain how Nigerian civil servants provide continuity in government.
4.0.
CONCLUSION You have learned in this unit the characteristics and functions of the Nigerian civil service.
You have learned earlier that the Nigerian civil service is a colonial legacy.
Because of this, it shared the characteristics of the British civil service which shall be treated in details in future units.
The functions of the civil service are more or less traditional in nature, that is, Nigerian civil servants most often carry out their normal civil responsibilities.
Nonetheless, some of the time, they were made to perform political functions.
For instance, during periods of political instability when the political ruling elites were ousted from power, civil servants used to take over the leadership of their ministries until normalcy returns.
In addition, during military regimes, many top civil servants were appointed as sole administrators and caretaker committee members in local governments and boards.
These are political functions outside the traditional.
Primary functions of civil servants.
5.0.
SUMMARY In this unit, you have learnt that the Nigerian civil service is guided by the principles of hierarchies structure, political neutrality written rules and regulations, anonymity and impartiality.
These are enduring characteristics inherited from the British colonial administrative system.
You also learnt the functions of the service which are mostly traditional functions of civil NOUN 74 -MPA 868 COMPARATIVE PAUDBMLINICIS T RATION services all over the world.
Exceptional cases of performing political roles were during times of political crises and coups by military officers when civil servants were appointed as sole administrators, board members and care taker committee members.
6.0.
TUTOR-MARKED ASSIGNMENTS 1.
Identify the needs for political neutrality by civil servants in Nigeria.
2.
Identify and discuss the basic responsibilities of civil servants in Nigeria.
7.0.
FURTHER READING AND OTHER RESOURCES Ajayi, Kunle (2001) “Military regimes and Nigerian Public Administration”in F Omotoso(ed) .
Contemporary Issues in Pub l i c Administration, Lagos, Bolabay Publications.
Dudley, B (1982) Nigerian Government and Politics, London, Macmillan.
Kolawole, Dipo (ed) Issues in Nigerian Government and Politics, Ibadan, Dekaal.
Makinney, J.B & L.C Howard (1979)Public Administration: balancing power and accountability, Moore publishing company.
UNIT 2 COMPARATIVE PUBLIC ADMINISTRATION NOUN 75 -MPA 868 COMPARATIVE PAUDBMLINICIS T RATION TABLE OF CONTENTS 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objectives 3.0 Problems of Civil Service 3.1.1 .
Ineffiency and Ineffectiveness 3.1.2 Indiscipline 3.1.3 Corruption and Bribery.
3.1.4 Ethnicity and Favouritism 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutor-Marked Assignments 7.0 Further Reading and Other Resources.
1.0.
INTRODUCTION In this unit, problems of the Nigerian civil service will be examined.
Nigerian civil services have at various times been alleged of inefficiency and lack of good performance.
Just a visit any day to a ministry will reveal a lot of things happening in the ministries such as vacant tables, workers just coming three hours after official resumption, civil servants busy reading newspapers and so on.
Definitely, a lot is wrong with the institution in Nigeria.
In this unit therefore, you will learn of the basic problems confronting the civil service in Nigeria.
2.0.
OBJECTIVES You should be able to do the following by the end of this unit; 1.
Explain the problems of civil servants in Nigeria.
2.
Describe the nature of corruption in the civil service.
3.
Compare corruption in the civil service with that of the public service.
NOUN 76 -MPA 868 COMPARATIVE PAUDBMLINICIS T RATION 4.
Explain the role of ethnicity in the appointment of higher civil servants.
5.
Explain the implications of corruption in the service.
3.0.
MAIN CONTENT 3.1.
PROBLEMS OF CIVIL SERVICE.
3.1.1.
INEFFICIENCY AND INEFFECTIVENESS In the last unit you learned about the characteristics and functions of Nigerian civil service.
You specifically learnt that the Nigeria civil service has adopted the basic characteristics of civil services elsewhere except in certain respects.
These characteristics include political neutrality, impartiality, anonymity and permanence.
Further function include policy execution, assisting in policy formulation, regulation of certain activities, law and order, custodian of societal values and appointment into political capacities as sole administrator.
Many of you are serving civil servants who know the basic weaknesses in the service.
The first of these problems is identified as attitudinal factor leading to the problems of inefficiency and ineffectiveness.
Derome Mc Kinney and Lawrence Howard (1979:339) conceive efficiency as “spending less to gain more” a definition based on economic cErfiftiecriieonnc.
y can be further simplified as obtaining maximum outputs with minimum inputs.
McKinney and Howard (Ibid, 345) also perceive effectiveness as impact, adequacy, performance and achievement in terms of productivity.
Nigerian civil servants are adjudged as lazy.
Many of them play truancy and absenteeism.
They seem to hate work because files are piled up without being attended to thereby undermining desired productivity.
Nigerian civil servants believe in the slogan of “we do not sweat on government work”, that is “you are not expected to put in your maximum best on government job.” 3.1.2.
INDISCIPLINE Many civil servants are indisciplined as they disobey the basic ethics of civil service.
Many come late to office, while others engage in selling of goods rounds offices, sleeping on duty, gossiping, loitering about and reading of NOUN 77 -MPA 868 COMPARATIVE PAUDBMLINICIS T RATION newspapers or texts in preparation for examinations.
They also engage in insubordination by flouting superior directives.
3.1.3.
CORRUPTION AND BRIBERY Civil servants across hierarchies abuse their offices by engaging in official corruption and bribery.
Top civil servants collude with contractor’s defraud government, present fictitious receipts for journeys made (and not made) and for goods and services procured.
Revenue collectors embezzle revenues collected or print private receipts for revenue collection.
The public has to offer bribes before civil servants perform their official duties.
In essence, bribery, corruption, graft, manipulation of accounts are the hallmarks of the civil service.
Among the reasons adduced for corruption in the service is poor remunerations which is a major problem on its own.
Civil servants are poorly paid, salaries are not paid as at when due.
Many civil servants at all levels; federal, state and local governments are owed salary arrears up to nmionne th s thereby giving non for servants to make ends meet at all costs.
To induce and promote efficiency and accountability the salaries of workers need be reviewed upward and paid promptly.
3.1.4.
ETHNICITY AND FAVOURATISM.
Nigeria civil servants suffer from lack of national out look like the general civil society of which the civil servants are a pa rt.
The civil service is supposed to be a national institution promoting national unity.
Primordial relations underscores everything in the civil service.
The merit system, which is part of the American model, is supposed to be the guiding principle in appointments and promotion in the service.
This has not been so.
Appointments, promotion and other privileges in the service are determined by ethnic considerations.
The ethnic groups are all interested in who becomes the head of service, permanent secretary and other key positions.
Copoe-r ation or lack of it in the service depends on the ethnic origin of the officials.
Co-operation is guaranteed among the immediate subordinates if they are from the same ethnic bloc with the superior, while it is denied if the contrary is the case.
The service is also marked with favouratism.
Administrative favours are extended to ethnic bloc members, friends, relations and those generally known, while others are denied of the service needed out rightly, unless they can bribe their ways out.
Favouratism, as you learnt earlier when treating the characteristics of the civil service, violates the principles of impartiality and impersonality of the civil service.
NOUN 78 -MPA 868 COMPARATIVE PAUDBMLINICIS T RATION EXERCISE 3 1.
It has been widely acclaimed that the Nigerian civil service is saddled with varied problems.
Highlight ten suggesting ways that you think these problems can be alleviated.
2.
Identify ten indiscipline attitude by civil servants.
4.0.
CONCLUSION This unit has explained to you the major problems facing civil sinesrvtiitcueti o n in Nigeria.
The institution suffers from inefficiency and ineffectiveness arising from ineptitude, laziness, absenteeism, indiscipline, buying and selling in the office, bribery and corruption.
5.0.
SUMMARY In this unit you have learnt that many problems are facing the Nigerian civil service.
You learnt that the system is corrupt, and it takes bribes from the public.
The system suffers from the problems of undisciplined personnel who also come late to office.
Many have converted their offices to market stores where they buy and sell during official hours.
You also learned that civil servants engage in ethnic politics and favouritism.
Appointments and promotion are not based on merit but on state of origin, ethnic affiliation and who you know.
All these problems have a clog on the wheel of gpoerofdo r mance and productivity in the civil service.
6.0.
TUTOR-MARKED ASSIGNMENTS 1.
Explain why corruption exists among civil servants in Nigeria?
2.
In what ways has indiscipline been manifested in the Nigerian civil service?
7.0.
FURTHER READING AND OTHER RESOURCES.
Ajayi, Kunle (2001) “Military regimes and Nigerian public administration” in F. Omotosho (ed) Contemporary issues in public Administration, Lagos, Bolabay publications.
Ayo, S.B (1998) “A review of the performance of Nigerian public Bureaucracy” in Dr Kolawole (ed) issues in Nigerian Government and politics, Ibadan, Dekaal Kolawole, Dipo (ed, 1998) Issues in Nigerian Government and politics, Ibadan Dekaal.
NOUN 79 -MPA 868 COMPARATIVE PAUDBMLINICIS T RATION UNIT 3 COMPARATIVE PUBLIC ADMINISTRATION NOUN 80 -MPA 868 COMPARATIVE PAUDBMLINICIS T RATION TABLE OF CONTENTS 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objectives 3.0 Reforms 3.1.1 Concept of Reform 3.1.2 Reforms between 1948 and 1973 3.1.3 1988 Reforms 3.1.4 Post 1988 Reforms 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutor-Marked Assignments 7.0 Further Reading and Other Resources.
1.0.
INTRODUCTION This unit deals with the various reforms put forward in attempts to correct the ills confronting the civil service in Nigeria.
In the unit you will learn of the reforms in stages starting with the ones between 1948 and 1973; 1re9f8o8rm s; and post-1988 reforms.
The 1988 civil service reforms have been evaluated to be the most comprehensive and revolutionary in the administrative history of Nigeria.
The reforms introduced very fundamental changes to the system in an attempt to make it confirm with the business- orientation of most civil services particularly in America and Europe.
2.0.
OBJECTIVES By the end of this unit, you should be able to: 1.
Recall the problems of the civil service in Nigeria.
2.
Explain the steps taken by successive regimes in Nigeria to alleviate some of the problems of the civil service.
3.
Analyse the contents of each regimes reforms.
NOUN 81 -MPA 868 COMPARATIVE PAUDBMLINICIS T RATION 4.
Explain the concept of reforms 5.
Compare the contents of all the reforms examined.
6.
Evaluate the contribution of successive regimes to improve efficiency in the civil service.
3.0.
MAIN CONTENT 3.1.
REFORMS 3.1.1.
CONCEPT OF REFORM.
You should recall what you learnt in the last unit on problems of the Nigerian civil service.
You learned in the unit that service is suffering the following: a.
Inefficiency and ineffectiveness b.
Corruption and bribery c. Ethnicity and favouritism These problems need to be resolved and remedied, or else, the service will not be able to perform the expected roles in the socio-economic development of the nation.
Successive leaders have tried one way or the other to provide remedial measure by coming with some reforms.
Let us ask a question; what is meant by reform?
Reform is about changing from bad to good.
Improving the quality of a thing, practice or structure.
Reform is an acknowledgment of a problem, a problem that need to be resolved.
Reform is about creating a new life for something.
Adding new energy to be able to perform better.
Overall, reform is about creating improved opportunities for better performance, improved efficiency for enhanced productivity.
Reform is an all life exercise and not just a one- time surgical operation.
This is so because no condition is permanent.
No engine can permanently work efficiently unless it is also being constantly serviced and repaired.
So also are administrative institutions like the civil service.
They need to be oiled regularly by way of reforms in order to make them constantly be in good shape and in good working condition.
3.1.2.
REFORMS BETWEEN 1948 AND 1973 Introduction of reforms to the Nigerian civil service is to direct acknowledgement of the problems of the service at some particular times, and therefore, a way of correcting the perceived inadequacies by tahuet h orities.
NOUN 82 -MPA 868 COMPARATIVE PAUDBMLINICIS T RATION The colonial authorities which heralded the British patterned administrative model to the country itself flagged off reforms in the system.
The reforms were initiated by way of commissions.
The first of these commissions to be so recognized was the 1948 foot commission.
It came about as a result of meeting nationalist demands.
The major pre-occupation of the commission was the Nigerianization of the civil service.
Hitherto, the middle and top levels of the service were occupied by colonial administrators, while educated Nigerians and nationalists were not recruited to the service.
Prolonged agitations by the nationalists brought about the recommendations of the commission for the recruitment of educated Nigerians to t he service and the training of Nigeria and higher institutions in Nigeria and abroad to replace the expatriates.
The 1954 Phillipson commission followed the foot commission.
The commission’s recommendations heralded the abandonment of the united civil service, leading to the decentralization of the service on regional basis.
The central and regional governments had a separate public service commission each.
Nigerian officials were given the options to join either the federal or regional service.
At independence in 1960, and up till 1966 when the first coup took place, the Nigerianization process continued at all levels but at different speed.
Almost immediately after independence, the Western region announced the complete Nigerianization of its top civil service cadres.
The military took over in 1966 and ruled till 1979.
The Gowon regime instituted the 1972/73 Udoji commission to recommend among other things, how to boost efficiency and productivity in the service.
T he commission recommended drastic improvement in the salary structure of civil servants and granting car credit loans to all senior civil servants in order to boost their morale.
The Gowon regime was toppled by the Murtala regime wpehriccehi v ed the civil service as very corrupt and inefficient and therefore, there was the need to sanitize the institution by getting rid of bad eggs.
The regime, within weeks of assumption of office, retrenched more than 10,000 civil servants of all cadres.
Not much was done by succeeding regimes in terms of restoring the confidence and permanence of tenure in the service until 1988.
3.1.2.
THE 1988 REFORMS The 1988 civil service Reforms could be regarded as the most fundamental min the annals of administrative re- organization.
The reform was instituted NOUN 83 -MPA 868 COMPARATIVE PAUDBMLINICIS T RATION by the Babangida administration based on the recommendations of the Dotun Phillips committee on the civil service.
The reforms brought about the following: i.
The minister/commissioner as chief executive and the accounting office of the political head of the ministry became the executive head rather than the permanent secretary under the earlier arrangement.
Before this new arrangement, the permanent secretary had effective control over all human and non-human resources of the ministry.
The minister/commissioner was more or less a mere figure head whose leadership often caused squabbles between him and permanent secretary.
The reforms corrected this situation.
ii.
The official nomenclature of permanent secretary changed to director- general.
The appointment became political as one could be appointmented by government to occupy the position and his tenure ends with that of regime that appointed it.
iii.
Professionalization of the civil service.
The service became professionalized as the departments and sections are re-arranged lased on professional lines and personnel in each department and its other sub-units are to have professional qualifications that accord with their duties in the department.
Moreso, transfer of servants across ministries and departments becomes a thing of the past.
iv.
New promotion criteria were set up for advancement of officials.
Merit system and other criteria such as promotional examination and additional qualification replaced the old system of length of service for promotion.
v. Accountability control.
The Audit Alarm was set up to expose misappropriation of funds and corrupt.
3.1.3.
POST 1988 REFORMS The Babangida regime was succeeded by the Shonekan-led interim government in 1993 but was shortly toppled by the Abacha regime.
The Abacha regime had its greatest impact on the civil service by its reversal of the nomenclature of the director-general back to permanent secretary and thereby depoliticizing the office and making it once again permanent.
The Abubarkar regime that succeeded the Abacha regime in 1998, the office of secretary to government and head of service hitherto combined by one person was separated into two by the regime as one secretary to government and two, head of service.
The two offices are occupied by two different people.
NOUN 84 -MPA 868 COMPARATIVE PAUDBMLINICIS T RATION The secretary to government is political, while the head of service iasp p o inted from among the most senior civil servants.
In May 1999, Abubakar regime handed over to a democratically elected regime headed by Olusegun Obsanjo.
The regimes most impact on the civil service in the areas of enhanced remunerations and purging of the service of “ghost” workers.
The regime increased the salary package of civil servants by 45%, a development that has enhanced the economic power of many civil servants.
At inception also, various seminars and conferences, particularly on corruption and accountability were organized for senior civil servants.
EXERCISE 1.
Explain the basic features of the 1988 Reforms of the Babangida Administration.
2.
Identify and discuss briefly the issues addressed by reforms instituted between 1948 and 1973 in the Nigerian civil service.
4.0.
CONCLUSION This unit has given you insight into the various administrative reforms by colonial, military and civilian administrations in Nigeria.
The reforms were a means of responding to the problems confronting the service at specific times and as ways of making it be responsive to the demands of the modern society.
It could be observed from the analysis that virtually every regime in Nigeria had one thing or the other to tinker with in the service.
5.0.
SUMMARY In this unit you have been given the opportunity to learn the various reforms regimes instituted for the Nigerian civil service.
You learnt that the colonial reforms were basically general towards indigenizing the nation’s civil service.
The immediate administrations at all levels after attaining independence continued with the Nigerianization process of the civil service at different speeds.
You learned also that the 1988 reforms were the most fundamental in the history of the civil service.
It made the minister the chief Executive and Accounting Officer of the permanent secretary became politicized.
The Abacha regime reversed some provisions of the 1988 reforms which other succeeding regimes have sustained.
6.0.
TUTOR-MARKED ASSIGNMENTS (TMAS) 1.
Highlight and briefly discuss the basic provisions of the 1988 civil service reforms.
NOUN 85 -MPA 868 COMPARATIVE PAUDBMLINICIS T RATION 2.
Identify and explain briefly the issues raised and addressed by civil service reforms between 1948 and 1973 in Nigeria.
6.0.
Further Reading and Other Resources.
Ajayi Kunle (2001) “Federal character, Ethnicity and the Nigerian Public Administration” in F.O Omotosho (ed) contemporary Issues in public Administration, Lagos Bolabay Publications.
Ajayi, Kunle (2001) “Military regimes and public administration in Nigeria in F.O Omotosho (ed) contemporary issues in Public Administration, Lagos, Bolabay publications.
Balogun, M.J (1983) Public Administration in Nigeria, London, Macmillian.
Dudley, B (1982) “Ni g erian Government and Politics, London, Macmillian.
Kolawole, Dipo (ed) (1998) Issues in Nigerian Government and politics, Ibadan, Dekaal.
Olagunju J.L (2001) “The roles of civil servants min Nation Building” in F.O Omotosho (ed) Contemporary issues in public Administration, Lagos, Bolabay publications.
UNIT 4 COMPARATIVE PUBLIC ADMINISTRATION NOUN 86 -MPA 868 COMPARATIVE PAUDBMLINICIS T RATION TABLE OF CONTENTS 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objectives 3.0 Philosophy 3.1.1 Concept of Philosophy 3.1.2 The doctrines 3.2 Ethnics 3.2.1 Concept of ethics 3.2.2 .The ethical ideals 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutor-Marked Assignments 7.0 Further Reading and Other Resources.
1.0.
INTRODUCTION You are in a unit that treats the philosophy and ethics of the British public administration.
In the unit you will learn the doctrines that serve as tghuei d ing principles of the British public administration.
You will also learn about its ethics which spell out the pattern of additional orientation of public servants and officials.
2.0.
OBJECTIVES By the end of this unit, you should be able to do the following activities: 1.
Explain the basic doctrines guiding British public administration.
2.
Describe the principles that underlies British public administration.
NOUN 87 -MPA 868 COMPARATIVE PAUDBMLINICIS T RATION 3.
Analyse the moral code guiding public administration practice in Britain.
4.
Describe the psychological orientation of public servants.
5.
Evaluate the administrative culture in Britain.
3.0.
MAIN CONTENT 3.1.
PHILOSOPHY 3.1.1.
CONCEPT OF PHILOSOPHY.
Every state in the world has its own guiding philosophy.
Philosophy is concerned about the political values that are thought to be essential to the good citizen and a just state.
It borders itself with the issues of justice, good, bad, injustice, political power, political authority and legitimacy.
Philosophy also asks such questions as: to what extent should citizens be entitled to participate in the decision-making processes of government?
Should elected legislators be the ubber- stamp representatives of the opinion of a majority of their constituents, or should they be entitled to vacocteo r ding to their own good conscience and their interpretation of the public interest?
(Rodee, etal 1983: 7-8) other questions asked include-what should be the relationship between the governed and the governor?
What is the nature of power?
What are units state powers?
What are the functions and limits of governmental institutions such as the civil service?
Philosophy provides answers to these questions.
At another level, philosophy cares about the normative implications opfo l it ical organization and behaviour, that is, the way , the state and society “ought” to be organized and the way the citizen “ought” to behave, given certain fundamental human values (ibid).
In essence, philosophy is much concerned with the organization of society and how its institutions work and the relationship people and their government and official institutions.
The way a state is organized may be similar or different, and so also societal values vary from one community to another.
And therefore, the philosophy value of state may be peculiar to it and therefore different from others.
3.1.2.
THE DOCTRINES You can recall that Britain colonized Nigeria and introduced her model of administration to the country.
Britain has one of the oldest administrative system in the world, and over the years it has remained very stable and tested.
She had more oversea colonial administrations in the world than any other NOUN 88 -MPA 868 COMPARATIVE PAUDBMLINICIS T RATION colonial power.
Some of the central concerns of the philosophy of her public administration are: i. Fusion of politics and administration.
The rigid destination between politics and administration obtaining in some countries does not exist in Britain.
In matters of policy process (formulation), career civil servants have a role to play without necessarily undermining their politic al neutrality.
Ministers, by law, advise the prime minister and sovereign while civil servants in turn advise the minister on administrative and political issues.
The constitution therefore, made it possible for civil servants to “acquire both constitutional and administrative roles”.
Despite the dual role of public servants, British administrative philosophy does not equate administrative politics with party loyalties but view it within the cont ext of the Bcornitsitsihtu tion.
ii.
Adoption of the merit system.
Britain initiated the merit sys tem based on competitive examination in recruitment into, and promotion in the administrative system.
This is to preclude incompetence on the job and favouratism appointments.
iii.
Non-partisan civil service.
As you learned just above, despite the fusion of politics and administration, and playing of political roles in policy process, the civil servant must transparently remain politically neutral.
This principle came into operation in 1870 based on the Northcote- Political Report of 1854.
Civil servants, despite their involvement in process must not involve themselves in sensitive area problems that might arouse embarrassing questions from parliament to the minister.
iv.
Pragmatism about science and ethics.
The British public administration combines science and ethics and utilize them as situation demands.
While Britain accepts scientific principles in administrative practice, it equally believes that such principles must be balanced with ethical ideals.
v. Communication is another major part of British administrative philosophy.
It embraced both formal and informal modes of communication.
The adoption of this value arose from the merger of human and structural elements made possible by Britain’s combination of scientific and ethic principles.
The system believes more particularly in oral (verbal) communication in modern organizations to promote smooth working relationship and cohesion.
EXERCISE NOUN 89 -MPA 868 COMPARATIVE PAUDBMLINICIS T RATION 1.
Identify the guiding principles of the British public administration.
3.2.
ETHIC 3.2.1.
CONCEPT OF ETHICS Society have their modes of conduct.
Where you live, there are permissible modes of behaviour and there are some non-permissible ones.
There are acceptable attitudes, while there are non-acceptable ones.
For instance, a sare society will frown at a mature man or lady working naked along the street.
Half- naked university girls are usually frowned at.
Likewise, each administrative system has permissible code’s of conduct.
Therefore, ethics technically borders codes of conduct, while administrative ethics concerns itself with code of conduct for administrators.
Administrative ethics are meant to curtail administrative abuses and administrative behaviour for administrators.
For instance, virtually all administrative systems flay corruption and indiscipline, truancy lateness to work and leaking of official secrets.
The most popular codes of conduct for civil servants in Nigeria, for instance, are the General Order (G O) and financial instruction.
The two present the behavioural boundaries, of and extent of administrative power, of Nigerian civil servants.
In some cases, the ethics of a particular profession may specify the mode of dressing.
This is common with bankers, lawyers, nurses and the armed forces.
Some also determine the nature of relation ship the service provider and a client.
For instance, a doctor must leak information about his patient, as a football referee must not be seen as too close to a side in a fcooomtbpaeltli ti on.
In wrestling you must hit your opponent below belt.
The lawyer in a court must be as polite as possible to the judge and his colleague at the other side of the case.
All these are examples of societal, professional values that have become part of the traditions of a particular society or profession.
Contraventions have punishments.
For instance, fighting in the university earns dismissal, so also examination malpractices.
Likewise, in the administrative set-up, contravening administrative ethics has punishments.
People or members of a particular group, organization or society conform with the ethical values in other to avoid being sanctioned.
3.2.2.
THE ETHICAL IDEALS Ethical ideals occupy a crucial position in British public administration.
These ideals revolve around three major points-: higher form of society, NOUN 90 -MPA 868 COMPARATIVE PAUDBMLINICIS T RATION service to community and the happiness and well being of the workers.
We shall briefly discuss each of these.
i.
Higher form of society: - The ideal stresses the need to work collectively to produce a better and modern society with a purpose and sense of direction, and which has the progress of individuals as a focal issue.
ii.
Service to the community: - The ideal requires that service for community well-being should be placed above all other considerations including those of trade unions and management of industries.
This has been the regulation in industrial disputes and the use of the bargaining process to settle trade disputes rather than work stoppages.
iii.
The happiness and well-being of the workers: - The ideal appreciates the values of workers and consequently the need to enhance their well-being and happiness through self respect, non-economic incentives and concentration on workers’ emotions (Agagu 2001:59- 107).
Thus, the state, society (community) and individuals are the central focus of British public administration.
1.
Identify and briefly discuss ideals of the British civil service.
4.0.
CONCLUSION This unit has examined the philosophical and ethical ideals of the British public administration.
In the unit you learnt that each society and organization has its own philosophy and ethics that guide the behaviour of the society and its people.
5.0.
SUMMARY You have learnt in this unit that ethics concerns the code of conduct of a people, a profession and organization.
You also learnt the basic doctrines motivate and guide the British public administrators which include fusion of politics with administration and the principle of merit system in recruitment and promotion of staff.
The services ethical values revolves around efficiency and service to humanity.
6.0.
TUTOR-MARKED ASSIGNMENTS.
NOUN 91 -MPA 868 COMPARATIVE PAUDBMLINICIS T RATION 1.
Highlight and discuss briefly the philosophical ideals of the British public administration.
7.0.
FURTHER READING AND OTHER RESOURCES.
Agagu, A.A (2001) Comparative political and Administrative studies, Ado- Ekiti, Political Science Department, UNAD.
Gray A and W.I Jenkins (1985) Administrative Politics in British Government, Brighton, Sussex, Wheatsheaf Books.
Parris, H (1968) The origins of the Bermanent Civil Service, 1780-1830” Public Administration, vol 46.
UNIT 5 COMPARATIVE PUBLIC ADMINISTRATION NOUN 92 -MPA 868 COMPARATIVE PAUDBMLINICIS T RATION TABLE OF CONTENTS 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objectives 3.0 Recent Historical Development 3.1 Characteristics 3.2 Functions 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutor-Marked Assignments 7.0 Further Reading and Other Resources.
1.0.
INTRODUCTION In this unit, you will learn of the British civil service.
You will recall that, Britain “exported” her administrative system to her colonial territories.
Nigeria for instance, is a former British colony that has patterned her civil service along that of Britain.
You will learn in the unit the uniqueness of the British civil service.
2.0.
OBJECTIVES By the end of this unit, you should be able to do the following: 1.
Describe how the contemporary British civil service evolved.
2.
Explain the basic characteristics of the British civil service.
3.
Discuss the functions of the civil service.
4.
Identify the unique factors in British civil service.
5.
Explain the relationship between administration and politics in Britain.
3.0.
MAIN CONTENT 3.1.
RECENT HISTORICAL DEVELOPMENT.
NOUN 93 -MPA 868 COMPARATIVE PAUDBMLINICIS T RATION Britain is noted for a durable civil service that has developed and improved over the years.
In concrete terms, the history of British contemporary civil service can be traced to the various changes brought about by the 1854 Trevelyan-Northcote Report otherwise referred to as principles.
The Trevelyan-Northcote Committee whose principles became the foundation for today’s civil service in Britain was brought out by complaints of “spwriedaed corrupt, incompetence and robbery which then existed in the government service”.
Among the adopted recommendations of the committee includes: i.
Open competitive examination for recruitment.
Joining the civil service should be made open to every British citizen who is qualified and pressed all categories of examinations for the purpose of recruitment.
The committee rejected the use of the spoil system for recruitment, it promotes incompetence and favouritism.
ii.
Making clear distinction between two groups of people- “the mechanical,” who should occupy lower class appointment, and the “intellectuals.” Who are designated to occupy superior positions in the service.
iii.
Unification of the service by the adoption of uniform salary grades and the acceptance of the principle that civil servants could be moved from one department to another.
That is, British civil servants are allowed to be mobile by relocating within department and between departments.
iv.
Promotion of civil servant should be based on merit rather than on seniority or length or service.
By this, it includes automatic promotion of officials based on security and length of service.
The system promotes inefficiency and lack of initiatives.
Whereas, with the introduction of merit, civil servants are supposed to meet certain criteria such as passing promotional examination and acquisition of additional training.
The adoption of these principles led to the 1920 re-organization of the service along the four lines.
As a summary, the idea of a permanent civil service with full-time salaried officials and recruitment based on uniform rules first emerged in Britiain in the early 19th century (Parris, 1968:143).
EXERCISE NOUN 94 -MPA 868 COMPARATIVE PAUDBMLINICIS T RATION 1.
Highlight the basic contributions of the Trevelyan-Northcote Committee contributions to the growth of civil service in Britain.
3.2.
CHARACTERISTICS You learnt earlier that the characteristics of the Nigerian civil service were legacies of British colonial rule.
British civil servants have a tradition of enduring characteristics which includes the following: i.
Division into scientific and professional class (i.e.
specialist class), and non-professional classes (i.e.
the generalist class).
The scientific and professional classes include personnel of government’s chief scientific Adviser’s and Treasury counsel offices respectively.
The non-professional (generalist) classes include the administrative, executive, clerical and the manipulative (messenger cal) grades follow a vertical, hierarchical order.
Though, the service is treated as one.
ii.
Permanence of tenure.
Practices the principle of career personnel which enjoy permanent tenure till retirement age, in the absence of any administrative misconduct.
iii.
Recruitment based on merit system.
Recruitment into the service is based on open competitive examination with or without open competitive interview.
iv.
Political neutrality.
Civil servants must abstain or insulate themselves from partisan party politics to ensure loyalty to the sovereign nation.
v. The civil service is transparent as it virtually non-corrupt.
Moral and administrative ethics are strong foundations of the service since the adoption of the Northcote-Trevelyan Report of 1854. vi.
Impartiality principle which excludes favouritism in rendering of service to the public by civil servants.
The observance of this is part reinforces the non- corruptible nature of the service.
vii.
Anonymity principle makes civil servants to be seen but not heard.
They are not supposed to make any open declarations to the public or mass media on any policy issues.
It is the basic role of political officials to do so.
Equally, he takes no praises or blames fgoorv e r nment success or failure.
But the leadership of each department takes responsibility for whatever happens.
NOUN 95 -MPA 868 COMPARATIVE PAUDBMLINICIS T RATION viii.
Impersonality principle here civil servants are concerned with record and not with the persons doing business with government departments.
The file with the contents of individual client are all a civil servant needs to render service to the people and no need to see them in person.
This principle is to erode avenues for partiality and undue favouritism.
ix.
Lastly, written rules and regulations.
The British civil service ahs a tradition of adhering to administrative rules and regulation.
The service has code of ethic that guide its operations and the behaviour of civil servants and the extent they can go in carrying out their official duties.
There are administrative laws that guide both political and civil officials in order to curb administrative excesses and abuse of power.
EXERCISE 1.
Highlight and discuss briefly the significant characteristics of the British civil service.
4.0.
CONCLUSION This unit has treated the basic background to the British civil service by tracing its recent historical development.
You also learn the tcrhaadriaticotenrails t ics of the service which are similar to those of Nigerian civil service except in the areas of decision-making by the British civil service.
5.0.
SUMMARY You have specifically learnt in this unit the following: 1.
British public is as old as the country, but contemporary British civil service emerged in the early 19th century due to administrative reforms.
2.
The general administrative philosophy hinged on the inter-play of politics and administration, merit system, anonymity and non- partisanship.
6.0.
Tutor-Marked Assignment 1.
Identify the basic characteristics that guide the British civil service.
NOUN 96 -MPA 868 COMPARATIVE PAUDBMLINICIS T RATION 7.0.
Further Reading and other Resources Agagu, A.A (2001) Competitive political and Administrative studies, Ado- Ekiti, University of Ado-Ekiti.
Gray, A and W.I Jekins (1985) Administrative Politics in British Governemnt, Brighton, Sussex, Wheatsheaf Books.
Parris, H (1968) “The origins of the permanent civil service 1780-1830” Public Administration vol 46.
MODULE 4 UNIT 1 NOUN 97 -MPA 868 COMPARATIVE PAUDBMLINICIS T RATION UNIT 1 COMPARATIVE PUBLIC ADMINISTRATION FUNCTIONS OF BRITISH CIVIL SERVICE TABLE OF CONTENTS 6.0 Introduction 7.0 Objectives 3.1 Functions 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutor Marked Assignment {TMA} .
7.0F urth Further Readings and Other Resources 1.0 INTRODUCTION You have learnt in the last unit information about the recent historical development of the British civil service.
You also learnt of the characteristics of the civil service with its guiding principles.
In this unit, you will learn the traditional and contemporary functions of the British civil service.
The civil service combines some political functions with other traditional functions are widely associated with other states civil services.
2.0 OBJECTIVES By the end of this unit, you should be able to: 1.
Explain the traditional functions of the British civil service 2.
Explain the political responsibilities being combined with the traditional functions by the service.
NOUN 98 -MPA 868 COMPARATIVE PAUDBMLINICIS T RATION 3.
Describe the basic distinctions between the functions of civil service in Britain and Nigeria.
4.
Explain the concept of delegated legislation.
3.1 FUNCTIONS You should be able to explain the functions of the Nigerian civil service, discussed in your last unit.
The functions of the British civil service were adopted to the Nigerian situation by the colonial administration except in two major areas which are present only in the British civil service.
I Civil servants take part in actual policy process by participating in policy formulation beyond providing necessary data.
They do assist the minister in the discharge of his political and parliamentary duties.
A situation by the constitution which gives room for interwoven politics administration, but without the civil servant over-shooting his bounds by involving himself in partisan politics.
II British civil servants are also very much engaged in legislation {delegated legislation}.
The British civil service is noted for its increasing powers particularly in the area of delegated law-making brought about by circumstances of the first World War when parliament saddled with the burden of the war was forced to delegate legislative power to public officials.
The officials continue to enjoy their enhanced powers.
Other functions such as executing public policies, maintenance of law and order, and societal values are also principal functions of the service.
Public policy execution is a primary function of the British civil service.
As the name civil servant indicated, civil servants are the errand staff of government.
Civil servants, apart from the fact that they actually contribute to decision-making, after a decision is made, either by consensus, compromise or majority votes, the actual implementation, analysis and evaluation are the primary duties of the servants.
Policy-makers merely draw a plan, a kind of skeletal work, a work that can be compared to that of an architect who merely provides a building plan.
The duty of civil servants is to provide details of an approval policy.
They flesh up the approved plans and translate it to a concrete object.
During the execution process, stage by stage evaluation is being carried out at regular intervals, and problems are being assessed for correction.
NOUN 99 -MPA 868 COMPARATIVE PAUDBMLINICIS T RATION The efficiency and commitment of the civil service is measured by its capacity to implement government policies as diligently as possible.
Ironically, the successful implementation of the policy earns the minister first, a pat on the back and praises rather than the civil servants that actually carried out the job.
On the other hand, the failure of policy, probably through poor implementation, which may be because of technical problems, lack of expertise, lack of commitment and sabotage, the blame the civil servant directly responsible.
The failure can lead to the resignation of the minister from government and can out rightly lead to a vote of no confidence in parliament and subsequently the sacking of government and calls for a new election.
Therefore, the performance of civil servants in Britain can indirectly determine the tenure of the cabinet.
The function of the maintenance of law and order is one of the oldest roles of the civil service in Britain.
Law and order border omna i ntaining peace {public peace} in the society and in all ohtuhmera n formations.
Civil servants have a duty, like the police, to report any breakdown of law and order in any district.
Tinhfoe rm ation department has a duty to liaise directly with the police and supply information regarding break down of law and oorcdceurr,r e nce of criminal activities including gang crimes.
Keeping of societal values is a function of state servants.
Specific government department deals with the keeping of societal artifacts and cultural properties including written materials and oral traditions.
The civil service also embarks on rendering of special social service functions such as road repairs and public health service.
The public works department does repair damaged public utilities; the public health department has the task of ensuring clean environments all times.
Monitoring of land, air and sea environments for incidents of pollution is primary to the department.
EXERCISE 1 Highlight and discuss the non-political functions of the British civisl e rvice.
2 Explain the traditional functions of British civil service.
4.0 CONCLUSION NOUN 100 -MPA 868 COMPARATIVE PAUDBMLINICIS T RATION In this unit, we have dealt with the political and non-political {traditional functions} of the British civil service.
Its political role in terms of actual involvement in decision-making is very unique.
This is contrary to what you learnt in the functions of Nigerian civil service whereby civil servants do not take part in policy formation.
They were only involved in policy-making only to that of information or data gathering to assist political officials.
The British civil service performs other functions that are not political in nature such as delegated legislation, policy execution and keeping of traditional, societal values of the nation.
5.0 SUMMARY You have learnt in this unit that the British civil service occupies a critical role in the nation’s administrative system.
It performs such roles as the following: 1.
Involvement in policy-making process 2.
Delegated legislation 3.
Execution of public policies 4.
Maintenance of law and order 5.
Taking custody of societal values and norms 6.
Providing public social services.
6.0 TUTOR-MARKED ASSIGNMENTS {TMA} 1.
Evaluate the relevance of the civil service in the British administrative system 2.
Differentiate between political and non-political functions of the British civil service.
7.0 FURTHER READING AND OTHER RESOURCES.
Agagu, A.A {2001} Comparative Political and Administrative Studies, Ado- Ekiti, Department of political Science, UNAD Ajayi, Kunle {1997} “The Executive” in Dipo Kolawole {ed} Readings in Political Science, Ibadan, Dekaas.
Dunleavy, P. etal {1990} {eds} Developments in British Politics, London, Macmillan.
Gray, A & W. J. Jenkins {1978} Administrative Politics in British Government, Brighton, Sussex NOUN 101 -MPA 868 COMPARATIVE PAUDBMLINICIS T RATION UNIT 2 NOUN 102 -MPA 868 COMPARATIVE PAUDBMLINICIS T RATION REFORMS IN THE BRITISH CIVIL SERVICE TABLE OF CONTENTS 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objectives 3.0 Main Content 3.1 Reforms 3.1.1 Concept of Reform 3.1.2 First Phase 3.1.3 Second Phase 3.1.4 Third Phase 3.1.5 Forth Phase 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutor Marked Assignment {TMA} .
7.0F urth Further Readings and Other Resources 1.0 INTRODUCTION In your previous units on the British civil service, you learnt the background to the development of contemporary civil service in Britain, philosophy and ethics Britain’s public administration, the characteristics and the traditional and political functions of the service.
In this unit, you will learn about the remedial measures introduced to the service in order to enhance its efficiency and correct any identified structural and behavioural weakness of the institution.
NOUN 103 -MPA 868 COMPARATIVE PAUDBMLINICIS T RATION 2.0 OBJECTIVES You will by the end of this unit be able to do the following activities: 1.
Recall some of the problems of the Nigerian civil service learnt in your last unit.
2.
Explain the concept of reform.
3.
Describe according to Phases, the reforms in British civil service.
4.
Compare reforms in Nigeria with that of Britain.
3.0 MAIN CONTENT 3.1 REFORMS 3.1.1 CONCEPT OF REFORM An old pensioner took out his car in the morning.
He knew quite well that the car was not totally alright.
The car was jerking and at times the engine would fail while passers by would help push it to start again.
The car had to stop finally on its own with a very black smoke coming out of it before it stopped.
The man was lucky as there was mechanic garage near-by.
He called the man in-charge and complained about the car.
The mwaelckheadn itco the car, opened the Bonnet and asked the old man to start the engine.
The mechanic told the old man that his car engine has knocked and that he needed a complete new set of some vital spare parts.
The old man asks for an estimated cost of spares.
After some minutes, the mechanic gave him an estimated bill of Sixty thousand Naira.
The old man exclaimed that he could not get the sum as his pension allowance had not been paid for nine months by government.
He asked the mechanic if he could keep the car in his garage, the mechanic agreed.
Surprisingly, the pensioner came back twelve days later with the money as the arrears of his pension has been paid.
The mechanic brought the necessary new spare part and three days later, the car was on the road again.
The pensioner told his friends that his car performs better now than before.
He sounds better and without any poisonous smoke any longer.
The lesson, I want you to learn from the above story is that no system is perfect.
Any system can develop a problem at any point.
As a system is getting old, its efficiency gets lower unless it is being serviced regularly.
Once a system is repaired and serviced regularly, it is as good as new as its efficiency and performance will be enhanced.
NOUN 104 -MPA 868 COMPARATIVE PAUDBMLINICIS T RATION Reform is therefore, likened to the repairs of a car when it becomes old or develops a problem.
It is about introducing change; making something becomes new; re-energize a thing, system or institution.
Bringing back to a perfect state by correcting the problems that comes up in a system Reforms take place to increase efficiency or performance of an institution or system.
Reform is not a time and final affair new, it is a regular activity.
As long as a system is working, it needs regular repairs and maintenance.
3.1.2 FIRST PHASE You have learnt in the previous unit the problems that confronted tNhieg e rian civil service thereby leading to series of reforms.
So also; you will learn about administrative reforms repetition so also you will learn about administrative reforms in Britain.
The British civil service despite its present evaluation as “not been noted for corruption” since the reforms of the mid-19th century, it has some problems bordering on inefficiency and incompetence.
Though, before the adoption of North cote-Trevelyan report, the civil service was riddled with corruption and bribery which the Northcote-Trevelyan committee was asked to investigate.
Thus, from the period of the investigations and subsequent adoption of its report to the 1930, marked the first phase of administrative reforms iBnr i tain.
The adopted and implemented portion of the committee’s recommendations included: recruitment based on open competitive examination; a unified civil service system with uniform grades; promotion criterion based on merit rather than security; and, the classification of personnel to classes namely: the scientific and professional classes; and administrative, executive, clerical and manipulative classes.
The recommendations were effectively implemented in 1870 to herald a new public service era.
Structural reforms were brought out in 1920 by the re-organisation report of the national council.
The Report replaced the initial two-fold division of the service with a four-fold class.
It went ahead to introduce a clear separation of tenure, functions responsibilities between political officials {Ministers} and civil servants.
3.1.3 SECOND PHASE NOUN 105 -MPA 868 COMPARATIVE PAUDBMLINICIS T RATION The second Phase of administrative reforms in Britain commenced in the 1930s and lasted till 1967.
The civil service within the period recorded the following: I Increase in the personnel size and the scope of its responsibilities.
This development had its origin in the welfare reforms of 1th9r1o0u g h the 1950s by government.
The period also coincided with the war time with increased tempo in government activities necessitating increased involvement of the service.
II Emergence of a comprehensive trade union structure to promote workers welfare.
The 1973 Hardman Report gave support to the geographical dispersal of civil servants in order to assist regional development policy.
The Phase generally witnessed a development of non-political interference in the conditions of service of civil servants.
3.1.4 THIRD PHASE The third Phase commenced in 1968 to 1978.
The reform in this period was the Fulton Report which started to be executed in 1970.
The Report achieved the following: I Establishment of the civil service college in June 1970.
The college provides the necessary training for civil servants.
II It merged the hitherto administrative, executive and the clerical classes up to the level of Assistant Secretaries to become tAhde m inistration group in 1971.
It also merged the scientific, professional and technical classes to scale down the number of classes so as to provide effective co-ordination.
3.1.5 FOURTH PHASE 1979 marked the take-off of the forth phase when the conservatives led by Margaret Thatcher assumed power.
The Thatcher administration was determined to improve civil service efficiency and changing the orientation of the service to be business like and responsive.
To achieve this, the administration designed a new administrative technique categorized into: NOUN 106 -MPA 868 COMPARATIVE PAUDBMLINICIS T RATION A Business-like management B Service and clients orientation, and C Competition As part of the administrative policy of a new management toward promoting efficiency, it reduced the work force from about 734,000 to 635,000 and later to about 600,000.
1988 witnessed structural changes in the service which led to the principle of delegation and differentiation in the pursue and service delivery functions of government.
The over-ridding goal of the Thatcher administration reforms was to ensure that the public service serves the public better and serves the needs of the public by meeting certain level of standard expected by individuals in giving them the right of redress in case these rights are not met.
In all, the Thatcher era has been described as remarkable for introducing reforms that could be described as the most remarkable in the 20th century {Agagu Ibid}.
EXERCISE 1.
The Northcote-Trevelyan Report of 1854 laid the foundation for the contemporary British civil service.
Identify the basic provisions of the Report 2.
What was the impact of the Thatcher administration on the British civil service?
4.0 CONCLUSION This unit focuses on reforms in British civil service.
Britain has attained an enviable civil service tradition because of its age and consequently ietxs p e rience.
Despite its global acclaimed reputation of having a virile civil service, is far from being perfect.
It has its own weaknesses as it equally has strengths.
Respective regimes acknowledged the basic problems of the service and those of the civil servants.
Successive reforms were attempted to resolve the problems of the service through some official initiatives, re- structuring and introduction of new practicing rules and regulations.
5.0 SUMMARY NOUN 107 -MPA 868 COMPARATIVE PAUDBMLINICIS T RATION In this unit, you have learnt the concept of reform as a way of introducing new life, new ways of doing things, making a change to something and re- energizing a system for the purpose of enhancing its performance aenffdic i ency.
You also learned of the new ideas and programmes introduced to the system.
This is done by treating the British civil service reforms phrase-by phrase.
The report of the Northcote-Trevelyan committee had much influence on the civil service; you also learnt of Thatcher’s administration contributions to the improvement of the efficiency of the service.
The administrations most remarkable influence was the reduction of the civil service staff strength from 734,000 to about 600,000.
6.0 TUTOR-MARKED ASSIGNMENTS {TMA} 1.
Explain the Concept of reform and why is it desirable?
2.
Examine the basic influence the Northcote-Trevelyan Committee has on the British civil service.
7.0 FURTHER READINGS AND OTHER RESOURCES Agagu, A.A {2001} Comparative Political and Administrative Studies, Ado- Ekiti, Department of political Science, UNAD Ajayi, Kunle {1997} “The Executive” in Dipo Kolawole {ed} Readings in Political Science, Ibadan, DekaaL.
Gray, A & W. I. Jenkins {1985} Administrative Politics in British Government, Brighton, Sussex, Wheat Sheaf Books.
UNIT 3 NOUN 108 -MPA 868 COMPARATIVE PAUDBMLINICIS T RATION DOCTRINES OF PUBLIC ADMINISTRATION IN THE UNITED STATES OF AMERICA TABLE OF CONTENTS 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objectives 3.0 Main Content 3.1 Doctrine of public Administration 3.1.1 Concept of Doctrine 3.1.2 The Doctrines 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutor Marked Assignment {TMA} .
7.0 Furth Further Readings and Other Resources 1.0 INTRODUCTION This is the opening unit on the American public administration.
America, like Britain, enjoys a very stable political system with a tested constitution.
Like Britain too, she has her own unique administrative system, though very much elaborate than that of Britain, France and Germany.
In this unit, you will learn the doctrines of the American public administration.
The concept of doctrine shall be examined so as to make you comprehend the topic very well.
Thereafter, the contents of the bpahsilioc so phical underlining of her public administration system shall be examined.
2.0 OBJECTIVES NOUN 109 -MPA 868 COMPARATIVE PAUDBMLINICIS T RATION You shall be able to carry out the following activists by the end of the unit: 1.
Explain the concept of doctrine 2.
Describe the basic principles underlying America’s public administration.
3.
Explain the concept of separation of power in relation to the American public administration system.
4.
Describe the relationship between science and administration in America 5.
Explain the concept of human element in the American public service system.
6.
Analyze the goals of the need for efficiency in the public service.
3.0 MAIN CONTENT 3.1 DOCTRINES OF PUBLIC ADMINISTRATION 3.1.1 CONCEPT OF DOCTRINE You will recall that in your secondary school days, you were all proud of your schools.
You always sang the motto of the school.
Beyond the school, there are other groups and organizations which have their motto.
Other has basic principles.
For instance, Rotary international has the “4-Way Test”.
Likewise, states {Countries} and governments, like political parties, have motto and basic principles which guide the policies of the state and the actions of its leaders.
These guiding principles of countries, groups and organizations are alternatively referred to as “doctrines”.
Doctrines are the philosophies of the state either generally or on a particular issue.
They serve as the guiding light, a compass or radar to locate ad ir ection.
Doctrines set the scope of what a nation, state, group oorr g a nisation want to do, the extent of its limits and how things should be done.
Doctrine can also be perceived as an attribute, the nature acnhdar a cteristics of a thing or organisation in state.
It is in the light of these interpretations that we shall examine the American public administration doctrines.
3.1.2 THE DOCTRINES NOUN 110 -MPA 868 COMPARATIVE PAUDBMLINICIS T RATION You will recall that the British public administration is guided by certain philosophies.
Likewise, America has some doctrines guiding her pubic administration.
Before analyzing the American public administration doctrine, let us briefly re- state that of Britain which include: A Fusion of politics and administration B Adoption of merit system C Non-partisan civil service and ethics E Formal and informal organizational communication Let us now proceed to the American doctrines.
To start with, America, like Britain, you learn earlier, enjoys political and administrative stability.
This has an advantage for her public administration, for it has been able to develop a tradition for public administration which contain the following guiding principles/doctrines: I Separation of politics from administration.
It is the belief that the two concepts are different and distinct processes of government that have their independence.
One of the original proponents of this view is Woodrow Wilson who argued in 1887 in his seminar work entitled “that administration lies outside the proper sphere of politics.
Administrative questions are not political questions”.
This philosophy is a remarkable departure from that of Britain which has a fusion of politics and administration.
II Marriage of science and administration.
Administration is treated as a separate field of science.
It was observed that government commitment is increasingly growing in size; therefore, there should be a science of administration, according to Wilson {1887}, which shall seek to strengthen the paths of government, to make its business less unbusiness-like, and to crown its duties with dutifulness.
III Emphasis on efficiency for economic attainment.
Economic goals and efficiency are synonymous in the American public administration.
The emphasis on efficiency was conspired, according to Thomas {1978i 17-18}, by the need to maximize human efforts with a view to making American industry more efficient.
The love for efficiency NOUN 111 -MPA 868 COMPARATIVE PAUDBMLINICIS T RATION was also provoked by the recession that trailed the First World War {WW1}.
IV Consideration of human element in administration.
Like the British administrative ethical ideals, the American public administration has human development as its focus and target.
This doctrine arose as a by-product of criticisms against the American scientific management school which believes that economic incentives alone determine efficiency.
It is now believed that productivity will increase if job satisfaction can be combined with good human relations in the public organization.
These doctrines make the American public service exceptionally unique.
EXERCISE 1.
Identify the principles that make the American public administration unique and distinct.
2.
What informed the American doctrine of “consideration in human element in administration”?
8.0 CONCLUSION This unit has addressed the fundamental principles or doctrines guiding the American public service system.
You learn that these doctrines rpeemrmaiann e nt features of her public administration irrespective of political party or person in power.
The concept of doctrine as explained in the unit clarifies it as the basic attributes and guiding compass guide on a course of action.
You learnt, each group, association or state has doctrines and they are rarely subject to manipulations by readers of regimes.
The doctrines of tAhme e rican public service in a way make hers unique.
9.0 SUMMARY You have learnt in this unit that the doctrines of the American padumbliinci s tration are her compass which determines what public policies are.
She can make, the subjective of such policies, how those policies aerxee c uted and what are the basic position of Americans in what tghoevire r n ment do.
The human element as the centre-focus of her padumbliinci s tration therefore, makes it distinct and human-oriented.
10.0 TUTOR-MARKED ASSIGNMENTS NOUN 112 -MPA 868 COMPARATIVE PAUDBMLINICIS T RATION 1.
Compare and contrast the American and British public administration doctrines.
2.
Explain the concept of “consideration of human element” in the American public administration doctrines.
11.0 FURTHER READING AND OTHER RESOURCES Agagu, A.
A.
{2001} Comparative Political and Administrative Studies, Ado Ekiti, Department of political Science, UNAD.
Freedman, Leonard {1980} Power and Politics in America, California, Brooks/Cole.
Redford, E. S. etal {ed, 1965} Politics and Government in America, USA, Harcourt, Brace &World Inc. Weisberg, R. {1980} Understanding American Government, New York, Holt Rinehart & Winston.
UNIT 4 NOUN 113 -MPA 868 COMPARATIVE PAUDBMLINICIS T RATION STRUCTURE AND CHARACTERISTICS OF THE CIVIL SERVICE OF THE UNITED STATED OF AMERICA TABLE OF CONTENTS 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objectives 3.0 Main Content 3.1 Structure and Characteristics 3.1.1 Structure 3.1.2 Characteristics 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutor Marked Assignment {TMA} .
7.0 Furth Further Readings and Other Resources 1.0 INTRODUCTION In the last unit, you learnt the basic administration that guides padumbliinci s tration in America.
You need to call these doctrines.
They include: Separation of politics from administration; marriage of science and administration, emphasis on efficiency and consideration of human elements in administration.
In this unit, you will learn about the structure and characteristics oAfm e rica’s civil service.
Like the doctrines, America a very unique structure in her civil service.
Decentralization of administrative, power within departments and outside of them is a central issue in the public sseyrsvteicme.
2.0 OBJECTIVES By the end of this unit, you should be able to: 1.
Analyze the basic structure of the American civil service.
2.
Explain the characteristics of American civil service.
3.
Explain the categories of personnel classes in the civil service 4.
Analyze the distinction between the British and American civil services in terms of their structure and characteristics.
NOUN 114 -MPA 868 COMPARATIVE PAUDBMLINICIS T RATION 3.0 MAIN CONTENT 3.1 STRUCTURE AND CHARACTERISTICS 3.1.1 STRUCTURE The American public administration revolves around government departments, specialized agencies and corporations.
You will recall that in Nigeria, civil administrative units are called Ministries but in America, they are called government departments.
Similarly, the head of a ministry in Nigeria is called of a “minister”, while in America; it is referred to as “Secretary of states”.
The American civil service represents the collectivity of the departments and non-departmental agencies within the executive branch, the specialized or regulatory agencies and government corporations.
The structure of the service takes two forms: I Each of the Departments, agencies and corporations is divided into smaller units such as officials service, bureau and divisions as a way of decentralization of legislative power II In terms of personnel structure, you will remember that the British civil service is structured into classes, but this is not so in America.
Instead, it has a unified civil service structure only with number of salary grades within scheduled grades from 1 to 18.
3.1.2 CHARACTERISTICS You have learned the characteristics of the British civil service.
That of America is learnt a bit different from the British.
The characteristics include the following: I Political involvement in policy process.
Public administration in general has always been touched by personal and political considerations.
Political neutrality by the body of administrators is not part of American civil service culture.
Civil servants take part in political discussions and can disagree with political officials on policy issues.
NOUN 115 -MPA 868 COMPARATIVE PAUDBMLINICIS T RATION II Permanence.
The civil service operates the principle of permanent tenure civil servants enjoy security of tenure and guarantee against arbitrary removal.
After an employee has served the mandatory one year probation, during which he can be dropped without ceremony, he acquires civil service status.
This means that except in lsoeycaulrtiyty- cases, he cannot be dismissed from service without a rather long and complicated shame of hearings and appeals {Redford et, 1965: 447}.
III Recruitment based on merit system rather than spoils system.
Until late 19th century, recruitment into the service was on partisan basis or what was called “Spoil system”.
In spoil era, the incumbent president would replace very many of the civil servants recruited by his predecessor with people from his faction and party.
This had often led to personnel instability.
But by the beginning of 1880s the system was changed to merit system.
The merit system in America stipulates that recruitment, promotion, assignment and pay are to be based on merit and not partisan politics.
Recruitment is based on open competitive examinations including written and oral examinations which can be in several stages.
IV Non- participation in competitive party politics.
That civil servant is allowed to participate in policy debate and process does not mean they have a right to join parties and contest elections.
Though, as ordinary citizens, they have the right to join parties and contest for elections but not as civil servants.
They cannot contest elections and still remain as career civil servants.
Therefore, the civil service is still guided by non-political partisanship.
V Professional civil service.
The service has laid emphasis on recruitment of staff with professional competence and specialized knowledge rather than generalists which are a feature of British class structure.
EXERCISE 1.
Describe the cardinal characteristics of the American civil service 2.
Explain the structural forms that the American civil service has.
3.
Compare the Nigerian civil service structure with that of America.
4.0 CONCLUSION NOUN 116 -MPA 868 COMPARATIVE PAUDBMLINICIS T RATION In this unit, you have learnt about two important items in the American civil service namely- the structure and characteristics.
You learnt earlier, that American is different in some ways.
One, it is a wider addemceinntirsatlriaztaivtieo n than that say Britain or France.
Two, Division of personnel to classes in the manner of Britain or Nigeria does not exist.
Her personnel categorization is based on salary grades.
5.0 SUMMARY You have learnt in this unit that like other states civil services, the American civil service is structured.
However, the structural arrangement in America is quite different.
The level of decentralization in terms of administration for the purpose of efficiency is wider than other states.
For instance, edaecpha rt ment of government is divided into offices, service, and bureau civil divisions.
You are also learnt about the characteristics of the service.
These include: Political involvement in policy process by civil servants, permanence, merit system and open competition for recruitment; non- participation in politics; and professional civil service.
6.0 TUTOR-MARKED ASSIGNMENTS {TMA} 1.
Examine the basic forms and structure that the American civil service has taken 2.
Identify and discuss FIVE major characteristics of the American civil service.
7.0 FURTHER READING AND OTHER RESOURCES Agagu, A.
A.
{2001} Comparative Political and Administrative Studies, Ado Ekiti, Department of political Science, UNAD.
Freedman, Leonard {1980} Power and Politics in America, California, Brooks/Cole.
Redford, E. S. etal {ed, 1965} Politics and Government in America, USA, Harcourt, Brace &World Inc. Weisberg, R. {1980} Understanding American Government, New York, Holt Rinehart & Winston.
UNIT 5 NOUN 117 -MPA 868 COMPARATIVE PAUDBMLINICIS T RATION FUNCTIONS OF THE UNITED STATES CIVIL SERVICE TABLE OF CONTENTS 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objectives 3.0 Main Content 3.1 Functions 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutor Marked Assignment {TMA}.
7.0F urth Further Readings and Other Resources 1.0 INTRODUCTION The civil service is regarded as the engine of development of a state.
This description is a reflection of how relevant the civil service is.
Regimes often acknowledge this fact and believe for this task to be possible the civil service must be efficient.
This unit will discuss the basic functions of the American civil service.
In doing so, you will learn of the various functions of the service and you will be able to compare these functions with those of other states.
2.0 OBJECTIVES By the end of this unit, you should be able to: 1.
Explain the various functions performed by the American civil service 2.
Recall the functions of the British civil service in order to compare their duties.
NOUN 118 -MPA 868 COMPARATIVE PAUDBMLINICIS T RATION 3.
Compare and contrast the functions of civil services of Nigeria and America to be able to explain their similarities and differences.
3.0 MAIN CONTENT 3.1 FUNCTIONS OF AMERICAN CIVIL SERVICE 3.1.1 FUNCTIONS You learned about the structure and characteristics of American civil service in the last unit.
You should recall the major points we made on the two topics.
On structure, you learned that America has two forms of structure for its civil service which outside the conventional structure we learned in the civil services of Nigeria and America.
These forms include: A Division of government department to smaller decentralizing units B Categorization of personnel into salary grades instead strict compartmentalization of classes such as professional administrative, executive, clerical and manipulative classes.
American model has 1-18 salary grades for civil servants.
You should also recall the characteristics of the service.
You learned that it has the following characteristics: A Separation of politics and administration.
B Non-Participation in partisan politics C Permanence D Merit system E professional public service.
The duties of civil servants in /America are not significantly different from those of Nigeria and Britain, except in a few cases.
In Nigeria, you learnt that civil servants perform the following duties: A Assisting political heads of ministries and executive in general in policy-formulation.
Civil servants provide the necessary information and data on specific policy issues at stake.
They provide options/alternatives, advice on each option and placement of options into categories indicating their level of importance.
NOUN 119 -MPA 868 COMPARATIVE PAUDBMLINICIS T RATION B Nigerian civil servants are the principal agents of public policy execution.
They have the sole responsibility to implement all decided and approved policy programmes.
The executing function of the service earned the civil servants the name “loyal servant” Other functions are- provision of social amenities and services; regulatory functions; custodian of societal values and maintenance of law and orders.
The functions of the British civil service are not significantly different from that of Nigeria, except in the aspect that relates to actual participation in policy-formulation process attributed to British civil servants.
In the same vein, the duties of civil servants in America are not significantly different from those of Nigeria and Britain, except too in a few cases.
The civil service, like bureaucracies in general, serves as a source oinfi t iative, and source of policy proposals growing out of technical porcec-u pation with various features of a sensitively interdependent society {Redford et al, Ibid, 440}.
Besides, the service takes part in the policy process which goes beyond mere information, and giving of advice to the political head, the staff of each Department engages in policy debate, and civil servants may show preferences for policies and their implementation.
They may be divergent views with political leaders on policy implementation and may decide to go at a chosen speed.
Civil servants in taking part in policy debate, they have a lot of information at their disposal.
As Leonard Freedman {1980:236} observes that however, the newly proposed ideas cannot work.
This is so because, the staff members, after all, have built up years of experience and practiced knowledge.
They can draw immediately on a staggering array of data of which a new director at the top is relatively ignorant.
They can commend the kind of technical and scientific competence increasingly necessary in making effective decisions and that is not usually part of the preparation of presidents or most of their top advisers.
The presidency having observed the vantage position of public servants regarding information on policy issues, presidents have been trying tsoim ilarly create that opportunity for political officials and therefore, off-set the bureaucracies’ information advantage by building up their personal staffs and technical advisers in the White House and the executive office, and although congress, too, has steadily improved its facilities for gathering data, NOUN 120 -MPA 868 COMPARATIVE PAUDBMLINICIS T RATION these staff cannot possibly keep up with everything for which they areresp onsible {ibid}.
EXERCISE 1.
In what ways are the functions of American civil servants different from that of Britain?
2.
Explain the assessment that “specialized information confer American civil servants a special advantage” .
Compare the functions of civil servants in America and Nigeria.
4.0 CONCLUSION This unit has explained the functions of civil servants in America.
In doing this, it made a comparison of the duties they perform in Nigeria and Britain.
As you learn earlier, the functions of American’s civil servant is very crucial on certain issues.
Their long years of experience place them on a higher terrain than political officials in the Departments as they have at tdhiespiro s a l very rich information.
5.0 SUMMARY You have learnt in this unit by way of revision, the structure acnhdar a cteristics of American civil service.
You also recalled the functions of civil services in Britain and Nigeria.
You learnt specifically that tfhuen c tions of the American civil service include the following: A Initiates policies because of their technical experience.
These are often in form of policy proposals.
B Takes part in actual policy process C Engages in policy debate with political officials.
D Takes custody of specialized information needed for policy and top civil servants.
From these functions, you should be able to explain the uniqueness oAfm e rica’s civil servants compared to those of other countries like Nigeria and others.
6.0 TUTOR-MARKED ASSIGNMENTS NOUN 121 -MPA 868 COMPARATIVE PAUDBMLINICIS T RATION 1.
Enumerate and discuss the functions of the American civil services.
2.
Discuss the ways in which information has put America civil servants above all others in America’s administrative politics.
7.0 FURTHER READING AND OTHER RESOURCES Agagu, A.
A.
{2001} Comparative Political and Administrative Studies, Ado Ekiti, Department of political Science, UNAD.
Freedman, Leonard {1980} Power and Politics in America, California, Brooks/Cole.
Redford, E. S. etal {ed, 1965} Politics and Government in America, USA, Harcourt, Brace &World Inc. Weisberg, R. {1980} Understanding American Government, New York, Holt Rinehart & Winston.
MODULE 5 NOUN 122 -MPA 868 COMPARATIVE PAUDBMLINICIS T RATION UNIT 1 INDEPENDENT AGENCIES IN THE UNITED STATE OF AMERICA TABLE OF CONTENT 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objectives 3.1 Administrative Agencies 3.1.1 Types 3.1.2 Functions 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutor-Marked Assignments 7.0 Further Reading and Other resources 1.0 INTRODUCTION In this unit, you will learn about part of what makes American padumbliinci s trative system unique.
You will learn about independent agencies.
You should recall that in Nigeria, there are some parastatals usually referred to as public corporations.
American administrative agencies are not the same thing as public corporations.
America has both categories.
In the unit, you will learn of the different typologies of independent agencies that exist in America and their functions.
1.2 OBJECTIVES By the end of this unit you should be able to do the following activities: NOUN 123 -MPA 868 COMPARATIVE PAUDBMLINICIS T RATION (1) Explain the different types of independent agencies in Nigeria.
(2) Analyse the functions of the independent agencies.
(3) Describe the work roles of each agency (4) Differentiate the types of independent agencies in America 1.3.0 MAIN CONTENT 1.3.1 INDEPENDENT AGENCIES 3.1.1 TYPES You learnt in the previous unit on the structure and characteristics oAfm e rica’s civil service that government departments are divided into smaller units for the purpose of decentralization and efficiency.
Outside Washington, various government bureaucracies exist up to the local level to the extent people used to wonder why the American bureaucracy has grown so large.
For instance, as at 1980, federal bureaucracies had almost 2.9 million civilian employees (Freedman, 1980:236), out of this population only 14.4 percent only worked in the Washington D.c, metropolitan area Weissberg 1980:401), the balance are decentralized unit employees.
Independent agencies share part of this statistics of employees.
You have learnt that the American public administration is unique in many respects.
Part of this uniqueness is the prominence given to independent agencies.
The agencies are referred to as “independent” because they are not directly under the supervision of a cabinet department nor part of the Executive Office of the president.
The agencies have categories which we sehnaulml e rate and discuss briefly (i) Regulatory agencies.
They include the Federal communications commission and the National Labour relations Board, just to mention two.
Their duties are to regulate the practices of business, labour, and other private economic organizations in accordance with federal legislations.
They are headed by commissioners appointed by the president.
NOUN 124 -MPA 868 COMPARATIVE PAUDBMLINICIS T RATION (ii) Administrative or executive agencies unlike the regulatory agencies which intervene in the affairs of private business without trying to run them directly, administrative agencies are directly involved in operating or supervising governmental programmes.
Agencies in this category include the National Aeronautics and Space Administration (NASA) and the Veterans Administration.
(iii) Government corporations.
Government corporations own and directly operate major services to the public.
Examples are the United States postal service and the Tennessec Valley authority (TVA).
The Rostal service has a rear-monopoly of mail delivery, while the TVA, established in the 1930s, provides hydroelectric power, irrigation and flood control.
Although, the corporations are public agencies owned by the government, they have a good deal of more flexibility than cabinet departments (ministries) and are not subject to the detailed administrative and financial control that the presidency and the congress impose on departments.
3.1.2 FUNCTIONS The independent agencies perform a range of functions.
These include, the following as listed by Leonard Freedman (Lbid;231-234) (i) Administration In many degrees, many federal agencies administer programmes.
The Postal service, the Tennessee Valley Authority, and the Veterans Administration directly manage enormous enterprises, with large staff and budgets running into billions of dollars.
In othercases, such as the public housing programme or the unemployment services, detailed administration is in the hands of state or local agencies, but the federal agency retains ultimate administrative control by establishing national policies and guidelines.
(ii) Legislation Federal government agencies are not limited to the administration or execution of the laws.
In many cases, they actually legislate.
When congress passes laws, it usually states that in rather general terms, learning it up to the cabinet departments and independent regulatory agencies to draw up the rules, that is, legislation that apply the law’s generalities to specific situations.
(iii) Adjudication.
NOUN 125 -MPA 868 COMPARATIVE PAUDBMLINICIS T RATION In addition to administering and legislating, some federal agencies adjudicate, that is, they settle conflicts between contending parties much as court do.
Over the year, congress has passed a large volume of legislation aimed at regulating and controlling business, labour, agricultural, and professional groups.
Laws of these kind inevitably give rise to disputes, sometimes between the affected groups and government, sometimes among the groups themselves.
These disputes have become so frequent and complex that the regular courts of law have neither the time nor the expertise to handle them.
Consequently, federal regulatory agencies have been assigned a judicial, or quasi-judicial, function.
In some cases, this function has led to their establishing hearing procedures that, although not as formal as the courts themselves, are nonetheless rigorous and quite elaborate.
The National Labour Relations Board, for instance, is a good example of a federal agencies that spends much of its time addisjpuudtiecsa.t iCngo n gress has passed laws forbidding unfair labour practices, and in a general way, the legislation indicates the criteria for what constitutes and unfair practice.
You should however know that whether or not management or labour has acted unfairly will depend on the very specific circumstances of a labour disputes, and this dispute will often be settled by the national Labour relations Board after full-scale hearings between the parties to the conflict.
(iv) Enforcement Yet, another responsibility of federal agencies you should know is enforcement.
Although, most of the law enforcement activity in America is carried out at the state and local government levels, mainly federal statutes includes provisions for criminal penalties.
For example, penalties were included in federal laws dealing wit kidnapping, forgery, unauthorised wire-tapping or electronic bugging, income tax evasion, violating the election finance code of 1974, or engaging in consumer fraud in any business that crosses state lines.
Several aegmepnlcoiye s , staff to investigate, apprehend, and prosecute persons suspected of breaking such laws.
You should know that sometimes, all these functions-administration, legislation, adjudication, and enforcement are exercised by the same agency.
For instance, the interstate commerce commission legislates NOUN 126 -MPA 868 COMPARATIVE PAUDBMLINICIS T RATION when it makes rules regulatory the rates charged by railroads and trucks.
It adjudicates when it sits as a tribunal to determine if its regulations have been violated.
It enters the realm of enforcement when it investigates complaints and initiates proceedings against alleged violators.
Take together, federal government is against spending vast sums of money to employ very large staff, and make great numbers odfe c i sions, some of enormous significance to the lives and fortunes of millions of people.
EXERCISE (1) Identify and explain the types of independent agencies in the United States of America.
(2) Briefly discuss the functions of independent agencies in the American administrative system.
(3) In what ways do independent agencies act as the normal works of laws in the United States?
4.0 CONCLUSION In this Unit you have learnt about the types and functions of independent agencies in America.
In demonstration of the doctrine of administrative decentralization that you learnt earlier when we treated the structure and characteristics of civil service, a lot of duties are assigned to the agencies in order to make government faster without undue delays that promote inefficiency which is against the spirit of American philosophy of public administration.
The work of the agencies permeate virtually every American public administrative system without the formal separation of power that exists between the executive, congress and the judiciary.
5.0 SUMMARY In this unit, you have specifically learnt the types and duties of independent agencies, you learnt that the categories of the agencies include; administrative; regulatory; and, government corporations.
Their functions cover legislation; adjudication; administration and enforcement.
You also learnt that the duties of these agencies are not restricted to any particular Department, aims of government or private organisation.
They have the power to be involved in any organisation or government in the performance of their duties, and therefore, the formal separation of power that exists NOUN 127 -MPA 868 COMPARATIVE PAUDBMLINICIS T RATION between the three arms of government is nor a limitation to the authority of the agencies.
6.0 TUTOR-MARKED ASSIGNMENTS (1) Name the types of independent agencies in America and discuss the nature of responsibilities of each.
(2) Discuss the functions of independent agencies in America.
(3) Examine the relationship between independent department agencies and other government departments and arms of government.
7.0 FURTHER READING AND OTHER RESOURCES Freedman, L (1980) Power and Politics in America , California, Brooks/Cole.
Redford, E.S.
et al.
(1965) Politics and Government in America, USA, Harcourt , Brace and World Inc. Weisberg, R (1980) Understanding American Government and Politics, Rinehart & Winston.
UNIT 2 NOUN 128 -MPA 868 COMPARATIVE PAUDBMLINICIS T RATION Historical Background of Public administration in France TABLE OF CONTENTS 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objectives 3.1 Era of Revolutions 3.1.1 The Great Revolution 3.1.2 Other Revolutions 3.2 General de Gaulle’s Era 3.3 Post De Gaulle Era 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutor-Marked Assignments 7.0 Further Reading and Other Sources 1.0 INTRODUCTION You are now going to learn about the French public administration.
In the previous units, you have learnt the British, American and Nigerian public administrations.
In this unit, you will learn the historical background to the contemporary French public administration, like her political history, has gone through series of instability.
2.0 OBJECTIVES By the end of this unit, you should be able to do the following; 1.
Explain how French public administrative evolved.
2.
Discuss the factors that led to the political instability witnessed in France.
3.
Describe the revolutions witnessed in French administrative history.
4.
Analyse the influence of De Gaulle era on the administrative system.
3.0 MAIN CONTENT 3.1 ERA OF REVOLUTIONS.
NOUN 129 -MPA 868 COMPARATIVE PAUDBMLINICIS T RATION 3.1.1 THE GREAT REVOLUTION, 178 France is a very old State like Britain.
Her origin lies in the feudal society that followed the disintegration of the Roman Empire.
France is unique in some respects she has a longer continuous development as such than any European country of her population, resources and world involvement, except Britain.
Besides, no other European state so epitomizes the civilization of continental Europe.
No other European state has so continuously excelled in so many fields of human endeavour simultaneously; in the visual, the plastic and architectural arts, in music, poetry and literature, in philosophy and in natural science, in the art of war as well as the most important aspect to us, in the science of administration and the international sports is another field.
You will recall that France is currently the World and European FCohoatmbaplilo n .
France is a veteran of wars as he fought in the two World Wars.
You must know that the French history on any issue at all will not bcoe m plete without a discussion of the Great Revolution of 1987.
The history of France is an almost classic examples of political institutions that failed to adapt to new conditions of social life.
Political changes in France, as a consequence, has become marked more by revolution tehvaotl u tion.
The 1789 revolution was classic in that it led to political and socio-economic changes in France.
The revolution was a ‘class struggle’ between the nobility on one hand, and the peasants and town middle class artisans apnrodf e ssionals such as lawyer, journalist and businessmen.
The revolution was basically caused by exploitations suffered by peasants in the hands of the nobility under the dynasty of Bourbon who ruled by divine right.
The nobles lived in expensive grandeur of Versailles and abandoned their estates in the provinces, but at the same time wanted to maintain their feudal prerogatives among the peasantry without meeting their own obligations of providing the services traditional to their responsibilities as nobles.
The financial crises and bankruptcy being experienced by the monarch who was more interested in war than domestic reform, provided the needed impetus for the peasants to launch a revolt on him by burning the estates of the nobility.
Under this condition, members of the middle class-lawyers, journalists and businessmen agitated for a new social and political ideology based on the right of man-liberty, equally and fraternity.
NOUN 130 -MPA 868 COMPARATIVE PAUDBMLINICIS T RATION The revolt paved way for a constitutional monarchy which was established between 1789 and 1792.
The monarch (Louis XVI) struggled to maintain his royal authority against the constituent Assembly and the representatives of the bourgeoisie (the town middle class).
The Constituent Assembly eventually dominated the king and was ultimately executed in January 1793.
3.1.2 OTHER REVOLUTIONS The revolution laid the foundation for much of France’s troubled history of revolutionary violence, unconstitutional seizures of power and radical departures from the existing regime in: 1792 - the First Republic.
1797 and 1799 – Coups d’etut against the executive ministers of the Directory.
1799 - establishment of the Consulate, dominated by Napoleon Bonaparte.
1804 - the First Empire under napoleon I.
1814 – 1815- restoration of the Bourbon monarchy under Louis XVII and, after 1824, Charles X.
1830 – the July Revolution, and installation of the Orleanist monarchy of Louis-Philippe.
1848 – the February Revolution, followed by the second Republic.
1852 – Coup detat of Louis- Napoleon and his declaration, as Napoleon III, of the Second empire.
1871 – inauguration of the Third Republic, following France’s defeat in the Franco – Prussian War and the uprising of the Commune of Paris.
1940 – installation of the Feanch government at Vichy.
under Marshal Petain, following Germany’s.
victory over France in 1940.
1944 – Organisation of a provisional government under General Charles de Gaulle.
1946 – adoption of the constitution of the Fifth Republic, following a military revolt in Algeria and the National Assembly’s investiture of General de Gaulle as premier; the election of the de Gaulle as the fpirresst id ent of the Fifth Republic in December 1958.
Instability caused by history of revolutions can be best appreciated by the revelation that between November 1945 and the inauguration of the Fifth Republic in September 1958, there were six national elections and twenty – five governments.
You can also observe that between 1789 and 1958, France existed thrice as a constitutional monarchy, twice as an empire, once as a semi-dictatorship and five times as a republic.
As macridis (Agagu, 2001; 109) observes, to understand these fluctuations, we must keep in mind that NOUN 131 -MPA 868 COMPARATIVE PAUDBMLINICIS T RATION whenever compromise between conflicting social groups is not possible, the dominant one will impose its views often of force.
Contrarily, according to Agagu (Ibid), despite the frequent turnover opfo l it ical regimes, France exhibits administrative stability.
EXERCISE 1.
Enumerate the uniqueness of France as a state.
2.
Describe the factors that led to the 1989 Great Revolution.
3.2 GENERAL DE GAULLE’S ERA General de Gaulle’s era coincides with the Fifth Republic inaugurated in 1958 with de Gaulle becoming the first executive president of France.
The constitution of the Fifth Republic provided for a strong presidency.
The president was expected to give policy direction.
In fact, the Coherence and direction that mark public policy making must come from the president, and the presidency is the only institution that has the potential for aggregating interest from across the various deaverages in the society.
President de Gaulle appointed his Prime Minister and ministers.
The power and prestige of the ministers cleavages were enhanced by de Gaulle.
Certain ministries, notably interior and finance, enjoying a very high reputation and confer upon their political head an undeniable prestige.
Though some other Ministries such as Ministry of Feminine Affairs suffered from a wademakin i stration, inadequate funding, an un-defined scope of action and the scepticism of other ministries.
Ministries engaged in administrative services did not enjoy equal power as those of Education.
Finance and Public Works have the reputation of being very powerful.
It requires a minister of ambition, ruse, ruthlessness alonndg e vity to impose his policies on these powerful ministries.
In a way, de Gaulle advanced the role of the civil service.
This he further did by institutionalizing through ordinances, the policy-making role of the service.
The highest echelon of the civil service called the ‘Council of States’ is implicitly mentioned in the Fifth Republic’s constitution for the first time and was granted consultative authority.
Thus, civil servants and technocrats were elevated to cabinet status.
EXERCISE NOUN 132 -MPA 868 COMPARATIVE PAUDBMLINICIS T RATION 1.
In What ways was the constitution of the Fifth Republic favoured civil servants?
3.3 POST –DE GAULLE ERA General de Gaulle left office in 1969 and was succeeded by his pmriinmiset e r and a Gaullist, Georges Pompidou Beeny de Gaulle’s premier for several years, and belonged to the same party, one was not expecting any restructuring of the civil service or changes to the de Gaulle’s legcicres.
Though it could be reasonably said that it is difficult for any regimes at all since the Fifth Republic to effect any radical changes to the ibnesctaituusteio n w hatever advantage or special position the civil service and ministries might be enjoying are constitutional provided and guaranteed.
Unless there are some amendments to the constitution, the current strength to top civil servants in policy process, particularly their consulting powers may be difficult to weaken.
EXERCISE 1.
Highlight the factors that made it difficult for the immediate successors of General de Gaulle to reverse it gains of the civil service of de Gaulle administration.
4.0 CONCLUSION This unit has told you the basic background information about the contemporary civil service in France.
France was noted for high lpeovleitli c al instability since the 1989.
Great Revolution carried out by the peasantry and the middle class.
France has been enjoying some relative stability since the de Gaulle’s era.
5.0 SUMMARY In this unit you have learnt that France is unique in many respects including in the field of administration.
France had a history of revolutions and political upheavals resulting in prolonged instability.
You also learnt that the system became stable when General de Gaulle assumed the presidency in 1959 thereby inaugurating the Fifth Republic.
De Gaulle through the Fifth Republic constitution enhanced the prestige of civil servants as they were constitutional made part of the policy-making NOUN 133 -MPA 868 COMPARATIVE PAUDBMLINICIS T RATION process.
Yu were told that the status of the civil service remains unchained by de Gaulle’s predecessors.
6.0 TUTOR-MARKED ASSIGNMENT (TMA) (1) Compare to some other European countries, identify the factors that made France a unique country.
(2) Describe the basics advantage(s) that the civil service is enjoying since the Fifth Republic.
France is regarded as unique for the following reasons (a) She has a history of a longer continuous development than others, except Britain.
(b) She was more involved in world politics than other countries, except Britain.
(c) France is regarded a the cradle of European civilization.
(d) She has a record of excellence in architectural arts, poetry and music.
(e) She is gifted in philosophy and natural science.
(f) Endowed in the art of war.
Veteran of two World wars.
(g) She is a leading country in the science of administration.
(h) Excellent in international sports.
She currently holds the championship of World cup and European Cup.
(3) Gains of the civil service since the Fifth Republic.
(i) The administrative environment became stable.
(j) Power of ministries was strengthened particularly of Education.
Finance, Public works and others.
(k) Ministries enjoy high reputation and prestige.
(l) Civil servants take part in policy-making process.
(m) The constitution guaranteed the consultative authority of civil servants.
Top civil servants and technocrats elevated to cabinet status 7.0 FURTHER READING AND OTHER RESOURCES Rodee C:C etal (1983) Introduction to Political Science , Tokyo, McGraw – Hill.
NOUN 134 -MPA 868 COMPARATIVE PAUDBMLINICIS T RATION Wright, V ( ) The Government and Polities of France, London, Hutchison & Co. UNIT 3 NOUN 135 -MPA 868 COMPARATIVE PAUDBMLINICIS T RATION STRUCTURE OF FRENCH CIVIL SERVICE TABLE OF CONTENTS 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objectives 3.1 Politics Administration (mix) 3.1.1 Concept of Politics 3.1.2 Concept of Administration 3.1.3 The Marriage 3.2 Administrative Classes 3.2.1 Criteria 3.2.2 The Classes 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutor-Marked Assignments with Marching Schemes 7.0 Further Reading and Other Sources 1.0 INTRODUCTION In this unit, you will learn the structure of the French civil service.
You will learn specifically the lack of dichotomy between politics and administration in France and the various criteria that determine the structure of the service.
2.0 OBJECTIVES By the end of this unit, you should be able to do the following; NOUN 136 -MPA 868 COMPARATIVE PAUDBMLINICIS T RATION (1) The double advantage civil servants enjoy in politics and administration.
(2) Describe the different structural layers in the French civil service.
(3) Discuss the criteria for entering each administrative class in the civil service.
(4) Describe the areas of specialization in the civil service.
3.0 MAIN CONTENT 3.1 POLITICS – ADMINISTRATION MIX 3.1.1 CONCEPT OF POLITICS We take part in politics everyday of our lives.
We take decisions on what to do, what food to eat, how much to spend on certain items including gifts, and whom to give.
Politics is about allocation of resources.
According to David Easton, it is concerned with ‘who get what, when and how?’.
It is the legal allocation of society values or resources.
Wgohvaetr n ment does everyday is to allocate national resources to communities, groups and the general populace.
Decision-making basically concerns what amenities and at what amount of money are to be done for the people.
Final decisions become policies of government.
Politics does not end with policy decision-making.
Such policies must be carefully seen to be implemented.
This means politics covers policy implementation Decisions of government do not really become policies until actually executed.
Political officials predominantly engage in policy decision- making, while civil servants are pre-occupied with policy execution.
3.1.2 CONCEPT OF ADMINISTRATION.
You will recall that we have explained the concept of administration in our first unit.
Let us just refresh our memories.
Administration is about organisation and management of resources in order to attain the set goal.
Societal, group or individual goals cannot be realized unless we organised our resources and manage them well.
This is done by performing the basic functions of administration which include planning, organising, staffing, directing, co-ordinating, reporting, and budgeting.
NOUN 137 -MPA 868 COMPARATIVE PAUDBMLINICIS T RATION Public administrators have the primary role of performing the roles listed above.
They execute government decisions and policies.
That is, why government decides what to do (i.e.
allocation of resources civil servants then carry out the wishes of government (i.e.
execution/implementation).
3.1.3 THE MARRIAGE (BETWEEN POLITICS AND ADMINISTRATION IN FRANCE) The basic principles of administration believes that there should be a divide between politics and administration, hence, the call for political neutrality by public administrators.
One basic attribute of French public administrative roles are more blurred than what obtains in Britain.
There seems to be no strict dichotomy between the two practices particularly since the era of de Gaulle.
Civil servants engage political activities without much constraints.
Bureaucrats are permitted by law to take part in active politics and later return their career posts.
Higher civil servants, as Quermonne observes, ‘have been so closely involved with top–level government making, social reforms, and economic development that the political and administrative worlds are now merging’.
The Fifth Republic’s constitution enhanced the strength of top civil servants in taking part in policy processes.
The constitution made their consultative authority very mandatory by seeking their inputs and views in policy debates and decision-making.
In addition, many members of the cabinet and parliament since de Gaulle era have been technocrats.
The ministers among them are referred to a‘ms i nisters-technicians’.
The ministers-technicians were never party members.
The appointment of civil servants as cabinet members coupled with their constitutional role in policy process show a strong tie between administration and public power.
EXERCISE 1.
Differentiate between politics and administration.
2.
How did the French civil servants combine the two aspects of government.
3.2 ADMINISTRATIVE CLASSES NOUN 138 -MPA 868 COMPARATIVE PAUDBMLINICIS T RATION 3.2.1 CRITERIA Like the other public administration you have learnt, the French civil service is structured into classes but unlike the others, there are certain requirements associated with recruitment into the ranks.
(i) Degree holders in specific fields Candidates willing to join the corps of higher civil service must have a degree in Law or Political Science.
Two disciplines have as part of their courses subjects on management, administration and administrative law.
So, it is expected that such candidates have the academic background which will assist them on the job.
(ii) Internship course.
Newly recruited candidates to the corps will mandatorily undergo a three –year internship course at the National School of Administration which evolved from the post-war administrative reforms in the civil service in 1945.
The programme, the assessment of Agagu (2001: 109 -116) combines theoretical intellectual studies industries and financial institutions.
The training also provides details studies in one of the four specialised areas of the candidates choice.
Those who are brought into the administrative cadre are taken at a relatively young age after completing their university education, and recruitment is done through a competitive examination and rigorous process.
Most of these recruits have been found out to be children of members of the upper class, many are actually children of public officials.
Therefore, recruitment into the upper cadres of the civil service is open but actually restricted as not just anybody can go in.
in general, members of the State administrative and technical elite issue come from a narrow social and educational bate and their exclusiveness is heightened by their belonging to corps.
It is the submission of Vincent Wright ( 1978, 1 – 234) that family, educational and professional socialization produces an administrative elite.
3.2.2 THE CLASSES Two broad classes can be identified from available literatures namely the lower classes and the higher classes.
The higher classes have taken much prominent place in the administrative analysis and role of the civil service in the political system.
NOUN 139 -MPA 868 COMPARATIVE PAUDBMLINICIS T RATION The higher ranks of the service fall into four specialization areas namely; (i) General administration (ii) Economic and financial administration (iii) Social administration (iv) Foreign Affairs Based on these divisions, levels of corps cadres exist within the uclpapsesre s .
We have the: (a) Grands corps which are senior officials of the Prestigious Financial Inspectorate; the court of Accountants; the Council of State; and, to a lesser extent, the perfectoral and the diplomatic corps.
Children of the well placed usually choose this cadre.
(b) Professional Corps made up of the powerful state administrative and technical elite.
(c) The top-ranking civil administrators.
(d) The middle-ranking bureaucrats.
Members of the grands corps and technical corps are often very mobile as they move in and out of their corps to manage key posts in the ministries and ministerial cabinets.
While members of the top-ranking civil administrators, and the middle-ranking middle bureaucrats remain in one ministry amnods t ly in the same division, and therefore very stable.
Members of the grands corps and technical corps see themselves as superior to other cadres, a situation arising from their background, qualifications and mobility in and out of other ministries.
They often distance themselves from other consequently they were regarded as ‘arrogant’ and ‘inhumane’.
The problem of setting differences between ‘generalities’ and ‘specialists’ cut across the hierarchy of the divisions of the service.
Bureaucrats are regarded as generalists and technocrats as specialists.
Besides, inter-professional differences and conflict, rivalries also occur between the corps, which are regarded as normal features of Fadremnicnhi st rative life.
Rivalries sharpen disputes over respective areas of influence and competence.
Again, conflict between the grand corps and the technical corps and the rest of the administration often spring from NOUN 140 -MPA 868 COMPARATIVE PAUDBMLINICIS T RATION resentment when the latter see the former being appointed to key administrative posts outside their corps.
Conflicts within the ministries are no less frequent.
It is difficult to transfer from less frequent.
It is difficult to transfer from one division to another in the same ministry.
For instance, the ministry of Education is described as a highly compartmentalized and hierarchical ‘monstrous machine’.
The Ministry of Industry is said to be ‘a juxtaposition of independent acnodm p artmentalized divisions’, while the Finance Ministry is perceived as ‘a federation of autonomous divisions’ often physically separated.
It is easier to turn a soldier to a Sailor that it is to transfer from one of the Finance Ministry divisions to another (Wright, 1978: 100).
Mutual suspicion is often a problem among the divisions.
EXERCISE 1.
Entry into upper administrative classes in the French civil service is not an all comers affairs.
Explain the criteria used for entry into the higher ranks of the civil service.
4.0 CONCLUSION You have gone through the structure of the French civil service.
More concern is put on the higher ranks of the civil than the lower levels.
There are several instances where corps assume an upper hand in the affairs of each ministry.
5.0 SUMMARY You have learnt in this unit that the French civil service structure is more or less categorized into two distinct classes namely; the upper classes and the lower classes.
You will recall that there are various other classes within the upper hierarchy.
Such criteria used for this sub-classification include nature of job done – professional / specialists / technical or generalities.
Then, you had of the corps cadres and the other senior cadres.
You also learnt of the educational qualification, social and training criteria needed for recruitment into the elite classes of the civil service.
You learnt too that inter-corps conflicts and intra-ministerial disputes are hallmarks of the French civil service.
6.0 TUTOR – MARKED ASSIGNMENTS NOUN 141 -MPA 868 COMPARATIVE PAUDBMLINICIS T RATION 1.
In what ways has France combined politics and administration?
7.0 FURTHER READING AND OTHER RESOURCES Agagu, A.A (2001) Comparative Political and administrative studies, Ado- Ekiti, Dept of Political Science, University of Ado – Ekiti.
Rodee, C.C et al (1983) Introduction to Political Science, Tokyo, Mchrew.
Wright, V (1978) The Government and Politics of France, London, Hutchinson & Co. UNIT 4 NOUN 142 -MPA 868 COMPARATIVE PAUDBMLINICIS T RATION CHARACTERISTICS OF THE FRENCH CIVIL SERVICE TABLE OF CONTENTS 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objectives 3.1 Issue of Political neutrality 3.1.1 Concept of political neutrality 3.1.2 Political involvement 3.2 Dominance of central administrative machinery 3.3 Administrative Law 3.4 Service Sense of mission 3.5 Security of Tenure 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutor-Marked Assignments 7.0 Further Reading and Other Sources 1.0 INTRODUCTION This unit will introduce to you the essential characteristics of the French civil service.
The attribution of the civil service are similar to those of other countries in some areas, while they are uniquely different in other areas.
The characterisation of the French civil service are enduring as you will recall that France has been described as a pace-setter in same human eenspdeecaivaolluyr sin, c luding the science of administration.
2.0 OBJECTIVES You should be able to do the following by the end of this unit: 1.
Explain the concept of political neutrality 2.
Explain the principle of security of tenure.
3.
Describe the role of the Central administrative machinery in the civil service.
4.
Discuss the relevance of administrative law in the administrative system.
5.
Evaluate the enduring characteristics of the French civil service.
NOUN 143 -MPA 868 COMPARATIVE PAUDBMLINICIS T RATION 3.0 MAIN CONTENT 3.1 ISSUE OF POLITICAL NEUTRALITIES 3.1.1 CONCEPT OF POLITICAL NEUTRALITY You will recall that in the previous unit, you learnt that France hadasm i nistrative tradition which had experienced the turbulent days of French politics.
Political neutrality virtually cuts across the attributes of states’ administrative practice.
You need to learn the interpretation of the concept of political neutrality by civil servants.
The meaning of political neutrality by civil officials is that civil servants must not take part in partisan, party politics.
Civil servants cannot join political parties, contest elections nor take part in political decision-making.
They cannot campaign for political parties, whether ruling or opposition.
They cannot also be spokesman of government on political issues or public policies.
They can only be seen but not heard.
In the same manner, civil servants cannot take praises for the success of government nor be blamed for the failure of government.
The political head of each ministry takes both the praise and blames on the policy failure of his ministry.
The principle of political neutrality has some advantages for civil servants which include; (i) Guarantee of job securing.
If the civil servant is a political, and seen to be transparently so, the incoming regime will definitely have no cause to terminate or determine his appointment.
But if found to be a member of an opposing party, the incumbent regime will have no cause other than to dismiss him from service on that ground.
Once, a civil servant engages in partisan politics, it means he has set basis for undermining his performance in the service.
(ii) Preventing sabotage to government programmes.
A civil servant whose party loses an election will do everything humanly possible to make sure that the programmes of the incumbent fail.
We wdeifliln itely not be loyal to the government of the day.
He can whip up sentiments against the regime and can even work with the military to stage a coup against the ruling party.
NOUN 144 -MPA 868 COMPARATIVE PAUDBMLINICIS T RATION (ii) Eliminate political influence in recruitment.
Contemporary civil service establishments rely on the merit system for recruitment rather than the spoil system or pressure from politicians.
If civil servants are allowed to join political parties and take part in active politics, recruitment and promotion of staff will definitely depend on one’s political affiliation and influence rather than merit and working hard to pass competitive recruitment and promotional examinations.
Then, the rank and file of civil service may be filled with incompetent and unqualified hands which will tell on government’s efficiency.
It is for these reason that most public administrative systems do not allow their civil servants to be actively involved in partly politics.
3.1.2 POLITICAL INVOLVEMENT The French civil service is not absolutely immuned from politics.
To a large extent, the civil servants are politically involved in state in state affairs.
There is no strict dichotomy between politics and administration since time of de Gaulle.
This means there is no restrictions on engaging in political activities by civil servants.
In the first instance, civil servants are allowed to leave their duty posts and take up political appointments and later return to their civil service careers.
Top civil servants are also appointed as minister (i.e.
Cabinet members).
It is calculated by Quermonne (1986: 397 – 406) that 37 percent of aglol v ernment members i.e.
ministers and deputy ministers during the first years of de Gaulle presidency were top civil servants.
Top civil servants are also involved in actual policy formulation, designing social reforms and economic development.
The constitution of the Fifth Republic strengthened the power and influence of top civil servants by providing for them the power of ‘Consultative authority’.
This implies that ministries and other agencies of government must sought the inputs and expertise of top civil servants in their decision-making on any issue.
It is therefore a basic characteristics of French civil service to underplay the dichotomy between politics and administration, because according to the state.
The worlds of political and administration are increasingly merging.
EXERCISE NOUN 145 -MPA 868 COMPARATIVE PAUDBMLINICIS T RATION 1.
It is generally believed that civil servants in France are not politically neutral.
In what ways, therefore, are they politically involved?
3.2 DOMINANCE OF CENTRAL ADMINISTRATIVE MACHINERY The central administrative machinery include principally that the ministries have control and supervisory role on provision of social services at the local, grassroot levels.
Rather than creating local authorities with delegated or decentralized authority to provide these services for the local people, it is the field branches of ministries that perform these functions.
Government appoints prefects to oversee the functions of the functions of the field units.
The prefects are therefore powerful officials.
The over-bearing role of the central agencies which started under de Gaulle continued until 1981 when the socialist party that won the pelreecstiidoenn tciaaml e up with a regionalization policy under which local and regional authorities were created.
The centralization were policy came with problems for the local people as the services of the field units most often inefficient, which thereby agitated the socialist regimes decentralization policy.
EXERCISE 1.
Identify the factors that brought about the 1981 regionalization policy in France 3.3 Administration law French public administration is historically built on administrative law.
There are established procedures covering the relationship between government administrative agencies, laws guiding governmental activities and functions, code of ethries for administrators and other public officials.
France itsh e refore known for a tradition of administrative law.
EXERCISE Highlight the scope of administrative law in France.
3.4 SERVICE SENSE OF MISSION NOUN 146 -MPA 868 COMPARATIVE PAUDBMLINICIS T RATION You will recall that a cardinal principle of the British civil service is service to the society.
Likewise, a major characteristic of the French civil service is what is termed ‘service sense of mission’.
This doctrine calls on the French civil servants to act with dispatch and take responsibilities for many aspects of governmental affairs including intimate, particularity in policy-making as well as programme planning.
This characteristics aims at efficiency and effective performance of duties, increased productivity and willingness to carry out official responsibilities with utmost dispatch.
The other impetus is the need to earn the confidence of new governmental regimes in carrying out its socio-economic and political programmes for the public.
Without a committed, hardworking and efficient civil service it may be impossible for the new regime to attain this.
Lastly, is the well known specialization and professionlization that the French civil service is noted.
This has implications for its image.
It implies things must be done correctly, promptly, efficiently, timely, and with expertise.
It also implies that qualification and competence must be part of the criteria for recruitment and selections in order to select the best and most competent candidates for the service to be able to function effectively.
The civil service places emphasis on training and re-training on the job.
Consequently, a college of administration for training candidates has been an enduring tradition of the French civil service.
EXERCISE Explain the concept of ‘service sense of mission’ in the French civil service system.
3.5 SECURITY OF TENURE Like other countries’ civil services namely Britain, Nigeria, United States and others, the French civil servants are guaranteed security of tenure.
This means that as career officials, there is guarantee against arbitrary loss of job and job instability.
The attribute also behaves that as long as a civil servant did commit any criminal offence, and performs his duties as legally required of him, and having successfully completed the mandatory probation period, then the civil servant cannot be unjustly seeking redress judicially.
Therefore, barring any or involvement in crime and professional misconduct, a French civil servant enjoys the service till retirement age.
EXERCISE NOUN 147 -MPA 868 COMPARATIVE PAUDBMLINICIS T RATION Under what circumstances can a French civil servant lose his job?
4.0 CONCLUSION In this unit, we have described characteristics of the French civil service.
France enjoys a tradition of age-long characteristics guiding its responsibilities to the people.
As you learnt, most of these characteristics accord with those other nations.
5.0 SUMMARY In this unit, you have learnt the basic attributes of the French civil service.
Specifically, you learnt that political neutrality, dominance of central administrative machinery, service sense of mission and security of tenure are central to the civil service.
Contrary to expectations, despite a high level of involvement in politics by the civil servants, they still enjoy performance and security of tenure.
6.0 TUTOR-MARKED ASSIGNMENT 1.
Identify and briefly explain the key characteristics of the French civil service.
7.0 FURTHER READING AND OTHER RESOURCES Agagu, A.A (2001) Comparative Political Administrative Studies, Ado – Ekiti, Political Science department, UNAD.
Wright, V (1978) The Government and politics of France, London, Hutchinson & Co. UNIT 5 NOUN 148 -MPA 868 COMPARATIVE PAUDBMLINICIS T RATION REFORMS IN THE FRENCH CIVIL SERVICE TABLE OF CONTENTS 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objectives 3.1 Review of concept and imperatives 3.1.1 Concept 3.1.2 Imperative 3.2 Problems of Civil Service 3.3 The Reforms 3.3.1 De Gaulle’s Reforms 3.3.2 Post de Gaulle’s Reforms 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutor-Marked Assignments 7.0 Further Reading and Other Sources 1.0 INTRODUCTION This is the last unit on the French civil service.
The unit treats reforms in the service.
Like any other civil service, the French civil service is not perfect, as it has its areas of strength and weakness.
You are therefore going to learn some of the reforms that aimed at improving efficiency in the service and improve on the quality of staff.
2.0 OBJECTIVES By the end of this unit, you should be able to do the following: NOUN 149 -MPA 868 COMPARATIVE PAUDBMLINICIS T RATION (1) Explain the concept of reform.
(2) Discuss the rationale for reforms.
(3) Describe some of the reforms in the French civil service.
(4) Identify the basic problems confronting the French civil service.
(5) Analyse the initiatives brought about by de Gaulle in the service.
3.0 MAIN CONTEXT 3.1 REVIEW OF CONCEPT AND IMPERATIVES 3.1.1 CONCEPT OF REFORM The concept of reform should not be new to you.
Its is an activity to carry out virtually everyday you change articles you considered old, you change your torn dresses, shoes, books, old furniture, worn tyres and other non- serviceable items.
Reform s about making an old article or practice new.
Putting new energy, make fresh, resuscitate, and renew.
It is a deliberate attempt or action to improve the quality of materials under use.
When you service your car you are giving it a new lease of life by putting new engine oil, oil filter, fuel filter and plugs.
The car thereafter performs better.
Its speed ability is enhanced.
When all these changes are being made, a system of reforms is taking place to those people or institutions concerned.
If the target of reforms is ainns t itution, changes may be to effect its structure, working tools or practices.
Practice could be the way things are done, enabling laws, otepcehrnaitqiouneasl, j ob ethncs and expertise.
Reforms can therefore be accepted in terms of explanation as organizational attempts to introduce fundamental changes and innovations meant to improve efficiency and increase productivity.
3.1.2 IMPERATIVES OF REFORMS You are conversant with the sayings that ‘nothing lasts forever’, and ‘no conditions is permanent’, and at the same time, ‘nothing happens without a purpose’.
Reformers have a motive for the suggested reforms.
There are therefore some important motives for deciding and implementing reform pTohleicseie isn.
c lude: (i) correcting the ills of a particular system or institution e.g.
corruption.
NOUN 150 -MPA 868 COMPARATIVE PAUDBMLINICIS T RATION (ii) change attitunal behaviour of the people, employees or a group of individuals.
For instance, the prison yard is a reformist centre like the juvenile rehabilitation homes.
(iii) providing new working ethncs and work practices and ways of doing things.
(iv) promoting efficiency and effect iveness.
(v) providing incentives for higher productivity e.g.
the 1973 Udoji award for all sectors of the Nigerian economy.
(vi) creating a new public/consumer image for the affected institution.
(vii) keeping institutions and employees absent of changes in the world and making them to respond those changes appropriately by making the necessary innovations and self-correcting.
(viii) keeping with the dictum that ‘nothing is permanent except change’ change is inevitable in the life of man and other things.
EXERCISE 1.
(a) Explain the concept of reform (b) Why is reform necessary?
3.2 PROBLEMS OF CIVIL SERVICE The French civil service, despite France’s outstanding record of experience in administration, still has its own problems and weaknesses.
The major identifiable problems the service suffers included: (i) Internal divisions.
The service lacks a coherent entity.
This is because it is very diversified and fragmentary and thereby make it prey to tension and dissension.
As Wright (1978: 97) point out, the interplay of divergent interest among the top civil servants is often open, unlike in Britain.
Intra, and inter, class conflicts often break out among the elite corps especially on issues bordering on interference in areas of influence and competence.
Vincent Wright notes further that internal division are manifested in various ways.
Citing examples, he observes that the administration is not spared of personal and generational conflicts.
Likewise there are deep-seated ideological clearages within the administration even within the top elite.
A background of different ideological differences is a further problem to cohesion and common understanding of view- points.
Of serious concern also is the feeling that the top ranks of the civil service are arrogant and have lost touch with the people they are NOUN 151 -MPA 868 COMPARATIVE PAUDBMLINICIS T RATION supposed to serve and consequently, the top officials are revealed as insensitive and ‘inhumane’ to public interests.
Over-politicization is another problem of the civil service.
This problem is often down-played and over simplified.
The service has become more political than those of other European civil services.
You have learnt earlier that, the civil service has produced ministers, disputes and presidents.
The constitution makes top civil servants an essential part of decision-making process through their power of consultative authority.
The implication of these developments is that the minds of top civil servants are more with the political class and the regime train in the civil service itself, hence, the appropriateness of the allegations of arrogance and insensitivity.
The widening gap between the top civil servants and the people raised another problem which borders on the general view that the purpose of establishing the civil service which concerns promotion of the social well-being and happiness of people has been defeated by their aheration from the public.
The last public problem concerns was alleged in the early 1960s that the civil service was working with outdated tools that were not in tune with modern management techniques and practices.
All these problems, therefore, at different times of the life of the civil service were thought desirable of being corrected through reforms.
EXERCISE The French civil service has its own problems like other civil services.
Identify the fundamental problems of the civil service of France.
3.3 THE REFORMS.
3.1.1 GENERAL DE GAULLE’S REFORMS You have learnt that reform is changing a form of a thing with the motive to make it look or work better.
The first de Gaulle’s administration before the Fifth Republic had acknowledge the need to correct certain things in the administrative system de Gaulle’s first administration commenced in 1944 and by 1945, he saw the need to improve the quality of civil officials being recinuted to the civil NOUN 152 -MPA 868 COMPARATIVE PAUDBMLINICIS T RATION service; correspondingly in 1945 the ‘Ecole Nationale d’ administration’ (i.e.
National School of Administration) as post-World War civil service reform.
Newly selected candidates for the civil service were trained in the school for three years internship course followed by a period of industrial attachment to a prefecture (perfect).
The programmes of the School combines both intellectual and pstoulditiiecsa.l Virtually all top ranks of the school service, particularly the elite corps pass through the school.
In 1946, de Gaulle administration also promulgated a law which provided for four general classes named as categories A,B,C,D.
which are veqirutuivaalllye n t to the British models classes of administrative, executive, clerical and messengerial.
The French civil service had its most fundamental reforms in the FRiefpthu b lic under president, General de Gaulle inaugurated in 1958 but the republic’s constitution was adopted in 1946.
The constitution, in the search for a ‘strong and respected state’ stressed that political and constitutional reform had to be complemented by administrative reforms’.
The Fifth Republic also aimed at improving the procedures for decision –making through constant reforms of the machinery of government at national, regional and local levels.
The realization that the administrative system inter-linked several ministries, agencies, and commissions and adhoc administrative committees, the regime through efforts to improve administrative co-ordination and implementation of policies, and again there was the introduction of a concept called RCB – Rationalization des choix which has equivalent in the British Planning, Programming, Budgeting System (PPBS) which tends to synthesize programme planning with budgeting and accountability.
The constitution enhanced the power of top civil servants by providing a clause which gives them the power of ‘consultative authority’.
This implies that top bureaucrats must be involved in every face of economic and political planning and decision-making.
Conclusively, the de Gaulle era gave the civil service a new focus and was more empowered in the performance of his traditional duties in an attempt at increasing its efficiency and productivity.
NOUN 153 -MPA 868 COMPARATIVE PAUDBMLINICIS T RATION 3.2 POST – DE GAULLE’S REFORMS The de Gaulle administration lasted till 1969.
Georges Pompidou, de Gaulle’s prime minister succeeded him and subsequently there were other administrations.
You learnt above that de Gaulle laid the foundation for a virile, strong and powerful civil service.
Pompidou, like de Gaulle was committed to ensuring an efficient civil service and coordination of all administrative organs.
Super-ministerial re-structuring and internal reforms of all ministries carried (Wright, 1978: 84 – 92) Other reforms carried out by various administrations at different times which according to Agagu (2001: 108 – 134) include: (i) Between 1944 and 1986, the judicial and legal background of the public services was strengthened to enhanced their performance.
In 1985, new regional and local administrative units were created thereby increasing the number of the civil service.
Improvement in relationship between public servants and clients (public) was initiated in order to create a conducive working environment for civil servants.
More important, the initiates were expected to correct the public image of higher ranking civil servants as ‘arrogant’ and ‘insensitive’.
(ii) The Public Service Removal programmes were set up between 1988 – 1992 which aimed at improving public servants and two, improving internal and external communication in the public service.
It also essentially entails making a compromise between progression of public management and the preservation of the traditional legal and financial structure .
(iii) The period between 1993 and 1995 was tagged ‘Towards the State Reform’ era.
As part of changes aimed at, there was a movement from over- centralization of administrative institutions to devolution (decentralization) of administrative authorities to the field regional, and local units.
This is with a view to reduce inefficiency in the provision of social services.
In all, you learnt earlier, the various reforms were attempts towards improving the efficiency of the civil service so that it can serve the people better.
NOUN 154 -MPA 868 COMPARATIVE PAUDBMLINICIS T RATION EXERCISE Examine the changes experienced by the civil service during General de Gaulle’s administration.
4.0 CONCLUSION This unit has examined the issue of administrative reforms in France.
You learnt that the French civil service has peculiar problems like civil services of other countries, which have consequently motivated the need for reforms.
Administrative reforms covering the periods before the de Gaulle era.
The de Gaulle administration and post de Gaulle era were analysed.
5.0 SUMMARY You have specifically learnt the following in this unit; one, reforms is about change with the aim of enhancing performance of any organisation oinrd iv iduals.
Two, the French civil service had its own problems like those of other countries.
It particularly suffered the problem of internal rivalling and over- politicization.
Three, the power of the civil service has been strengthened through constitutional provisions and officials means particularly during the de Gaulle era.
Finally, as part of the reform, efforts to promote efficiency, a special school for training selected candidates for civil service appointment was established in 945.
6.0 TUTOR-MARKED ASSIGNMENTS 1.
(a) Explain the concept of reform.
(b) Identify and discus the fundamental changes introduced to the civil service during de Gaulle’s presidency.
NOUN 155 -MPA 868 COMPARATIVE PAUDBMLINICIS T RATION MODULE 6 UNIT 1 NIGERIA AND LOCAL GOVERNMENT SYSTEM TABLE OF CONTENTS 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objectives 3.1 Nigeria and Local Government System 3.1.1 Justification 3.1.2 Functions 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutor – marked Assignments 7.0 Further Reading and Other Sources 1.0 INTRODUCTION This unit treats Local Government system in Nigeria.
Local Government as a third tier of government in Nigeria’s federal arrangement has been described as “government at Local Level exercised through representative council established by law to exercise specific powers within defined areas” (guidelines, 1976).
It is the closest government to people in Nigeria.
Hence, it is referred to as “grassroot” governments.
In this unit, you will learn specifically the justification for local governments in Nigeria and the basic functions they perform.
You will learn the basic functions they provide for the grassroot people.
You will also learn about how local Government are financed in Nigeria so as to enable them perform their constitutional roles to the people of their areas.
NOUN 156 -MPA 868 COMPARATIVE PAUDBMLINICIS T RATION 2.0 OBJECTIVES You should be able to do the following activities by the end of the unit: (a) Appreciate the relevance of Local Government System in Nigeria’s Public Administration System (b) Explain the reasons why Local Government System is adopted as part of Nigeria’s Administrative System; (c) Describe the major functions performed (d) Appreciate the relevance of finance in the Administration of Local government (e) Analyse the main sources of revenue to Local Government (f) Explain the Concept of internally generated revenue.
3.0 MAIN CONTENT 3.1 NIGERIA AND LOCAL GOVERNMENT SYSTEM 3.1.1 JUSTIFICATION You will recall that you learnt that civil service in Nigeria is a BCroiltoisnhi a l legacy because before European contact about 1400AD the various people and ethnic groups in pre-colonial Nigeria had their own traditional systems of administration.
So also, the Local Administration System is a British Colonial creation, a legacy of the Colonial administrators.
Local System first evolved as a native Authority System whereby the Badrmitiisnhi s trators relied on the traditional rulers for the purpose of effective administration.
As you learnt earlier, the colonial administrators had to rely on the traditional rulers in an arrangement called “Indirect rule” for reasons you have learnt earlier.
However, you should recall these reasons.
The reasons include: (a) Language Barrier as both British administrators and Nigerians could not communicate with each other as they speak different languages.
(b) Shortage of British administrative personnel back home.
(c) Shortage of funds to run a direct administration as much money would be needed to transport personnel from Britain, pay their transport allowances and disturbances allowance.
NOUN 157 -MPA 868 COMPARATIVE PAUDBMLINICIS T RATION (d) The existence of well organized traditional rulership system in some parts of Nigeria which the administrators had to utilize.
At independence, the Local System was utilized.
You will expect tNhiagt e rian leaders would have discarded the practice as it was colonial in nature.
Nigerian Leaders could not discard the Local Administrative practice till today because of some attractive reasons.
Therefore, Local Government is justified for the following reasons: (i) The need for decentralization.
Nigeria is a very large country geographically, with equally large population.
It would have been very difficult for government to effectively rule directly from Abuja, the Federal Capital.
Therefore, there is the need for decentralization for the purpose of administrative efficiency and effectiveness so to be able to satisfy the basic needs of the people.
Government realized this fact and consequently divided the country into 774 Local Governments.
State Governments have started creating more Local Governments in their States though declared illegal by the federal government.
(ii) Trends in contemporary administrative practice.
Decentralization of political and administrative power has been the vogue throughout the World which had resulted into the creation of Local Governments, this global trend of which Nigeria has become a part is made possible because of the complexity of Government in the modern system.
Now problems are emerging for Government attention everyday, the population is growing, new diseases such as AIDS is in the increase, there are inter-ethnic national wars, problems of hunger and internally displaced people to mention a few have all pre-occupied Government and subsequently brought up the need for administrative decentralization.
(iii) Grassroot accelerated development Nigeria leaders also realized that closest Government to Nigerian, that it will easily know the problems of its people because of the people closeness, small population and limited geographical area to cope with, that Local Government will respond quickly to their developmental aspirations than the other higher levels of Government, that is, State and Federal Government.
(iv) Bridging communication gap.
You should recall that we said that Abuja is too far away to people at the remote areas of Nigeria.
The president and the Governors do not know many of these areas.
A gap of communication therefore exists between the grassroot people and NOUN 158 -MPA 868 COMPARATIVE PAUDBMLINICIS T RATION the two higher levels of Government.
Therefore, Local Governments serve to bridge the communication gap that exists between the two.
Chairmen and Councillors therefore act as the link in terms okfn o w ing the problems of the people by government on one land, and what Government is doing about the plight of the people on the other hand.
(v) Training of future leaders: Local Government is seen as a training school for future national leaders.
It is the belief that entering into political leadership right from the Local level either as Chairman or Councilor will confer the necessary leadership training that will enable them to lead at the State regional level and from that level to the Federal level.
Passing through from Local to State would have conferred the necessary Leadership qualities and training for a higher task at the Federal level.
You will recall that many of our relatives or friends are now either Chairmen of Local Government or Councilors of their wards in their respective Local Governments.
These political office holders at the grassroot are indirectly being groomed for higher future political callings.
Local Government provides platform for training and development (Ajayi, 2000: 1-7).
3.1.2 FUNCTIONS You learnt above that Local Government is a grassroot Level of administration to bring development and government to the people.
Specifically Local Government is created in Nigeria to perform vfuanricetdio n s. The fourth schedule of the 1999 Constitution contains these functions which include: (i) the Consideration and the making of recommendations to a State Commission on economic planning or any similar issues bordering on the economic development of the State particularly in so far as the areas of authority of the council and of the area affected.
(ii) Collection of rates, radio and television licenses.
(iii) Establishment and maintenance of cemeteries, burial grounds and homes for the destitute or infirm.
(iv) Licensing of bicycles, trucks, canoes, wheel barrows and carts.
NOUN 159 -MPA 868 COMPARATIVE PAUDBMLINICIS T RATION (v) Establishment, maintenance and regulation of slaughter houses, slaughter slabs, markets, motor parks and public conveniences (vi) Construction and maintenance of roads, streets, street lightings, drains and public highway, parks, gardens and open spaces.
(vii) Naming of streets and roads and numbering of houses.
(viii) Provision and maintenance of public conveniences, sewage and refuse disposal.
(ix) Registration of births, deaths and marriages.
(x) Assessment of private houses or tenements for the purpose of varying rates.
(xi) Control and regulation of out-door advertising.
(xii) Control and regulation of movement and keeping of pests of all descriptions.
(xiii) Licensing, regulation and control of the sale of liquor .
(xiv) The provision and maintenance of primary, adult and vocational education (xv) The development of agriculture and natural resources other than the exploitation of minerals.
(xvi) The provision and maintenance of health services and (xvii) the functions of local Government are not exhaustive as the law provides that Local Governments have power to perform such other functions as may, be conferred on a Local Government Council by the House of Assembly of the State.
EXERCISE 1.
In what ways are Local Governments considered a grassroot government?
2.
Explain the basic importance or functions of Local Governments.
3.
Explain reasons why Local Government are considered justified in Nigeria.
NOUN 160 -MPA 868 COMPARATIVE PAUDBMLINICIS T RATION 4.0 CONCLUSION In this Unit, you learnt the structure and functions of Local Government system, like the Nigeria Civil Service, is a British colonial legacy which become a major tool of social service delivery in Nigeria.
It has remained enduring in the nation’s administrative system.
Its durability rests on the belief of the Nigerian leaders that decentralization of administrative power will improve administrative efficiency in social service delivery and in the coverage of Nigeria’s big population of which about 70% are rural dwellers.
They also acknowledge the potency ocof m munication in resolving human problems.
In a large country lNikige e ria, communication between the central government and the rural dwellers at the remotest part of the country would have been existence of Local Governments serving as a relay to the State and Federal Government 5.0 SUMMARY In concrete terms, you have learned in this unit that Local Government is a third-tier level of Government in Nigeria, implying that it is the closest government to the rural people who constitute the bulk of the npaotpiounla’tsi o n. You learnt also that Local Government system in the country runs one-tier, multi-purpose system contrary to the British model of two-tier multi- purpose model.
Local Governments in Nigeria are statutorily empowered to perform an u mber of functions including establishment and maintenance of primary schools, primary health centres, markets and cemeteries.
They are also responsible for cleaning of drainages and disposal of refuse.
Engage in the development of agriculture and other economic activities in the area.
6.0 TUTOR-MARKED ASSIGNMENTS 1.
Account for the adoption of Local Government System by Nigeria political leaders.
2.
The 1999 constitution of the Federal Republic of Nigeria empowers Local Governments to perform certain responsibilities.
Identify and explain this responsibilities.
7.0 FURTHER READING AND OTHER RESOURCES NOUN 161 -MPA 868 COMPARATIVE PAUDBMLINICIS T RATION Ajayi, Kunle (ed, 2000): Theory and Practice of Local Government Ado- Ekiti, Department of Political Science, University of Ado-Ekiti, Nigeria.
Gboye, A.
(1987): Political Values and Local Government in Nigeria, Lagos, Malt House Publishing Company.
Lawal, S. (2000): “ Local Government Administration in Nigeria; A Practical Approach” in Kunle Ajayi (ed) Theory and Practice of Local Government.
Kolawole, Dipo (ed, 1998): Issues in Nigerian Government and Politics, Ibadan, Dekaal.
NOUN 162 -MPA 868 COMPARATIVE PAUDBMLINICIS T RATION UNIT 2 FINANCING LOCAL GOVERNMENTS IN NIGERIA.
TABLE OF CONTENTS 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objectives 3.1 Financing Local Governments in Nigeria 3.1.1 Internally Generated Revenue (IGR) 3.1.2 External Sources 3.1.3 External Non-Official Funding.
4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutor-Marked Assignment 7.0 Further Reading.
1.0 INTRODUCTION You learnt in the last unit that Local Government is the closest government to Nigerians.
This is besides, being the last layer in the circle of governmental systems, but also because, Nigeria mainly has a rural population of whom many are not aware of the existence of other levels of government – State and Federal Governments.
Local governments are constitutionally permitted to perform varied functions which include advising top level governments on economic development of their areas, establishment and maintenance of primary schools, primary NOUN 163 -MPA 868 COMPARATIVE PAUDBMLINICIS T RATION health centres, markets and cemeteries.
Registration of birth, death and marriages.
Refuse disposal and cleaning of drainages.
In this unit you will learn how Local Governments are financed as every organization needs money for the execution of its programmes.
2.0 OBJECTIVES By the end of this unit you should be able to do the following: i.
Recall the responsibilities of Local Councils in Nigeria ii.
Explain the role of finance in Local Government administration iii.
Analyse the various internal sources of revenue to Local Governments.
iv.
Describe the external finance opportunities available to Local Government v. Evaluation of the problems of tax collection in Nigeria.
3.0 MAIN CONTENT 3.1 FINANCES 3.1.1 Internal Sources 3.1.2 External Sources 3.1.3 External Non-Official Sources.
3.1.1 INTERNAL SOURCES You learnt in the last unit that Local government has become an attractive arrangement for modern States so as to decentralize administrative power and consequently make governments serve the citizenry better.
Other reasons adduced for its existence include promoting drawing government nearer to the people.
It equally serves as a platform for training future political leaders, as well as bridging the gap between the grassroot people and the higher levels of Government.
You also learnt of its constitutional functions which include providing basic and primary social amenities such as primary smcahrokoeltss,, health centres, recreation centres and other functions.
To be able to perform its numerous functions, Local Governments need sufficient money.
Money is considered as the fuel of organization without which it will not be able to function well.
Similarly, without adequate funding Local Governments will fail in their responsibilities.
NOUN 164 -MPA 868 COMPARATIVE PAUDBMLINICIS T RATION The enabling law of local government make it very clear the various avenues Local Government can get funds.
The avenues are categorized as (a) Internally Generated Revenue (IGR) and (b) External Sources of Finance (a) Internally Generated Revenue (IGR): Local Government can generate revenue from the following internal sources.
(i) TAXES Local governments are empowered to impose taxes on all employed adults in the area.
Usually a pool tax is paid by all working adults.
Revenues from taxes are supposed to be high but this is not so because of high rate of evasion.
(ii) RATES: The Constitution (1999) empowers councils to collect kinds of rates which include: (a) License fees and fines.
General license fees are charged on bicycles, radio, and pushed tricks.
(b) Regulation of food and drinks.
Premises and beer selling shops either as on-and –off or off licences.
(c) Social Charges: Many of us used to observe on Saturdays that some roads are closed for social engagements.
Such roads are closed with the permission of the councils, but after paying some fees the councils confers.
(d) Repairs/Rentage Services: Some Local Governments render some repair services to people after paying some amounts, for instance, the works Department can embark on the repairs of private vehicles for some fees, chairs, tables and generators can be rented out for some fees.
Commercial undertakings, some can decide to invest in certain sectors of the economy.
For instance, some councils have floated business centres which generates profits for the councils.
However, there are still some other sources.
NOUN 165 -MPA 868 COMPARATIVE PAUDBMLINICIS T RATION 3.1.2 EXTERNAL SOURCES Local Governments can also generate funds from external sources.
This include the statutory allocation; grants; bank loans.
(i) Statutory Allocations: Those are revenues accruable to Local Governments as a matter of constitutional rights, that it is their entitlements by right.
There are two basic sources of statutory allocation: (a) Allocations from the Federation Account (b) Allocations from the state Government Account for internally generated reform.
(a) Allocation from the Federation Account by Law, Councils are entitled to a certain percentage of the Federation account.
In 1976, the percentage was 10%, while it was increased to 15% in 1991, and 20% in 1992.
There have been pressures on the Federal government to increase percentage again to 25%.
The Presidency and the National Assembly is working on a new formula.
(b) Allocations from State Government’s IGR Accounts.
The Local Government also, is entitled to 10% of all IGR by each State.
However, very many State Governments are defaulters as far as this legal provision is concerned, as they have not been remitting such percentages to the Local Governments.
(iii) GRANTS –IN- AID Local Governments are entitled to grants from State and Federal Governments for carrying out specific programmes.
For instance, Governor Audu of Kogi State gave out N1,000,000 each to newly created LGoocvaelr n ments in the State as take-off grants.
3.1.3 EXTERNAL NON- OFFICIAL SOURCES (i) Loan credit from Banks and other financial institutions.
Local Governments take loans from banks with some interest and collaterals.
(ii) Dividends and Profits from private companies and profits on bank deposits.
Many Local Governments buy shares in companies, while profits are yielded on bank deposits.
Dividends are paid to LGoocvaelr n ments based on the number of shares possessed in the company.
NOUN 166 -MPA 868 COMPARATIVE PAUDBMLINICIS T RATION EXERCISE 1.
Differentiate between internally generated revenue and externally generated revenue.
2.
Identify and discuss the major sources of revenue accruable from state and Federal Governments to Local Governments.
3.
Explain why taxes have remained poor sources of revenue to Local Governments.
4.0 CONCLUSION This unit has treated the justification and functions of Local Government in Nigeria.
You learnt that Local Government evolved as a way of serving the people better by way of enhancing efficiency by decentralizing administrative power to the grassroot level.
The constitution guarantees Local Governments some functions to perform which are basic responsibilities.
The unit also looks at how local government are funded in Nigeria.
Two major sources of funding emerged, namely internal and external sources.
Grants and borrowing credit loans from bank is are also permitted for Local Government 5.0 SUMMARY In this unit, you have learnt that the existence of Local Governments is justified for the reasons of decentralization, bridging communication gap between grassroot people and higher levels of governments, bringing Government nearer to the people and serving as training schools for future political leaders.
You have learnt that Local Governments perform such functions as advising higher levels of Governments on the economic development of their areas, providing and maintaining primary health centres, primary schools, maintaining the road and drainages, naming of streets and roads, registering births, marriages and death, and providing and maintaining markets and market stalls.
You learnt also that adequate funding is very important to the effective performance of Local Governments, therefore, the law permits Local Government to generate revenue internally and externally.
Shares from the Federation account form the largest to Local Governments.
Local Governments can take loans from banks and financial houses tcoo m plement revenues from other sources.
NOUN 167 -MPA 868 COMPARATIVE PAUDBMLINICIS T RATION 6.0 TUTOR-MARKED ASSIGNMENTS 1.
(a) What is Local Governments?
(b) Rationalize why Local Governments are described in Nigeria 2.
Identify and Discuss the major sources of internally generated revenue to Local Government 7.0 FURTHER READING AND OTHER RESOURCES Ajayi, Kunle (2000): Theory and Practice of Local Governments Ado-Ekiti, Department of Political Science, University of Ado – Ekiti Gboyega, A.
(1987): Political Values and Local Government In Nigeria, Lagos, Malt-House Publishing Company.
Lawal, S. (2000): “Local Government Administration in Nigeria: A Practical Approach” in Kunle Ajayi (ed) Theory and Practice of Administation Ado-Ekiti, Department of Political Sciences, UNAD Kolawole, Dipo (ed., 1998), Issues in Nigerian Government and Politics, Ibadan, Dekaal.
NOUN 168 -MPA 868 COMPARATIVE PAUDBMLINICIS T RATION UNIT 3 BRITAIN AND LOCAL GOVERNMENT SYSTEM TABLE OF CONTENTS 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objectives 3.1 Britain and Local Government System 3.1.1 Structure 3.1.2 Functions 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutor-Marked Assignments 7.0 Further Reading and Other Sources.
1.0 INTRODUCTION Britain, as you learnt in previous units, has an enduring asydsmteinmi.s t raAtisv pea rt of her administrative experience, Local Government System, you learnt when treating local government in Nigeria that the adoption of the system in Nigeria was part of British colonial legacy in Nigeria.
You also learnt that the existence of the system in Nigeria is justified by the leaders for the reasons of decentralization, promoting administrative efficiency and serving as training school to future political leaders at other higher levels of governance.
These justifications are part of the Britain Local Government system introduced to Nigeria.
In this unit you will learn the structure and the basic functions of local Government in Nigeria.
This will provide you a basis for comparing the Nigeria system with the British practices.
NOUN 169 -MPA 868 COMPARATIVE PAUDBMLINICIS T RATION 2.0 OBJECTIVES By the end of this Unit, you should be able to do the following: (i) Explain the basic structures of the British Local Government System (ii) Explain the various functions Local Governments perform in Nigeria (iii) Explain the basic differences in the functions of Nigerian and British Local Government (iv) Explain the central role Local Government plays in the British Administrative System.
3.0 MAIN CONTENT 3.1 LOCAL GOVERNMENT IN BRITAIN 3.1.1 STRUCTURE 3.1.2 FUNCTIONS 3.1.1 STRUCTURE You learnt that Local Government is a third-tier level of Government in Nigeria.
This means that there are three levels of Government in the Country namely – Local, State and Federal Governments.
The structure of Local Government in Britain does not follow this structure.
You will recall that Britain is a unitary Government with a central government.
Local government is just a sub-set of the British central Government, that is, it is a sub-central Government rather than an autonomous level of Government like what obtains in Nigeria.
Despite Local Governments sub-position in the British governmental system, you should note that it is also the nearest government authority to the British citizens, like it is also in Nigeria.
The structure of Local Government in Nigeria takes a uniform single multi- purpose form.
But in Britain, the Local structure takes the form of two-tier structural system.
That is, a situation whereby Local Government are further divided into smaller administrative units.
The 1974 structural reforms provide for new countries, six metropolitan countries and greater London.
Each is respectively restructured into counties districts, metropolitan districts and London boroughs.
This is the structure in Wales and England.
County boroughs were eliminated from both in 1974 leaving only the Lboornoduognh s .
These authorities were again classified as upper-tier and lower-tier authorities.
The upper-tier authorities being new counties, metropolitan countries and greater London, while county districts, metropolitan districts and London boroughs are categorized as lower-tier authorities.
NOUN 170 -MPA 868 COMPARATIVE PAUDBMLINICIS T RATION The Greater London Council was abolished in 1986 and the Inner London Education Authority in 1990, a development which led to a complex split of tasks with thirty- two (32) London boroughs having individual responsibility for education, housing, social services, local planning, leisure and environmental health (Dunleavy et al1990:128).
The Metropolitan countries were also abolished in 1986 by the Thatcher-led conservative government which had some aversions for local powers.
The conservations for its tenure since 1979 embarked on a centralizing agenda and which consistently was edging out local governments.
3.1.2 FUNCTIONS You learnt in the last unit the structure of Local Government in Britain.
You learnt that structurally, the system was stable until 1974 when some structural changes were made thereby bringing out a new structural outlook.
You also learnt that through the periods of conservative party with Thatcher as Prime Minster, the prestige and stature of local authorities diminished for the party behaved more in the centralization of authority than the local powers.
The regime fell short of doing away completely with the local apurothboarbiltyie bs e cause of the realization of its importance in national and local development.
And moreso, the various functions being performed in Britain.
Local Government System in Britain therefore, performs two category of functions which are: (a) Obligatory functions and (b) Permissible functions However, Harvey (1974:219) provides a more detailed categorization of the British councils functions into five groups namely: (i) Protection; (ii) Regulation and Control; (iii) Personal Functions, (iv) Environmental Functions; (v) And lastly trading.
The details of these functions are: (i) Protection: Achieved through the police which maintain law and order, hazard and safety management.
NOUN 171 -MPA 868 COMPARATIVE PAUDBMLINICIS T RATION (ii) Regulation and Control: Local authorities are legally empowered to licence vehicles, amusement centres such as Grema houses and inspection of food and drugs.
(iii) Personal Functions: Relate to providing direct social services to individuals such services include day care for children and the aged.
(iv) Environmental Functions: It is the duty of Councils to clean the environment of all types of waste and making sure there are no land, air space and water that are contaminated.
In addition the upper-tier council level responsibilities to provide housing, local planning, environmental health and leisure services.
They also have responsibilities for strategic planning, transport, fire, education and social services (Ibid:128).
You should note that the duties of the Local authorities very from level to level.
For instance the 32 London boroughs have individual responsibilities for education, housing, social services , Local planning and environmental services.
The boroughs also shared combined responsibilities for fire and any protection services, strategic planning, waste disposal, grants to voluntary organizations.
The functions of the Metropolitans countries and districts were different.
The Metropolitans were abolished in 1986, Metropolitan districts were created.
After the abolition, Metropolitan districts shared joint responsibility for services such as transport, fire and civil defence, strategic planning, waste disposal and grants to voluntary organization.
Finally, Parish Councils, were available merely perform the function of merely providing Parish halls, buses, planning fields, foot paths and allotments (Agagce, 2000: 81-82).
The above mentioned functions of Local Governments and authorities do not capture the totality of all activities local authorities perform.
For instance, the Manchester city councils A-Z Guide, a kind of information booklet about the council, listed as much as 700 activity items of the services it performs.
EXERCISE 1.
Explain the changes brought to the local government system in England Wales by the 1974 structural reforms.
2.
Examine the scope of social service delivery by local councils in Britain NOUN 172 -MPA 868 COMPARATIVE PAUDBMLINICIS T RATION 4.0 CONCLUSON You learnt in this structure and functions of local councils in Britain.
Britain is a unitary, centralized system of government.
Besides members opfa r liament, the next elected representatives citizens know in Britain are the elected councilors.
British councils perform various activities but which are different in scope from council to scope from council to council.
5.0 SUMMARY In this unit, you learnt that the British local councils have a pfeeartmuraense onft t he administrative service, which then has given British and image of having a tradition of local government administration.
Local government system in Nigeria, as you learnt earlier, is equally a colonial legacy from Britain, like the country’s civil service.
You learnt that the structure of local government in Britain is different from that of Nigeria.
That while Nigeria operates a multi-purpose single-tier structural system, Britain operates a two- tier, multi-purpose system.
By implication, the British has two layers of local councils.
Which varied in name from region to region.
You also learnt that the new structural changes took place in 1974 which eliminated country boroughs system, except in London, where there were the London boroughs.
Other structural reforms took place in 1986 when Greater London council was abolished, and in 1990, the Inner London Education Authority was also scrapped.
You learnt that local authorities in Britain perform variety of functions which range from housing, transportation, leisure and parks, social services, local planning, maintenance of law and order, licencing of vehicles removal of abandoned vehicles, control and licencing of Cinemas amusement parks, inspection of food and drugs, fire, services, and environmental control.
6.0 TUTOR- MARKED ASSIGNMENTS.
(1) Examine the structure of Local Governments in Britain.
How it is different from that of Nigeria?
(2) The functions of Local Authorities vary in Britain councils and describe the different functions they perform.
7.0 FURTHER READING AND OTHER RESOURCES Agagu, A.
A.
(2000): “Local Government in Britain” in Kunle Ajayi (ed) Theory and Practice of Local Government, Ado-Ekiti, Department of Political Science, University of Ado-Ekiti.
NOUN 173 -MPA 868 COMPARATIVE PAUDBMLINICIS T RATION Ajayi, Kunle (2000) (ed): Theory and Practice of Local Government Ado- Ekiti, Department of Political Science, University of Ado-Ekit.
Dunleary, P. et al (eds.)
(1990): Developments in British Politics, London, Mecmillan.
Gray, A. W. I. Jenkins (1986): Administrative Politics in British Government, Brighson, Sussex, Wheat sheaf Books.
(g) Environmental cleaning including ensuring no air, land and waters pollution.
(environmental health) (h) Housing (i) Local Planning (j) Leisure Services (k) Fire Services.
(l) Transportation services.
NOUN 174 -MPA 868 COMPARATIVE PAUDBMLINICIS T RATION UNIT 4 FINANCING LOCAL GOVERNMENT IN BRITAIN TABLE OF CONTENTS 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objectives 3.1 Financing Local Government in Britain.
3.1.1 Role of Funding 3.1.2 Internal Sources 3.1.3 External Sources 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutor-Marked Assignments 7.0 Further Reading and Other Resources.
1.0 INTRODUCTION In the last unit, you learnt the structure and functions of Local Governments in Britain.
You should recall that you learnt that Britain introduced modern Local authority system to Nigeria as part of her colonial legacies despite this fact, the structure of Local Government in Nigeria and Britain are different.
Nigeria practices one-tier multi-purpose system, while Britain adopts a two- tier, multi-purpose system.
This implies that Britain has a two layer system namely the upper-tiers and the Lower-tiers.
Some structural reforms took place in 1974, 1986 and 1990.
The functions of Local authorities vary from the upper-tier to the lower-tier.
In totality, they perform the following functions; maintenance of law and order, hazards management, fire services, transportation service, Housing, NOUN 175 -MPA 868 COMPARATIVE PAUDBMLINICIS T RATION Local planning, strategy planning, leisure services, licensing of vehicles and cinema houses; control of foods and drugs, educational services are for the aged, child care, Environmental control and maintenance This unit concerns how Local Councils are financed in Britain in order to be able to perform their duties.
2.0 OBJECTIVES By the end of this unit, you should be able to do the following activities; (i) Recall the functions of Local Governments in Britain (ii) Describe the structure of Local Government in Britain.
(iii) Analyse and compare the structure of Local Governments in Nigeria and Britain.
(iv) Explain the importance of funding to Local Governments in Britain.
(v) Analyse the various Internal sources of revenue to British Local Councils.
(vi) Analyse and explain the sources of external financing to British local Councils.
(vii) Analyse and compare sources of revenue to Local Government in Britain and Nigeria.
3.0 MAIN CONTENT 3.1 FINANCING LOCAL GOVERNMENT 3.1.1 Role of Funding 3.12 Internal Sources 3.1.3 External Sources 3.1.1 ROLE OF FUNDING You should recall your thinking when you were considering taking part in this programme.
First in your mind, probably, was how to get the huge amount required considering your lean purse and poor pay.
The you weighed your choices whether to participate in the programme or to use your little savings to buy a small car.
Suddenly, you opted to enroll for this programme to the surprise and anger of your wife who has been dreaming of a car for the family, probably in another one year.
Her hope was dashed.
NOUN 176 -MPA 868 COMPARATIVE PAUDBMLINICIS T RATION This small narration demonstrates the role of finance in our daily activities, hopes, expectations, and achievements.
Finance is the fuel, not only to organizations, but also to individuals, governments and countries.
It is like petrol to a vehicle, without it the vehicle will not perform.
Finance dictates the extent an individual can go in any society – his level of education, dressing, respect, achievement and others.
So also, a company, group or organizations in general including all levels of government cannot realize their set goals unless there are ample financial resources to set about those goals.
The functions and responsibilities of governments grow every day.
So also, their level of financial requirements.
Responsible and responsive government will go to any length to source for funds.
Increased revenues could be due to increased/improved self efforts (internal funding) or source for funds externally by borrowing from creditors in order to supplement internal efforts.
On the whole, the success or failure of any organization or government depends, among other things, on the amount of money at its disposal.
3.1.2 INTERNAL SOURCES You should recall the various sources of funding available to local governments in Nigeria.
You learnt that the Nigerian Constitution empowers Local Governments to raise revenues internally through taxes, rates, levies and licenses on bicycles, radio, television and trucks.
You also learnt that the councils can engaged in certain investment to make money such as engaging in commercial transpiration, rentage of canopies, chairs, tables and generating plants.
British Local Governments need finance, like any other organization or government to prosecute their numerous programmes and render Social services.
You should recall that you learnt that local governments in Britain perform such functions as providing housing, transportation, leisure and parks, maintenance of law and order, fire service, maintenance of tehnev i ronment and waste disposal amongst other areas.
These functions can only be effectively performed if there is sufficient level of funding.
British Local Authorities are financed from four major sources namely – service revenues, rate fees, grants and loans.
These sources will be grouped in to two cardinal categories – Internal sources and External sources.
Internally, Local Authorities are empowered by British Statutes to collect NOUN 177 -MPA 868 COMPARATIVE PAUDBMLINICIS T RATION (a) Rate, levies on certain items which include tenement and categories of mar kets.
(b) They charge fees on services they render such as from transportation, fire service, child care and care for the aged.
(c) Investments on capital projects such as housing from which they collect rents.
(d) Licenses fees.
They are responsible for licensing vehicles and also collect radio and television license fees.
(e) Miscellaneous.
There are other sources which usually come up depending on the initiatives and ideas of each Local Councils.
But over the years, the scope of internal sources of revenue widens.
3.1.3 EXTERNAL SOURCES The British government knows fully well that considering the enormous services local councils perform that revenues realized from internal sources will need to be supplemented in order to enable carry out programmes that will enhance the living standard of the people.
The statutes therefore permit the central government to give grants-in-aid to local authorities for executing specific projects.
You should know that, grant-in-aid may be directly given to the recipient but spent for the recipient on the specific project by the donor.
And if given to recipient directly, the donor has a controlling power on the project the money is being spent on.
The law also allows councils to take external loans from financial houses.
Loans usually take the form of putting up a collateral to guarantee repayment.
Such loans also yield interests for the banks or other sources.
Loans are usually used to finance major capital projects such as housing and provision of parties.
EXERCISE 1.
Evaluate the place of finance in organizational life.
2.
Highlight and discuss the various avenues of internal funding available to a British Local Council.
3.
Compare the external sources of funding available to British and Nigerian Local Councils.
NOUN 178 -MPA 868 COMPARATIVE PAUDBMLINICIS T RATION 4.0 CONCLUSION This unit discussed the role of finance to all organizations and Local Councils in Britain.
Local Government need sufficient fund to be able to rseenrvdiecre s and execute their policy programmes for the people.
Statutorily, Local Councils are empowered to accrue revenues through internal aenxdte r nal sources.
Internally, Local government collect revenues from: (a) Rate Charges (b) Service charges on transportation, fire service, child care, care for the aged.
(c) Returns from investments (d) Miscellaneous sources.
Externally too, grant-in-aid from higher authorities, and taking of credit loans to supplement internal revenues.
5.0 SUMMARY You learnt in this unit that Local Councils in Britain are setmatpuotowreilrye d to generate revenue from internal and external sources.
You learnt the various sources of internal income which include charging rates on properties, fees from licensing of vehicles, service charges and returns from investment in businesses.
Externally, you learnt that, councils can be given grants-in-aid for specific projects which may be directly supervised by the central governments.
They can raise credit loans for capital projects with the implication that some percentage interests have to be paid.
6.0 TUTOR-MARKED ASSIGNMENTS (1) (a).
Identify and explain the various leads under which local councils in Britain can generate revenue internally.
(b) Examine and discuss fully external revenue sources available to British Local Government NOUN 179 -MPA 868 COMPARATIVE PAUDBMLINICIS T RATION 7.0 FURTHER READING AND OTHER SOURCES.
Agagu, A.
A.
(2001).
Comparative Political and Administrative Studies, Ado-Ekiti, Department of Political Science, UNAD, Nigeria.
Ajayi, Kunle (ed, 2000): Theory and practice of Local Govern m e,A ndt o- Ekiti, Department of Political Science, UNAD, Nigeria.
Dunleavy, P. et.
al.
(ed.s 1990): Developments in British Politics, London, Macmillan.
Gray, A.
& W. I. Jenkens (1986) Administrative Politics In British Government Brighton, Sussex, Wheat sheaf Books.
NOUN 180 -MPA 868 COMPARATIVE PAUDBMLINICIS T RATION UNIT 5 BRITAIN: LOCAL GOVERNMENT REFORMS.
TABLE OF CONTENTS 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objectives 3.1 Local Government Reforms in Britain 3.3.1 Reforms 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutor-Marked Assignments 7.0 Further Reading and other Resources 1.0 INTRODUCTION This Unit is the fifth Unit in this Course.
In unit 4, you learnt about the sources of finance to British Local Governments.
In this Unit, the various Local government reforms in Britain will be examined.
You will recall our earlier submission that no system or institution is perfect.
Local governments in Britain have heir own peculiar problems that reforms introduced to the system are trying to alleviate.
Some of the problems of the local system shall be examined while some of the reforms established for their resolution shall be equally examined.
2.0 OBJECTIVES By the end of this last unit, you should be able to do the following activities: (i) Recall the internal and external sources of funding to British local governments.
(ii) Explain the basic problems facing British local governments.
NOUN 181 -MPA 868 COMPARATIVE PAUDBMLINICIS T RATION (iii) Enumerate the various local government reforms in Britain (iv) Describe the various local Government reforms in Britain.
3.0 MAIN CONTENT 3.1 BRITAIN: LOCAL GOVERNMNENT REFORMS 3.1.1 REFORMS You should recall the common saying that “No condition is permanent”.
The only permanent thing is change.
Change is desirable in order to renew a way of doing things.
Changes are often introduced when a system or institution manifests some problems which hamper the workings or efficiency of the system or institution.
The British Local Government system is not performing as it suffers some problems.
The most noticeable problem of the Local Governments was not of structure.
Before 1974, there was multiplicity of structures which resulted in duplication of services by the countries.
This is to the extent that in the rural areas, people were confused as to which level of the Local Government system performs a particular service.
Services were split among three or more councils.
It was also observed that another defect of the system was that council areas were so small that they were not financially viable and therefore could not afford engaging the services of specialized and professional personnel and consequently found it impossible to provide the required services to the people.
The Local Government Act of 1972 therefore brought about a reorganization of Local Government as implemented in 1974.
The Act was the first attempt since 1889 to re-structure local governments in England and Wales (Ajayi, 2000: 79).
The re-organization created a two-tier system, and led to the elimination of the country Boroughs.
Also, the reforms introduced special metropolitan systems having six districts with enhanced powers (Ibid).
Besides the Structural weakness identified in the British Local Government that the 1972 Act was promulgated to correct, it was also found out that the Local Governments had the problem of financial mismanagement.
To correct this problems, the Layfied committee of Enquiry into LGoocvaelr n ment Finances in Britain was established in 1976.
The Committee upheld the important position of Local Government as a means of providing opportunities for people to take part in decisions concerning their odwevne l opment.
The Committee recommended, as a way of alleviating the NOUN 182 -MPA 868 COMPARATIVE PAUDBMLINICIS T RATION problem of lack of accountability and mismanagement of resources tLhoact a l Governments should be a system of impartiality, openness and accountability.
4.0 CONCLUSION Reforms are about change.
Systemic change which is about improving the working system and efficiency of an organization or institution.
The British Local System before 1974 suffered structural weakness, and lacked accountability and was noted with partiality.
The 1972 Local Government Act heralded a structural reorganization which corrected the earlier multiplicity of structure which hindered the efficiency of the Local Governments.
Similarly, the 1976 Layfied Committee of Enquiry on Local Government Finances was to find ways of making the Local Governments accountable and be financially prudent.
5.0 SUMMARY In this Unit, you have learnt that Local Governments in Britain had their own inherent problems which included structural deformity, financial mismanagement, poor service delivery and partiality.
You also learnt that the Local Government Act of 1972 was promulgated to re-structure the Local Government System and thereby enhance their efficiency of mismanagement was meant to be corrected by the 1976 Layfied Committee of Enquiry which recommended financial openness and the need for accountability and impartiality.
6.0 TUTOR-MARKED ASSIGNMENTS 1.
(a) Examine the need for reforms (b) Identify and discuss the basic problems suffered by British Local Governments up to 1976.
2.
Discuss in details the Local Government Reforms in Britain between 1972 and 1976.
NOUN 183 -MPA 868 COMPARATIVE PAUDBMLINICIS T RATION 7.0 FURTHER READING AND OTHER RESOURCES Ajagu A.
A.
(2000): “Local Government in Britain” In Kunle Ajayi (ed.)
Theory and Practice of Local Government, Ado-Ekiti, University of Ado-Ekiti.
Ajayi, Kunle (ed., 2000) Theory and Practice of Local Government Ado- Ekiti, University of Ado-Ekiti.
Dunleavy, P. el.
al.
(eds) (1990): Developments in British Politics 3 London Macmillan.
Gboyega, A.
(1987): Political Values and Local Government in Nigeria Lagos, Malt House Press Gray, A. and W. I. Jenkins Administrative Politics in British Government, Sussex, Wheat Sheaf Books.
NOUN 184
