NATIONAL OPEN UNIVERSITY OF NIGERIA COURSE CODE :MPA 717 COURSE TITLE: THE ROLE OF BOARD AND ITS TRUSTEES/TOTAL QUALITY MANAGEMENTCourse Guide MPA 717: THE ROLE OF BOARD AND ITS TRUSTEES/TOTAL QUALITY MANAGEMENT Course Developer/Writer: Joel Adeleke Afolayan Ph.D. RN MPA 717: The Role of Board and Its Trustees/Total Quality Management Course Guide MPA 717 Contents 1.
Introduction.
2.
Working through the Course.
3.
Study Units.
4.
Assignment File.
5.
Tutor Marked Assignment 6.
End of Course Examination and Grading.
7.
Summary.
8.
References/Further Readings.
1.
INTRODUCTION Health care organizations operate in an increasingly complex and demanding environment.
Their survival is challenged by extensive changes in public policies, funding patterns, technological innovations, labour force characteristics, community attitudes and expectations.
A basic function of a board-management partnership is to maintain focus on the institution’s mission.
Keeping the mission in view and formulating a well-delineated strategy for moving toward providing the entire organization with a sense of direction.
Policies emerge from the mission and vision, in turn guiding choices and organization wide priorities.
Direct attention to board quality and effectiveness can be a challenging process as most trustees learned their roles simply by watching and listening to other trustees.
As new comers they hesitate to question or criticize what they hesitate to question or criticize what they hesitate to question or criticize what they observed and also came to accept customary practices as normal and beyond questioning.
The inherent risk in this is, that new members come to accept long-standing practice patterns and in doing so, perpetuate outdated and out-of-touch board proceedings hence the need for educated, enlightened and experienced board members that worth their salt to make the indelible prints in the operation of board management.
2.
WORKING THROUGH THE COURSE To successfully complete this course MPA 717: The Role of Board and Its Trustees/Total Quality Management, you are requested to read the study units carefully, read the references/further reading books and any other materials provided for you by the National Open University of Nigeria (NOUN).
Each unit also contains Tutor-Marked Assignments that will assist you greatly in your study.
3.
STUDY UNITS Unit 1: Introduction.Unit 2: Step toward Change in Organization Unit 3: Building Instrumental Competencies.
Unit 4: Building Social Competencies.
Unit 5: Committee Organization and Office Staff and Functions.
Unit 6: Meetings.
Unit 7: Information Management.
Unit 8: Records Management.
Unit 9: Working Conditions, Safety, Welfare and Employees Health Services.
Unit 10: Promotions, Transfers and Dismissals/Resignations.
Unit 11: Collective Bargaining in Hospitals.
Unit 12: Discipline.
Unit 13: Assessment of Performance and Identifying Targets for Change.
Unit 14: Retreats for Board Development.
Unit 15: Setting Goals for Action.
Unit 16: Examining Three Models of Governance.
Unit 17: Sustaining Ongoing Improvement Initiatives.
Unit 18: Total Quality Management I.
Unit 19: Total Quality Management in Health.
4.
ASSIGNMENT FILE The University is expected to provide your assignment file which you should work on and submit to your facilitator for grading through your counselor.
But kindly note that your performance in this assignment is crucial to your success in the course as it carries 40% of the total grade so this calls for your complete seriousness and commitment.
Your not doing the assignment shows that you are not ready to graduate the course.
5.
TUTOR MARKED ASSIGNMENT All the units in the course have tutor-marked assignment questions at the end of the units for your benefits.
It is compulsory for you to attempt each tutor-marked assignment except otherwise directed by the University but it is essential that you practice the questions in the tutor-marked assignment as parts of the preparation for your final examination in the course.
It is advisable that in an attempt to answer the tutor-marked assignments, there is the need to keep to the rules and regulations given by the University.
It is also important that you read the course guide well and that you understand every aspect.
6.
FINAL EXAMINATION AND GRADING Every student is expected to attend the final examination in this course which is determined by the University.
The examination is made up of 60% of the course and then added to the 40% assignment.
It is important that for the learners to study all the units religiously as questions can be drawn from any aspect of the course.
The learners are adviced to attend the facilitation classes for clarity and then do the tutor-marked assignment properly since all aspects of the course are important to the course evaluation.
7.
SUMMARYThis course MPA: The Role of Board and Its Trustees/Total Quality Management, upon the completion must have equipped you with relevant knowledge to discharge your responsibilities as hospital administrator effectively and efficiently.
8.
REFERENCES/FURTHER READINGS Adepoju, A.
2006.
Management Concepts and Applications 2nd Ed.
Lagos: Concept Publications.
American Heritage Dictionary.
1980.
Boston: Houghton Mifflin Comp.
Bowen, W. G. 1994.
Inside the Boardroom.
New York City: John Wiley and Sons.
Dunn, R. T. 2007.
Haimann’s Healthcare Management.
8th Ed.
Chicago: Healthcare Admin Press.
Holland, T. P., Ritvo, R. A. and Kovner A. R. 1997.
Improving Board Effectiveness Practical Lessons for Nonprofit Health Care Organizations, Chicago: American Hospital Publishing.
Inc. Keeling, B. L. and Kallaus, N. F. 1983.
Administrative Office Management.
Cincinnati: South-Western Publishing Comp.
Onifade, A.
2004.
Management: Office, Business Education.
Abeokuta: KAPPCO Nig.
Ltd. Rundler, M. 1992.
The Challenge of Hospital Governance: How to Become an Exemplary Board, Chicago: American Hospital Publishing.
Senge, P. 1990.
The Fifth Discipline: The Art and Practice of the Learning Organization.
New York City: Doubleday/Currency.
Strakweather, D. 1988.
Hospital Board Power.
Health Services Management Research 1(2): 74-86 Summer.
Stoner, J.
A. F., Freeman, R. E. and Gilbert JR. D. R. 2005.
Management, 6th Ed.
Delhi: Pearson Education (Singapore) Pte.
Ltd. Umbdenstock, R. J.
1992. so You’re on the Hospital Board, Chicago: American Hospital Publishing.
Inc.
