NATIONAL OPEN UNIVERSITY OF NIGERIA SCHOOL OF ARTS AND SOCIAL SCIENCES COURSE CODE:MPA 779 COURSE TITLE:CONFLICT RESOLUTION STRATEGIESMPA 779 CONFLICT RESOLUTION STRATEGIES COURSE GUIDE MPA 779 CONFLICT RESOLUTION STRATEGIES Course Developer Dr. Stephen T. Aroge Department of Adult Education Adekunle Ajasin University Akungba-Akoko, Nigeria Course Editor Martha Oruku National Open University of Nigeria Programme Leader Dr. O. J. Onwe National Open University of Nigeria Course Coordinator Martha Oruku National Open University of Nigeria NATIONAL OPEN UNIVERSITY OF NIGERIA iiMPA 779 CONFLICT RESOLUTION STRATEGIES National Open University of Nigeria Headquarters 14/16 Ahmadu Bello Way Victoria Island Lagos Abuja Office No 5 Dar es Salam Street Off Aminu Kano Crescent Wuse II, Abuja Nigeria e-mail: centralinfo@nou.edu.ng URL: www.nou.edu.ng Printed by National Open University of Nigeria Printed 2009 ISBN: 978-058-571-0 All Rights Reserved iiiMPA 779 CONFLICT RESOLUTION STRATEGIES CONTENTS PAGE Introduction………………………………………..…….………….
1 What You Will Learn in this Course…………………….………… 1 Course Aims…………………………..…………………………… 2 Course Objectives …………………………………….………….... 2 Working through this Course…………..…….……….…………… 3 Course Materials…………………………………..……………….
3 Study Units………………………………….…….……………….
4 Assignment Files……………………….………….……………….
5 Presentation Schedule…….………..……………………………….
5 Assessment……………………..………………………………….. 5 Tutor-Marked Assignment ………………………………………... 5 Final Examination and Grading………..………………….……….
6 Course Marking Scheme……………..…………………………….
6 Course Overview…………………………..……………………….
7 How to Get the Most from This Course…………….……………… 7 Facilitators/Tutors and Tutorials…………………………………... 10 Summary……………………………………………..…………….
10 Introduction MPA 779: Conflict Resolution Strategies is a first semester year one, two credit and 700 level core course.
It will be available for all students offering Master’s degree in Public Administration (MPA) and those offering Master’s degree in Business Administration (MBA) in Corporate Governance and Human Resources Management.
This course will expose you to understanding of many of the concepts and theories in Conflict Resolution Management as they affect individuals, groups, government, national, international and business organisations.
It will assist you to be able to apply these concepts and theories to the task and roles that you perform as a crisis manager, an entrepreneur, business manager, top management executive in the corporate business setting and government establishments.
The course will consist of 15 units, which include course guide, definition, philosophy and nature, typology and nature, courses or sources of conflicts, products or fallouts of conflicts conceptualization of conflict resolution, the state and conflict resolution strategies, analysis and stages in conflict, traditional internal methods of conflict resolution, other forms of traditional internal conflict resolution, resolving conflict through adjudication, using political methods for conflict resolution, alternative dispute resolution, negotiation, mediation, conciliation, and arbitration.
ivMPA 779 CONFLICT RESOLUTION STRATEGIES This course guide tells you briefly what the course is about, what course materials you will be using and how you can work your way through these materials.
It suggests some general guidelines for the amount of time you are likely to spend on each unit of the course in order to complete it successfully.
It also gives you some guidance on your tutor-marked assignments, which will be made available in the assignment files.
There are regular tutorial classes that are linked to the course.
You are advised to attend these sessions.
What You Will Learn in this Course MPA 779: Conflict Resolution Strategies is to introduce you to various techniques, guides, principles, practices, etc.
relating to resolution of conflicts or disputes between individuals, groups, business organisations, communities, local, state, federal and international governments.
vMPA 779 CONFLICT RESOLUTION STRATEGIES Course Aims The aim of the course can be summarised as follows: This course aims to give you an understanding of the meaning of conflict resolution and strategies and how they can be applied in everyday business and governmental activities.
It also aims to help you develop skills in the conflict management and resolution.
You can also apply the principles to your job as crisis manager, business managers, top management of corporate organisations in both the private and public enterprises.
All these will be achieved by introducing you to: 1.0Definition, philosophy and nature of conflict resolution; 2.0Theories and issues related to conflict resolution strategy; 3.0Typology and nature of conflict; 4.0Causes and sources of conflicts; 5.0By-products or fallouts of conflict; 6.0Conflict resolution conceptualized; 7.0The state and conflict resolution strategies; 8.0Analysis and stages of conflict; 9.0Traditional internal and non-traditional internal methods of conflict resolution; 10.0Other forms of traditional internal conflict resolution; 11.0Resolving conflict through adjudication; 12.0Using political methods for conflict resolution; 13.0Alternative dispute or conflict resolution; 14.0Negotiation, mediation and conciliation as well as arbitration.
Course Objectives To achieve the aims set out, the course sets overall objectives.
Each unit also has specific objectives.
The unit objectives are always included at the beginning of a unit; you should read them before you start working through the unit.
You may want to refer to them during your study of the unit to check on your progress.
You should always look at the unit objectives after completing a unit.
In doing so, you will be sure that you have followed the instructions in the unit.
Below are the wider objectives of the course as a whole.
By meeting these objectives, you should have achieved the aims of the course as a whole.
On successful completion of the course, you should have been exposed to the following: • Definition, philosophy and nature of conflict resolution, • Typology and nature of conflict, viMPA 779 CONFLICT RESOLUTION STRATEGIES • Causes and sources of conflicts, • By-products or fallouts of conflict, • Conflict resolution conceptualised, • The state and conflict resolution strategies, • Analysis and stages of conflict, • Traditional internal methods of conflict resolution, • Other forms of traditional internal conflict resolution, • Resolving conflict through adjudication, • Using political methods for conflict resolution, • Alternative dispute or conflict resolution, • Negotiation method of conflict resolution, • Mediation and conciliation and • Arbitration method of conflict resolution.
Working through This Course To complete this course, you are required to read the study units, read set books and read other materials provided by the National Open University of Nigeria (NOUN).
Each unit contains self-assessment exercises, and at a point in the course, you are required to submit assignments for assessment purposes.
At the end of the course, is a final examination.
The course should take you about 16 – 17 weeks in total to complete.
Below, you will find listed, all the components of the course, what you have to do, and how you should allocate your time to each unit in order to complete the course successfully on time.
Below are the lists of all the components of the course: Course Materials Major components of the course are: 15.0Course Guide 16.0Study Units 17.0References 18.0Assignment 19.0Presentation Schedule viiMPA 779 CONFLICT RESOLUTION STRATEGIES Study Units The study units in this course are as follows: Module 1 Unit 1 Definition, Philosophy and Nature of Conflict Resolution Strategies Unit 2 Typology and Nature of Conflict Unit 3 Causes and Sources of Conflicts Unit 4 By-products or Fallouts of Conflict Unit 5 Conflict Resolution Conceptualised Module 2 Unit 1 The State and Conflict Resolution Strategies Unit 2 Analysis and Stages of Conflict Unit 3 Traditional Internal Methods of Conflict Resolution Unit 4 Other Forms of Traditional Internal Conflict Resolution Unit 5 Resolving Conflict through Adjudication Module 3 Unit 1 Using Political Methods for Conflict Resolution Unit 2 Alternative Dispute or Conflict Resolution Unit 3 Negotiation Method of Conflict Resolution Unit 4 Mediation and Conciliation Methods of Conflict Resolution Unit 5 Arbitration Method of Conflict Resolution The first two units explain the important terms, concepts and meanings, theories and related issues, organisation goals in corporate governance.
The next three units give insight on stakeholders in corporate governance, law and corporate governance, development versus corporate governance, mechanisms and controls in corporate governance.
The next unit explains the whistle blowers on the board and their rights, corporate governance and environment managerial roles and functions and the role of accountants in corporate governance.
This is followed with four other units, which tend to describe the different views on corporate governance, Anglo-American model and non-Anglo American model of corporate governance and corporate governance in Nigeria.
viiiMPA 779 CONFLICT RESOLUTION STRATEGIES Assignment Files There are fifteen assignments in this course.
The fifteen-course assignments which cover all the topics in the course material are there to guide you to have proper understanding and grasp of the course.
Presentation Schedule The presentation schedule included in your course materials gives you the important dates for this year for the completion of tutor-marked assignments and attending tutorials.
Remember, you are required to submit all your assignments by the due date.
You should guard against falling behind in your work.
Assessment There are three aspects to the assessment of the course: first are self- assessment exercises, second, are the tutor-marked assignments; and third, there is a written examination.
In tackling the assignments, you are advised to be sincere in attempting the exercises; you are expected to apply information, knowledge and techniques gathered during the course.
The assignments must be submitted to your tutor for formal assessment in accordance with the deadlines stated in the Presentation Schedule and the Assignment File.
The work you submit to your tutor for assessment will count for 30% of your total course mark.
At the end of the course, you will need to sit for a final written examination of ‘2½ hours’ duration.
This examination will also count for 70% of your total course mark.
Tutor-Marked Assignment There are nine tutor-marked assignments in this course.
You only need to submit five of the eight assignments.
You are encouraged, however, to submit all eight assignments in which case the highest five of the eight marks will be counted.
Each assignment counts 10% towards your total course mark.
Assignment questions for the units in this course are contained in the Assignment File.
You will be able to complete your assignment from the information and materials contained in your reading, references and study units.
However, it is desirable in all degree level education to demonstrate that you have read and researched more widely than the ixMPA 779 CONFLICT RESOLUTION STRATEGIES required minimum.
Using other references will give you a broader viewpoint and may provide a deeper understanding of the subject.
When you have completed each assignment, send it together with a TMA (tutor-marked assignment) form, to your tutor.
Make sure that each assignment reaches your tutor on or before the deadline given in the Presentation Schedule and Assignment File.
If for any reason, you cannot complete your work on time, contact your tutor before the assignment is due to discuss the possibility of an extension.
Extensions will not be granted after the due date unless there are exceptional circumstances.
Final Examination and Grading The final examination for MPA 779 will be of 2½ hours duration and has a value of 70% of the total course grade.
The examination will consist of questions, which reflect the types of self-testing, practice exercise and tutor-marked problems you have previously encountered.
All areas of the course will be assessed.
Use the time between finishing the last unit and sitting for the examination to revise the entire course.
You might find it useful to review your self-tests, tutor-marked assignments and comments on them before the examination.
The final examination covers information from all parts of the course.
Course Marking Scheme Total Course Marking Scheme ASSESSMENT MARKS Assignment 1 – 9 Nine assignments, best five marks of the nine count 30% each = 30% of course marks Final Examination 70% of overall course marks Total 100% of course marks xMPA 779 CONFLICT RESOLUTION STRATEGIES Course Overview This table brings together the units, the number of weeks you should take to complete them and the assignments that follow them.
Unit Title of Work Weeks Assessment Activity (End of Unit) Course Guide Module 1 1 Definition, Philosophy and Nature of 1 Assignment 1 Conflict Resolution 2 Typology and Nature of Conflict 1 Assignment 2 3 Causes and Sources of Conflicts 1 4 By-Products or Fallouts of Conflicts 1 Assignment 3 5 Conflict Resolution Conceptualised 1 Assignment 4 Module 2 1 The State and Conflict Resolution 1 Strategies 2 Analysis and Stages of Conflict 1 3 Traditional internal methods of 1 Assignment 5 conflict resolution 4 Other Forms of Traditional Internal 1 Conflict Resolution 5 Resolving Conflict Through 1 Assignment 6 Adjudication Module 3 1 Using Political Methods for Conflict 1 Resolution 2 Alternative Dispute or Conflict 1 Assignment 7 Resolution 3 Negotiation Method of Conflict 1 Assignment 8 Resolution 4 Mediation and Conciliation 1 5 Arbitration Method of Conflict 1 Assignment 9 Resolution Revision Total 15 How to Get the Most from This Course In distance learning, the study units replace the university lecturer.
This is one of the great advantages of distance learning.
You can read and work through specially designed study materials at your own pace, and at a time and place that suits you best.
The study unit will tell you when to read your other materials.
Just as a lecturer might give you an in- xiMPA 779 CONFLICT RESOLUTION STRATEGIES class exercise, your study units provide exercises for you to do at appropriate points.
Each of the study units follows a common format.
The first item is an introduction to the subject matter of the unit, and how a particular unit is integrated with the other units and the course as a whole.
Next is a set of learning objectives.
These objectives let you know what you should be able to do by the time you have completed the unit.
You should use these objectives to guide your study.
When you have finished the unit, you must go back and check whether you have achieved the objectives.
If you make a habit of doing this, you will significantly improve your chances of passing the course.
The main body of the unit guides you through the required reading from other sources.
This will usually be from a Reading Section of some other sources.
Self-tests are interspersed throughout the end of units.
Working through these tests will help you to achieve the objectives of the unit and prepare you for the assignments and the examination.
You should do each self- test as you come to it in the study unit.
There will also be numerous examples given in the study units, work through these when you come to them too.
The following is a practical strategy for working through the course.
If you run into any trouble, telephone your tutor.
Remember that your tutor’s job is to help you.
When you need help, don’t hesitate to call and ask your tutor to provide it.
(a) Read this course guide thoroughly.
(b) Organise a study schedule.
Refer to the course overview for more details.
Note the time you are expected to spend on each unit and how the assignments relate to the units.
Important information e.g.
details of your tutorials, and the date of the first day of the semester will be made available.
You need to gather all this information in one place, such as your diary or a wall calendar.
Whatever method you choose to use, you should decide on and write in your own dates for working on each unit.
(c) Once you have created your own study schedule, do everything you can to stick to it.
The major reason that students fail is that they get behind with their coursework.
If you get into difficulties with your schedule, please let your tutor know before it is too late for help.
xiiMPA 779 CONFLICT RESOLUTION STRATEGIES (d) Turn to unit 1 and read the introduction and the objectives for the unit.
(e) Assemble the study materials.
Information about what you need for a unit is given in the ‘Introduction’ at the beginning of each unit.
You will always need both the study unit you are working on and one of your references, on your desk at the same time.
(f) Work through the unit.
The content of the unit itself has been arranged to provide a sequence for you to follow.
As you work through the units, you will be instructed to read sections from your other sources.
Use the unit to guide your reading.
(g) Well before the relevant due date, check your Assignment File and make sure you attend to the next required assignment.
Keep in mind that you will learn a lot by doing the assignments carefully.
They have been designed to help you meet the objectives of the course and, therefore, will help you pass the exam.
Submit all assignments not later than the due date.
(h) Review of the objectives for each study unit confirms that you have achieved them.
If you feel unsure about any of the objectives, review the study material or consult your tutor.
(i) When you are confident that you have achieved a unit’s objectives, you can then start on the next unit.
Proceed unit by unit through the course and try to face your study so that you keep yourself on schedule.
(j) When you have submitted an assignment to your tutor for marking, do not wait for its return before starting on the next unit.
Keep to your schedule.
When the assignment is returned, pay particular attention to your tutor’s comments, both on the tutor-marked assignment form and also written on the assignment.
Consult your tutor as soon as possible if you have any question or problem.
(k) After completing the last unit, review the course and prepare yourself for the final examination.
Check that you have achieved the unit objectives (listed at the beginning of each unit) and the course objectives (listed in the Course Guide).
xiiiMPA 779 CONFLICT RESOLUTION STRATEGIES Facilitators/Tutors and Tutorials There are 17 hours of tutorials provided in support of this course.
You will be notified of the dates, times and location of these tutorials, together with the names and phone numbers of your tutor, as soon as you are allocated a tutorial group.
Your tutor will mark and comment on your assignments, keep a close watch on your progress and on difficulties you might encounter and provide assistance to you during the course.
You must mail your tutor- marked assignments to your tutor well before the due date (at least two working days are required).
They will be marked by your tutor and returned to you as soon as possible.
Do not hesitate to contact your tutor by telephone, e-mail, or discussion board if you need help.
The following might be circumstances in which you would find help necessary.
Contact your tutor if: 19.1.1 You do not understand any part of the study units or the assigned readings.
19.1.2 You have difficulty with the self-test or exercise.
19.1.3 You have a question or problem with an assignment with your tutor’s comment on an assignment or with the grading of an assignment.
You should try your best to attend the tutorials.
This is the only chance to have face-to-face contact with your tutor and to ask questions which are answered instantly.
You can raise any problem encountered in the course of your study.
To gain the maximum benefit from course tutorials, prepare a question list before attending them.
You will learn a lot from participating in discussions actively.
Summary As earlier stated above, this course MPA 779: Conflict Resolution Strategies is to introduce you to various techniques, guides, principles, practices, etc.
relating to corporate governance in business organisations.
It makes comparative analysis of the corporate governance in Nigeria with those around the world for better understanding of the practices and principles of governing business organisations.
xivMPA 779 CONFLICT RESOLUTION STRATEGIES We hope you enjoy your studies with the National Open University of Nigeria (NOUN).
We wish you every success in the future.
xvMPA 779 CONFLICT RESOLUTION STRATEGIES Course Code MPA 779 Course Title Conflict Resolution Strategies Course Developer Dr. Stephen T. Aroge Department of Adult Education Adekunle Ajasin University Akungba-Akoko, Nigeria Course Editor Martha Oruku National Open University of Nigeria Programme Leader Dr. O. J. Onwe National Open University of Nigeria Course Coordinator Martha Oruku National Open University of Nigeria NATIONAL OPEN UNIVERSITY OF NIGERIA xviMPA 779 CONFLICT RESOLUTION STRATEGIES National Open University of Nigeria Headquarters 14/16 Ahmadu Bello Way Victoria Island Lagos Abuja Office No 5 Dar es Salam Street Off Aminu Kano Crescent Wuse II, Abuja Nigeria e-mail: centralinfo@nou.edu.ng URL: www.nou.edu.ng Printed by National Open University of Nigeria Printed 2009 ISBN: 978-058-571-0 All Rights Reserved xviiMPA 779 CONFLICT RESOLUTION STRATEGIES CONTENTS PAGE Module 1 …………………………………………..………….. 1 Unit 1 Definition, Philosophy and Nature of Conflict Resolution Strategies………………………………….
1 Unit 2 Typology and Nature of Conflict…………….……….. 6 Unit 3 Causes and Sources of Conflicts……………………... 10 Unit 4 By-products or Fallouts of Conflict………………….. 14 Unit 5 Conflict Resolution Conceptualised…………….…….
18 Module 2 ………………………………….…………………….. 21 Unit 1 The State and Conflict Resolution Strategies……….... 21 Unit 2 Analysis and Stages of Conflict………………….…… 25 Unit 3 Traditional Internal Methods of Conflict Resolution…………………………………………..... 29 Unit 4 Other Forms of Traditional Internal Conflict Resolution………………………………………….... 33 Unit 5 Resolving Conflict through Adjudication…………….
37 Module 3 ……………………………………………………….. 40 Unit 1 Using Political Methods for Conflict Resolution…... 40 Unit 2 Alternative Dispute or Conflict Resolution……….... 44 Unit 3 Negotiation Method of Conflict Resolution ……..… 48 Unit 4 Mediation and Conciliation Methods of Conflict Resolution…………………………………………… 51 Unit 5 Arbitration Method of Conflict Resolution………….. 56 xviiiMPA 779 CONFLICT RESOLUTION STRATEGIES MODULE 1 Unit 1 Definition, Philosophy and Nature of Conflict Resolution Strategies Unit 2 Typology and Nature of Conflict Unit 3 Causes and Sources of Conflicts Unit 4 By-Products or Fallouts of Conflict Unit 5 Conflict Resolution Conceptualised UNIT 1 DEFINITION, PHILOSOPHY AND NATURE OF CONFLICT RESOLUTION STRATEGIES CONTENTS 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objectives 3.0 Main Content 3.1 Definition of Conflict 3.2 Concept of Conflict Resolution 3.3 Conceptualization of Conflict Resolution Strategy 3.4 Philosophy of Conflict Resolution Strategy 3.5 Nature of Conflict Resolution Strategy 3.6 Aims and Objectives of Conflict Resolution Strategy 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutor-Marked Assignment 7.0 References/Further Readings 1.0 INTRODUCTION This unit will be devoted to providing you with the general overview about the course by intimating you with the definitions of conflict resolution, explanations on strategies, philosophy and nature of conflict resolution.
The unit will as well take you through the ways, forms and manners of strategies that could be employed as tools for resolving conflictual issues arising out of human relations and borne out of daily activities.
Conflict and its resolution have remained topical issues in the world over, while conflict existence and/or occurrence also remain inevitable in any human interaction as its ubiquitous nature is never in contest.
Its examination and that of the accompanying issues remain matters of concern and necessity for individual, groups, the states and world regional organisations.
1MPA 779 CONFLICT RESOLUTION STRATEGIES 2.0 OBJECTIVES By the end of this unit, you should be able to: • define conflict • explain the phrase conflict resolution • describe the idea of conflict resolution strategies.
3.0 MAIN CONTENT 3.1 Definition of Conflict There have been diverse definitions of conflict, but for our purpose in this course, we are going to define conflict as “a process that begins when one party perceives that another party has negatively or is about to negatively affects, something that the first part cares about”.
Conflict is a hostile struggle between two or more persons or groups for an object or value that each prizes.
It is also the process in which opposing parties attempt to injure, harm or destroy one another in order to achieve certain goal(s).
Conflict can be conceived as overt, coercive interactions of contending collectivities.
It is a situation of competition in which the parties are aware of the incompatibility of potential features, positions and in which each party wished to occupy a position that is compatible with the wishes of the other.
3.2 The Concept of Conflict Resolution Conflict resolution can be described as a process of finding and maintaining the right level of harmony by the parties involved in the conflict (i.e.
internal resolution) or by third party (i.e.
external resolution or intervention resolution).
The term is also referred to as conflict management.
It is the process through which interpersonal communication is used to gather the parties to a conflict with the aim of resolving the differences in their ideas, views and actions so as to arrive at amicable and satisfactory consensual ideas, views and actions through negotiation, bargaining, conciliation, mediation and arbitration.
The degree to which conflict is effectively settled or resolved is a function of the degree which parties to the conflict perceive their benefits and losses relatively equitable during the negotiations and bargaining.
3.3 Conceptualizing Conflict Resolution Strategy Many strategies of conflict have been advanced.
Such strategies are as divergent as the types and substances of conflicts as well as interests, and nature of the parties and the existing atmosphere (political, economic, social and individual personality make up).
Conflict 2MPA 779 CONFLICT RESOLUTION STRATEGIES resolution strategy has to do with a plan, process and action intended to achieve relative peace and harmony within and between parties or groups with respect to mission and goals.
It is the large-scale action plans for interacting with internal and external environment in order to achieve long term goals.
It requires commitment and belief on the part of the parties involved.
Conflict resolution strategy is as diverse as the nature and level of conflict.
Its proper formulation and management have very useful micro and macro implications for both the parties involved in the ensuing conflict and the operations of the system (state, organisation or groups).
3.4 Philosophy of Conflict Resolution Strategy The general thinking of conflict resolution strategy is always informed by a number of reasons, the main thrust of which is the enhancement of management of conflicts as they may exist, or already existing or are likely to exist, as product of relationships that are necessitated by people’s social, political and economic circumstances.
There is a general belief that conflict is in-built in every group relation which ranges from personal grievances, interpersonal disagreement, up to serious violence and destructional conflict including revolution and total dissolution of status quo.
Envisaging the extent to which unresolved conflicts, as fall outs of human interaction and/or relations can lead to total dislocations, there is the need to have effective and efficient means of resolving the conflicts as they occur or may occur which is achievable through a number of well formulated strategies.
This is predicated on the fact that the method of settling disputes should be tailored towards zero point of conflict in group relations to facilitate good terrain, free of rancour, but will engender harmony, progress and development.
3.5 Nature of Conflict Resolution Strategy Conflict is by nature ubiquitous and inevitable in human everyday life and living.
It is a product of human interaction and relation and its occurrence is only among and between parties or groups.
For conflict to occur, it requires at least two people or two parties or actors who may be individuals or organisations or departments or nations or their components.
Conflict arises from a desired scarce resources, status or power.
The occurrence of conflict can come about as a result of a multiplicity of avenues and reasons hinged on the nature, reason and the trends and terrain of conflict, and the parties in the ensuing conflictual relationships.
3MPA 779 CONFLICT RESOLUTION STRATEGIES 3.6 Aims and Objectives of Conflict Resolution Strategy The occurrence of conflicts and the resources being lost due to conflict including the efforts being expended to manage it have all remained a thing of concern in everyday human existence.
Hence, the need to fashion out strategies that are believed or seen to be possible to resolve such conflicts as they occur to challenge the peaceful coexistence of human beings.
The aims and objectives of conflict resolution strategy are, therefore, basically to: - identify likely sources and nature of conflict; - devise strategic means of solving conflict(s).
SELF ASSESSMENT EXERCISE What do you mean by the term conflict and the phrase conflict resolution strategy?
4.0 CONCLUSION The nature and effects, especially the negative impact of conflict are matters of concern that call for strategic conflict resolution to which parties at various levels of human groups and relationships should have belief and commitment.
This will prepare for friendly, socio-political and economic terrain that will be of great benefits to the parties involved in the ensuing conflicts in particular and the meaningful overall development of the society and its various components in general.
5.0 SUMMARY So far, we have in this unit dealt with such areas as definition, nature and types of conflicts.
We have also discussed the concept of conflict resolution, conflict resolution strategy, its philosophy and nature as well as its aims and objectives.
6.0 TUTOR-MARKED ASSIGNMENT How would you conceptualize the term ‘conflict resolution strategy’?
Of what benefit is this term to human interaction?
4MPA 779 CONFLICT RESOLUTION STRATEGIES 7.0 REFERENCES/FURTHER READINGS Amuseghan, S.A. (2007).
Peace and Conflict Studies: An Introductory Text, Akure: Stebak Books and Publishers.
Fasoranti, O. O.
(2003).
Understanding Sociology.
Akure: Logos Universal Publishers Incorporated.
5MPA 779 CONFLICT RESOLUTION STRATEGIES UNIT 2 TYPOLOGY AND NATURE OF CONFLICT CONTENTS 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objectives 3.0 Main Content 3.1 Some of Human Interaction Products 3.2 Types of Conflicts Explained 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutor-Marked Assignment 7.0 References/Further Readings 1.0INTRODUCTION In the earlier discussion, it has been said that conflict is one of the products of human interactions as may be naturally and circumstantially necessitated by their needs in the first place, and at the extreme, by their greed with all the accompanying displeasures.
Conflict may not always be of negative consequence.
It can lead to positive changes in time, ideas, situation and things of material nature.
Conflict is of highly diverse occurrence and nature.
Its diversity also points to the fact that there could not be a single universal strategy for resolving a particular conflict.
Conflict’s occurrences are as varying and numerous as there are human issues arising out of their everyday existence and living in which differences relating to basic needs, political, social, economic, religious and even matters relating to greed, self preservation, etc.
2.0 OBJECTIVES By the end of this unit, you should be able to: • list some other products of human group interactions • identify the various types of conflicts • describe and explain the types of conflicts resulting from human and group interactions.
3.0 MAIN CONTENT 3.1 Some of Human Interaction Products We have reiterated that conflict is as a result of human relationship, and that it is one of the products.
It is important and only relevant to itemise 6MPA 779 CONFLICT RESOLUTION STRATEGIES some of these other products of human interactions.
They are in both their positive and negative instances and nature.
They include the following terms among others: love, affection, tolerance, accommodation, assimilation, compromise, consensus, cooperation, respect, agreement, obedience, harmony, peace, give and take, gain, allowance, freedom, satisfaction, responsibility, resolution, association, discussion, dialogue, bargaining, negotiation, argument.
Others include grievance, disagreement, disappointment, displeasure, discontent, difference, disobedience, disharmony, disturbance, dissatisfaction, dissolution, discontent, disrespect, aggression, irresponsibility, loss, argument, suspicion, disallow, cheating, confrontation, conflict, violence and change.
These words usually arise out of the relationship that ensued between parties and among groups starting from two individuals to the largest or widest human co-habitation and grouping.
They have the relational process or the occurrence of one leading to the existence of another.
The list as presented here is in no way exhaustive and there is no absolute way of categorizing one or set of these terms as being bad or good.
This is because violence and argument or conflict can lead to positive change, while too much affection, accommodation and love may lead to a compromise of good ideas and innovations.
Even conflictual ideas and situations may at the end turn out positive changes in the lives of individuals and groups, as well as the society at large.
3.2 Types of Conflict Explained The very concept of ‘social’ prefixing the word conflict is suggestive of the fact that conflict has to do with activity in which people meet each other on one thing or the other.
Its types have link with its causes, the parties involved, situations or terrain.
It is simply a group related concept.
However, the following types are very useful for our purpose to be conceived, described or explained as the types of conflict or social conflict.
(a) Forms of Conflict - Competition such as in examination or athletics to attain a goal mutually contested for.
The laurel could be for one or few persons like athletic, job interviews.
- One sided aggression – deliberate wiping out of a race (genocide) or alienation from society and hatred of the society as an entity.
- Opposition of absurd ideas – tradition and modernity.
7MPA 779 CONFLICT RESOLUTION STRATEGIES - Conflict generations – the younger generation conflicting with the idea of the older.
- Institutional conflict within institutions (e.g.
family, religion, etc.)
or between institutions e.g.
education and the family.
- Political conflict – in ideologies and policy of groups and societies.
This can be in form of political competition, regulated or otherwise, sanctions, diplomatic wrangling and war.
- Economic/industrial conflict – this emerges in the economic situation between the elements therein such as employer and employee, union and management, the economic institutions and their environment.
- International and intra-national conflict – between two or more nations – international wars, sanctions etc.
or within the nations as in civil wars, secessions etc.
Going further on typology, conflicts could be classified as games, fights, debates, depending on whether the object is to harm the opponent, to score over him or to persuade him.
In this category are wars, revolutions, coups de tat, gang fights, riots, community controversies, political campaigns, feuds, strikes and other familiar types of conflict.
Conflicts may be classified as being of large-scale or small-scale, as involving organised or unorganized groups or in terms of episodic, continuous and terminal.
(b) Episodic Conflict This is recurrent and regulated by rules accepted by and binding on the parties in the conflict.
What to use and how winners would emerge are predetermined e.g.
elections to office, legislative campaigns, law suits, contract negotiations and athletic contests.
(c) Continuous Conflict These are unplanned conflicts within a state social system.
It is the opposite of the episodic conflicts.
Winners or losers are difficult to identify, exact moment not fixed, nothing is predetermined, not even the start or end.
They occur in nearly all organisations.
Examples of these include: sibling rivalry and marital discord especially between wives in a polygamous arrangement, office politics, schism in churches or mosques, factionalism in voluntary associations, commercial rivalry and religious and ethnic or tribal hostilities.
8MPA 779 CONFLICT RESOLUTION STRATEGIES (d) Terminal Conflict These are those in which one participant or group attempts to destroy the other e.g.
war and revolution, but they occur in a smaller scale in mutinies, feud, gang fights and the more extreme forms of bureaucratic intrigue and marked competition.
Better still, conflict types can be summarized thus: interpersonal, group conflicts, ethnic or tribal, racial, political, economic/industrial, religious, social, intra-national and international conflicts.
All these could result from a variety of issues occurring in and challenging human beings in their every day interactions with each other or with one another – on material and non-material contents of human culture.
SELF ASSESSMENT EXERCISE Make a comprehensive list of the fallouts of human interactions in addition to conflict.
4.0 CONCLUSION We have seen the ubiquity of conflict in relation to human interaction and that it can only occur in group relation and activities.
Its types are as numerous as there are human interactions and are influenced or affected by socio-political, economic, religious and ideological circumstances.
5.0 SUMMARY This unit has taken us round the issue of conflict as the product of human interaction.
It has also listed the other products resulting from human relations or group activities.
We have also been intimated with various types of conflicts.
6.0 TUTOR-MARKED ASSIGNMENT Make a summarised and explanatory articulation of the types of conflicts that you are familiar with.
7.0 REFERENCES/FURTHER READINGS Amuseghan, S.A. (2007).
Peace and Conflict Studies: An Introductory Text.
Akure: Stebak Books and Publishers.
Fasoranti, O.O.
(2004).
Understanding Sociology.
Akure: Logos Universal Publishers Incorporated.
9MPA 779 CONFLICT RESOLUTION STRATEGIES UNIT 3 CAUSES OR SOURCES OF CONFLICTS CONTENTS 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objectives 3.0 Main Content 3.1 Sources/Causes of Conflicts 3.2 Theoretical Orientations on Sources/Causes of Conflicts 3.2.1 Power Politics Source 3.2.2 Structuralism Source 3.2.3 Liberal Pluralist Source 3.3 Itemisation of Sources/Causes of Conflicts 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutor-Marked Assignment 7.0 References/Further Readings 1.0 INTRODUCTION The society in which we live, from the smallest to the largest or widest level, is a multi-group one where individual values, orientations, needs and need satisfaction are numerous and multifaceted.
These permeating and enduring differences give rise to conflicts arising from the human grouping and group relations; hence the different sources of such ensuing conflicts.
These sources/causes of conflictual interactions and responses need to be identified and examined for ease of the choice of method(s) towards resolving them to engender peaceful and habitable living for the humans as social beings.
2.0 OBJECTIVES By the end of this unit, you should be able to: • discover what is meant by the concept of sources of conflict • itemise many of the causes of conflicts.
3.0 MAIN CONTENT 3.1 Sources/Causes of Conflicts It has been mentioned above that human society is full of differences and that these differences result to different sources of conflicts among 10MPA 779 CONFLICT RESOLUTION STRATEGIES human beings especially in their group setting(s).
Such sources are enumerated and explained here theoretically.
3.2 Theoretical Orientations of Sources/Causes of Conflict We can trace the causes of conflict to three principal sources: (a) Power politics source (b) Structuralism source, and (c) Liberal pluralist source.
3.2.1 Power Politics Source The power politics view presupposes that human beings and groups everywhere struggle for domination.
This simply leads to conflict as none of the struggling actors wish to be overwhelmed by the other.
The struggle may start from little argument and escalate to violence of epochal magnitude.
3.2.2 Structuralism Source The structuralism view is focused more on institutions, living conditions, manipulation of resources, money and material goods in which people exploit one another to the disadvantage of another.
This again may lead to unending human struggle either to gain from or to avoid likely or emerging manipulation.
3.2.3 Liberal Pluralist Source The liberal pluralist view is that conflict occurs at different levels of human existence and living primarily arising from human needs.
The above three theories are not mutually exclusive in the real life situation.
Power play leads to defective nature of certain socio- economic institutions and the poor living conditions in the society.
At some other time, simple misunderstanding or poor perception of issues may cause conflicts among stakeholders at the various levels.
3.3 Itemisation of Sources/Causes of Conflicts Apart from the above three theoretical frames of reference, causes of conflict can be distilled further into the following sources, namely: - Differences in human nature (individual/group) in terms of emotion, psychological and physiological make ups.
- Goal and interest-related conflicts resulting from differences in orientation.
11MPA 779 CONFLICT RESOLUTION STRATEGIES - Differences in ideology and philosophy (individuals/groups up to nations).
- Cultural differences - Ethnic differences and boundary issues.
- Personality clash and struggle - Unequal access to group or societal means of achieving common goals.
- Unequal distribution of wealth.
- Artificial human combination or artificial/political creation of groups.
- Natural placement of resources versus political/official sharing formula of such resources e.g.
the struggle for resources control in Nigeria or principle of derivation.
- Opposing nature of interests of parties/groups.
- Unequal access to power and authority.
- Type of leaders and leadership styles and system of governance.
- Merger of incongruous members or groups (tribal / ethnics).
- Exploitative management of state or group affairs.
- External or third party influence.
- Neglect of interest/exclusion.
- Scarce nature of resources versus limitless nature of human wants.
- Feeling of insecurity and threat.
- Servicing greed as opposed to meeting the actual human needs.
- Poor communication among and between groups and system of information management.
- Differences in reward system within and between groups.
- Nepotism, tribalism and corruption.
- Religious differences - Stratification leading to class distinction and struggle for all available spheres of life, one class trying to outwit the other.
- Personal human behaviour e.g.
dogmatism, ignorance, narrow mindedness, low self esteem, perceived inability to succeed (frustration, despair and boredom) are sources of conflict.
- Poor organizational behaviour (in case of industrial conflict).
- Lack of confidence in and mistrust of the status quo or government of the day coupled with disrespect to the rule of law or poor judicial system.
- Unwholesome or uncritical importation or adoption of ideas, technology that may bring about sudden change which may attract resistance.
- Suspicion, distrust, misinterpretation, interpersonal dynamics, abuse of power, authority, inferiority complex, poor human relations etc.
This list is not in any way exhaustive.
12MPA 779 CONFLICT RESOLUTION STRATEGIES SELF ASSESSMENT EXERCISE Carefully explain the three basic theoretical orientations advanced on the sources of conflict in the society.
4.0 CONCLUSION Conflict is one of the areas of dynamism of human society because people are brought together to live as social being.
Conflict and crisis are inevitable in any society.
This means that they are both normal phenomenon in human existence, which is, in turn, a function of individual differences based on their personal nature, behaviour, and socio-political, economic and religious circumstances.
These differences invariably give rise to the different sources and/or causes of conflicts.
5.0 SUMMARY In this unit, we have given a cursory look at the three main theories on sources of conflict as power politics source, structuralism source and liberal pluralist source.
A wide range of causes of conflicts have been presented in an itemised manner for your understanding, though the list is inexhaustive.
6.0 TUTOR-MARKED ASSIGNMENT Simply itemise twenty sources of conflict in line with the Nigeria experiences.
7.0 REFERENCES/FURTHER READINGS Fasoranti, O. O.
(2003).
Understanding Sociology.
Akure: Logos Universal Publishers Incorporated.
13MPA 779 CONFLICT RESOLUTION STRATEGIES UNIT 4 BY-PRODUCTS OR FALLOUTS OF CONFLICT CONTENTS 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objectives 3.0 Main Content 3.1The Concept of By-product of Conflict 3.2Conflict By-products Itemised 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutor-Marked Assignment 7.0 References/Further Readings 1.0 INTRODUCTION While recognising the fact that an ill-managed or unresolved conflict may escalate into violence and wars, it must be stressed that conflict can have social utility as well.
Many important and positive changes in human society, mainly for the betterment of human life, have come from hard-fought conflicts that resulted in change of human institutions, relationships or ideas.
But the facts also remain that conflict, if poorly handled or left unresolved, can produce negativity of the highest order leading to destructions and disruptions of lives, properties, ideas, values and parts of or all existing social structures and create social problems.
Conflict by its nature is a double-edged sword, which aftermaths or consequences herein described as by-products or fallouts should be made isolated and known for ease of reference.
This is in relation to its possible resolution or management strategies in terms of which such conflicts by-products or consequences are to be highlighted under this instance for your understanding.
2.0 OBJECTIVES At the end of this unit, you should be able to: • recognise the dual nature of conflict as part of social process • list all the negative consequences of conflict • assess the positive aspects of well-managed and properly resolved conflicts • explain the concept of the by-products of conflict.
14MPA 779 CONFLICT RESOLUTION STRATEGIES 3.0 MAIN CONTENT 3.1 The Concept of By-Product of Conflict Conflict’s by-product has to do with the resultant products or aftermaths or consequences of conflicts and conflict situations or environments.
The unresolved or mismanaged conflict produces negative social facts or variables that are inimical to human relations and other socio-political and economic processes, in relation to individuals, groups and society at large.
On the other hand, the existence of conflicts, their proper management and resolution may often give rise to positive changes in all spheres of life with respect to the individuals, groups, institutions and the whole community.
Conflict gives rise to both good and bad happenings as its fallouts.
It can enhance building, replacement of parts or result to total dislocations of social systems.
3.2 Conflict By-products Itemised (a) Destructive potentiality or negative consequences of conflict.
Unresolved or poorly managed conflict can bring about any or combination of the following negative consequences as its by- products: • fluctuation in acceptance of internal discipline and order; • defeat leads to weakness on groups hold on members; • disruption and destruction of peace and unity; • class struggle (conflict) breeds antagonism, hostility, obstruction to progress and development, fear, distrust, hatred etc.
• wastage of all manners of resources, lives properties and other materials resulting from violence and wars; • diversion of efforts and energy towards war prosecution, reconciliation, reconstruction and rehabilitation; • taking care of victims of violent conflicts such as the destitutes, the injured and resettling the displaced persons within the society or group or organisation; • wanton killings may result in epidemics with its attendant financial implications; • prevention of cooperation, change value system increases tension, hatred and social problems.
(b) The positive by-products of conflicts – the existence of rightly managed and well resolved conflict has a lot of advantageous 15MPA 779 CONFLICT RESOLUTION STRATEGIES fallouts which are worth mentioning in this discourse and they are as enumerated below acting as push and pull factors: • leads to positive changes, fosters unity and stability, causes or modifies groups, ideas and values; • enhances group formation, cohesion and cooperation as a result of external threat and aggression; • a non-contradictory conflict enables or facilitates a financial, political, economic and religious structures; • engenders readjustment in norms, power and authority relations; • resolution of conflicts restores peace and stability, resolves tension; • its push and pull effects enhance members’ active participation in political and other group or organizational activities in the process of resolution, sources of disagreement, dissatisfaction and dissociation are identified and differences are ironed out, new and acceptable parameters for relationship are set out.
This is to fast track the desired unity and establishes cohesion through processes of reconciliation, reconstruction and rehabilitation.
Example is the federal government policies and implementation efforts after the Nigerian civil war to rebuild the country.
Conflict revitalizes existing norms and values or contributes to the emergence of new ones as a means of ascertaining the relative strength of the opposition.
It also produces further association and coalition thereby reducing isolation and mutual hostility.
It helps to define power relations among subgroups.
In short, positive conflict is functional and integrative.
SELF ASSESSMENT EXERCISE How would you describe the concept of conflicts by-product?
4.0 CONCLUSION The need to identify the two sides of conflicts’ by-products or consequences cannot be overstressed.
This is because people tend to view conflict only in the negative way.
The presentation here is to give impetus to balanced view(s) on conflict and its fallouts as may be experienced by the society.
5.0 SUMMARY Our discussion under this unit has taken us through the concept of conflict’s by-product and some explanations of same to situate our views well.
Also covered under this unit are both the negative and 16MPA 779 CONFLICT RESOLUTION STRATEGIES positive consequences of conflict which have been vividly itemised for easy reading and understanding.
6.0 TUTOR-MARKED ASSIGNMENT Conflict is part of social processes that should not be allowed to occur at all on any issue in the society.
Discuss.
7.0 REFERENCES/FURTHER READINGS Fasoranti, O. O.
(2003).
Understanding Sociology.
Akure: Logos Universal Publishers Incorporated.
17MPA 779 CONFLICT RESOLUTION STRATEGIES UNIT 5 CONFLICT RESOLUTION CONCEPTUALISED CONTENTS 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objectives 3.0 Main Content 3.1 Definition of Conflict Resolution 3.2 The Alternative Dispute Resolution (ADR) Explained 3.3 The Concept of Conflict Resolution Strategy 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutor-Marked Assignment 7.0 References/Further Readings 1.0 INTRODUCTION There are socio-political and economic implications to conflict in any human relationship or interaction in any society.
These ranges from interpersonal to group through national and at international levels.
These warrant the need for identification of and resolution of conflicts to prevent their negative effects on individuals, groups and the larger community.
The needs for evolving resolution to conflicts hinge on the fact that unresolved and mismanaged conflict is inimical to human peaceful living.
2.0 OBJECTIVES By the end of the unit, you should be able to: • explain the concept of conflict resolution • discover the idea of alternative dispute resolution (ADR) strategies • explain what is meant by conflict resolution strategy.
3.0 MAIN CONTENT 3.1 Definition of Conflict Resolution This term is also referred to as conflict management.
As had earlier been mentioned in this course, it is a process by which communication is used to assemble parties to conflict with a view to reducing differences and resolving conflicts in their ideas and views.
This will enable the parties arrive at amicable and satisfactory consensual ideas and views through conciliation, mediation, arbitration, bargaining and negotiation.
18MPA 779 CONFLICT RESOLUTION STRATEGIES Conflict resolution has a variety of approaches aimed at terminating conflict through constructive solving of problems distinct from management or transformation of conflict.
It is also conceived as an outcome in which the issues in an existing conflict are satisfactorily dealt with through a solution that is mutually acceptable to the parties.
The solution should also be self-sustaining in the long-run and productive of a new, positive relationship between parties that were previously hostile adversaries.
Conflict resolution is regarded as any process or procedure by which such an outcome is achieved.
3.2 Alternative Dispute Resolution (ADR) There is the concept of alternative dispute resolution (ADR) arising out of the problems associated with the adversarial model of dispute resolution which invariably led to evolution of the alternative mechanisms or strategies for resolution of conflicts or disputes.
ADR has also become associated with a variety of specific conflict resolution options such as negotiation, mediation, conciliation, case evaluation, mutual arbitration and a lot of other hybrid strategies.
It is a process through which legal disputes are resolved privately by the parties other than resorting to litigation in the traditional courts.
It is a system of multi-option justice in which a wide range of dispute resolution processes are available to parties in the public judicial system.
ADR has the advantage of time and other resources because it does not allow long period before conflict or dispute is resolved as in the case of court resolution.
3.3 Conflict Resolution Strategy Conflict resolution strategy simply means such planned resolution process that is intended to achieve a near to zero level of disagreement among parties involved in a conflict.
It is a process of planning conflict resolution mechanism or putting conflict resolving method into operation in a skillful way to achieve the desired goal on resolution of conflict on a long term basis resulting from large-scale strategies.
It is a process that is oriented or tailored towards reaching long-term goals with respect to conflict resolution efforts; that weighs important variables that will engender the achievement of permanent or long term peaceful relations among disputants.
SELF ASSESSMENT EXERCISE What do you understand by the concept of conflict resolution?
19MPA 779 CONFLICT RESOLUTION STRATEGIES 4.0 CONCLUSION The issue of conflict resolution and the strategies to be employed are multifaceted.
The nature of conflict, its environment and the parties involved and trends are also discussed.
There is no single universal method of resolving conflicts; rather the strategies or methods always evolved as responses to the upcoming challenges as may be brought about by the ensuing conflicts.
It is however imperative to get familiar with the concepts involved which are pointers to the types of such methods and processes of conflict resolution usually geared towards establishing peace in human relations.
5.0 SUMMARY In this unit, we have dealt with the definition of conflict resolution and that of the alternative dispute resolution (ADR).
Also dealt with is the explanation of the concept of conflict resolution strategy as an illustration of the action plan methods towards achieving long term goals in the areas of resolving disputes and to restore peace among humans.
6.0 TUTOR-MARKED ASSIGNMENT Give a concise description of the following: - Alternative Dispute Resolution (ADR) - Conflict Resolution Strategy.
7.0 REFERENCES/FURTHER READINGS Fayakinnu, E.A.
(2007).
Conflict Resolution in Amuseghan, S.A. (ed).
Peace and Conflict Studies: An Introductory Text.
Akure: Stebak Books and Publishers.
20MPA 779 CONFLICT RESOLUTION STRATEGIES MODULE 2 Unit 1 The State and Conflict Resolution Strategies Unit 2 Analysis and Stages of Conflict Unit 3 Internal Traditional Methods of Conflict Resolution Unit 4 Other Forms of Traditional Internal Conflict Resolution Strategies Unit 5 Resolving Conflict through Adjudication UNIT 1 THE STATE AND CONFLICT RESOLUTION STRATEGIES CONTENTS 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objectives 3.0 Main Content 3.1 The Role of State in Conflict Resolution 3.1.1 Machinery of Adjudication 3.1.2 Commissions or Boards of Enquiry 3.1.3 Establishments of Special Tribunals 3.2 Enactment of Special Mechanisms 3.2.1 Mediation 3.2.2 Conciliation 3.2.3 Arbitration 3.3 Industrial Courts 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutor-Marked Assignment 7.0 References/Further Readings 1.0 INTRODUCTION The state here is synonymous with or represented by the government of the day.
The state is the overall or the alternate manager responsible for the overall control of the variety of affairs of the society as they may affect individuals, groups and the community at large.
It is therefore largely held responsible for the good and bad happenings in the society.
Hence, it should normally take such measures that will ensure stability within the society and peace among members to allow them enjoys their living with little or no rancour that may lead to conflictual relationship and violence in their dealings.
Progress friendly environment and terrain should be established, maintained and retained so that progress and developments in all ramifications could be made on individual and 21MPA 779 CONFLICT RESOLUTION STRATEGIES group basis.
These could be achieved through good management of conflicts which components include: prevention and resolution.
2.0 OBJECTIVES By the end of this unit, you should be able to: • describe the role of government in conflict resolution • identify the various conflict resolution strategies established by the state through its enactment of necessary laws.
3.0 MAIN CONTENT 3.1 The Role of the State in the Resolution of Conflicts The state carries out its role through enactment of necessary laws and institutionalization of certain procedures, structures and apparatus in the direction of conflict management.
The major components of such management of conflicts include: prevention of any imagined, presumed or real ongoing conflicts and resolution of brewing and existing conflictual happenings or events between and among individuals, groups and communities.
Principal among state involvements in conflict resolution include: 3.1.1 Machinery of Adjudication This is the establishment of a judicial system to administer justice generally and to deal with the resolution of conflicts as may be brought before the court of justice in operation in the society.
Such resolution may be in respect of conflict between individual persons and groups, private individuals and groups and statutory or corporate bodies as well as conflict between and among corporate bodies and even the state.
3.1.2 Commissions or Boards of Enquiry For speedy disposition of justice in respect of certain type of conflict, resolution commissions or boards of enquiry are usually and often constituted or set up to resolve conflicts and/or settle disputes between and among conflicting parties and to prevent the existing conflicts from growing further or leading to another conflict.
3.1.3 Establishment of Special Tribunals Special tribunals are also instituted by the state and any arm of the state to handle conflicts of peculiar nature.
It may be the one requiring 22MPA 779 CONFLICT RESOLUTION STRATEGIES professional or technical knowledge and skills to facilitate effective and enduring resolution.
3.2 Enactment of Statutory Mechanisms These may be in the areas of such methods as: 3.2.1 Mediation By this, government, through its Act, makes it obligatory for disagreeing parties to meet within certain time frame under the chairmanship of a mediator mutually agreed upon and appointed by one or both of the parties with a view to amicably settling their dispute(s).
If this fails, further step is taken via another structure.
3.2.2 Conciliation Under this procedure, a conciliator is appointed for the parties for the purpose of effecting a resolution of conflict.
The conciliator is to investigate the causes and circumstances of the disagreement and nature of the disputants to enable negotiation with the parties to effect settlement.
The terms and contents of settlement are usually to be forwarded to the appropriate government agency.
3.2.3 Arbitration It is another means by which government lays down the rules on how conflicts could be resolved among conflicting parties as a step further from conciliation.
It marks the beginning of judicial process for conflict resolution.
This is in reference of a dispute or difference between not less than two parties for determination after hearing both sides in a judicial manner, by a person or persons other than a court of competent jurisdiction otherwise called an arbitrator.
The arbitrator is described as an arbiter between feuding parties and any decision or award made by him may be binding or non-binding.
There is the law regulating commercial act which regulates both the domestic and international arbitration.
There is also the customary and modern arbitration.
3.3 Industrial Court This is peculiar to conflicts resolution in the world of work.
It is a system of adjudication where disputes among parties, especially between employees and their employers, are referred to.
This special court is involved as a result of their non-resolution within the earlier stages or structures such as the arbitration.
Its decision is final on the issue brought before it.
23MPA 779 CONFLICT RESOLUTION STRATEGIES SELF ASSESSMENT EXERCISE Make a comparative analysis of mediation and conciliation as conflict resolution strategies.
4.0 CONCLUSION In the world over, government of each nation has the duty of ensuring lasting peace among the citizenry.
To get this done, government makes a number of facilitating efforts to resolve any issue(s) that may jeopardize peace within the society through institutionalization of certain measures as has been enumerated above.
This is with a view to creating harmony as to promote progress and development and invariably engendering the required happiness among people.
5.0 SUMMARY The discussion under this unit has taken us through the various ways through which the state, as represented by the government of the day, could put in place measures to effect dispute settlement.
6.0 TUTOR-MARKED ASSIGNMENT Briefly explain the role of government in facilitating conflict resolution in a society like Nigeria.
7.0 REFERENCES/FURTHER READINGS Amuseghan, S.A. (2007).
Peace and Conflict Studies: An Introductory Text.
Akure: Stebak Books and Publishers.
24MPA 779 CONFLICT RESOLUTION STRATEGIES UNIT 2 ANALYSIS AND STAGES OF CONFLICT CONTENTS 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objectives 3.0 Main Content 3.1Context of Conflict 3.1.1 Distant Past 3.1.2 Immediate Past Context 3.1.3 Current Events 3.2 Stages of Conflict 3.2.1 Pre-Conflict Stage 3.2.2 Confrontation Stage 3.2.3 Crisis State 3.2.4 Outcome Stage 3.2.5 Post-Conflict State 3.3 Other Components of Conflict Analysis 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutor-Marked Assignment 7.0 References/Further Readings 1.0 INTRODUCTION All conflict situations are products of some context and features.
Hence, discourse in respect of any aspect of conflict study especially the resolution of conflicts with its accompanying strategies should be linked with the context or circumstances and stages.
This is germane for analysis and identification of sources and nature of conflicts with a view to adopting effective and appropriate resolution strategies following proper analysis aimed at isolating the context of the ensuing conflict, stages of the conflict and time lines.
2.0 OBJECTIVES At the end of this unit, you should be able to: • describe what is meant by context of conflict • identify the various stages of conflict • explain the two concepts discussed.
25MPA 779 CONFLICT RESOLUTION STRATEGIES 3.0 MAIN CONTENT 3.1 Context of Conflict It is a generally accepted fact that every conflict is related to a specific origin and context.
In other words, parties involved in conflicts emerge from given socio-cultural and political contexts.
For example, each African society has historical evolution before colonialism and through the colonial period and up to the commencement of the contemporary period.
These may be rooted in the patterns of migration, settlement, citizenship, nationalism and communal settlement, system of power sharing, economic issues including resources allocation etc.
Thus, people try to identify themselves along the line of history, culture, values, language and geographical territory.
In some cases, conflict emerges due to equilibrium between these histories and cultural values with those of others.
However, there are three main and related dimensions to which the context of any conflict can be described as explained below.
3.1.1 Distant Past This dimension may run back into centuries or decades, as the case may be.
3.1.2 Immediate Past Context This reveals the level of damage inflicted on the relationship among parties.
If the analysis is of a violent conflict, then immediate events, including the trigger or source that caused the violence will be captured for ease of reference with respect to provision of strategic resolution of the conflict.
3.1.3 Current Events This dimension takes cognizance of current happenings and relates it to the existing relationship among parties in the conflict.
3.2 Stage of Conflict Identifying and understanding of stages or levels of conflict will surely provide the handlers with ample opportunities of making appropriate choice of strategies for acceptable and lasting resolution of conflicts and even conflict prevention.
Conflicts are well within the pattern of changes, exemplified by various stages of change and transformation.
Conflict is not a static social phenomenon but it is expressive, dynamic and diabolical hence the five stages of conflict are, for our purpose, explained below.
26MPA 779 CONFLICT RESOLUTION STRATEGIES 3.2.1 Pre-Conflict Stage This shows the time before a conflict characterized by disequilibrium in values and goals or interests between parties occurs.
The conflict is not yet pronounced or manifested because the persons involved still pretend that all is well when it is indeed not.
3.2.2 Confrontation Stage At this level, conflict has become overt or open.
Some of the characteristics of this stage include occasional grumbling, quarrel, fighting, low level violence, mobilization of resources: human and materials, plans etc.
3.2.3 Crisis Stage This is the apex of the conflict that may have resulted in violence, war, shooting, killing, genocide, injuries, population displacement etc.
Breakdown of law and order and all manners of dislocation of social structure up to outright dislocation of the entire social systems become the order of the day.
Status quo is largely affected as the resultant effects become epochal in extent.
3.2.4 Outcome Stage There is the usual assumption that conflicts of all types will pass through this stage.
In this stage, a winner or loser, a ceasefire or surrender may be declared or the government or the third party intervening forces can be stronger than the warring parties to impose a solution and stop the fighting.
Here, the violence is low or reduced thereby giving opportunity for negotiations or other solutions to the conflict.
3.2.5 Post-Conflict Stage At this stage, violence has been experienced and conflict has declined significantly and parties have gone past the crisis stage.
What is paramount here now is the examination of the factors precipitating then conflicts.
This is in order to employ appropriate resolution methods and to make sure there is no reoccurrence of the conflicts.
Otherwise, there may be a regeneration of situations of the pre-conflict stage thus leading to a vicious circle of conflict.
3.3 Other Components of Conflict Analysis These include timeline and parties to the conflict.
There are several methods through which conflict analysis can be done.
These are 27MPA 779 CONFLICT RESOLUTION STRATEGIES mapping, the onion/doughnut, and the Attitude, Behavior and Context methods otherwise called ABC SELF ASSESSMENT EXERCISE What do you understand by the terms ‘conflict analysis?
4.0 CONCLUSION Conflict analysis presents a vivid picture of the areas to look for in directing efforts at conflict resolution and the types of strategies to be adopted in terms of appropriateness to engender effectiveness and efficiency in the use of resources.
Choice of plans, composite enough to lead to long-term solutions to social problems are also enhanced by proper understanding of the analysis, efforts, nature and circumstances of the conflicts.
5.0 SUMMARY In this unit, we have had a panoramic view of the areas that should be covered in our efforts to analyse conflicts for their proper understanding with a view to providing appropriate strategies to resolve them for peace to reign in conflict ravaged areas of social life in order to forestall the appearance of some other likely conflicts.
Thus, you have been taken through such topics as context (distant past, immediate past, current) and stages of conflict comprising pre-conflict stage, confrontation stage, outcome stage and post-conflict stage analysis of conflict.
Also covered are methods such as time line, parties to conflict, mapping, onion/doughnut, Attitude, Behaviour and Context (ABC).
We can draw from this discussion that negative attitudes engender negative behaviour and these create and sustain conflict situations.
6.0 TUTOR-MARKED ASSIGNMENT In your own view, what are the components of conflict analysis, and how would you like to describe them for the understanding of others?
7.0 REFERENCES/FURTHER READINGS Amuseghan, S.A. (2007).
Peace and Conflict Studies: An Introductory Text.
Akure: Stebak Books and Publishers.
Fasoranti, O.O.
(2003).
Understanding Sociology.
Akure: Logos Universal Publishers Incorporated.
28MPA 779 CONFLICT RESOLUTION STRATEGIES UNIT 3 INTERNAL TRADITIONAL METHODS OF CONFLICT RESOLUTION CONTENTS 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objectives 3.0 Main Content 3.1The Concept of Internal Traditional Conflict Resolution Strategy 3.1.1 Mutual Conflict Resolution or Collective Bargaining 3.1.2 Peace Meeting Problem Solving Option 3.1.3 Oath-taking on Conflict Settlement 3.1.4 Bad Side of Traditional Non-Violent Internal Conflict Resolution System 3.2Component of Non-Violent Traditional Conflict Resolution System 3.3Agreement of Interest Option 3.4Constructive Dialogue Option 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutor-Marked Assignment 7.0 References/Further Readings 1.0 INTRODUCTION History is a factor to the type and nature of conflicts and the measures to either prevent or resolve them.
Resolution of conflict method is as old as conflict and human relation.
As conflicts occur in variety of ways and at different time frame, each stage requires its own type of management or solutions.
Hence, the concept of internal traditional or direct conflict resolution which is our concern in this unit.
2.0OBJECTIVES At the end of this unit, you should be able to: • describe the concept of internal traditional conflict resolution • describe the components of the traditional conflict resolution strategy.
29MPA 779 CONFLICT RESOLUTION STRATEGIES 3.0 MAIN CONTENT 3.1 The Concept of Internal Traditional Conflict Resolution Internal traditional system presupposes that parties in conflict situation are either conditioned or they voluntarily put up efforts to settle their differences without any external or third party intervention in any way, form or manner.
This in-house mechanism may come in a variety of forms.
Such internal resolution method may be through the amicable settlement of their differences with no winner or loser situation.
Many strategies are in use in the traditional internal resolution methods either jointly chosen or the opposing party elects to take such choice.
3.1.1 Mutual Conflict Resolution or Collective Bargaining Under this method, parties in conflict come together for deliberation on their differences resulting in conflict to come out with mutual agreement.
This is through a traditional process of collective bargaining.
Points are raised and debated, terms and conditions are negotiated to reach such mutual agreements leading to amicable settlement of conflictual issues.
New form of relations that accommodate the parties, circumstances, values and goals must have been harmonized without any external influence.
3.1.2 Peace Meeting Problem Solving Option This is closely related to the above.
In the event of internal wrangling, bickering invariably escalates to real conflictual situation.
When it happens like this, parties concerned, who are already feeling uncomfortable by the emerging situation may initiate a peace meeting.
This type of meeting is called and the proceedings are exclusively at their own instance.
They may even be conscious that third party or external knowledge could cause more damage to their conflict situation.
Face-to-face meeting is to identify and solve problems through open discussion 3.1.3 Oath Taking on Conflict Settlement Oath-taking is a common feature of detecting facts and establishing truth relating to issues of discomfort among and between parties especially in the African context.
It is a strategy to rest a conflict in a relatively permanent way, usually done with secrecy using a variety of items or instruments including blood sucking, eating of cola and making some committal statements with likely serious consequences for members in case of default.
The Yorubas called this method “imule” meaning 30MPA 779 CONFLICT RESOLUTION STRATEGIES “convenant”.
It is mainly to settle disputes/differences and to ward off deviation and tilting towards another group or party.
3.1.4 Bad Side of Non-Violent Traditional Internal Conflict Resolution System It is non-formal and no record of proceedings is kept.
A reluctant party to the agreement earlier negotiated may renege thereby giving rise to a renewed conflict of higher magnitude than the already settled one with its multiplier negative effects.
In case of oath-taking, unfaithful party may end his/their existence in the process.
This may again lead to some social unrest if the secrecy is made open.
It can result in party or group stigmatisation within the larger community.
However, the system is still accepted and practised in some societies and groups to manage their differences with a view to putting a stop to conflicts among them.
3.2 Component of Non-Violent Traditional Internal Conflict Resolution As earlier mentioned, conflicts come up in various forms; equally their systems of resolution are in variety of ways.
Some of these will be enumerated in this section.
They are evolved in relation to different levels – intrapersonal, intragroup and international and can be about subject matters – ideological or beliefs, values, materials, resources, emotions, roles, responsibilities, properties ranging from the intangible to highly tangible of land and territorial issues.
3.3 Agreement of Interest Options This is when and where parties to conflict accept each other for peace’s sake.
No victor, no vanquished.
Such agreement does not mean that the parties agree to everything or like each other.
It only means that they accept the implementation of the agreements to allow peace to reign.
It recognizes a give and take situation 3.4 Constructive Dialogue Option Peace rather than violence is always sought in human relation.
Constructive dialogue arising out of meetings by parties to resolve disputes and engender peace has remained one of the most desired strategies in the conflict resolution business.
It is however not limited to interpersonal relations, it permeates all human group relations.
It is a vital social instrument for achieving peace and understanding between individuals and groups in societies.
31MPA 779 CONFLICT RESOLUTION STRATEGIES SELF ASSESSMENT EXERCISE In which way would you explain your conception of the term non- violent internal traditional conflict resolution?
4.0 CONCLUSION Non-violent traditional in-house handling of conflict among parties is one of the many strategies usually employed to iron out differences arising out of human or group interaction.
Its choice is a function of some variables as may be prompted by the circumstances surrounding the conflicts and the parties in conflict.
The method has its advantages and disadvantages.
The disadvantages notwithstanding, it is still being used by parties who perceive it as being appropriate to their circumstances.
5.0 SUMMARY The concept and tenet of the non-violent traditional internal conflict resolution system have been explained in this unit.
The various topics that constitute its component though not exhaustive, such as mutual conflict resolution or collective bargaining, negotiation peace meeting, and oath-taking, have been discussed.
The demerits of the methods have equally been touched for your balanced knowledge of the discourse under reference.
6.0 TUTOR-MARKED ASSIGNMENT Present a very good explanation of at least three (3) ways in which African people can settle their differences in-house amicably with examples.
7.0 REFERENCES/FURTHER READINGS Aluko, Adeniran (2000).
“Philosophy, Culture and Question for Social Order in Africa” in Issues and Problems in Philosophy (ed.)
Owolabi, R.A. Ibadan: Grovacs Network.
Shedrack, Gaya Best (2004).
“The Method of Conflict Resolution and Transformation”: Introduction to Peace and Conflict Studies in West Africa.
Ibadan: Spectrum Books Limited.
32MPA 779 CONFLICT RESOLUTION STRATEGIES UNIT 4 OTHER FORMS OF TRADITIONAL INTERNAL CONFLICT RESOLUTION STRATEGIES CONTENTS 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objectives 3.0 Main Content 3.1Explanation of Other Forms of Internal Conflict Resolution 3.1.1 Avoidance/Withdrawal 3.1.2 Accommodation Option 3.1.3 Compromise 3.1.4 Attack Option 3.1.5 Subterranean Strategy Option 3.1.6 Creation of Superordinate Goal 3.1.7 Smoothing Strategy Option 3.1.8 Authoritative Command 3.1.9 Altering the Human Variables 3.1.10 Altering the Structural Variables 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutor-Marked Assignment 7.0 References/Further Readings 1.0 INTRODUCTION Due to the inexhaustive sources of conflict among humans, the strategies to curtail and contain same are as numerous.
Those to be mentioned here constitute yet another set of traditional in-house method of managing conflict.
These include: avoidance, accommodation, compromise, attack and confrontation especially used for interpersonal conflict.
2.0 OBJECTIVES By the end of this unit, you should be able to: • identify more methods in use for conflict resolution in-house • discover more issues involved in conflict resolution • explain the variables in conflict resolution system.
3.0 MAIN CONTENT 33MPA 779 CONFLICT RESOLUTION STRATEGIES 3.1Explanation of Other Forms of Internal Conflict Resolution 3.1.1 Avoidance/Withdrawal People who cherish this approach are ready to give up any issue arising in their interactions that may cause or has actually caused conflict in their relationship.
The parties in this group believe that it is hopeless or futile to attempt to resolve conflict.
Instead, they prefer to drop the issue in conflict outrightly.
3.1.2 Accommodation Option This is a situation in which parties drop their own goals or one of the parties drops his/her goals in preference or in order to retain or be in the relationship.
In other words, the relationship is more valuable to him than his/her own goals.
He/she then gives up such goal and accommodate or romance the relationship at the expense of own goal.
They don’t want the ensuing conflict to be discussed.
They believe that there is no way conflict will be discussed without hurting or damaging the relationship.
This category of people cherishes friends and relationship, harmony and tranquility notwithstanding at what expense it is to them and their goals.
3.1.3 Compromise This is more relevant to conflict in the world of work.
The users believe in the current approach to relationship especially industrial relationship in which a win-win approach is opened for (where both conflicting sides need to surrender some of their goals for one another to keep their relationship and their jobs) to avoid a worse situation than the existing conflict situation.
People who use this method are compromising.
One party gives up part of his goals while at the same time persuading the other party in the conflict to give up part of his own goals as well.
The resolution of the conflict must be such that both parties gain something somewhere in the middle ground between the two extreme positions.
3.1.4 Attack Option These are sharks-like individuals who usually attempt to overpower their opponents.
They care less about their relationship with others.
They are coercive in making others (opponents) accept their own solution to a problem.
Their goals are more important to them than the relationship.
They believe that in a conflict, there must be a winner who must be themselves and nobody else.
They don’t want to lose in any conflict situation or else they think that they will be considered as weak.
34MPA 779 CONFLICT RESOLUTION STRATEGIES The coercive party does not care if the other party could be so overwhelmed to the point of extinction, permanent disability or death while the whole situations (interests, goals or values) become theirs at the expense of the defeated or overpowered party or parties.
Examples are where interpersonal relationship conflict results in serious fight or intergroup and boundary or ethnic unrest, international fight or crisis, eventually leading to war in which lives and properties are lost and one party emerges as winner while the opponent is defeated or killed.
3.1.5 Subterranean Strategy Option Under this guise, especially in interpersonal relationship, parties in conflict attempt to seek for some secret means to outsmart or outwit the opponent.
In Africa, the concept of the use of “juju” or spiritual attack comes into play.
It may lead to technical elimination of one party by another.
It may lead to a situation whereby one party is made to either forget or abandon his own goals either consciously or unconsciously.
This is however not a popular method of conflict resolution.
SELF ASSESSMENT EXERCISE Describe the concepts of “compromise and avoidance” as strategies for conflict resolution?
3.1.6 Creation of Superordinate Goal Creating a shared goal that cannot be attacked without the cooperation of each of the conflicting parties.
3.1.7 Smoothing Strategy This is simply playing down differences while emphasizing common interests between conflicting parties.
3.1.8 Authoritative Command Here, management uses its formal authority to resolve the ensuing conflict and then communicate its desire to the parties involved.
This is the situation in the world of work.
35MPA 779 CONFLICT RESOLUTION STRATEGIES 3.1.9 Altering the Human Variables This is the use of behavioural change strategy such as human relations training to alter attitudes and behaviours that cause or can cause conflict.
3.1.10 Altering the Structural Variable Changing the formal organisational structure or variables and interaction patterns of conflicting parties through restructuring, job redesign (if industrial), transfer, creation of coordinating positions, and the like.
4.0 CONCLUSION The discussion in this unit has further broadened our orientation about strategies that could be employed in resolving conflicts particularly those arising from interpersonal interactions to which no third party or external party assistance is overtly sought and obtained.
5.0 SUMMARY So far, in this unit, you have been taken through sub-topics of avoidance, accommodation, compromise, attack, subterranean option as parts of pool of strategies that could be geared towards either resolving or ending conflicts between parties.
6.0 TUTOR-MARKED ASSIGNMENT Illustrate with examples the issues involved in “attack” and “subterranean” options in settling differences by parties in conflict.
7.0 REFERENCES/FURTHER READINGS Erinola, Akintunde (2005).
The Principle of African Customary Law, (2nd Edition).
Ibadan: Erionla Publishers.
Shedrack, Gaya Best (2004).
“The Method of Conflict Resolution and Transformation”: Introduction to Peace and Conflict Studies in West Africa.
Ibadan: Spectrum Books Limited.
36MPA 779 CONFLICT RESOLUTION STRATEGIES UNIT 5 RESOLVING CONFLICT THROUGH ADJUDICATION CONTENTS 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objectives 3.0 Main Content 3.1The Concept of Adjudication 3.2Level of Adjudication 3.3Other Forms of Adjudication 3.4The Characteristics of Adjudication 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutor-Marked Assignment 7.0 References/Further Readings 1.0 INTRODUCTION In the earlier two units, we discussed some traditional but non- interventionist approaches available to parties in conflicts to resolve their differences.
In this unit, adjudication as the adoption of third party strategy for conflict resolution is our concern for discussion.
Also, the discussion will cover the use of the political methods as another option and court as the state apparatus to resolve differences.
2.0 OBJECTIVES By the end of this unit, you should be able to: • identify the tenets and the functionality of the two strategies to conflict resolution • explain each of the two methods • choose any of the two options available to conflicting parties as may be appropriate to their circumstances and or situations.
3.0 MAIN CONTENT 3.1 The Concept of Adjudication Adjudication is one of the non-violent conflict resolution options open to parties in conflict to settle their differences.
It is also one of the state’s longstanding apparatuses being used by the state, individuals and groups.
The state places at the disposal of all and sundry irrespective of status of age, socio-economic, political and race and other criteria.
Adjudication is the system or method of resolving conflict through the 37MPA 779 CONFLICT RESOLUTION STRATEGIES use of the law courts and litigation mechanisms.
Rather than parties in conflict taking laws into their hands, aggrieved parties can seek redress in the law courts before a judge of competent jurisdiction.
Services of lawyers are involved under the adjudication system.
3.2 Level of Adjudication Adjudication is usually operated at various and different levels and stages.
The court system is structured from lowest to the highest.
These ranged from customary, to high court, court of appellate jurisdiction and the Supreme Court being the highest in the case of Nigeria and many other nations of the world.
Because of the plural nature of Nigerian society in terms of religious inclination, there is the Sharia Court system up to the level of appellate adjudication to cater for the Muslim segment of the Nigerian populace in terms of the resolution of differences.
The structural arrangement implies the category and nature of conflicts that could be brought before each level of adjudication for resolution.
The arrangement also indicates the category of parties and their differences in terms of the administration of justice.
This is because a level cannot be flagrantly jumped in preference to another for hearing on resolution of conflict.
Where the jurisdiction of a level stops is the start of a higher level of adjudication.
3.3 The Forms of Adjudication In resolving some other conflicts of peculiar adjudication, special bodies of legal status are statutorily constituted to resolve special conflict situations.
These are tagged as special tribunals, special courts, commissions, bureau and boards of inquiries.
They investigate created cases, and listen to complaints from parties.
They are especially at the stance of the state (government).
Some are to apportion blames and make awards based on the substance of the complaints or conflicts made to them.
There could be losers and winners.
Serious sanctions could be meted out to those found guilty while compensation could be awarded to those exonerated from blames.
Losses suffered in this type of resolution option include properties and status.
This system of adjudication applies to conflict between groups, and between one country and another.
The example is the case of Nigeria and Cameroon over the oil rich Bakassi peninsular which was adjudicated by the World Court and resolved in favour of Cameroon.
3.4 The Characteristics of Adjudication Even though adjudication is very formal, reliable and has records of the substances and circumstances of the complaints and conflict situations being handled, the machinery is not free from blame.
It is usually 38MPA 779 CONFLICT RESOLUTION STRATEGIES characterized by witnesses because the loser usually feels embittered and unhappy with the party that wins the case in dispute.
The Yoruba expression that we cannot remain friends and friendly on our return from court aptly explains this position.
The duration of the trial in adjudication is usually beyond the parties in conflict to decide and the judgement is usually legally binding on both parties to the conflict.
Unlike in arbitration where judgement passed may not be binding legally but can only be respected and observed on moral grounds.
SELF ASSESSMENT EXERCISE How would you like to describe the term ‘adjudication’?
4.0 CONCLUSION The discussion here has provided another opportunity for us to add to our knowledge and understanding of the span of conflict resolution mechanisms.
Adjudication is simply a deviation from the non- interference of third party in conflict resolution.
It is not even the issue of mere intervention, but that the decision is out of the volition of the parties to the conflict but the judgement becomes legally binding on the parties.
5.0 SUMMARY In this unit, we have discussed the concept of adjudication, its usage and level of court system in terms of jurisdiction.
Other forms of adjudication have been considered.
The characteristics features of adjudication have been discussed in terms of its demerits in particular.
6.0 TUTOR-MARKED ASSIGNMENT Adjudication is a conflict resolution method that renders the conflicting parties helpless.
Discuss.
7.0 REFERENCES/FURTHER READINGS Mitchell, Chris and Banks, Michael (1988).
Handbook of Conflict Resolution: The Analytical Problem Solving Approach.
London Printer.
Wallensteen, Peter (2006).
Understanding Conflict Resolution War, Peace and the Global System.
London: Sag Publications.
MODULE 3 39MPA 779 CONFLICT RESOLUTION STRATEGIES Unit 1 Use Political Methods for Conflict Resolution Unit 2 Alternative Dispute or Conflict Resolution Unit 3 Negotiation Method of Conflict Resolution Unit 4 Mediation and Conciliation Methods of Conflict Resolution Unit 5 Arbitration Method of Conflict Resolution UNIT 1 USE OF POLITICAL METHODS FOR CONFLICT RESOLUTION CONTENTS 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objectives 3.0 Main Content 3.1Political Approach to Conflict Resolution 3.2Suggested Political Methods for Conflict Resolution 3.3Loose World Federation 3.4National Disarmament 3.5Joint National Solution Option 3.6Redefinition of UNO Structure for effectiveness on Conflict Issues 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutor-Marked Assignment 7.0 References/Further Readings 1.0 INTRODUCTION Politics by its very nature touches all aspects of humanity in general and human relations especially in group relations.
Such group relations include intra and intergroup interactions concerning issues bordering on activities of social, religious, economic and political nature.
Human grouping in respect of these activities starts with two individuals coming together, to structures like associations, civil societies, trade unions, local, state, national and international governments and international organisations or regional bodies.
2.0 OBJECTIVES At the end of this unit, you should be able to: • describe political methods in conflict resolution • explain the issues involved in the choice of political approach.
3.0 MAIN CONTENT 40MPA 779 CONFLICT RESOLUTION STRATEGIES 3.1 Political Approach to Conflict Resolution In all human groupings, interest, values and goals vary.
As a result of this, there are clashes of interests, uncomplimentary dealings and growing differences.
The resultant end-products or fallouts from all these differences are ranges of conflicts which must be resolved through appropriate methods to avoid causing more problems than the one being solved.
Among the methods is the political approach; more so that human interaction involves politics in one way or another; even some conflicts arising from non-political issues are resolved using political methods so that a worse conflict situation with multiplier negative effects will be avoided especially among nations and world regional groups.
Some regional and world bodies such as ECOWAS, AU, UNO, EEC, ECOMOG have evolved structures to handle the resolution of international conflicts among and between nations.
3.2 Suggested Political Methods for Conflict Resolutions These are to apply to national and international conflicts.
3.3 Loose World Federalism There has been proposal as to the establishment of a world government with such other bodies as in international police and justice system.
It is the hope and expectation of the iniators that this scheme will facilitate easy and, put prompt and effective resolution of international conflicts arising from all aspects of relationships among the nations of the world.
3.4 National Disarmament The United Nations has always been insistent on the inspection of Iraqi’s and other nation’s weaponry so as to eliminate the weapons of mass destruction.
There has also been discussion and decisions on the type and level of arms and ammunition, as well as nations’ involvement in nuclear activities with a view to playing down on nuclear acquisition for war prosecution.
Conflicts within the nations as they may occur between each country’s component parts, (states and council areas, and ethnic groups), are better resolved with political approach.
Such conflicts come in the guises of land disputes, ethnic and religious chauvinism, boundary disputes; resources control issues, power sharing, chieftaincy tussle etc.
In all these, arms and ammunitions are freely and indiscriminately used resulting in wanton destruction of lives and properties.
Laws and treaties are made to which nations become signatories.
This is to curb resolution of conflicts through violence in preference to political solutions.
Pronouncements on disarmament are 41MPA 779 CONFLICT RESOLUTION STRATEGIES usually binding on all the signatories to them and necessary penalties or sanctions are meted out to erring members.
3.5 Joint National Solution Option This is the adoption of joint national solution to international problems of sovereign nations which could engender international cohesion.
International cooperation is sought and adopted on the political platform as pathway to resolve ensuing conflict to bring together the peoples in conflict, to once again live together peacefully for progress and development in all its ramifications.
3.6Redefinition of UNO Structures for Effectiveness on Conflict Issues As parts of steps to make the UNO and its specialised agencies more effective, efficient and acceptable to members on conflicts resolution efforts, there have been calls for a redefinition of the World body.
It has been advocated that such definition should cover the status, powers and functions of the superpowers and permanent members of the security council of the organisation.
SELF ASSESSMENT EXERCISE Describe what is meant by political methods in the business of conflict resolution.
4.0 CONCLUSION The political nature of human beings, especially in group relations, presupposes that conflict is inevitable as there is bound to be differences of all sorts.
Such conflicts in whichever forms they come up will always require political touch with respect to their resolution to engender cohesion, harmony and room for progress and development.
Even in the world of work, some conflicts on terms and conditions of employment require political solution since work or business organisation does not exist only purely for bread and butter issues alone but for social concerns among others.
5.0 SUMMARY This unit has taken us through some topics under the political methods as strategic option to solve conflicts.
The topics covered so far are: concept of political approach to conflict resolution, suggested political methods which comprise a loose world federalism, national disarmament, joint national solution option and redefinition of UNO 42MPA 779 CONFLICT RESOLUTION STRATEGIES structure for effective conflict resolution in a manner acceptable to members.
6.0 TUTOR-MARKED ASSIGNMENT Carefully enumerate the components of political methods for conflict resolution that you are familiar with.
7.0 REFERENCES/FURTHER READINGS Fasoranti, O.O.
(2003).
Understanding Sociology.
Akure: Logos Universal Publishers Incorporated.
North, R.C.
(1968).
Conflicts: Political Aspects of International Encyclopaedia of Social Sciences Vol.
I.
43MPA 779 CONFLICT RESOLUTION STRATEGIES UNIT 2 ALTERNATIVE DISPUTE RESOLUTION CONTENTS 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objectives 3.0 Main Content 3.1The Concept of Alternative Dispute Resolution 3.2Overview of Alternative Conflict/Dispute Resolution 3.3Benefits of Alternative Dispute Resolution 3.4Critiques of Alternative Dispute Resolution (ADR) Process 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutor-Marked Assignment 7.0 References/Further Readings 1.0 INTRODUCTION In this discourse, conflict and dispute are used interchangeably to mean the same thing.
The aim of any conflict or dispute resolution strategy is of course to reach an agreement preferably to the satisfaction of the parties in conflict or the disputants.
Negotiating procedures provide for various stages of failure to agree and often include a clause providing for some form of third party interventionist dispute/conflict resolution in the event of the procedure being exhausted.
The failure of some other conventional processes or methods that are traditional in nature has led to looking elsewhere for solutions to conflicts problems which is majorly involving external third party interventionists.
This is referred to as alternative conflict/dispute resolution.
Its processes include negotiation, mediation, conciliation and arbitration (and National Industrial Court) in respect of conflict or dispute in the world of work.
2.0 OBJECTIVES By the end of this unit, you should be able to: • recognize the concept of alternative conflict resolution • explain the advantages of employing alternative conflict resolution methods.
44MPA 779 CONFLICT RESOLUTION STRATEGIES 3.0 MAIN CONTENT 3.1 The Concept of Alternative Dispute Resolution Alternative dispute resolution (ADR) is a term, which has become associated with a variety of specific dispute/conflict resolution options such as: negotiation, mediation, arbitration, conciliation, mini-trial, case evaluation and a host of other hybrid mechanisms.
It is a process through which legal disputes are resolved privately by the parties other than resorting to litigation in the tribunal or courts.
ADR is a short and useful expression to refer to a system of multi-option justice in which a wide range of conflict resolution processes are available to parties in the public judicial system.
Alternative Dispute Resolution implies consensual solutions that are by definition ones in which interested members of the public have participated and reached an agreement.
This leads us to the topic of the next section which is the benefits of ADR.
3.2 Benefits of Alternative Dispute Resolution (ADR) Alternative dispute resolution is cheaper and quicker than trial through adjudication which usually draws more cost to parties and it is perceived to be friendly, flexible and nicer than the uncivil exchange that usually characterizes litigation where services of lawyers are hired at exorbitant fees.
The informality of the resolution process and its privacy are assumed to put parties at their ease to bring about better resolutions of conflicts.
Conversation and cooperating replace conflict while informality empowers it.
It is more efficient than the conventional adversarial system.
The parties clearly understand ADR powers and proceedings as they are less formal, unlike the complex rules of evidence used in the courtroom.
The choice of location, time of meetings and control and the process have all combined to ensure confidence in the entire process.
Conflicting parties enjoy the assistance of third party neutrals who are usually experts in the subject matter of their disputes.
The expertise nature reduces the time and other resources.
The choice of the expert third parties (neutrals) to serve them is that of the disputants.
The environment is conducive; there is proximity to evidence and witnesses, hence its friendliness and acceptability by the parties in conflicts.
The proceedings and records of same and awards are not open to the public.
The privacy engenders the parties being more frank in the presentation of their cases hence, there is positive working relationship.
The satisfaction to the voluntarily reached agreement enhances long term compliance far more than the government agencies imposed outcomes.
Solutions reached via ADR usually have the support and understanding, and meet the needs of agencies and 45MPA 779 CONFLICT RESOLUTION STRATEGIES affected parties.
The volition involved in arriving at awards in ADR helps to bring about finality to the conflict situation and/or disputes unlike the decision by judgement imposed by adjudicator via litigation in the conventional adversarial judicial system of resolution.
Appeals are easily discouraged especially where there is provision that such awards shall be final as in the arbitration agreement under the Act.
ADR has additional advantage of preserving relationships between disputing parties.
Examples are the divorce matters where children are involved, disputes between family members, landlords-tenants, business partners, consumers, employment etc.
ADR processes of negotiation and mediation are very useful in settling national and municipal armed conflicts and other international disputes.
Parties in municipal conflicts are free to opt for any convenient lawyer of their choice that will provide fairest means of resolving their disputes.
The UNO Commission on International Trade Law is an example that is useful to cite in this regard (read details).
3.3 The Critiques of Alternative Dispute Resolution Despite the various advantages of ADR, it does not provide the solution to all kinds of disputes.
There are conflict situations where court trial is most appropriate.
These include definitive interpretation of law and constitutional provisions/contents, public policy demand for court pronouncement on certain issues in conflict, protection of parties other than the disputants and where governmental entities must be held accountable.
ADR processes rob the public of important precedents and thus hinder the development of law as arbitrary award is limited to specific grounds precedence is usually lacking.
There is failure of accountability because of the adherence to privacy of proceedings and awards.
Sometimes, power imbalance i.e.
disparities in resources between the parties cause unfair bargaining.
This has multiplier negative effects because the ability of one party to pass along its cost, or the inability of the other to pass along its costs, will invariably affect the bargaining process and the final settlement.
SELF ASSESSMENT EXERCISE Carefully define or describe the term alternative dispute resolution.
4.0 CONCLUSION There is no doubt that the advantages derivable from the ADR are overwhelming and could easily be taken as better option for resolution of disputes in any society.
Its assumptions indeed make it a better 46MPA 779 CONFLICT RESOLUTION STRATEGIES alternative to the conventional traditional adversarial adjudication.
In Nigeria, if going by anything, it is worse as our judicial system is plagued with myriads of problems such as courts congestion, corruption, politicization.
This precarious situation actually demands that we embrace the concept and processes of alternative dispute (conflict) resolution (ADR) to supplement litigation in the conventional adjudication and its processes.
5.0 SUMMARY In this unit, the concept and contents of alternative dispute resolution (ADR) as another way of viewing conflicts or disputes settlement methods have been discussed.
The benefits with respect to speed, economy, informality and flexibility, choice of impartial neutrals (third parties); privacy, finality and preservation of relations after settlement and disputants freedom of choice and control together with the enduring nature of awards and resolution have all been discussed.
A number of criticisms on the processes of ADR have been touched for your balanced view and understanding.
6.0 TUTOR-MARKED ASSIGNMENT What advantages would you agree that the Alternative Dispute Resolution has as one of the prepared strategies in resolving conflicts among and between parties?
7.0 REFERENCES/FURTHER READINGS Carie, J. Menkel-Meadow, et.
al.
(2005).
Dispute Resolution Adversarial Model.
Aspen Publishers Inc. Dele Peters (2005).
What is Alternative Dispute Resolution.
Dee-Sange Nigeria Limited.
Oluduro, Oludayo et.
al (eds) (2007).
Trends In Nigeria Law: Essays in Honour of Oba D.V.F.
Olateru-Olagbegi., JP.
Constellation (Nigeria) Publishers.
47MPA 779 CONFLICT RESOLUTION STRATEGIES UNIT 3 NEGOTIATION METHOD OF CONFLICT RESOLUTION CONTENTS 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objectives 3.0 Main Content 3.1Definition and Nature of the Term ‘Negotiation’ 3.2Negotiation Method of Conflict Resolution 3.3Processes underlying Negotiation 3.4Strategies and Merits of Negotiation (Distributive and Integrative Bargaining) 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutor-Marked Assignment 7.0 References/Further Readings 1.0 INTRODUCTION We are now giving a somewhat detailed explanation on negotiation as one of the alternative dispute/conflict resolution strategies in this unit.
Its nature or properties, processes and merits will be mentioned.
2.0 OBJECTIVES At the end of this unit, you should be able to: • define the term negotiation • analyse the advantages and strategies of negotiation • explainr the processes involved in negotiation.
3.0 MAIN CONTENT 3.1 Definition and Nature of the Term ‘Negotiation’ Negotiation is a process in which two parties reach an agreement.
It can be described as a convergent process where both parties are equally keen to reach a win-win agreement to engender future or further harmonious relationship between them as an aftermath of the resolution of their conflicts.
It can also be described as a divergent process of conflict resolution whereby both parties aim to win as much as they can from the other while giving away as little as possible.
The nature of negotiation is in a sense like a war game in which the bargainers are pitting their wits against each other while also bringing in 48MPA 779 CONFLICT RESOLUTION STRATEGIES the heavy artillery in the shape of sanctions or threatened sanctions.
Its process can produce a pyrrhic victory in which both sides, including the apparent winning sides retire to mourn their losses and lick their wounds.
Negotiation process has conventions and rules guiding the parties, but it is sometimes broken in the heat of the negotiating battle.
Negotiation is a bargaining relationship between the parties to the agreements with a view to resolving their differences.
3.2 Stage of Negotiation Negotiations can normally be broken down into four stages, namely: - preparing for negotiation: setting objectives, defining strategy and assembling data; - opening the bargaining; - bargaining proper, and - closing stage.
3.3 Process Underlying Negotiation The process of negotiation consists of some distinct though related areas thus: - Separate the people from problem by encouraging parties to direct their attention to the problem before them and not attacking each other; - Focus on the interests not the position.
The parties should not consider their positions but rather focus on the goals, needs and concerns; - Generate a variety of options before deciding on a solution; - Insist that the result be based on some objective standard for the parties to accept the resolution, agreement reached must be fair and based on objective standard (market value, expert opinion, custom or law etc).
3.4 Strategies and Merits of Negotiation Negotiation has strategies which can be categorized into two main headings of Distributive and Integrative bargaining.
In the case of distributive (competitive) bargaining strategy of negotiation, the parties take up opposing positions from which they proceed to negotiate a settlement sometimes between these positions.
Some parties aim to win instead of working towards mutual beneficial outcome.
Thus, the demand of one party may be met to the detriment of the other.
It is a zero sum exchange as the gain of one is at the expense 49MPA 779 CONFLICT RESOLUTION STRATEGIES of the other i.e.
win-lose approach that requires hard or serious bargaining.
It is best suited when parties do not need to still maintain any relationship in the future.
Integrative bargaining or principled negotiation on the other hand is a problem solving approach as both parties seek mutual solutions for mutual gains and mutual interest.
It is collaborative as it is geared towards each other’s interest as opposed to their oppositions.
It is based on shared interest and there is absence of third party facilitator.
Parties may or may not require any legal petitioner or their representation.
The parties have total control of the affairs with a back-and-forth communication approach built into the method.
SELF ASSESSMENT EXERCISE Simply explain the word “Negotiation” in relation to dispute settlement mechanism.
4.0 CONCLUSION Negotiation is a homemade resolution method that abhors third party intervention.
Its nature, process and advantages usually engender acceptability among parties to conflict and this enhances a very lasting negotiation outcome once the disputants are sincere in their commitment to its tenets.
5.0 SUMMARY In this unit, we have had a panorama of the meaning, nature, stages, processes and the merits of negotiation as one of the alternative and in- house methods of conflict or dispute settlement among parties having differences or disputes.
6.0 TUTOR-MARKED ASSIGNMENT Give a concise explanation on the strategies and merits of negotiation in the enterprise of conflict resolution.
7.0 REFERENCES/FURTHER READINGS Shedrack, Gaya Best (2004).
“The Method of Conflict Resolution and Transformation”: Introduction to Peace and Conflict Studies in West Africa.
Ibadan: Spectrum Books Limited.
50MPA 779 CONFLICT RESOLUTION STRATEGIES UNIT 4 MEDIATION AND CONCILIATION METHODS OF CONFLICT RESOLUTION CONTENTS 20.0 Introduction 21.0 Objectives 22.0 Main Content 22.1The Concept of Mediation 22.1.1 Forms of Mediation 22.1.2 The Stages of Mediation 22.1.3 The Merits of Mediation 22.1.4 The Demerits of Mediation 22.2Definition and Nature of Conciliation Method 22.2.1 The Benefits of Conciliation Method 22.2.2 The Critique of Conciliation 23.0 Conclusion 24.0 Summary 25.0 Tutor-Marked Assignment 26.0 References/Further Readings 1.0 INTRODUCTION We have somewhere in this course mentioned that there are two main systems of conflict resolution.
These are the voluntary and statutory systems.
The two methods of mediation and conciliation somewhat represent largely the voluntary type of conflict resolution with third party intervention.
They have their advantages and disadvantages though such third parties are voluntarily selected by the disputants.
These methods are simply facilitated by third parties and they are part of the processes of alternative resolution strategies usually non-adversarial.
2.0 OBJECTIVES At the end of the unit, you should be able to: • describe the concepts of mediation and conciliation • recognise their processes • assess the merits and demerits of mediation and conciliation as methods of conflict resolution.
51MPA 779 CONFLICT RESOLUTION STRATEGIES 3.0 MAIN CONTENT 3.1 The Concept of Mediation It is a process whereby enabling environment is created by the mediator for parties in conflict to carry out dialogue sessions leading to the resolution of a pending conflict.
It is a mechanism that engenders the mediator to work on communication between parties by drawing their attention to neglected points.
Mediation is a means in which the mediator becomes a confidant to the parties as well as a reconciler.
Mediation is a voluntary and informal process in which the parties in conflict select an impartial and neutral third party to assist them in dealing with their dispute and, where possible, to reach an agreement.
3.1.1 Forms of Mediation There are three distinct forms of mediation, namely: - Rights-based mediation which is based on the rights that the disputants would have in court and the likely resultant effect of a trial in court; - Interest/needs-based – this approach would look up to the needs of the parties; and - Therapeutic mediation which focuses more on problem-solving skills of the parties involved.
3.1.2 Stages of Mediation Following are the stages of mediation: - Begin the discussion – parties are guided in deciding who should participate; - Accumulation of information or facts – parties are listened to and urged to listen to each other; - Developing the agenda and discussion strategies – helping the parties to build a constructive agenda i.e.
matters that require negotiation; - Generation of movement – strategies are used to find a compromise between two extreme positions taken by the disputants so as to overcome impasse – shifting grounds by the conflicting parties; - Escaping to separate discussion sessions – conducting with the parties, often described as caucus so as to generate movement (facilitating shifting of grounds/positions); 52MPA 779 CONFLICT RESOLUTION STRATEGIES - Resolution of the conflict – helping parties after all, to capture and memorialize their commitments to each other concerning where they have been able to resolve.
3.1.3 The Merits of Mediation The benefits of mediation include: party control over the outcome of disputes; ability to devise creative agreement; solutions that focus on the future, not on provision of a misdeed of the past; party choice of mediators; convenience in scheduling one location and avoidance of the expenses on trial through court system.
3.1.4 The Demerits of Mediation Mediation is very good if only it is properly handled, otherwise it can lead to escalation of conflict.
External people become involved in the conflict and may take sides.
The following possible ways in which mediation can lead to escalation of conflicts constitute its demerits: - one or both parties feel threatened by others; - there is no interest in maintaining the relationship, or there is a history of unproductive negative conflict between the parties; - there is increase in the acting out (indirect expression) of anger, fear of frustration; - important needs involved are not acknowledged and met; - there is a lack of skills necessary for peace making or lack of awareness of the skill the parties do possess.
3.2 Definition and Nature of Conciliation Method of Conflict Resolution Conciliation is an attempt through which parties in conflict are helped to reach their own agreement by the third party.
It is non-adversarial in nature but aimed at bringing the parties in conflicts together so as to resolve their conflicts.
The main object of conciliation is to achieve an amicable conflict or dispute resolution with the assistance of a neutral conciliator who is respected by both parties.
Such conciliator usually assists them to reach compromise decision by proposing solutions to them for consideration among themselves as he does not decide for the parties.
In Nigeria, like other countries of the world, conciliation has statutory backing by an Act of Parliament.
Conciliation, as a conflict management tool, is either done by the disputants themselves without any external force or done with an external force.
The process usually starts from the party that appreciates that he has wronged the other and he decides to make positive gestures 53MPA 779 CONFLICT RESOLUTION STRATEGIES to this other party to come together for peaceful settlement.
Under this idea, disputants usually become very frank and sincere to each other for optimum results; otherwise the conflict remains perpetually unresolved.
3.2.1 The Benefits of Conciliation Method It is an improvement in alternative dispute resolution.
One of conciliation benefits is that it helps the parties to retain ownership of the resolution of the problem, which can in turn facilitate greater commitment to its implementation.
It is a method that is frequently used among the third party involvement in conflict resolution.
The future relationship is taken into consideration by the parties in their discussion and bargaining.
3.2.2 The Critique of Conciliation One main criticism of conciliation process hinges on the likely fallouts from the externalization of conflicts between parties.
These fallouts have a lot of disadvantages.
The conciliator’s role or activities are merely advisory hence the decisions arising from the resolution may or may not be binding.
SELF ASSESSMENT EXERCISE Carefully express your conception of the term mediation and explain its nature.
4.0 CONCLUSION Mediation and conciliation are indeed very potent methods of conflict resolution if properly managed by experienced and fair-minded third party.
They are appropriate where there is an existing relationship between the parties.
For example, it can be used in employment situations and divorce matters.
But they become inappropriate where the courts have exclusive jurisdiction over the matters in conflict.
5.0 SUMMARY Our journey so far in this unit has taken us round the main topics of mediation and conciliation and subtopics under them.
These are their definitions, nature, stages, forms, merits, criticisms and demerits.
54MPA 779 CONFLICT RESOLUTION STRATEGIES 6.0 TUTOR-MARKED ASSIGNMENT Why would mediation and conciliation be preferred to adjudication in conflict resolution mechanism?
Briefly itemise the forms and stages of mediation.
7.0 REFERENCES/FURTHER READINGS Armstrong, M. (2006).
A Handbook of Human Resource Management Practice.
London: Kogan Page.
Amuseghan, S.A. (2007).
Peace and Conflict Studies: An Introductory Text.
Akure: Stebak Books and Publishers.
55MPA 779 CONFLICT RESOLUTION STRATEGIES UNIT 5 ARBITRATION METHOD OF CONFLICT RESOLUTION CONTENTS 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objectives 3.0 Main Content 3.1Conceptualisation of the Term Arbitration and its Nature 3.2Forms and Stages of Arbitration 3.3Merits and Demerits of Arbitration 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutor-Marked Assignment 7.0 References/Further Readings 1.0 INTRODUCTION If the conciliation and mediation methods fail to achieve the desired solution to a dispute, arbitration mechanism becomes a ready avenue for conflict / dispute settlement among disputants.
It marks the beginning of judicial process for settling differences at the end of which award is made by the arbitrator or panel of arbitrators.
Arbitration as a system or method of conflict resolution has forms, stages, procedures and practice covering a wide range of socio-cultural, political, economic and ethnic issues of groups, national and international status.
2.0 OBJECTIVES At the end of this unit, you should be able to: • define the term arbitration • explain the nature or properties of arbitration as a mechanism for conflict resolution • recognise the forms and stages of arbitration • explain the trends and structure of arbitration practice with its merits and demerits.
56MPA 779 CONFLICT RESOLUTION STRATEGIES 3.0 MAIN CONTENT 3.1 Conceptualising the Term “Arbitration” and its Nature Arbitration could be defined as the official process of settling differences or disagreement among and/or between persons or groups by a person or a body of persons, that is not involved in the disagreement based on the agreement by the conflicting parties to go to arbitration or engage an arbitrator.
It is an administrative mechanism put in place by government to resolve and manage conflict situation before proffering solutions in pursuance of peace among citizens.
World and regional bodies also employ arbitration as a strategy to seek, obtain and maintain peace among the regions and individual communities of the world on varieties of issues such as social, political, economic, boundary disputes and ethnic and religious conflicts up to violent wars.
Arbitration is the use of assistance of a neutral third party in conflict, who hears the evidence from both parties and thereafter renders a decision, usually called award, which is expected to be binding on the parties.
It is similar to adjudication.
The major difference is that unlike litigation, arbitration is done outside the courts.
It is simply a third party intervention in conflict resolution.
The rule of law ensures that proper legal procedures are followed in the arbitration of cases.
It is a situation where an experienced and respected person of honour is chosen as an arbitrator or to serve in an arbitration panel and who, after hearing from both parties in conflicts, decides who wins or loses.
3.2 Forms and Stages of Arbitration Arbitration can be in two different forms namely: (l) Binding and (m) Non-binding forms Binding arbitration presupposes that arbitrator’s decision are normally binding and final and no appeal on such decision is allowed except there is proof of misbehaviour against the arbitrator or member(s) of the arbitration panel.
Such as failure to reveal a conflict of interest or refusal to hear one side of a case in a conflict.
The non-binding arbitration, a mandatory process (often called court- annexed arbitration) must be resorted to in some jurisdiction than to going to court.
Each party has the opportunity to present proofs and argument at arbitration; which is less formal procedurally, than court adjudication.
57MPA 779 CONFLICT RESOLUTION STRATEGIES There is a form of domestic arbitration and that of international arbitration.
In Nigeria, there is the development of customary arbitration based on the voluntary submission of the parties to the decision of the arbitrators.
These arbitrators may be chiefs, elders or heads of their families or communities.
Also, there is oath-taking under customary arbitration as earlier mentioned in this course.
The forms depend on situations and cultural differences.
Individual(s), groups, civil societies and business organisations and all segments of government, international bodies make use of arbitration as a system of settling disputes.
3.3Merit and Demerits of Arbitration in Conflict Management It allows the parties to agree in advance to the acceptance of the arbitrator’s decision as a means of finally resolving the matter before it, but there is sometimes reluctance to the use of this method because it removes control over the final outcome from the parties in conflict.
This is the case of a workplace dispute in which control of decision is removed from the employers, employees or the trade unions.
Most often, particularly in Nigeria, arbitration decisions are ignored even by a government party to the dispute under one flimsy excuse or the other.
Its non-binding form underscores its demerits.
4.0 CONCLUSION The inability of parties to settle their differences in-house on their own but still wanting to escape court and litigation costs usually lead to the choice of the alternative method of arbitration as a preferred option.
The needs for the method is further enhanced by its merits and its wide embrace by individuals, groups, domestic, national and international governments up to the world organisations as well as work organisations.
It is a method that has historical trends and it fits into several cultures of the world.
5.0 SUMMARY This unit has taken us through the definition of arbitration and its nature, forms and stages, procedures, merits and demerits.
We have also seen that it has wide coverage in terms of acceptance by different groups in the society cutting across national boundaries while the world bodies equally make use of it for conflict resolution among nations.
58MPA 779 CONFLICT RESOLUTION STRATEGIES 6.0 TUTOR-MARKED ASSIGNMENT What do you understand by forms of arbitration and which of the forms would you like to introduce to your client?
7.0 REFERENCES/FURTHER READINGS Armstrong, M. (2006).
A Handbook of Human Resource Management Practice.
London: Kogan Page.
Amuseghan, S.A. (2007).
Peace and Conflict Studies: An Introductory Text.
Akure: Stebak Books and Publishers.
59
