 NATIONAL OPEN UNIVERSITY OF NIGERIA SCHOOL OF MANAGEMENT SCIENCE COURSE TITLE: PUBLIC POLICY MAKING AND ANALYSIS COURSE CODE: PAD 405 1 COURSE GUIDE COURSE CODE: PAD 405.
COURSE TITLE: PUBLIC POLICY MAKING AND ANALYSIS .
COURSE WRITERS: MARTHA ORUKU ABDULAHI MOHAMMED YAMMAH.
PROGRAMME CO-ORDINATOR: BABATUNDE OSABIYA.
PROGRAMME LEADER: DR.
I. IDRISU.
2  TABLE OF CONTENTS 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Course contents 3.0 Course Aims 4.0 Objectives 5.0 Course Materials 6.0 Study Units 7.0 The Modules 8.0 Assignment 9.0 Assessment 10.0 Tutor Marked Assignment 10.1 Final Written Examination 11.0 Summary 1.0 INTRODUCTION Policy Analysis and Implementation is a 3-credit unit course consisting of 15 units.
It is one-semester course for students offering undergraduate studies in Public Administration.
Each unit is to be covered in 2 hours and it is a core course.
2.0 COURSE CONTENTS The course has 5 module and 21 units.
Characteristics, (3 units) Methods and Approaches in Policy Analysis (3 units) Theories of Policy Making, (4 units), Modules of Policy Making (3 units), and Tools and Techniques in Policy Analysis with 3 units including a case study of National Industrial Policy.
The citing of the case study is to enhance your understating of the gap between policy making and policy implementation in Nigeria.
3.0 COURSE AIM The aim of this curse is to enrich your knowledge on the concept of policy, its features and implementation process.
Therefore, you are introduced to: 3 - Concepts of Public Policy and Policy Analysis - Different methods and approaches in Policy Analysis.
- System elite Institutional and Group Theories - Models in policy-making techniques and tools of in policy analysis.
4.0 COURSE OBJECTIVES The main objectives of this course are given in each unit.
However, you will achieve the following objectives after successful completion of this course.
1.
Know what is Public Policy and Policy Analysis.
2.
Understand models, theories approaches tools and techniques of Public Policy 3.
Appreciate problems encountered in Policy Implementation and evaluation process.
5.0 COURSE MATERIALS The basic parts of this course are: 1.
Course Guide 2.
Study Units 3.
Further Reading 4.
Activity and Tutor Marked Assignment (TMAs) These components are contained in each units minus the text books which are recommended fro you to get.
You may also do further research in libraries and internet to update your knowledge.
4 6.0 STUDY UNITS There are fifteen (15) units in this course.
They are as follows.
Units 1 The concept and field of Public Policy.
Unit 2 The uses and types of Public Policies .
Unit 3 The Prescriptive, Descriptive, Micro and Macro Approaches.
Unit 4 The Dependent and Independent Variables .
Unit 5 The Qualitative and Quantitative Approaches.
Unit 6 System and Elite Theories.
Unit 7 Institutional and Group Theories.
Unit 8 The Rational-Comprehensive, satisfying and Mixed scanning Models.
.
Unit 9 The Policy Process .
Unit 10 Actors in Policy Analysis .
Unit 11 System Analysis Cost-Benefit Analysis and Cost Effectiveness .
Unit 12 Management by Objectives (MBO) and Planning- Programme Budgeting System (PPBS).
Unit 13 Game Theory and Zero Base Budgeting.
Unit 14 Critical path method (CPM), Programme Evaluation .
And Review (PERT) And The Delphi Method.
Unit 15 A Case Study Of National Industrial Policy.
5 Unit 16 Public Policy Analysis and Implementation.
Unit 17 Decision Making In Government.
Unit 18-----Communication in Government.
7.0 THE MODULES The units are in the following Modules Modules 1 - Unit 1-3 Modules 2 - Unit 4 –6 Modules 3 - Unit 7 –9 Modules 4 - Units 10 –12 Modules 5 - Units 13 – 15 Modules 6- Units 16-18.
Each module comprises of relevant topics.
Module one conceptualizes policy and its characteristics.
Module two analyses methods and approaches in policy analysis, while module three discusses theories of policymaking and module five explains the tools and techniques in policy analysis.
You should read the units comprehensively because Public Policy Analysis is an interesting course.
You can also update your knowledge by consulting reference materials quoted in this lecture material.
Supplementary reading is recommended for more knowledge.
The core of the units is at 3.0 levels while conclusion, which is 4.0 helps, you to round up what you have read so far.
The “summary” (5.0) gives the summary of the major matters discussed in each unit.
This is to enable you remember to key issues and simplify the discussion at the end.
You will come across “Activity” at the end of some issues discussed at the 3.0 level in each unit.
These “Activities” are meant to provide simple questions to enable you comprehend and refresh your memory of the things discussed before the 6 Activity.
Answers are directly provided in most cases.
However, do not consult the answers until you have attempted the questions.
The answers may give you more insight than you might have attempted.
8.0 ASSIGNMENTS There is a Tutor-Marked Assignment (TMA) which you are expected to do at the end of each unit and give to your facilitator.
9.0ASSESSMENT Your assessments for this course are made up of two components - Tutor-Marked Assignment - Final Examination You should note that the practice exercises, (or activity) are not part of your formal assessments but it is important to complete all of them.
Doing the practice of the subject matter or topic and your tutor-marked assignments.
9.1 TUTOR-MARKED ASSIGNMENT You can write the assignment by using materials from your study units and from textbooks or other sources.
However, it is preferable that as graduate students, you should demonstrate evidence of wide reading especially from texts and other sources, something to show that you have research more widely.
You must remember that copying from any source without acknowledge is plagiarism and is not acceptable.
References must be properly written if you use other people’s work.
7 The assignments are, in most cases, easy questions and multiple choice in format.
Examples from your own experience or environment are relevant when you answer such questions.
This allows you to apply theory to real life situations.
9.2 SUMMARY Policy Analysis and Implementation discuss theories, methods, models and approaches in Public Policy Analysis.
A case study of National Industrial Policy is cited to further explain policy implementation process in Nigeria 8  PAD 405.
PUBLIC POLICY MAKING AND ANALYSIS COURSE DEVELOPERS :MARTHA ORUKU ABDULLAHI, MOHAMMED YAMMA.
PROGRAMME CO-ORDINATOR:TUNDE OSABIYA.
PROGRAMME LEADER:DR IDRISSU.
FOR NATIONAL OPEN UNIVERSITY OF NIGERIA 9  TABLE OF CONTENT MODULE 1 POLICY CONCEPTION AND CHARACTERISTICS Units 1 The concept and field of Public Policy Analysis Unit 2 The uses and types of Public Policies Unit 3 The Prescriptive, Descriptive, Micro and Macro Approaches MODULE 2 METHODS AND APPROACHES IN POLICY ANALYSIS Unit 4 The Dependent and Independent Variables Unit 5 The Qualitative and Quantitative Approaches Unit 6 System and Elite Theories MODULE 3 THEORIES OF POLICY MAKING Unit 7 Institutional and Group Theories Unit 8 The Rational-Comprehensive, satisfying and Mixed scanning Models Unit 9 The Policy Process MODULE 4 MODLES OF POLICY PROCESS Unit 10 Actors in Policy Analysis Unit 11 System Analysis Cost-Benefit Analysis and Cost Effectiveness MODULE 5 Unit 12 Management by Objectives (MBO) and Planning- Programme Budgeting System (PPBS) Unit 13 Game Theory and Zero Base Budgeting Unit 14 Critical path method (CPM), Programme Evaluation and Review (PERT) and the Delphi Method Unit 15 A case study of National Industrial Policy.
10  UNIT 1 The Concept and Field of Public Policy Analysis Table of contents 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objectives 1.0 Main Content 1.1 Definition of Public Policy 1.2 The features of Public Policy 3.3 The meaning of Policy Analysis 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutor Marked Assignment 7.0 References and List for further readings 1.0 INTRODCUTION According to Olaniyi (1998:13) Public Policy Analysis is a field of study that has its meaning enriched by two separate terminologies – namely: “Public Policy” and Analysis.
Thus, any attempt at understanding the field must first explain the two concepts separately before their integration.
2.0 OBJECTIVES At the end of this unit, you should be able to: 1.
To know the definition of Public Policy 2.
To understand the features of Public Policy 3.
The meaning of Policy Analysis 11 3.1 DEFINITION OF PUBLIC POLICY A policy can refer to a proposal, of a programmed, major decision or the refusal to make certain decision.
(Sharkanskv:1978:7) In other words, policy is simply actions taken or to be taken by government or private organisation.
(Ikelegbe:1996:1) A policy option made by an individual is known as “private policy” because it effects the person alone and no any other person.
(olaniyi : 1998 :13) However, “Public Policy”.
Emanates from the ‘public sector’ including both the institutions of central and local government and state created agencies such as water or health authorities, commission and corporations- it may be implemented through and directed at a wide variety of individuals and organisations which may or may not be part of the state apparatus and which may be to a greater or lesser degree independent of state influence or control.
(Barrett and Fudge: 1981.V) Chandlier and Plano (1988:107) defined Public Policy “as the strategic use of resources to alleviate national problems or government concerns”.
Similarly, Dimock, et al (1983:40) described Public Policy as deciding at anytime or place what objectives and substantive measures should be chosen in order to deal with a particular problem issue or innovation.
It also includes the reasons they should be chosen.
ACTIVITY 1 Define Public Policy ANSWER Public policy can be defined as actions taken or to be taken and actions not taken or not to be taken by government.
12 3.2 THE FEATURES OF PUBLIC POLICY The main features of a policy is that, first, it involves a choice.
It is an important choice or a critical or important decision taken by individuals, groups or organisations.
Therefore, there has to be several policy alternatives and policy formation involves the development of several policy alternatives and the choice of an alternative.
Second, polices are proposed courses of actions or projected set of decisions.
Policies are prospective or are statements of future actions.
Policies states what is going to be done or would be done.
It outlines a course of contemplated or desired action in relation to certain desired objects or events in the real world.
Third, a policy is goal oriented.
It is directed at the attainment of certain end states or objectives.
A policy has certain purposes or intention.
Fourth, policies have to do with particular problems or problems areas.
They are not abstracts, but rather relate to and are actually responses to the challenges and pressures arising from an environment.
Furthermore, policies are designed and targeted at dissolving existing or future problems or satisfying certain needs.
Finally, a policy is a course setting action.
It provides the direction, the guide and the way to the achievement of certain goals.
It provides the frame within, which present and future actions are undertaken.
It is a major guideline for action.
(Ikelegbe:1996:2-3).
3.3 THE MEANING OF POLICY ANALYSIS Policy analysis is defined as “a set of techniques that seeks to answer the question of what the probable effect of a policy will be before they actually occur” (Shafritz 1986:409).
This refers to a “before the fact” analysis of Public Policies.
However, the term is also used by many to refer to both before and after the fact analyses of Public Policies.
But a Policy Analysis undertaken on a 13 programme that is already in effect is more properly called a “programme evaluation”.
(Shafritz 1986:410).
All Policy analysis involves the application of systematic research techniques most of which are borrowed in other disciplines.
Similarly, Chanlder and Plano explained Policy Analysis as: An attempt to measure organizational effectiveness through an examination and evaluation of the qualitative impact of an agency program.
Policy analysis is a systematic and data based alternative to intuitive judgments about the effects of policy or policy options.
It is used (1) for problems assessment and monitoring, (2) as a “before the fact” decision tool, and (3) for evaluation.
(Olaniyi: 1998:17) Furthermore, Roberts and Edwards (1991:98) argued that Policy Analysis is the study of the formation, implementation and evaluation and evaluation of public policy, the values of policy makers and environment of the policymaking system and the cost of policy alternatives Finally, policy analysis may be used, in a secondary usage, as a term to describe the detail examination of a particular policymaking system at any and/or all the stages of policymaking process.
ACTIVITY 2 What is policy analysis?
ANSWER Policy Analysis is a set of techniques that seeks to answer the question of what the probable effect of a policy will be before they actually occur.
4.0 CONCLUSION The study of Public Policy Analysis is necessary to all public and private citizens for better understanding of government decision and programmes.
Better knowledge of public policies helps in reducing.
14  5.0 SUMMARY The unit discussed the conceptualization of Public Policy and its characteristics.
In addition, the meaning of policy analysis was also analysed to enhance your understanding of Public Policy Analysis.
6.0 TUTOR MARKED ASSIGNMENT (TMA) Public Policies are more than decision-making.
Expantiate Answer Public Policy is the strategic use of resources to alleviate national problems or governmental concerns.
It simply refers to government position on actions to be taken.
While decision making may be restricted to a particular issue, public polices encompasses wide perspectives.
7.0 REFERENCES Barrett, S and Fudge C. (eds).
Policy and Action Essays on the Implementation of Public Policy.
London and New York: Methuen.
Chandler, R.C.
and Plano, J.C. (1988).
The Public Administration Dictionary.
England: ABC-CL 10.
Dimock, M.E.
et al (1983).
Public Administration New York: Saunders College Publishing.
Roberts, G. and Edwards, A.
(1991).
A Dictionary of Political Analysis.
London: Edward Arnold.
Shafritz, J.M.
(1986).
The Dictionary of American Government and Politics.
New York Sharkanskv, I.
(1978).
Public Adminsitration Policymaking in Government Agencies.
Chicago: Rand McNally College Publishing Company.
Olaniyi, J.O.
(1998).
Foundations of Public Policy Analysis.Ibadan.
SUNAD Publishers Limited.
15 Ikelegbe, A.O.
(1996).
Public Policy Making and Analysis.
Benin City: URI Publishing Ltd. 16  UNIT 2 The Uses and Types of Public Polices Table of contents 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objectives 3.0 Main Text 3.1 Uses of Public Polices 3.2 Types of Public Policies Distributive Polices Regular Polices Redistributive Polices Fundamental Polices Major Polices Functional Polices Mega Polices Meta Polices 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutor-Marked Assignment 5.0 References and a list for further readings.
1.0 INTRODUCTION Public Policy Analysis can be said to drive its importance and relevance in its contribution to the determination, study and assessment of public problems, policy making, policy performance, impact evaluation, policy prediction and advocacy, policy forecast, prediction and anticipation.
(Ikelegbe:1996:8) Public policies have classified on the basis of several criteria.
This unit discusses uses and types of public policies.
17 2.0 OBJECTIVES At the end of this unit, you should be able to: 1.
Understand uses of public policies 2.
Identify types of public policies 3.
Know distributive and Regulation policies 4.
Differentiae between redistribute and fundamental policies 5.
Explain major, functional, mega and meta policies.
3.0 MAIN TEXT 3.1 THE USES OF PUBLIC POLICY ANALYSIS Public policy Analysis is a systematic activity and process, which involves the determination and delineation of pertinent public problems and issues.
The following are uses of Public Policy Analysis.
i.
It involves the ascertaining of public problems; ii.
It is the definition of public problems in precise and perhaps quantifiable terms; iii.
Public Policy Analysis is the study of such problems and issues; iv.
It is in the monitoring of such problems through the provision of statistical and other information on the state of problems; and v. Policy analysis provides a base for determine strategies for the resolution of public problems (Ikelegbe: 1996:8) Therefore, policy analysis is a problem solving discipline, which encompasses methods, techniques and more precisely, a scientific approach to public problem resolution.
(Dye: 1978:3) 18  ACTIVITY 1 Mention 3 uses of Public Policy Analysis ANSWER - Ascertaining public problems - Definition of public problems precisely - Provides a base for determine strategies for resolution of public problems 3.2 TYPES OF PUBLIC POLICIES Thoedore Lowi (1964:677) classified policies into distributive, regulatory and Redistributive on the basis of intent operating processes, issues and clientele.
Similarly, McKinney and Howard, (1979:73) categorizes policies in terms of their hierarchy or levels such as fundamental, major, functional policies furthermore, Dror (1973:18) identified two types of policies.
All these policies are discussed in this unit for your understanding.
3.2.1 Distributive Policies These are types of policies, which involve incremental dispersal, unit to different segments of the population and to individuals and institutions.
They can be the actual favours, benefits or patronage policies that are dispensed to a small number of people.
This dispersal is continual and those not favoured at one point, may be favoured at another time.
However, the nature of distributive polices is that recipients and losers do not come into direct confrontation.
Although potential beneficiaries seek required favours, they do not often oppose or interfere with favours to others.
Examples of distributive policies are those that relate to public land, tariff, orts, etc.
19 3.2.2 Regulatory Policies They are policies, which refer to law or policy outputs that regulate distribution, practices, actions and activities.
These are policies, which relate to directions, rules and frameworks on activities in various areas such as business, commerce, agriculture, transportation, etc.
Their impact is either increases in costs or restrictions or expansion of activities and alternatives to private individuals organisations.
Examples are NAFDAC and Standard Organisations.
3.2.3 Redistributive Polices These are policies, which relate to relations between or among classes or categories of the population.
They benefit particular segments or category of the population, such as the unemployed, homeless, the poor, the retired, etc.
Their target and impact normally large scale or broad.
They are largely discriminatory to the disadvantages ir advantages, working or retired, etc.
They relate particularly to transfer of resources among large groups or classes (Anderson, 1975:58).
Examples of distributive policies are social welfare programmes and some educational and tax policies.
3.2.4 Fundamental Policies These are policies derived from the constitution; hence they are based on constitutional provisions or judicial interpretations of the constitution.
Such policies can only be changed or abolished by constitutional amendment and are characterized by large size, high importance and long tenure.
20 ACTIVITY 2 What is a Redistributive Policy?
ANSWER Redistributive policy is a policy that relates to relations between or among classes or categories of the population such as the unemployed, homeless, the poor, the retired, etc.
3.2.5 Major Polices Major policy is based on legislature enactment made by the highest legislative bodies at varying levels of government.
They are either in the form of laws or programmes.
Major policies are therefore important and backed by the highest legislative bodies.
They could be regarded as general policies, stating broad outlines and frameworks.
3.2.6 Functional Polices They emanate largely from the executive branch but could also emanate from decision and resolution set by legislatures and the courts.
They are actually minor policies that relate to regulations and guidelines.
They could also be administrative decision that are made in the process of implementing or administering public policy programmes overtime and indifferent situation and circumstances.
They are therefore functional and operational policies.
3.2.7 Mega Policy It is a policy that constitutes a framework for other, which usually are minor or secondary policies.
Mega policy is a master policy within which and by, which some other policies within a specific 21 policy issue or area are made.
It provides the guide, the direction and the major assumptions and goals for other policies.
Mega policies dictate the pace of more specific policies in relation to scope, time, levels of change and orientation.
3.2.8 Meta Policy It is a policy that relates to policy making.
Its attention and goal is on how to make other policies and particularly how to make better policies.
Meta policy is concerned with the mode of policy and the system within, which public policy is made.
It relates to policies on the process, guides, techniques, methods, requirements and characteristics of policy-making system.
It is concerned with the design and redesign of policy-making systems in terms of structure, procedures, patterns, outputs level, models, methods, components, personnel and requirement.
The goal of Meta Policies is to influence positively or improve policymaking systems and thus policy making.
(Ikelegbe: 1996;18-19) 4.0 CONCLUSION The analyses of uses and types of Public Policies in this unit have educated you more on public policy analysis.
The effort was geared to make you a good public policy analyst.
5.0 SUMMARY In this unit, you were given the uses and types of public, monitoring problems, among others.
Furthermore, the types of public policies discussed in this unit are distributive, regulatory, redistributive, fundamental, major, functional, mega and meta policies.
It is hoped that you have understood them but try to revise regularly.
22 6.0 TUTOR-MARKED ASSIGNMENT (TMA) Differentiate between Mega and Meta Policies.
ANSWERS Mega policy is a policy that constitutes a framework for others usually minor or secondary policies.
It is a master policy within which and by, which some other policies within a specific policy or area are made.
Meta policy relates to policy making.
Its attention and goal is on how to make other policies and particularly, how to make better policies.
It is concerned with the mode of policy and the system within which public policy is made.
7.0 REFERENCES AND LIST FOR FURTHER READING Aderson, E.J.
(1975).
Public Making New York: Praeger Publishers Dror, Y.
(1973).
Public Policy Making Re-examined.
London: Leonard Hill Book.
Dye, T.(1978).
Understanding Public Policy.
Englewood Cliff: N.J. Prentice Hall Inc. Ikelegbe, A.O.
(1996).
Public Policy Making and Analysis.
Benin City URI Publishing Ltd. McKinney, B and Howard,L.C.
(1979).
Public Administration, Balancing Power and Accountability.
U.S. Oak Park: Illinois Moore Publishing Company Inc. Theodore, L. (1964).
“American Business public Policy, Case studies and Political Theory” World Politics.
Vol XVI.
No.4 23 UNIT 3 THE PERSPECTIVE, DESCRIPTIVE, MICRO AND MACRO APPROACHES IN POLICY ANALYSIS 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objectives 3.0 Main Text 3.1 The prescriptive Approach 3.2 The Descriptive Approach 3.3 Micro Approach 3.4 Macro Approach 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutor-Marked Assignment (TMA) 7.0 References and a list for further readings.
1.0 INTRODUCTION Several approached are used in the study of Public Policy Analysis.
In this unit, you are given prescriptive, Descriptive, micro and approached to begin with.
This will enable you understand their definitions, meanings and characteristics.
2.0 OBJECTIVES For you to know the following approaches: a.
The Perspective Approach b.
The Descriptive Approach c. The Micro Approach and d. The Macro Approach.
3.0 MAIN TEXT 3.1 THE PRESCRIPTIVE APPROACH The prescriptive approach basically is the generation of information and analysis directed at better policy making and performance.
It proffer policy options or alternatives, solution and strategies based on analysed data which could emanate from the social and policy problems, social indicators, evaluation of existing or past programmes and projects.
24 There are four characteristics of prescriptive approach and are as follows: i.)
It is analytical.
It emphasizes the generation of data analysed with social science techniques and methodologies, models and concepts, especially quantitative techniques ii.)
Prescriptive approach is goal and problem oriented.
It directed at specific problems and the goal is to proffer solutions and advice.
iii.)
It is tended to be more client oriented.
Such actors have suggested prescriptive approach address issues relevant to policy actors or that.
The emphasis is on the practice and relevance of public policy analysis to real life and societal needs.
3.2 THE DESCRIPTIVE APPROACH Descriptive studies describe and explain public policies.
Its focus of research is on history, development, causes, implementation, consequences and problems of public polices.
Descriptive studies also focus on the description of the national and state policy process and individual policy or policy sector processes.
The Descriptive Approach characteristics are: i.)
It is more of academic studies whose intentions and goals are not informed by the needs of prompts of clients or policy actors; ii.)
Descriptive approach seeks the understanding of policy processes, policy problems and situations.
It particularly seeks to explain the causes of public policy, the nature and trends of expenditure in policy sectors or areas, and the problems of public policies, among others.
25 iii.)
It is more concerned with the investigations of policy contents implementation, output and impact of particular policies.
iv.)
Descriptive approach is evaluatory and therefore retrospective and relates the studies of on-going or completed programmes.
ACTIVITY 1 What is prescriptive approach in the study of public policy analysis?
ANSWER Descriptive approach is essentially the generation of information and analysis directed at better policy making and performance.
3.3 MICRO APPROACH The micro approach relates to the scope of research studies undertaken and focuses on the study of specific public policies and policy problems.
Its aims are a thorough investigation of a particular policy’s process of formulation, enactment, implementation, output, performance, impact and problems.
The approach generally involves intensive studies of the policy involving examination of reposts, documents and other sources of information on the development, implementation and impact of the policy.
It also involves historical narratives, accounts and chorological presentations of information on the policy.
It reports or describes the policies as they were or are and involve limited explanations of causes and problems.
Micro approach enhances understanding of the workings of the policy and political process and particularly enlightens us on how the various institutions of government, interest groups and influential elites interact and contribute to policy development and implementation.
It broadens our outlook to the input and effects of various persons groups and institutions in the policy process.
26 While some researches may study a specific policy as a whole, seeking to understand and describe it other focus on aspects of the policy such as the policy formulation, implementation and impact.
ACTIVITY 2 Describe micro approach ANSWER The Micro Approach focuses on the study of specific public polices and policy problems.
Its objectives are a thorough investigation of a particular policy’s process of formulation, enactment, implementation, output, and performance impact problems.
3.4 THE MACRO APPROACH Macro approach is broad and place more emphasis on the development of knowledge, understanding and generalizations on the nature of public policies.
It focuses on general aspects of public policy analysis such as types of policies, policy process models and policy areas.
Macro approach comprises wide range studies and analyses of policy issues.
The aim is to provide broad structures of analyses or basic organisation of policy studies and guides for analyses of more specific policy areas.
Such studies also provide broad concepts, tool, models, generalizations and knowledge for understanding and analysis.
There are four broad categories in macro approach studies.
First, it focuses on the nature of policies themselves.
Second, it also focuses on thorough investigation of the policymaking process and implementation.
Third, it develops models, theories and concepts to explain or interpret policy issues.
Fourth, it focuses on public policy areas rather than on specific policies.
The macro approach contributes immensely to enriching our understanding of policy activities and providing a better framework for the systematic study of public policy.
(Ikelegbe: 1996:26) 27 4.0 CONCLUSION Approaches in the study of public policies are important to enable you understand the public policy analysis better.
More of them are discussed in units 4 and 5.
5.0 SUMMARY In this unit, we discussed prescriptive, descriptive, micro and macro approaches in the study of public policy analysis.
It is recommended that you revise them often for better understanding.
6.0 TUTOR MARKED ASSIGNEMENT (TMA) Differentiate between Micro and Macro Approaches.
ANSWER While micro approaches focuses on the study of specific public policies and policy problems, the macro approach focuses on general aspect of public policy analysis such as types of policies, policy process models and policy areas.
Both are geared towards improving the ways and means of improving public policies.
7.0 REFERENCES AND A LIST OF FURTHER READINGS Ikelegbe, A.O.
(1996).
Public Policy Making and Analysis.
Benin City URI Publishing Ltd. Robert, G. (1975).
“Public Administration And Public Policy: An Analysis of developmental Phases” in Spadaro, T. and Dye, T et al “The Policy Vacuum.
Lexington: D.C. Health and Co. 28 PAD405.
UNIT 4 THE PERSPECTIVE, DESCRIPTIVE, MICRO AND MACRO APPROACHES IN POLICY ANALYSIS 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objectives 3.0 Main Text 3.1 The Dependent Variable 3.2 The Independent Variable 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutor-Marked Assignment (TMA) 7.0 References and a list for further readings.
1.0 INTRODUCTION In policy analysis studies tend to adopt either a dependent variable or independent variable approaches.
Both of them are analysed in this unit 2.0 OBJECTIVES a) To improve your knowledge of public policy analysis b) Understand a dependent variable c) Difference between dependent and independent variables.
3.0 MAIN TEXT 3.1 THE DEPENDENT VARIABLE In dependent variable, a policy is regarded as an output of a dominantly linear policy process.
Policy is regarded as the output of demands and support inputs into the political system which then convert or process them into policies.
Therefore, policy is equated as an output dependent on or determined by the process.
Under dependent variable, the content, nature and impact of policies are determined by the nature of the policy 29 process.
The policy analyst’s aim is to explain policy in relation to the policy process.
Hence the study of any given policy becomes that of inquiry into the determination of demands, the interest groups that articulate them, the channels or government structures through which the demands were processed, the input of the legislature, executive and bureaucracy in the policy formation and enactment and the agencies responsible for its implementation among others.
ACTIVITY 1 Describe the Dependent variable Approach in Public Analysis ANSWER The dependent variable regards policy as an output of a dominantly liner policy process and as the output of demands and support inputs into the political system, which converts or process them into polices.
However, the dependent variable diverts attention from thorough study and examination of the policy itself, which includes its peculiarity, nature, content scope, innovations, strategies, loopholes and implementation feasibility.
Furthermore, it diverts attention from the effect of the policy on the structures and processes of government, implementation agencies, groups and the environment.
3.2 THE INDEPENDENT VARIABLE The independent approach attempts to understand explain the policy process and the entire political process through the study of policies.
The nature of the policy made is related to the entire policy and political process such that the interactions and relationships between them and the effects or impacts of policy on the policy and political process area examined.
The nature, goals contents and characteristics are studied.
The focus is directed to the relationship between the policy, the political system and the environment.
The essence is to know the ways in which the policy affects or is affected by the political system and 30 the environment either structurally or in terms of activities.
The knowledge and understanding of the policy and its interactions, becomes and aid in the understanding and explaining of the nature of the policy process, the administrative agencies, the relevant public and wider environment.
The major of areas of study in independent variable is impact analysis while the focus is on the effect of the policy on the real world.
It seeks to investigate the consequences of the policy on the target group, other groups, the political and policy process, the structures of implementation and others both in the immediate sense and in the future.
Independent variable directs attention to the independent study of policy.
In particular, it directs attention to the interaction between the policy and political process and the environment.
Independent variable enables a broad focus and perspective in policy studies.
(Ikelegbe: 1996 26-27).
ACTIVITY 2 What is independent variable in Public Policy Analysis?
ANSWER Independent variable explains the process and the entire political process through the study of policies 4.0 CONCLUSION The study of public policy analysis is wide and has many approaches.
Dependent and independent variable are among the various approaches, which you have just read.
This is to give you further insight into the study of public policy analysis.
5.0 SUMMARY This unit tells you about the dependent and independent variables in the study of Public Policy Analysis.
Basic characteristics of the two variables were discussed.
You are being introduced to the variables systematically to enable you have an easy understanding.
31 6.0 TUTOR-MARKED ASSIGNMENT (TMA) What is the difference between dependent and independent variables in the study of public policy analysis.
Answer The dependent variable regards policy as an output of a dominantly linear policy process as the output of demands and support inputs into the political system, which converts or process them into policies.
While the independent variable explains the process and the entire political process through the study of policies.
7.0 REFERENCES AND A LIST OF FURTHER READINGS Golembiewaki, R. (1975).
“Public Administration And Public Policy: An Analysis of developmental Phases” in Spadaro, T. and Dye, T et al “The Policy Vacuum.
Lexington: D.C. Health and Co. Ikelegbe, A.O.
(1996).
Public Policy Making and Analysis.
Benin City URI Publishing Ltd. 32  UNIT 5 THE QUALITATIVE AND QUATITATIVE APPROACHESSSS TO THE STUDY OF PUBLIC ANALYSIS 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objectives 3.0 Main text 3.1 The qualitative approach 3.2 The Quantitative approach 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Intro – marked assignment 7.0 Reference and a list for further reading 1.0 INTRODUCTION The qualitative and quantitative approaches are used to narrate, described and studies data of policy issues.
Each of them is extensively discussed in this unit.
2.0 OBJECTIVES a.
To enable you know the qualitative approaches in the study of public policy analysis b.
For you to know the qualitative approaches in analyzing data of public policy issues.
3.0 MAIN TEXT 3.1 THE QUALITATIVE APPROACHES The qualitative approaches to policy analysis relies on narrations and description rather than quantitative data analysis.
The focus is on historical, anthropological, philosophical, legal and journalistic description and narrations of policy issues, problems and incidents, they describe the policy process, narrate the implementation and impact of programmes, describe the history of the policy problems and the policy attempts at as dissolution and present the anthropological, moral, legal and historical backgrounds to policy programmes.
33 The qualitative analysis tell on both quantitative data such as documents, records, content analysis of media sources, interviews and observations.
However major goal of qualitative approach is the presentation of finding in lunch, descripture form and the methodology is therefore not rigorously quantitative.
These study have considerable value in polices analysis particularly in accounting for or describing policy relevant incidents, backgrounds and other information.
Furthermore, they enable better understanding of the policy issues, problems and programmes because they present considerable information which assist researchers any policy analysis in explaining policy relevant phenomena, as well as background for policy formation and recommendations.
(Ikelegbe: 1996:28).
ACTIVITY Describe Quanlitative approach in the study of public policy analysis ANSWER The qualitative approach in the study of public policy analysis describes the policy process, narrate the implementation and impact of programmes, among others.
3.2 THE QUANTITATIVE APPROACH The quantitative approach in policy analysis rely on quantitative data and techniques in is source, method, analysis and presentation.
It emphases quantitative techniques as the method of analysis of its data and findings.
The statistical techniques used vary from sample percentages, tests of associations and time series to very rigorous techniques as complex regression.
These statistical techniques help the researcher in inducting relationships and differences between variables and policy related phenomena.
Percentages cross tabulations and histograms constitute some of the very simple techniques.
Test of association and correlations constitute more 34 complex techniques.
Some of these test such, as the time series analysis test and linear regression are very important in policy analysis and evaluations.
The time series analysis is very important in measuring policy differences, impact and other correlates in political/geographical units at various time intervals.
The analysis helps provide periodic evaluations, estimates of change or difference and in comparisms.
The t test is also important in this direction particularly in terms of estimating differences.
Regression analysis is commonly used in policy analysis is commonly used in policy analysis.
Linear regression is particularly useful in evaluation in providing linear extrapolations of pre-policy values thus enhancing comparisons with actual policy values.
These are several techniques and models for determining causality in policy analysis such as recursive path estimation analysis.
ACTIVITY 2 What is quantitative approach in the studies of public policy analysis?
ANSWER The quantitative approach in the studies of public analysis relies on quantitative data and techniques in its source, method, analysis and presentation.
Another popular quantitative technique is the experimental research design.
The design is aimed at determining ex post, the effects of programmes through careful planning and experiments.
It consists of an experimental and control group.
The experimental group, which should be identical to the control group are observed and compared, such that the effects of the policy treatment are determined.
However, because of the difficulties of pure experimental designs, such as infeasibility, rigor, cost and relays, quasi-experimental designs are often use as practical alternatives or as approximate method.
This include the 35 estimation of programme effects through interrupted time series technique and the choice of control group most similar to the experimental group.
The sample surveying research is also commonly used in policy analysis of quantitative technique.
Under it, policy 4.0 CONCLUSION The two approaches relay to the focus scope, direction and method of studying policy research.
They are not mutually exclusive in usage but rather over tapping.
5.0 SUMMARY This unit as discussed the qualitative and quantitative approaches in the studies of public policy analysis.
Their techniques are moderately analysed.
6.0 TUTOR-MARKED ASSIGNMENT Differentiate between qualitative and quantitative approaches in the study of public policy analysis.
ANSWER While the quantitative approach to the study of public policy analysis relies on narrations and descriptions, the quantitative approach relies on data and techniques in its source, method, analysis and presentation.
7.0 REFERENCE AND S LIST FOR FURTHER READINGS Ikelegbe, A.O (1996) Public policymaking and analysis.
Benin city: URI publishing ltd. Osuala, E.C.
(1982).
Introduction to research methodology.
Onitsha.
Africana –Feb.
Publishers Ltd. 36 UNIT 6 SYSTEMS AND ELITE THEORY 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objectives 3.0 Main Content.
3.1 System Theory 3.2 Easton Model Of System Analysis 3.3 Elite Theory 4.0 Conclu8sion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutor Marked Assignment 8.0 References And List For Further Readings 1.0 INTRODUCTION Historical the system theory has its origin rooted in biological sciences.
The control and guiding concept in the general system theory is the concept in the general system theory is the concept of “systems”.
Systems are generally relationship or better still a whole which is composed of many parts.
It emphasizes relationships and not individuals.
Elide theory is also discussed.
2.0 OBJECTIVES a.
To enable you know the three elements that guide the understanding of system theory, namely: i.
Parts ii.
The part must be related to the whole iii.
Each part makes certain contributions towards the survival of the whole.
This third part is called the functions and is the essence of functionalism.
b.
For you to understand that the central guiding principle of the approach is the assumption of equilibrium, that is, the whole will need the cooperation of the part to keep it mobile.
c. To enable you know the elide theory 37 3.0 MAIN TEXT 3.1 THE SYSTEM THEORY The systems theory sees policy as an output of the political system.
The output itself is concerned as the result of various environmental variables acted upon by the political system.
The system’s theory of policy making is based on the Estonian frame work for the analysis of political systems.
The theory conceives of political activities as the essentially involving the environment, the political system and output.
The environment consists of the objective condition and forces that generate demand and support inputs.
Support consist the adherence to law or positive orientations, which promote the political system such as loyalty and patriotism.
Demand are the articulated needs, problems and articulated needs, problems and aspirations which are brought to bear upon the political system.
The political system consists of the institutions, process and personnel of government.
The political systems acts as the processors of inputs into outputs, which are authoritative allocations or outputs are the public policies.
Public policies are therefore the reaction of the political system to environmental elemental demands and pressures.
(Ikelegbe: 1996:3,20 ACTIVITY 1 What is system theory?
ANSWER System theory, generally, are relations or a whole which is composed of many parts.
In public policy analysis, the system policy sees policy as an output of their political system.
Meanwhile the systems theory has the advantage of insight into the totality of the policy process and the interactions between component parts.
The theory places before the policy analyst several relationships and question of interest for investigation such as: what is the relationship between environmental input and public policies?
or how does environmental input and the characteristics 38 of the political system affect the content of public policy?
And so on.
However, the model assumes that policies are environmental input converted by the political system.
It fails to recognize that the characteristics of the political system itself may have considerable independent effect on the content of policies.
For example, policy maker may just be independently creating policies or at best enacting as policies what may be believed to be in the populations interest.
Therefore, sometimes, it is not the environmental input that is converted but policy is the result of the characteristics, interrelations, values, bargaining and consensus within the political system itself.
What is required is to look at the political system itself, not just as a converter of input but as an independent source of policy output.
3.2 EASTON’S MODEL OF SYSTEM ANALYSIS David Easton in (1953) popularized the system theory in political studies.
In relation to human society, any political system is made up of several sub-groups performing different functions and it is a combination of these function that keep the entire system moving (Olaniyi 1995-71) David Easton’s system theory can be explained as a two – way traffic between the governor and the governed.
It is graphically instructed thus: Input Demand gate political Authoritative Supports keeper system decisions The feed back /evaluation Source: Hagene and Harrop (1982:12) 39 The political system takes inputs from society consisting of demands for particular policies and expression of support for the regime and converts into output authoritative policies and decisions.
These out puts then feedback to societies so as to affect the next circle of outputs.
Outputs are what governments actually do or the service will render.
The degree of successes of government policy is tested through feedback.
Therefore, policy option cannot be taken for granted, it must be tested, and measure analysed and improved it.
If its performance is to be improved.
(olaniyi, 1998:59).
Literally, people tend to support government when their needs are met and withdraw supports when the reverse is the case.
The relationship between inputs and outputs is very vital.
Without input, the system cannot work, and without outputs, it cannot identify the work done by a system.
However, it is only the demands which cannot be resolved privately that need authoritative decision or matter for serious political decision.
ACTIVITY 2 What are the inputs and outputs in system theory?
ANSWER Inputs are the demand or support from society while outputs are the authoritative policies and decisions.
Finally, the flow of inputs into the system, is regulated by gatekeepers such as interest groups and parties which collectively bias the system in favour of certain demands and against others.
3.3 ELITE THEORY The elite theory populates that public policy reflects the values and preferences of the elite, rather than demands of the masses.
It is the elite that make policies while administrators and public official carry out the elites policy decisions.
Because the elite have common interest in the preservation of societal status quo, policies are bound to be conservative, non-invocative and marginal, rather than those with bold and high change potentials.
40 Policies might sometimes be in the masses interests, even though the long-term interest may be that of the elites, but this happens as concession to or reactions by the elites to threats of the status quo by the masses.
There is consensus among the elites on the survival and stability of the society and its fundamental values.
The consensus is based on self and vested interests in the protection of their status quo.
The elite maintain the systems stability in several ways.
It co-opts citizens who challenge the system into the elite class so long as they accept the basic elite consensus.
The elite provide a slow, gradual but some access to the elite class so that change and stress could be avoided.
To preserve itself and to avoid change and stress, it concedes to some welfare policies and public demands.
The masses of the population are, on the other hand, unorganized, passive and uninformed.
The masses are atomized, not organize for concerted political action, and caught in their own milieu, have fragmented perception, are politically in competent and inert, lack political initiative, innovation, interest and knowledge concerning political activity and displays a psychological need for guidance ands direction.
The masses have relatively little influence or control over public policy or even over the elites.
Public policy, therefore seldom reflects their interests and preferences.
The elite theory directs our attention to the source of policy flow and whose interests public policies services.
The theory attempts a realistic explanation of the source of policy by predicating it in the elites rather than the masses.
4.0 CONCLUSION The political system may be slow or unable to convert demand into policies.
41 5.0 SUMMARY The system theory is discussed in this unit with characteristics.
The inputs from society are converted into outputs through authoritative policies or decisions and feedback is expected from society.
The system theory is essentially a whole unit parts (sub- systems) each performing its functions for the overall effectiveness of the system.
The elite theory and its features were also discussed.
6.0 TUTOR-MARKED ASSIGNMENT How relevant is system theory to public policy making?
ANSWER System theory is relevant to public policy making because political system is made up of several sub-groups economic, political, cultural, educational and social among others.
These sub-groups perform different functions and it is a combination of these functions that keep the entire system moving.
7.0 REFERENCES AND LIST FOR FURTHER READINGS Easton, D. (1969).
“The flow characteristics of policy making” in Lynden, F.J. etal (eds).
Policy and Decision Organisations New Yoke: Meredith Corporation.
Hague, R. and Harrop, M. (1982) Comparative Government: An introduction.
London and Basing stoke: the Macmillan press.
Ikelegbe, A.O.
(1996).
Public Policy making And Analysis.
Benin- CHY:URI Publishing Ltd. Olaniyi, J.O (1995).
Demarcating Public policy making process in Nigeria in Dan mole, I.I.
etal.
Contemporary issues in Nigerian Affairs.
Ibadan: SUNAD Publisher Limited.
Olaniyi, J.O.
(1998).
Foundation of Public Policy Analysis.
Ibadan SUNDA Publisher Limited 42 UNIT 7 INSTITUTIONAL AND GROUP THEORIES 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objectives 3.0 Main text 3.1 Institutional Approach 3.2 Group Theories 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutor- Marked Assignment (TMA) 7.0 Reference and List Further Reading 1.0 INTRODUCTION Both institution approach and group theory to the study of public policy Analysis are discussed in this unit.
You will know their relevance to Public Policy Analysis after you have read thus unit.
2.0 OBJECTIVES a.
To enable you know institutional approach in the study of Public Policy.
b.
Understand Group Theory 3.0 MAIN TEXT 3.1 THE INSTITUTIONAL APPROACH The relevance of the institutional approach to the study of Public Policy Analysis was popularized by Dye in 1972.
It focuses on the formal institutions of government – legislature, executive and judiciary while less premium is given to organisations such as pressure groups or the mass media or to the wide social context within which government operates.
According to Dye, institutions may be so structured as to facilitate certain policy outcomes.
They may give advantage pf certain interest in the society and withheld advantage from other interests.
Certain individuals and groups may enjoy greater 43 access to government power under one set of structural characteristics than under another.
In the short run, the structure of government constitutions may have important policy consequences.
If one relates Dye’s position to the contemporary experiences in the world, it will reveal that any of the institutions of government can be structured in a way to get predetermined results.
For example, in a military government, the tasks of lawmaking and law-execution are fused.
Similarly, when a Constituent Assembly is dominated by government appointees the end result is to get a constitutional draft that will benefit the ruling body.
ACTIVITY 1 Describe Institutional approach in the study of public policy analysis.
ANSWER Institutional approach focuses on the formal institutions of government such as legislature, executive and judiciary while less attention is given to pressure groups, the mass media or to the wide social context within which government operates.
However, institutional approach was criticized because it was descriptive rather than analytical in nature.
The executive, legislature and judiciary, which are all institutions of government are some of the actors involved in policy making and each of them performs specific tasks in relation to decision making.
(Olaniyi, 1998:59-60) 3.2 THE GROUP THEORY Let us start by defining a group.
A group can be defined a collection of individuals who have some characteristics in common and interact with some frequency on the basis of their shared interest.
(Truman; 1971:23) 44 Harry (1963:391) summarized the group that politics is the process by which social values are authoritatively allocated and this is done by decisions.
The decisions are produced by activities, and each activity is not something separate from every other, but masses of activity have common tendencies, in regard to decision.
These masses of activity are groups, so the struggle between groups or interest determine what decision are made.
Thus, when a group makes claim upon other groups, it is an interest group.
When it makes claims on the government, it becomes a political interest group.
However, all groups are interest groups and may become a political interest group at one time or the other.
Therefore, to the group theorist, the interaction among groups is the central fact of politics and an important element of the governmental process.
The interaction, competition and struggle between the groups results in policies when articulated by the conversion process.
A given policy therefore, at any time is the equilibrium or the compromises reached in the group struggle.
The political system or the institutions of government and policy makers referee the group interaction and enact policies in favour of the most influential group.
Government and its institutions are the centers of interest group power and the object of the ends or means of group objectives and interests.
Interest groups focus their attention on the bargaining, compromises, coalitions and other activities that take place within the institutions of government among various groups and interests.
To ensure their influence, the groups maintain access to the key points of decision making in governmental institutions of government among various groups and interests.
To ensure their influence, the groups maintain access to the key points of decision making in governmental instructions such as the legislative committees, the executive, administration and even the judiciary.
The influence of any groups depends on its leadership, organisation, resources and strategy position.
The group activities generate conflicts and controversies.
However, 45 these are prevented from causing serious instability or systemic breakdown because of the presence of multiple and overlapping group memberships, competing groups, potential interest groups and unorganized interests.
ACTIVITY 2 Define the group theory ANSWER A group theory can be define as a collection of individuals who have some characteristics in common and interact with some frequency on the basis of their shares interests.
In developed countries, groups may have much input in the policy formulation and implementation process.
There is also a growing role of groups in the developing countries.
However, the role and importance of groups differ across countries.
Meanwhile several factors such as the degree of modernization and ideological orientation tend to affect group development.
The therefore more a reflection of policy making in societies which have considerable group development either because of the level of economic development or ideological orientation.
The group theory ignores the role of the individual, the poor and the unorganized masses of societies.
In the final analysis, the group theory enables the policy analyst to attend to and understand the role of groups in the policy process.
(Ikelegbe; 1996:34-35) 4.0 CONCLUSION Instructional approach to the study of politics dominated the study of the comparative politics for many years and focuses on the formal institutions of government while the group theory emphasizes interaction among people with common tendencies to achieve the desired interests.
46 5.0 SUMMARY The unit discussed the institutional approach and the group theory in the study of public policy analysis.
The institutional approach focused on institutions and the group theory analysed a collection of individuals with shared interest.
6.0 TUTOR-MARKED ASSIGNMENT (TMA) How effective is the group theory in public policy formulation and implementation in developing countries.
ANSWER Although there is a growing role of groups in the developing countries, their impact in the policy formulation and implementation process is not as effective as those of developed countries because of several factors such as the degree of modernization and ideological orientation which tend to affect group development.
7.0 REFERENCES AND LIST FOR FURTHER READINGS Dye, T.R.
(1972) Understanding Public Policy.
Englewood Cliffs, N.J Prentice-Hall Harry, E (1963) “Group Theory and the comparative study of Pressure Group” in Apter and Harry (eds) Comparative Politics.
London: The Free Press.
Ikegbe, A.O.
(1996).
Public Policy making And Analysis.
Benin- CHY:URI Publishing Ltd. Olaniyi, J.O.
(1998).
Foundation of Public Policy Analysis.
Ibadan SUNDA Publisher Limited Truman, D (1971) The Governmental Process.
New York: Alfred Knopt Inc. 47 UNIT 8 MODELS OF POLICY MAKING 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objectives 3.0 Main text 3.1 The Rational Comprehensive Model 3.2 Incremental Model 3.3 Satisfying Models 3.4 Mixed Scanning Model 3.5 Organizational Process and Political Bargaining 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutor- Marked Assignment (TMA) 7.0 Reference and List Further Reading 1.0 INTRODUCTION Models can be described as simplifications and abstractions of the real world, with the purpose of discovery of facts, which enhance our understanding.
Therefore, the models of policy making are attempts of simplifying the real world situation of policy making through relating how individuals and groups take decisions, what guides such decisions, what information the decision maker looks for and what influences his decision.
The models give answers to the questions of what assumptions and puzzles guide decision making and what frames of reference and scale of relevance do guide and should guide the entire analysis (Ikelegbe; 1996:36).
2.0 OBJECTIVES To enable you know: a.
The Rational-Comprehensive Model b.
The Incremental Model c. The Satisfying Model d. The Mixed Scanning Model and e. The Organizational Process and Political Bargaining 48 3.0 MAIN TEXT 3.1 THE RATIONAL-COMPREHENSIVE MODEL The rational-comprehensive model of policy making can be described as a system analysis approach based on principles of scientific investigation and scientific problem solving.
It has five features namely: 1.
Classification of values 2.
Mean-ends analysis 3.
Choice of most appropriate means to achieve desired ends 4.
Comprehensive analysis; and 5.
Analysis that is theory based (Lindblow, 1959:79) The Rational-comprehensive analysis defined the problem, develops alternatives solutions, places values on the consequences pf various alternatives, assesses the probability that they will occur and makes a decision based on logical rules.
The model attempts to serve the ideal contained in Max Weber’s view of bureaucracy in which decisions are on impersonal rules and techniques.
It also draws heavily on the economists’ vision of how a rational “economic man” should make decision.
In addition, it relies on rational decision-making models developed by Mathematicians and psychologists.
(Olaniyi, 1998:64).
The Rational-Comprehensive analysis assumes a static situation in which relevant conditions do not change and no new information becomes available during the time period of analysis and decision.
(Chandler and Plano, 1988:131).
3.3 THE INCREMENTAL MODEL The incremental model was postulated by Robert Dahl and Charles Lindblown as a reaction to the constraints of the rational model.
The model abandons economic rationality as impossible and instead posits that decision makers only consider limited values, limited goals, limited alternatives and only realistic 49 solution to the desired goal.
It involves successive and limited comparisons.
The goal is no the one time, radical, bold and major solution to societal problems but marginal or incremental polices or changes.
According to Lindblown (1959:135), incremental policymaking proceed in chronological series, made and remade endlessly, a succession of incremental changes, building out from the current situations, step by step and in small degree.
Therefore, decision makers do not review the whole range of societal values and problems and the whole range of policy alternatives and their consequences nor calculate, cost and weigh each set of values and alternatives.
Mann (1975:158) gave summary of the incremental model as consisting of marginal calculation, consideration of limited alternatives, adjustment of goals to means, consideration of limited consequences, reconstructive treatment of data and remedial orientation of policies.
However, the weaknesses of the incremental model include its subjectivity, failure to realize that new values need to be incorporated, among others while its main strength is the reflection of the political realities of decision-making.
(Ikelegbe, 1996:39).
ACTIVITY 1 Briefly explain the Rational-Comprehensive model ANSWER The model focuses on the means of attaining rational decision- making.
It believes that the decision maker is a rational actor who wants to make rational decision or net benefits policies.
It therefore involves the calculation and quantification of all costs and benefits, or value achievements and sacrifices and the choice of the alternative with most net benefit.
50 3.3 THE SATISFYING MODEL The satisfying model is the process of finding a decision alternative that meets the decision maker’s minimum standard of satisfaction.
The model was postulated by Herbert Simon and focuses on the administrative actor in the decision-making situation.
To the model, there are so many constraints to rationality that the administrator does not look for economic rationality or net value decision but for the satisfactory alternative.
The ultimate choice is the alternative that is good enough, feasible, satisfactory and meets the decision makers standards and expectations.
Where no satisfactory alternative is found, the level of aspiration would be reduced so that eventually an alternative that is satisfactory matches the new level of aspiration is found.
(Simon, 1995:134).
3.4 THE MIXED-SCANNING MODEL The mixed-scanning model is a reaction to both rational and incremental model.
According to Etzioni (1967:27) who is the scholar of this model, none of the two models is completely satisfactory in explaining, predicting and guiding decision-making.
He therefore postulates that the right kind of analysis is a kind of mixed-scanning, which is a mixture of both rational and incremental models depending on the problem, the need and the situation.
Thus in circumstances requiring fundamental decisions, the rational model could be used while the incremental model would be used in situations requiring incremental policies.
ACTIVITY 2 What is incremental model?
ANSWER Incremental model presumes that public choices arise out of the interplay of partisans and that administrative decision-making usually involves a continuation of past policies with the least possible modifications to suit changing circumstances.
51 3.5 THE ORGANISATIONAL PROCESS AND POLITICAL BARGAINING MODELS The organisation process model as postulated by G. Allison is that decision-making within organisations is different from individual decision making because decision process in organisations is fragmented among departments and individuals, as are the goals, objectives, values and perception of means for attaining objectives.
The input into the decision-making process are also disjointed because of their differing sources within the organisation.
The number and variety of goals are limited by the need to maintain the organisation might be manipulated to project or project certain interest.
Organizational decision, therefore, reflect the standard procedures, regular patterns of behaviour, features and interest of the organisation.
Meanwhile, the Political Bargaining model, also postulated by G. Allison, emphasized that decision-making in government circles is characterized by conflict, compromise and bargaining.
The actors involved that is, individuals, groups and organisations have interest, which they project or protect when faced with decision-making situations.
Each player invest this resources and influence in such a way as to advance his interest and policy is the outcome of the bargaining and trade offs between the actors.
The policy itself reflects an outcome that has general support, accommodates several interest and is based on the consensus reached.
The model explains to a large extent how societal decisions are made and what determines the outcome.
It particularly explains how a web of interrelated individuals and groups barging to produce policies congruent to their interests.
This enables us to understand why certain policies are made, why governments choose not to act in certain policy areas and why such inaction or non-decision sometimes constitute decisions.
(Ikelegbe 1996:41- 42).
52 4.0 CONCLUSION The models of policy making, namely, rational-comprehensive, incremental, satisfying, mixed-scanning organizational process and political bargaining were analysed.
The essence is to enrich your knowledge on policy-making models.
5.0 SUMMARY Five models of policy making had been discussed in this lecture.
Some of them are interrelated or mixed.
The choice of any of them depends on circumstance and interest attached to a particular policy-making.
You should therefore, review them regularly so that whenever you find yourself in such situations, you can easily pick the most suitable model to your condition.
6.0 TUTOR-MARKED ASSIGNMENT (TMA) Models are just simplifications and abstractions.
Discussion this statement with any two models as examples.
ANSWER Models are actually simplifications and abstractions representing the real world.
The essence of any models is to enhance our understanding.
In policy making models attempts at simplifying the real world situation of policy making through relating how individuals and groups take decisions, what guides such decisions, what information the decision looks for and what influences his decision.
Explanation of any two of the models should be acceptable.
7.0 REFERENCES AND LIST FOR FURTHER READINGS Chanlder, R.C.
and Plano, J.C. (1988) The Public Administration Dictionary England: ABC – CL 10 Etzioni, A (1967).
“Mixed-scanning: A Third Approach to Decision making” in Public Administration Review Vol.
27, Vol.
5 53  Ikegbe, A.O.
(1996).
Public Policy making And Analysis.
Benin- CHY:URI Publishing Ltd. Lindblow.
C.E.
(1959).
“The Science of Muddling Through” Public Administration Review Mann, D (1975).
Policy Decision Making in Education: An Introduction to calculation and control.
New York: Teachers College Press Olaniyi, J.O.
(1998).
Foundation of Public Policy Analysis.
Ibadan SUNDA Publisher Limited Simon, H.A.
(1955) “A Behavioural model of rational choice” 69 Quarterly Journal of Economics.
(February) 54 UNIT 9 THE POLICY PROCESS 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objection 3.0 Main Text 3.1 Model of the policy process 3.2 Stages in the policy making process a.
The Policy generation and Agenda b.
The policy formation/formulation c. Policy implementation, performance and impact d. Policy output/outcome and evaluation 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutor-Marked Assignment 7.0 References and a list for Further Reading 1.0 INTRODUCTION The policy process refers to the methods, conditions, procedures, activities, interactions and stages by which policies are made.
It refers to how policies come about or are made and what is involved in the processing of policies from problems identification to the policy outcome.
You are being given the analyses of policy process and its features in this unit 2.0 OBJECTIVES The objectives of this unit is to enable a student to: a.
Explain Model of policy forces and b.
Stages in the policy making process.
3.0 MAIN TEXT 3.1 MODEL OF THE POLICY PROCESS The policy process could be examined in general, several or specific terms.
At the general level, it relates the pattern of activities, interactions, procedures and methods of making 55 policies at the level of international organisations and state at the sectoral level, for example, you can talk of health policy [process or defence policy process.
In specific terms, the process of a particular policy could also be isolated and examined.
However, the processes of policies may differ as a result of the context, conditions, the persons involved and manner by which the policies are made.
Furthermore, the processes may even be unique by virtue of precedence, choice, tradition and peculiar characteristics to states governments and even policy sectors.
The examination of the policy process as an interactive process can be done from the holistic perspective provided by systems analysis.
The process of policies in organisations government could be described from this perspective as consisting of several activities and interactions between the environment which generates demands, the political system or more accurately the conversion process, which converts and translates demands and preferences into policy output and the implementation system which consists of implementing agencies and activities.
(Robinson and Majark; 1967:179).
3.2 STAGES IN THE POLICY MAKING PROCESS The policy process consists of policy generation, formulation, policy output, implementation, performance and impact.
a.
The Policy Generation and Agenda The policy generation system consists of essentially the environment.
There is physical and human environment.
The physical environment consists of the spatial environment, with its peculiarities, problems and strengths and the resources whether they are physical, economic and industrial or otherwise.
While the human environment comprises the citizenry and groups and their peculiarities.
The human environment possesses value, attitudes, perceptions and preferences, which in interaction with human conditions and the physical environment generate numerous demands and interests which are transmitted into the political and processes.
56 The environment thus influences the level, direction and content of demands and interests.
Policy Agenda are the public opinions that government gives or intend to give serious attention.
Therefore, Policy Agenda refers to public problems awaiting response in the present or in the future.
Policy Agenda denotes the phase in the policy process when government begin to think about considers and discuss the policy problems and the probable nature of response.
ACTIVITY 1 What is a policy process?
ANSWER Policy Process refers to the methods, conditions, procedures, activities, interactions and stages by which policies are made.
b.
The Policy Formation and Formulation The policy formation consists of the policy-making structures and interactions, which in the case of the political system are the institutions and structures of government such as the legislative bodies, the executives, judiciary, bureaucracy and the officials of ruing political parties.
The policy formulation system acts on the expectations demands and interests generated by the environment and take certain actions.
The actions are policies.
The policy may be backed by funds and personnel or it may be merely a symbolic response.
In other words, policy formation refers to the identification of the policy problem, the development and analysis of policy alternatives and the choice or selection of an alternative and the choice or selection of an alternative, which is then the policy.
It is all the activities that go in before the policy is declared.
Policy formation refers to the development of relevant policy in relation to public problems and to the proposition, consideration and enactment of the policy.
This refers specifically to the consideration of policy alternative, the recommendation of a policy enactment by legislative bodies of the policy proposal.
57 Policy formulation is important because the fact that government considers responses to a problem is not enough.
Government may decide to respond through a non-decision or defer action and it may as well take action to resolve the problem.
The nature of action would depend on the nature and circumstances of the public problem.
c. Policy Implementation, Performance And Impact Policy implementation is the process of translating policy mandates into action, prescription into results and goals into reality.
It refers to the processes and reality.
It refers to the processes and activities involved in the application, effectuation and administering of a policy.
It is the actions taken to carryout, accomplish and fulfill the intents, objectives and expected outcomes of public policies.
It is the act and process of converting a policy into reality and of enforcing a policy (Pressman and Wildavsky, 1979:181).
Meanwhile, the implementation process consists of the implementing organization, the environment particularly the political and economic environment, the policy target group, the objectives and the enunciated method o implementation and policy resources.
Policy performance refers to how well a policy is doing in relation to intended purposes, objectives target and intended accomplishments.
It releases to whether intended services haven been delivered, intended outcome or other desired and state is achieved, or whether the target problem or situation has experienced the desired changes.
Performance answers the question of how the policy has fared in its interaction with the environment.
The degree of achievement of the aforementioned aspects, determines the level of performance.
Performance encompasses effectiveness and efficiency.
While effectiveness refers to the level of attainment or realization of programme goal, efficiency relates the input or resources invested to the results obtained.
An efficient programmes is one that achieves a high output with minimum input.
58 Policy impact refers to the consequences of public policy in the environment.
It can be defined as the measurable changes in the social or physical environment that the policy programme was designed to produce.
(Dye, 1972:312).
It can also be described as the effect of a policy on real world conditions.
ACTIVITY 2 Describe policy formation and policy formulation.
ANSWER Policy formation refers to the identification of he policy problem, the development and analysis of policy alternatives and the choice of an alternative, which is then the policy.
On the other hand, policy formulation refers to the development of relevant policy in relation to public problem and to the proposition, consideration and enactment of the policy.
d. Policy Outcome, Output and evaluation Policy outcomes refer to the results or products of policy making.
Policy outcome is the total results or products of the entire policy activity of process.
It is the sum of outputs of policy activity.
It is policy outcomes that impact the environment and produces policy effects.
Policy output refers to tangible manifestations of public policies.
Policy output comprises all actions, activities and concrete achievements of things done, in the pursuance of policy objectives or in the course of effectuating a policy.
It refers to actual things done to back up a formulation policy or statement of intentions (Ikelegbe 1996:82).
Policy evaluation can be described as a analysis of operating programmes designed to asses impact or effectiveness in attaining objectives or to asses their efficiency.
(Alan and Gregory, 1980:60).
Evaluation enhances data availability on the state of programmes and provide feedback on the programme results, activity and impact.
59 4.0 CONCLUSION The policy process and stage involved are discussed.
This to further enhance your understanding of the policy making process.
5.0 SUMMARY The unit discussed policy generation.
Agenda, formation, formulation, implementation, performance, impact outcome, output and evaluation.
You should review them regularly for better understating .
6.0 TUTOR-MARKED ASSIGNEMENT How can you differentiate policy outcome from policy output?
ANSWER Policy outcomes are the results or products of policy making.
It is the total result of the entire policy activity.
Policy output refers to tangible manifestations of public policies.
It comprises all actions, activities and concrete achievement of things done in the pursuance of policy objectives.
7.0 REFERENCES AND A LIST FOR FURTHER READING Alan, S and Gregory (1980).
Preforamance Administration.
Lexington: D.C. Health &Co. Dye, T (1972), Understanding Public Policy.
Englewood Cliffs: Prentice Hall Inc. Ikelegbe, A.O.
(1996).
Public Policy Making and Analysis.
Benin- City URI Publishing Ltd. Pressman, J.C. and Wildavsky, A (1979) Implementation.
Berkeley.
University of California Press.
Robinson, J.A.
and Majark, R.R, (1967) “the theory of decision- making in Charles works, J.C. (ez) Contemporary Political Analysis.
New York: free press.
60 UNIT 10 POLICY ANALYSES ACTORS IN THE POLICY PROCESS 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objectives 3.0 Main Text 3.1 Government Actors (a) The Legislative bodies (b) The Executive (c) The Judiciary (d) The Bureaucracy 3.3 Non Governmental Actors (a) Political parties (b) Interest Group (c) The Citizenry 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutor-marked Assignment 7.0 References and a list for further reading 1.0 INTRODUCTION There are persons, groups and institutions who are active in the policy process.
These actors influence the environment, the political system and every stage of the policy process.
The actors make policy or influence policy and the direction and level of implementation activities.
2.0 OBJECTIVES a) To enable you know the governmental actors such as legislatives, executives, bureaucracies and judiciary and b) Non governmental actors, which include the political parties, interest groups and the citizenry.
3.0 MAIN TEXT 3.1 Governmental Actors in the Policy Process The governmental actors occupy formal public positions and are therefore directly connected to and very influential in the policy 61 process.
These are the actual policy makers who occupy the policy making position.
They are mainly the acceptors and converters of environmental demands and pressures into policies.
However, they have their own institutional individual perceptions, attitudes, values, beliefs and interests which are brought to bear on policy making.
a.
The Legislative Bodies Legislatives influence over policy range from its initiation and formulation to its implementation, control and review.
The influence over policy emanates from the legislative function for representation and expression of power opinion, law making, control and oversight of the executive branch and control of expenditure.
The legislatures therefore enact the laws, which set up policy programmes and consequently determine the content, extent and timing of policies, as well as the personnel, mode and intensity of implementation and sources and level of funding.
Apart from these, most legislative bodies also have power to monitor, oversee, control and review policy programmes.
This is done through relevant legislative committees, the annual appropriations, the power to investigate, legislate resolutions and motions, questions and deliberations.
The legislatives influence over policy varies from state to state and depends on constitutional provisions, the party system, regime type and the legislatives leadership.
For example, in liberal democratic systems, legislative influence over policy tend to be high while low in authoritarian and socialist regimes.
b.
The Executive The executive includes the president, ministers, top political office holders, advisers and assistants.
The executive has responsibility and power for the implementation of policies.
The executive possesses enormous influence on the initiation, enactment, implementation, performance and modification of public policies through its powers, responsibilities and activities.
62  The executive branch is clearly a major actor in the initiation, drafting and formation of public policies.
The executive influence on policy formation is because of its primary and resources in the political process.
It provides leadership to the public bureaucracy and manages it to accomplish lows.
Moreover, as policy implementation, the managers of governmental administration, the executive possesses and controls enormous funds facilities, patronage and other resources through pronouncements as to the propriety, fairness, legality and constitutionality of laws or proposed laws.
The judiciary could therefore make laws, kill laws by declaring them null and void and unconstitutional, change the course of policy activities and action, and enhance policy choice by tending the weight of legality and propriety to a policy alternative and moderate implementation activity particularly the conduct and manner of bureaucratic officials and implementation.
The judiciary is a moderator, an umpire and mediator of conflicts and judge of propriety in the policy process.
The judiciary, however, does not initiate or propose policies.
It does not formulate policy neither does it implement policies.
Rather, it only reacts to policy proposals, enactments, implementation and conduct of services and personnel.
This reaction may lay the bases for policy decisions, legitimizing policies and modifying them.
The judicial response is not independently prompted but intervention is based on cases brought before it by arms of government, institutions, groups and individuals.
Thus judicial influence only becomes operative when conflicts in the policy process are brought before it for interpretation and review.
ACTIVITY 1 Mention government actors in the policy process.
ANSWER They are legislature, Executive, Judiciary and Bureaucracy 63 d. The Bureaucracy.
The bureaucracy is a major organizational content within which policy making implementation and evaluation takes place.
The traditional conception of policy bureaucracy’s role in public policy is that of bringing to bear on policy making and implementation, expertise, skill and competence.
The bureaucracy is strategically placed to generate and it does generate or initiate a large part of public policy.
The policy making power of bureaucracies is also inherit in her being the administrative organisation for implementing policies.
The bureaucracy is therefore the most important actor at the level of implementation.
The bureaucracy constitutes the administrative machinery for executing public policy.
The bureaucracy comprises the structures processes and staff for effectuating public policies.
3.2 Non-Governmental Actors The non governmental actors influence policy through governmental actors.
They seek access to these actors, lobby and mobilize them to support and convert their interest and demands into required policy output.
However, their access and influence depend on their professional or other connections to the policy area, their strategic importance in the policy process and their strength in terms of membership, leadership and resources.
a.
Political Parties Political parties help in the articulation and aggregation of policy issues and in the initiation and formulation of proposed policies.
Political parties articulate the needs, demands and interests of their members and supporters and mediate, comprise and aggregate them into course of policy action.
The party machinery researchers and considers policy issues and alternatives and decide on course of action.
These policies constitute the programmes, manifestos and positions on policy issues.
Political parties are sometimes considerably influential in the execution of public polices particularly when in control of the government apparatus.
They ensure the implementation of their manifestos, policies and programmes by their influence on their 64 candidate in office because their election , support and continuity depend on their faithful adherence and proper implementation of their programmes.
The party influence on policies tend to be high where they are ideological committed because in such case, the ideology guide policy action.
b.
Interest Groups An interest group is a collection of individuals with some common characteristics, interests and interactions.
They exist principally to project, pursue and protect their common interest group influence on the policy process occurs at every storage.
They are active in the initiation, generation, formation of public policies and in the determination of their content and direction.
Groups constitute a linkage between the public and the government.
They articulate the interests and demands of their members to governmental actors in the policy process and seek to influence them to enact their demands and choices into policy actions.
Interest groups actually initiate policies by suggesting and recommending policy solutions to problems that pertain to their activities and interests.
Sometimes groups cooperate with governmental actors in the design and formulation of policies.
Interest groups may mobilize the public and other groups to support its policy positions and interest.
They may use the mass media to build up public support.
This enhances their resources and strength may increase their access and influence with governmental actors.
Furthermore, interest groups influence is reinforced by the consequences of their reactions to negative or poor response by governmental actors to their desired policy positions.
Groups could embark on certain actions such as protests and strikes to back up their demands.
ACTIVITY 2 Name non-governmental actors in the policy process.
ANSWER They include political parties, interest groups and the citizenry.
65 c. The Citizenry The citizenry are important actors in the policy process.
They constitute the human environment of policies, make the demands for public policy and are the beneficiaries of public policies.
Citizens influence the policy process through political parties, interest groups, elections and the mass media.
(Ikelegbe, 1996:89-101).
4.0 CONCLUSION The role of both governmental and non-governmental actors in the policy process are important, which made them to be basically analysed here.
5.0 SUMMARY The unit treated the governmental actors in the policy process such as the legislative, executive, judiciary and the bureaucracy.
Also discussed was non-governmental actors which included political parties, interest groups and the citizens.
6.0 TUTOR-MAKED ASSIGNMENT (TMA) The citizens has no contribution in the public policy process.
Do you agree?
ANSWER The citizenry has influence in the policy process through political parties, interest groups, elections and the mass media.
7.0 REFERENCES AND A LIST FOR FURTHER READING Ikelegbe, A.O.
(1996),Public Policy Making and Analysis.
Benin- city Uri publishing Ltd. Key, V. O. Jr. (1967),Public Opinion and American Democracy.
New York Knopf.
Ronke, F.E.
(1976).
Bureaucracy, Politics and Public Policy.
Boston Little, Brown and company.
66 UNIT 11 SYSTEM ANALYSIS, COST BENEFIT ANALYSIS AND COST EFFECTIVENESS.
1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objectives 3.0 Main Text 3.1 System Analysis 3.2 Cost Benefit Analysis 3.3 Cost Effectiveness 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutor-marked Assignment 8.0 References and a list for further reading 1.0 INTRODUCTION There are techniques or tools, which are used in the planning, analysis, evaluation and management of policies and programmes.
These tools include systems analysis, cost benefit analysis, cost effectiveness, efficiency, programme effectiveness, management by objective, planning, programming-budgeting system, zero base budgeting, among others.
In this unit, systems analysis, cost benefits analysis,, cost benefits analysis and cost effectiveness are discussed while some others are discussed in subsequent units.
2.0 OBJECTIVES To enable you know: a.
System Analysis b.
Cost Benefit Analysis; and c. Cost effectiveness 3.0 MAIN TEXT 3.1 System Analysis System analysis is an attempt to apply the scientific methods to public problem solving by suing a method that is open, explicit, verifiable and self-correcting it is therefore described as a 67 qualitative approach to problem solving using analytical methods to identify alternative solution.
System analysis, also sometimes called system theory, is a way to dealing with the basic economic problems of how best to use limited resources by specifying degree of effectiveness for the least cost or the greatest effectiveness for a given cost.
(Olaniyi, 1998:71) System analysis evolved from systems engineering and operations research.
It was first developed between late 1950’s and early 1960’s and the origin is traced to the United States Department of Defence’s investment through grants and contracts on systems analysis and quantitative techniques for analysis of weaponry systems, methodologies, techniques and approaches.
(Alan and Gregory: 1980:4-5).
System analysis involves the application of explicit, systematic comprehensive and quantitative analysis to decision problems, requiring decisions particularly governmental problems and programmes.
It involves systematic collection of relevant data and comprehensive analysis, using sophisticated, quantitative and rigorous methods, models and techniques and rational criteria to aid policy makers and programme managers in arriving at rational, efficient alternatives and the emphasize is therefore quantitative methods and analysis.
System analysis is used to advise public officials on most favourable alternatives or combination of alternatives based on the model.
(Ikelegbe, 1996:44) ACTIVITY What is system analysis?
ANSWER System analysis is an attempt to apply the scientific approach to solve public problems by using a method that is open, explicit, verifiable and self-correcting.
68 3.3 Cost-benefit Analysis (CBA) Cost benefit analysis is an analytical frame technique for analyzing decision, policies, programmes and projects.
It serves two purposes in public administration and public policy analysis to determine the most efficient policy or decision alternative.
The CBA helps to determine the policy or decision with the highest social benefit.
It is also important for prospective evaluations.
A particular project is evaluated to enable decisions on its choice, benefits, level of operation and feasibility.
Secondly, CBA is also useful in process and summative evaluation.
The analysis “ex-post.)
it is undertaken after the act to determine the efficiency and performance of a programme or project.
The purpose is to determine how the project is doing in relation to objective, resources and net benefits, such that decisions could be taken whether the programme should be terminated or continued or modified.
It is useful as an analytical technique for decision making and evaluations.
Furthermore, CBA involves the systematic examination of all the costs of a programme, whether they are tangible or not, quantifiable and measurable or whether they are real of opportunity costs.
ACTIVITY 2 Describe cost benefit analysis (CBA) ANSWER Cost Benefit Analysis is an analytical technique for analyzing decisions, policies, programmes and projects.
3.3 Cost Effectiveness Cost effectiveness is analytical tool for determining the least cost alternative to achieving policy objectives or accomplishments.
Cost effectiveness has some similarities with the cost benefit analysis.
The main difference is that cost effectiveness emphasizes lest cost for same or higher benefits rather than net social benefits.
Cost effectiveness requirements are on the realization of the obvious difficulties of quantifying and monetarising the benefits of public policy programmes.
In cost 69 effectiveness, the benefits are assumed and the search is for the lower cost but maximally effective alternative to attaining the benefits.
Cost effectiveness therefore does not require the quantification and monetarisation of benefits; neither is the calculation and criteria of net social benefits given any much importance.
The cost effectiveness requires the clear statements of objectives and output, and the objectives should be operationalised.
It also requires the enumeration of alternative for achieving the operationlised objectives.
Furthermore, it requires the determination of the costs, benefits and impact of each alternative and the quantification of costs in achieving the stated objectives.
The benefits and impact need not be quantified.
However, it requires the comparison on alternative in relation to the objectives.
The criteria for the choice of an alternative is effectiveness in achieving stated objectives at relatively same or lower projected costs.
The alternative that achieves most at same cost is preferred.
Cost effectiveness is quite suitable and applicable to policy makers and project managers in situations where the objectives and benefits of a programme accomplishment are fixed and identical and the issue is only the determination of the least cost alternative with highest effectiveness.
Cost effectiveness is very useful because of the limited and inadequate resources available to governments and corporations amidst so much problems, demands and needs.
4.0 CONCLUSION Some tools in policy analysis had been discussed in this unit and more are discussed in units 12 and 13.
It is hoped that you will understand the tools very well after the subsequent units have been read.
5.0 SUMMARY The unit discussed system analysis cost benefit analysis and cost effectiveness, which are among the techniques or tools in policy analysis.
More techniques would be discussed to enhance your comprehension.
70 6.0 TUTOR-MARKED ASSIGNEMENT In which ways could cost effectiveness be useful policy analysis?
7.0 REFERENCES AND LIST FOR FURTHER READINGS.
Alan, W.S and Gregory, A.D. (1980) Performance Administration Lexington D.C: Health & Co. Ikelegbe, A.O (1996).
Public policing making and analysis.
Benin City Olaniyi, J.O.
(1998).
Foundations of Public Policy Analysis.
Ibadan: SUNAD Publishers Limited.
71 UNIT 12 MANAGEMENT BY OBJECTIVES AND PLANNING PROGRAMING – BUDGETING SYSTEMS (PPBS) 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objectives 3.0 Main Text 3.1 Management by Objectives (MBO) 3.2 Planning – Programming – Budgeting Systems (PPBS) 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutor – Marked Assignment 7.0 References and list for further readings.
1.0 INTRODUCTION This unit continues with the tools in policy analysis.
Management by Objectives (MBO) and planning – Programming – Budgeting Systems (PPBS) are discussed.
Their explanations will enhance your understanding of techniques or tools of policy analysis.
2.0 OBJECTIVES At the end of this unit, you will be able to: a Understand management by objectives b planning – programming – Budgeting Systems (PPBS).
3.0 MAIN TEXT 3.1 MANAGEMENT OBJECTIVE (MBO) Management by objectives, often referred to as MBO, is a management techniques that emphasizes establishing clarifying and personnel within the organizational objectives such that different sets of activities, operations and personnel within the organisation or programme could be directed and managed in accordance to and to achieve such.
However MBO is not only a technique, it is also philosophy or belief in subordinate – manager 72 participation in goals setting and management and co-operation in the joint act of achieving effectiveness.
The implementation of MBO requires clarification and agreement by management as a purpose or intentions, accomplishments or results these may be analysed in terms of their concreteness, attainability, desirability and measurability.
(Baker, 1971:194).
This means that they should also be stated in quantitative and verifiable terms.
On the bases of those analyses, the objectives are rated in terms priorities.
This process applies to both the entire organisation, and subunits.
However, there has to be overall consistency in objectives.
The second stage is budgeting which consists resources available to the list of prioritized objectives.
Decisions as to which objectives would be given priority in resource allocations are then made.
Planning follows this stage.
This is the allocation of responsibilities and the design of programmes or actions to attain objectives of varying levels and units of the organization.
The control stage is that of decisions and activities to achieve unit goals.
Under NBO techniques, managers and units are given autonomy to achieve set objectives in their own spheres.
MBO is also characterized with periodic and performance reviews.
At unit levels, managers are expected to know accomplishments and initiate modifications where necessary.
Thus there has to be feedback to the manager and where necessary, to top management.
The technique also requires performance reviews at the expiration of each implementation period.
A year’s performance to the objectives is reviewed by management and individual contributions are assessed and rewarded on the basis of rewards are related to achievement.
MBO can be applied to both business or profit and public organisations.
(Ikelegbe 1996:52-53).
73  ACTIVITY 1 What is MBO?
ANSWER MBO, which means management by objectives, is a management technique when emphasizes establishing, clarifying and operationalizing objectives such that different sets of activities operations and personnel within the organisation or the programme could be directed and managed in accordance to and to achieve such.
3.2 Planning – Programming – Budgeting System.
(PPBS) It is a policy planning, management and budgeting technique introduced in America in 1963.
In Nigeria it was first adopted in the 1972-73 financial year.
The purpose of PPBS is to enhance management of activity through a three pronged integrated system of planning, programming and budgeting and thus equip management with a better framework for planning, particularly decision, the administration, of the organisation and its programmes.
For better understanding, planning in the P.P.B.
System is simply the determination goals and the specification of the best functions consists to attain them.
The programming function consists of the specification and implementation of projects within each programme.
The budgeting function is the allocation of resources in money terms to achieve the specified goals programmes and projects.
P.P.B.S.
specified that these activities should be integrated and coordinated within an organisation.
The organisations budgeting must be integrated with its plans and programmes such that the activities of the organization and clearly organized, guided and appraised.
74 ACTIVITY 2 Describe PPBS as a management technique.
ANSWER PPBS enhances management of activity through a three integrated system of planning, programming and budgeting which equips management with a better framework planning, particularly decision, the administration of the organisation and its programmes.
The characteristics of PPBS system include the importance attached to the examination and determination of objectives, the design of alternative programmes to achieve stated objectives, the choice of the best alternative and the design of projects with programmes and the allocation of resources to achieve the choice programmes and the emphasis on management on the basis of programmes.
Furthermore, the emphasis on projections and performance.
Thus the costs of programmes have to be projected into the years ahead and the year by the year programme achievement projected.
Finally, the system is characterized by moitoring or appraisals based on data generated on the programmes and projects.
The purpose is to provide a basis for decisions on effectiveness, worth, appropriateness of operations, levels of activity and services and modifications of current programmes and projects.
(Akinyele, 1980.298).
4.0 CONCLUSION Both MBO and PPBS are both framework for decision-making, budgeting, management and evaluations.
Their objectives are to promote efficiency and effectiveness I an organisation.
5.0 SUMMARY The MBO as a management technique clarifies and operationalized objective and personnel within the organisation or programme while PPBS is a system that determines goals and the specification of the best performances to attain them, among other objectives.
75 6.0 TUTOR – MARKED ASSIGNMENT TMAS In your own opinion, how does MBO enhances efficiency in an organisation.
ANSWER MBO enhances efficiency in organisation through the determination, clarification and measurement of objectives.
Particularly, the determination of priorities and the allocation of resources to achieve organizational priorities is a considerable step towards organizational effectiveness.
Thus MBO helps organisations in clarifying resources to properties.
The emphasis on performance, effectiveness, periodic reviews performance appraisals and rewards based on contributions is particularly enhancing to high performances in organisations.
7.0 REFERENCES AND LIST FOR FURTHER READINGS.
Akinyele, T..A (1980) “ P.P B.S.
in former western Nigeria: History, progress and problems” in Balogun, M.J. (ed) Managerial efficiency in the public sector.
Ile-Ife: Ife University Press.
Baker, W. (1971).
“Management by objectives in Kernghan, W.D.
K and William, A.M (eds).
Public Administration, Selected readings.
Toronto: Menthuen Publications.
Ikelegbe, A.O (1996).
Public policing making and analysis.
Benin City 76  UNIT 13 GAME THEORY, ZERO-BASED BUDGETING, AND DECISION ANALYSIS AND DECISION TREE 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objectives 3.0 Main Text 3.1 Game Theory 3.2 Zero – Based Budgeting 3.3 Decision Analysis and Decision Tree 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutor – Marked Assignment 7.0 References and list for further readings.
1.0 INTRODUCTION In this unit, you are introduced to another three tools and techniques in policy analysis.
These are Game Theory, Zero- Based Budgeting and Decision Analysis and Decision Tree.
This will further improve your understanding of policy analysis.
2.0 OBJECTIVES This unit will enhance your knowledge of tools and techniques in policy analysis through the explanation of more theories such as: a.
Game Theory b. Zero-Based Budgeting c. Decision Analysis and Decision Tree 77 3.0MAIN CONTENT.
3.1 Game Theory Game theory provides a means by which strategic decision are modeled and analysed.
Its assumptions are presumed on zero- sum politics the out comes is dependent on choices mad by each of two or more players.
The players usually make rational choices as a way of maximizing their benefits and minimize their worst possible out comes.
The benefits of various alternatives open to a player are weighed and employment of an optional strategy is referred to by the Game theorist as rational behaviour.
The game theory is useful to policy makers because it encourages thoughtful examination of options before any action is taken in order to maximize gains and ameliorate the hardship of the target population.
(Olaniyi, 1998:74) 3.2 Zero-Based Budgeting This is a budgeting technique that emphasizes comprehensive annual reviews and scrutiny in the allocation of funds to organisations and activities.
It was introduced in the state of Georgia in the United State of America in 1973 and has since then been a common technique in business and public organisations in many parts of the world.
(Horn & Meter, 1975:445) Zero-based budgeting requires that the present budget should be an entirely new activity and not based on old estimates and activity.
A zero-based budgeting basic assumption is that the entire budget be built up based on current goals, reasoning, operations, reviews and target accomplishments.
This contrasts the traditional budgeting, which is based on increments.
Zero- based budgeting requires every department, programme or unit to justify every expenditure proposed annually in respect of goals, programmes or projects, operations and set accomplishment levels.
Rather than justify only increases as in traditional budgeting, every proposal must be supported by a rational explanation.
Budgeting ceases to be a mere routine but a 78 comprehensive qualitative and rewarding annual exercise.
(Ikelegbe, 1996:56) ACTIVITY I What is Game Theory in policy analysis?
ANSWER It is an assumption premised on rational choices as a way of maximizing benefits and minimizing worst possible out comes by each of two or more players.
3.3 Decision Analysis and the Decision Tree Decision analysis is used by decision makers to address uncertainties, probabilities, value pay-off to simplify and enhance decision making.
Decision tree is a decision making tool that presents graphically the sequence in the decision process, to enable easier understanding, management and choice in decision making.
It is a diagrammatic model and a conceptual frame, which denoted precisely the flow or sequence, the structure, stages, tasks, activities and consequences in the decision making process.
It therefore enables a summary of essential information on a flow chart, relating to a particular decision problem.
Decision chance events Probabilities Or choices A A B C Pay offs B A B Pay offs Decision node A C B Pay offs C D 79  The decision diagram shown above consists of four components; namely decision nodes, chance nodes, probabilities and pay offs.
A decision node is a square that denotes the point of decision between curses of action and from the decision node flows alternative or possible courses of action.
Chance events are intervening events or changes that determine the consequence or out comes of alternative.
The chance events are represented by circles in the flow diagram.
Chance events actually denote uncertainties they face each course of action.
It provides the decision maker the uncertainties to be resolved.
Probabilities are the possible out comes or results of chance event.
The probabilities are calculated, in terms of percent chances of each out come.
The probabilities are represented by branches from the circle (chance event) along with percent chances.
Pay offs are the result of outcome of each alternative.
It is the summary of the consequences of each possible combination of choice an chance.
The pay-offs are recorded at the end of each branch (alternative).
(Stoky and Zeckhanser).
The decision tree thus presents the decision maker with the sequence, the choices available, the uncertainties and calculations of probabilities and outcomes.
The calculated pay off and the percent chances of probabilities form the basis of decision.
ACTIVITY 2 Describe zero-based budgeting.
ANSWER It is a budgeting technique, which emphasizes comprehensive annual reviews and scrutiny in the allocation of funds to organisations and activities.
4.0 CONCLUSION The tools and techniques are important in policy analysis.
It is for this vital reason that you are being taught all of them for basic understanding.
80  5.0 SUMMARY The Game Theory, Zero-Based Budgeting and Decision Analysis and the Decision Tree are discussed in this unit.
The last three tools and techniques are discussed in unit 14.
6.0 TUTOR-MARKED ASSIGNMENT Decision analysis is used by the decision maker to address uncertainties, probabilities, value pay offs to simplify and enahcen decision making.
Decision tree is a decision making tool which present graphically the sequence in the decision process, to enable easier understating, management and choice in decision making.
7.0 REFERENCES AND LIST FOR FURTHER READINGS.
Horn, C.V. and Meter, D.V (1975) “The Policy Implementation Process.
A conceptual Framework” Administration and Society, Vol 6 No.
4 (February) Ikelegbe, A.O (1996).
Public policing making and analysis.
Benin City Olaniyi, J.O, (1998).
Foundations of Public Policy Analysis.
Ibadan: SUNAD Publishers Limited.
Stokey, E and Zeckhauser (1979).
A Premier for Policy Analysis.
New York: W.W. Norton & Co. Inc. 81 UNIT 14 CRITICAL PATH METHOD, (CPM) PROGRAMME EVALUATION AND REVIEW TECHNIQUE (PERT) AND THE DELPHI METHOD 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objectives 3.0 Main Text 3.1 Game Theory 3.2 Programme Evaluation and Review 3.3 The Delphi Method 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutor – Marked Assignment 7.0 References and list for further readings.
1.0 INTRODUCTION This unit discusses the last three of the tools and techniques.
At the end of this unit, you should have understood very well how tools are used to analyse policies.
This makes you a good policy analyst.
2.0 OBJECTIVES You will be able to know: a.
Critical Path Method (CPM) b. Programme Evaluation and Review Technique (PERT); and c. The Delphi Method.
3.0 MAIN TEXT 3.1 Critical Path Method (CPM) CPM is a planning and control technique that is used based on network analysis.
It is specifically used in the planning and control of programme/project operations and implementation.
The CPM involves the management functions of the determination of what is to be done such as designing programmes and activities to achieve planning.
It also involves the determination of when each activity is best initiated in relation 82 to optimal achievement of programmes activities.
Furthermore, it involves the determination of a time frame or projection of completion times for the activities, events and the entire programme.
Lastly, it involves the determination of critical activities and thus a frame of preference for allocation of programme resources and efforts.
CPM is essentially a graphic presentation of routes, activities, actions and events that are to be undertaken in relation to a terminus, the programme’s completion.
It is a flow chart or a diagrammatic model denoting a plan of action listing all activities and events in a programme and delineating linkages or relationships between the activities and events and the sequence of events and activities, in terms of what should precede or done at the same time or done afterwards and finally specifying a projection of completion times for the activities and the entire programme.
Thee activities, events, linkages and sequence are presented in arrows and paths.
The anchor of the arrow diagram is the start of the initiation of the programme.
The arrows are the linkages between events, they actually represent the activities that lead to an event or milestone representation by nodes.
The terminus is the programme completion or achievement.
The scheduling activities in CPM are within a time frame.
CPM helps in calculating time duration for achieving each event or activity related to programme achievement and for the entire programme.
Under CPM, the earliest possible time that an event can be completed (EPO) is computed for each activity (arrow), as well as for the entire project.
The amount of time (float) that an activity’s time is also computed.
Furthermore, the latest possible occurrence (LPO) or completion time, for each event (node) without negative consequence for programme duration is also computed.
83 A SIMPLE CRITICAL PATH METHOD CHART F A 2 4 2 B E START TERMINUS 4 5 C D J 5 7 4 Source: Ikelegbe 1996:60 These time computations, lead to the determination for the critical path.
First, the computation determine the activities with positive float or precisely those whose achievement can be shortened or lengthened without affecting the achievement of any other activity or the entire programme’s duration.
Second, the computations determine the activities with zero float, or whose completion times control the entire programme.
ACTIVITY 1 Analyse Critical Path Method (CPM) ANSWER CPM is a planning and control technique that is based on network analysis.
It is specifically use in the planning and control of programme/project operations and implementation 3.2 Programme Evaluation and Review Technique (PERT) PERT is a planning and control technique based on network analysis.
Like the CPM; PERT is a technique for planning and organizing tasks and activities in relation to programme completion.
PERT was developed in the late 1950’s.
It emerged out of the need to provide techniques for the planning and 84 management of a huge, complicated weapons programme, the Polaris weapons system in the United States.
PERT is a flow or diagrammatic model that denotes the tasks of a programme, the events, sequence, expected completion time and variance in completion times of events in a programme.
PERT network is design in several stages.
The first is a flow chart, denoting all the events in circles, and the activities or processes with arrows connecting the previous events (statement of activities) with the pointed end, to the next events (completion of activity and thus of event.)
The chart also denoted the terminal point, which is the completion of the entire project.
The chart is a logical sequence of events and activities and infact denoted a network of interrelated and interconnected events and activities from programme statement to termination or completion.
In the second stage, the expected completion times and variance in the completion times are calculated for each activity.
The expected time estimate is the most likely or probable time the event would be completed.
PERT builds in or accommodates uncertainties in its analysis and therefore variance is calculated.
The time estimate (Te) is calculated using three parameters, the most optimistic, the most likely and the most pessimistic.
The formula V = 6 – a2 where, V is (variance) 6 6 (pessimistic estimate) a is optimistic estimate and 6 is a constant.
The expected time duration (completion time) and variance is put against each activity.
The next stage is the determination of the critical path to programme completion.
The procedure here is almost similar to that of the CPM technique.
PERT is similar to CPM in several ways.
Both are flow charts.
Both calculate expected completion times.
Both determine the critical path.
Infact CPM can be subsumed in PERT analysis, because PERT involves CPM.
85 A SIMPLE PERT NETWORK te te te 2 5 v v v te 1 te 4 te START TERMINUS v v v te te 3 v v Source: Ikelegbe; 1996:63 PERT is however different from CPM some ways.
First PERT is concerned with events, unlike CPM which is more concerned with activities or jobs.
Second, PERT enables the calculation of variances in the expected completion times.
This the most probable time for completing events given uncertainties is determined.
This is unlike CPM, which is only concerned with determining expected completion time.
Third PERT is the more rigorous and sophisticated of the two techniques.
Infact PERT was designed as an approach to managing large-scale projects.
It requires the aid of sophisticated computer programmes to manage and monitor requirement, calculations and charts.
The PERT technique particularly has advantage in handling large- scale programmes with high uncertainties.
While CPM is more applicable to a well-defined programme, with single management, PERT can handle complex programmes with multiple and overlapping management, logistic problems and imprecise objectives.
Like the CPM technique, PERT is useful in the planning, operations and management of programmes.
As a matter of fact the advantages of CPM to planning, control and management, as well and applications and uses of CPM also apply to PERT.
PERT has advantage over CPM because of its rigour, 86 sophistication to handle large scale complex programmes and uncertainties.
ACTIVITY 2 Describe PERT ANSWER It is concerned with events and enables the calculation of variance in the expected times.
3.3 The Delphi Method The Delphi Method is a technique of forecasting or prediction applicable in situations of inadequate database or analogy to provide empirical predictions about future events and relationships.
In such situation, the other options for forecasting are intelligent and knowledgeable guesses of expert from relevant or related fields on the issues.
This is precisely what the Delphi is about.
It was developed by Olaf Halmer, Norman Dalkey and Theodore Gordon in the early 1960’s.
The Delphi method is a technique for eliciting expert opinion and prediction of issues of interests.
More specifically, it is a means of managing expert prediction to avoid common errors and disadvantages of expert committees.
The purpose is to obtain the best unbiased, uninfluenced a true opinion of expert on the issues of interest.
In Delphi, experts interact the basis of opinion, arguments, explanations and forecast.
However, the experts do not interact personally.
The method involves first, the selection of a committee or panel experts by the agency or organisation that has jurisdiction over the topic, issues or policy in question.
Second, is the management of several stages of the Delphi third, is the compilation of responses and analysis The management of Delphi stages of operation is very important.
There are four stages.
In all the stages or rounds, personal contacts are avoided.
In the first stage, unstructured questionnaires are presented to member to elicit open responses on predictions of events and 87 their timing.
In the second round, the opinion of participants is circulated without mention of source.
Participants are presented with forecast, dates and arguments, such that they may react to the prediction estimates, timing of events or forecast, or to reveal their former prediction or opinion in the light of circulated opinion of others.
They are also requested to provide explanation as to their present opinion.
In the third round, the participants are again presented with the predictions, events, dates and explanation in the second round, without disclosure of the source.
Members are again given opportunity to reconsider their earlier forecast in light of general predictions and explanations of group members.
Members deviate considerably from the opinion and forecast of others are asked to expert their position.
The fourth round beings with the circulated of dates, arguments and explanations from the third round.
Participants are then asked to make it forecast.
These are then collated and analysed.
Some of Delphi requirements are meant to avoid some problems often emanate in panels or committees.
These include the undue influence eloquent, vociferous, tenacious and logical advocates and arguments, tendency of face saving, the inability to and infact pain associated with changing one’s idea or opinion, the tendency to associate with the views, opinion arguments of the topmost expert in the panel or even outside and the tendency towards minimizing disagreements and emphasizing agreements or areas of agreements.
Some of these problems arise from the group interactions with and between members.
The Delphi method by avoiding personal interactions by its various rounds of forecast, avoid to some extend these problems.
The key advantage of the Delphi method, is that it enables expert opinion or forecast, based on consideration and reconsideration of available expert opinion by participations.
In addition, it avoids interpersonal interaction, which often times, blur objectivity and individual contributions in committees and expert panels.
The problems however with the technique are the reliability of forecast.
In Delphi, consensus or convergence of opinion is perceived as enhanced reliability of forecast.
The ultimate 88 usefulness of the Delphi method however depends on accuracy of forecast or forecasting success.
4.0 CONCLUSION The analyses of last tools and techniques in this chapter concluded their discussion in this course.
The final unit shall treat a case study of industrial policy in Nigeria.
5.0 SUMMARY The unit discussed the Critical Path Method Programme Evaluation and Review Technique, and the Delphi Method.
These tools are the last techniques in policy analysis to be discussed in this course.
6.0 TUTOR-MARKED ASSIGNMENT (TMA) critically analyse the Delphi Method ANSWER The Delphi method is a technique of forecasting or predication applicable in situations of inadequate database or analogy to provide empirical predictions about future events and relationships.
In such situations, the other option for forecasting is intelligent and knowledgeable guesses to expert from relevant or related fields on the issue.
7.0 REFERENCES AND LIST FOR FURTHER READINGS.
Barry, B (1979), Public Management and Policy Analysis.
New York: St. Martins Press.
Ikelegbe, A.O (1996).
Public policing making and analysis.
Benin City: URI Publishing Ltd. 89 UNIT 15 A CASE STUDY OF INDUSTRIAL POLICY OF NIGERIA 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objectives 3.0 Main text 3.1 Introduction 3.2 Policy objectives 3.3 Incentives to Industry 3.4 Institutional framework 3.5 Relevant Laws and Regulations 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutor-Marked Assignment (TMA) 8.0 References and a list for further readings.
1.0 INTRODUCTION The year 1986 was a significant year for manufacturing industry in Nigeria.
In July 1986, Nigeria embarked on a Structural Adjustment Programme (SAP) whose major features include substantial deregulation of import and export practices and easier access to foreign exchange market where the exchange market where the exchange rate for the naira is determined by the interplay of market forces.
Under the SAP, the private sector was expected to play a vital role in the manufacturing sector.
In recognition of the vital role the manufacturing sector has to play in the economic recovery and growth of the nation, government introduced significant changes in the legislation governing the manufacturing sector to improve the investment climate in the economy.
Hence the Federal Ministry of Industries produced a national industrial policy in 1986, which was aimed at ending the major barriers that had hampered industrial investment in Nigeria.
But whether the policy has achieved its objective or not will be left to you to conclude after reading the policy aims.
90 2.0 OBJECTIVES To enable you know the following about industrial policy in Nigeria: a.
Its background b.
Policy objectives c. Incentives to industry d. Institutional framework, and e. The scheduled enterprises 3.0 MAIN CONTENT 3.1 Industrialisation in Nigeria: The Background 3.1.1 Throughout most of the post-independence era, Nigeria pursued an industrialisation strategy based on import substitution.
As the economy benefited from increased foreign exchange earnings from petroleum exports in the early to mid 1970's, ambitious and often costly industrial projects were embarked upon by government.
Private Sector investment in manufacturing grew too, taking advantage of an array of government incentives such as the Pioneer Status and Approved Users Scheme.
.
3.1.2 By the late 1970's, a clear picture of the structure of the manufacturing sector had emerged.
The sector was characterised by: (a) High geographical concentration; (b) high production costs (c) Low value-added; (d) Serious underutilization of capacity!
(e) High import content of industrial output and (f) Low level of foreign investment in manufacturing.
3.1.3 Most of the problems of the manufacturing sector have often been attributed to inadequate infrastructure, lack of executive capacity, poor utilization of available manpower and absence of a sound technological base.
Many more reasons could probably be adduced; but by the early 1980's, as the country's foreign exchange 91 earnings declined significantly, the high import dependence, of the manufacturing sector became a serous liability on the economy.
By this time too, government had invested heavily in a diversified portfolio of industrial projects including salt, iron and steel, cement, sugar, pulp and paper and' fertilizers.
The poor returns on these projects, however, could not justify the enormous public funds that had been committed to their execution.
Infact, many industrial projects, in which huge amounts had been expended, remained lar- gely uncompleted. '
3.
1.5 Against the background of these problems and after several exhaustive studies, it became clear that a restructuring of the manufacturing sector was required.
To cope with the problems of this sector and the economy in general, Nigeria embarked on a Structural Adjustment Programme (SAP) in July, 1986.
The major features of SAP include increased import liberalization and easier access to foreign exchange market (FEM), where foreign exchange rates for Naira are determined by an interplay of market forces.
3.1.6 SAP has important implications for government and, industry alike.
Among other things, it has brought about government's re- appraisal for the regulatory environment, the structure of protection for local industries and the package of incentives available.
For the private sector, and industrialists generally, it will demand a more serious effort to control costs, increase production efficiency and stay competitive.
SAP thus marks a watershed in the evolution of the manufacturing sector in this country.
3.2 Policy Objectives and Strategies Policy Objective The objective of government industrial policy shall be to achieve an accelerated pace of industrial development.
In this regard, the industrial sector would become the prime mover of the economy.
92 The elements of this objective include: (a) Providing greater employment opportunities; (b) Increased export of manufactured goods; (c) Dispersal of industries; (d) Improving the technological skills and capability available in the country (e) Increased local content of industrial output (f) Attracting foreign capital, and (g) Increased private sector participation in the manufacturing sector.
(i) Employment generation: The social and political consequences of a high rate of unemploy- ment make it imperative that the industrial sector should aim at creating job opportunities.
This vital role has become even more crucial to be economy in view of the, large number of trained techni- cal manpower for which the industrial sector is yet to find gainful employment.
(ii) Increased export of manufactured goods: To diversify the nation's foreign exchange earnings' base and strengthen the manufacturing sector through exposure to interna- tional competition, government will actively encourage a more ex- port-oriented approach by the manufacturing sector.
As a substantial part of our foreign exchange earnings is used up by the industrial sector, is expected that industry should try to contribute more to foreign exchange earning.
This represents an important policy shift.
(iii) Promotion of Nationwide Industrial Development through industrial dispersal; To discourage over-concentration of industries in a few industrial centres and to promote national integration, the nation needs ra- tional dispersal of industries.
As a corollary, rural areas and others 93 hitherto neglected areas of the country will increasingly begin to feel the positive impact of industrial development.
(iv) Improving technological skills; To create and maintain a modern industrial society, the average level of technological competence of the Nigerian population needs to be significantly raised.
.
The quality and availability of technical education and industrial training, the content and level of industrial research being under- taken in the nation's industries and research institutes Will all con- tribute to the achievement of this vital objective.
(v) Increase Local Content: This will be achieved mainly through increased use of local raw materials and further backward integration by existing industries clearly, as local content of industrial output increases, this will affect the general.
Level of economic activity and open up employment opportunities across sectors.
(vi) Attracting Foreign Capital Attracting foreign capital into the manufacturing sector is crucial to the attainment of many of the policy goals of government.
Indeed, government hopes that the restructuring of the economy through SAP and other measures taken would make the country more attractive to foreign capital.
.
(vii) Increased private sector participation The realization of government objective of accelerated industrial development hinges critically on increased private sector participa- tion in the manufacturing sector dwindling government financial resources, ever-increasing socio-economic responsibilities to a rapidly increasing population and past expleriel1ce with many public sector industrial projects have all combined to make increased private participation an important policy objective.
94 Strategies and Policy Measures In pursuit of the central objective of accelerated industrial development, government shall take a number of steps, involving.
(a) Encouraging increased private sector participation in the industrial sector, and privatizing and commercializing holdings in certain existing industrial enterprises; (b) Playing a catalytic role in establishing new core industries; providing and (c) Improving infrastructural facilities;.
(d) Improving the regulatory environment; (e) Improving the investment climate prevailing in the country; (f) Establishing a clear set of industrial priorities, and (g) Harmonizing industrial policies at Federal, State and Local Government levels.
Employment Generation The major policy tool through which government plans to enhance employment generation is the promotion of small scale industries.
In the light of SAP economic realities “small scale” industries are defined as those with total investment of between one hundred thousand naira (100,00) and two million naira (N2,000,000) exclusive of land, but including working capital.
“Micro/Cottage industries; are defined as those whose total investment cost does not exceed on hundred thousand Naira (N100,000) including working capital but exclusive of land.
Government therefore accords high priority to the small and medium scale enterprise (SME) projects whose main objectives are to develop in Nigeria, a broader base of entrepreneurial culture, a core of trained manpower and an effective institutional structure' capable small and medium scale enterprises with different organisations working at different levels, government considers it necessary to set up a co- coordinating umbrella organisations called "Small Scale Industries Corporation" charged with the following responsibilities among others: (a) Promotion of small-scale industries; (b) Development of policies and programmes for small scale 95  Industries; (c) Provision of extension services; (d) Meeting the training needs of small scale industries; (e) Provision of technical and management assistance, and (f) Provision of facilities for credit delivery.
A key government strategy for the development of this class of in- dustries is helping more actively to meet financing needs of small- scale industries.
Hitherto the Nigerian Bank for Commerce and Industry had been the major medium for providing funds for small- scale industries.
The Federal government shall evolve a broader- based mechanism of credit delivery, allowing small-scale industrialists grater access to credit facilities.
To this end government plans to involve the following mix of financial institutions.
(a) Five (5) commercial banks (b) Three (3) merchant banks (c) The Nigerian Bank for Commerce and Industry (NBCI), The Nigerian (d) Agricultural Co-operative Bank (NACB) and (e) State development finance Corporations Government shall also strive to encourage the growth of small scale industries through:- (a) The establishment of industrial estates with appropriate infrastructural facilities henceforth the Federal Government will assist States with matching grafts in the establishment of industrial estates for the promotion of small scale industrial estates for the promotion.
of small scale industries.
The administration of such estates, however, will be left to the states.
(b) In addition, the ongoing Entrepreneurial Development Programme (EDP), the Working For Yourself Programme (WFYP) and the.
Training the Trainers Scheme will be further intensified and improved upon as these are avenues for developing the corps of 96  entrepreneurs needed in the economy.
(c) The Small Scale Industries Corporation will accord -high priority to industries engaged in the manufacture of basic needs including food processing and agro-industries, household equipment manufacturing industries, building material industries, industries for manufacturing low cost transport equipment, pharmaceutical industries, etc.
Increased export of manufactured goods Government strategy for increased export of manufactured goods rests on making Nigerian exports more competitive internationally and export activities more profitable for industrialists.
The major planks for this strategy are: (a) The regulatory environment, (b) Promotion of export free zones (c) Liberalization of access to foreign exchange and (d) Allowing a market-determined exchange rate for the Naira.
(e) Fiscal and financial incentives.
The Nigerian Export Promotion Council is the premier organisation responsible for the administration of various incentive schemes and measures aimed at encouraging exports.
It is also responsible for administering the Export Development Fund.
Dispersal of industries In pursuit of this objective local government areas (LGAs) of the country have been grouped into three zones: Zone 1: Industrially and economically developed local government areas; Zone 2: Less industrially and economically developed local govern- ment areas; Zone 3: Least industrially and economically developed local government areas.
97 The criteria for such classification include: (a) Industrial production in gross and per capita base (b) Social and economic infrastructures available and (c) Level of labour market development.
Through an array of incentives, including a programme of industrial layouts and craft villages development, government at various levels plans to make all areas attractive to new investment.
Improving technological capacity: Meaningful industrial development will necessitate the widespread acquisition of technical know-how by Nigerians.
Every effort will be made to acquire the level of industrial technology that would estab- lish a self-reliant economy.
Government shall actively support industry's research and development efforts and promote agencies engaged in industrial research and manpower training.
The Industrial Development Centers (IDCs) represent an important instrument [or improving technological capacity.
The IDCs were created to ensure that small and medium scale enterprises (SME) not ordinarily in a position to employ highly skilled manpower, such as managers, engineers and technical staff, are assisted to solve their operational problems.
Specifically, the functions of IDCs are to provide: (a) Technical advice and assistance regarding the selection f the proper manufacturing process for the product in view, selection of the right machinery, equipment and raw materials for the purpose.
(b) assistance in the installation and operation of machinery (c) on-the-job training of artisans in the handling of machines and simple tools.
.
(d) assistance in the repairs of machinery and tools and tooling facilities of IDC's workshops 98 (e) advice and assistance to resolve operational problems encountered by SMEs (f) advice and assistance to small scale industrialists to improve the design and quality of their products; (g) training of, proprietor and supervisory staff of SME's in modern management methods and practices suited to their enterprises; (h) marketing counseling regarding pricing, packaging, sales strategy, advertising and.
marketing methods for the promotion of sales of their products, and (i) Feasibility reports for intending small scale industrialists.
Increased Local Content Increasing the local content of Nigerian industrial output is a central objective of government industrial policy.
Finding suitable local raw materials and promoting their use by industry is one clement of the strategy by which government plans to realize this objective.
The Raw Materials Research and Development Council will allocate resources to research and development of identified raw material substitl1tes or alternatives.
Government will active encourage new industries with greater linkages to the rest of the economy.
Existing industries will be en- couraged to pursue further backward integration.
Assistance in the commercialization of research results represents another strategy which government plans to adopt in order to raise the local content of manufacturing output.
Attracting foreign capital Accelerating the pace of industrial development will require enor- mous capital investments.
While government welcomes domestic private capital investments, it also recognises that such investment 99 may not be available in the required volume.
Government therefore welcomes foreign capital into the manufac- turing sector.
Indeed, toe Structural Adjustment Programme was embarked upon with the prospect of increased inflow of foreign capital.
The main component of government strategy for attracting foreign capital is the liberalization of access to foreign exchange for in- dividuals and companies provided through the foreign exchange market (FEM).
Easier capital and dividend repatriation through less cumbersome procedures is a by-product of recent changes in the regulations.
Another clement of government strategy consists of amendments to the Nigerian Enterprises Promotion Decree 1977 (NEPD).
These amendments are designed to open up more areas for foreign invest- ment.
Thus in the amended Decree, only one list of schedu1cd enterprises instead of three have been retained and which list con- tains businesses exclusively resolved for Nigerians alike arc now free to own up to 100% equity, separately or in partnership, in, any unscheduled enterprises.
Foreigners are welcome to invest in the scheduled enterprises with a minimum capitalisation of twenty million naira (N20,000,000.00) Government will continue to cultivate and improve bilateral trade links with other countries as a means of encouraging foreign capital investment in the economy.
Increased private sector participation The first main strategy by which government seeks to achieve in- creased private sector participation in manufacturing is the privatisation/commercialization of public sector investments.
In this connection, Government has completely divested itself of holdings in 67 companies.
In addition, while some companies will be fully commercialised, others especially those considered strategic for the moment will be partially privatised/commercialied.
These arrangements as indicated hereunder are embodied in Decree No.
100 25 of 1988.
Enterprises in which 100% of Equity held by The Federal Military Government shall be Fully Privatised Role of the Private Sector The various enterprises being privatise were set up when revenue accruing to Government were considerable.
In a few cases, however, the private sector at that time was slow in reacting to the investment opportunities that existed either due to the heavy capital outlay involved or lack of technology and skill To close the gap and provide the goods and services to the public, government took the initiative to invest in those activities.
Indeed, during the Third National Development Plan period certain economic activities were either exclusively reserved for government or for majority government interest.
The situation that gave rise to the predominance of government in some economic activities has, however now changed.
What is more, the Organised and even the informal sector have grown considerably over .the years.'
There is need to release government resources for the provision and development of infrastructure etc.
Government therefore welcomes and actively encourages a more significant role for the private sector in the restructuring of .the economy and in' improving the long term growth and development prospects.
Government has in addition opened up hitherto restricted areas in manufacturing to the private sector.
In defence industries, however, government shall establish regulatory mechanism guiding investment.
Furthermore, government will maintain continuous contact and consultations with the private sector on issues of concern to industry.
In view of the foregoing, government expects the private sector to seize the opportunity and play their rightful role in the economy.
Debt Conversion Programme In addition to the privatization / Commercialisation exercise and in a determined effort to reduce the debt burden of the country and thereby improve the investment climate especially in the critical areas of the economy, Government has established a Debt Conversion programme(DCP).
The objectives of the Programme are: 101 (a) to improve Nigeria's external debt position by reducing the stock of outstanding foreign currency denominated debt in order to alleviate the debt service burden; (b) to improve economic environment attractive to foreign investors; (c) to serve as an additional incentive for the repatriation of flight capital; , (d) to stimulate employment generating investments in industries with significant dependence on local inputs; (e) to encourage the creation and development of export base of the Nigerian economy, and (f) to increase access to appropriate technology, external market and other benefits associated with foreign investment.
For the effective implementation of the programme, Government bas set up a Debt Conversion Committee whose secretariat is located at The Central Bank of Nigeria, Tinubu Square, P.M.B.
12194, Lagos.
Prospective participants in the programme, whether corporate or non-corporate, national or foreign, are required to obtain the prior approval in principle of the Committee in order to qualify for participation.
Detailed guidelines covering rules and regulations as well as application forms are obtainable from the secretariat of the Debt Conversion Committee.
ACTIVITY 1 What led to the formulation of industrial policy in Nigeria?
ANSWER To remove business barriers in Nigeria and improve the investment climate in the economy.
3.3 Incentives to Industry In order to induce greater support of the industrial development objectives outlined in this document and considering the need to 102 promote a dynamic, efficient and balanced manufacturing sector, a package of incentives has been approved by Government.
These incentives are designed to promote investment, employment, product mix and various other aspects of’ industry.
In addition the nature and application of these incentives have been considerably simplified.
Li general, the package of incentives can be grouped into five.
These are: (i) Fiscal measures on taxation and interest rates (ii) Effective protection with import tariff (iii) Export promotion of Nigerian Products (iv) Foreign currency facility for international trade (v) Development Banking 3.3.1 Taxation Fiscal measures have been fashioned out to provide for deductions and allowances in the determination of taxes payable by manufacturing enterprises.
The fiscal measures are targeted at aspects of industrial activity as follows: (i) Pioneer Status By the provision of the Income Tax Relief Act 1958 Amendment by Decree No.
22 of 1971), public companies are granted specific tax holiday on corporate income.
The object of the Decree is to encourage the establishment for such industries that government considers beneficial to Nigeria.
During the period of the exemption, the companies are expected to achieve a reasonable level of profitability.
To benefit from the Decree, the relevant company (or the product) is declared a pioneer industry (or pioneer product).
The Act is applicable to both public and private limited liability companies Furthermore, the relief covers a non-renewable period of five years for pioneer industries and seven yeas for such industries located in economically disadvantaged areas.
103  Additional tax concessions are available to industrialists who take initiative in the following areas: (a) local raw materials development (b) local value added (c) labour intensive processes (d) expert-oriented activities (e) in-Plant training (f) investment in economically disadvantaged areas.
Details on these concessions’ are embodied in a separate pamphlet on incentives to industries.
IDCD is responsible for the administration of these and other incentives to industry on application.
(ii) Tax Relief for Research and Development Industrial establishments are expected to engage in Research and Development (R & D) for the improvement of their processes and products.
Up to 120% of expenses on R & D are tax deductible, provided that such R&D activities are carried out in Nigeria and are connected with the business from which income or profit is derived.
For the purpose of R & D on local raw materials, 140% of expenses are allowed.
Where the research is long term, it will be regarded as a capital expenditure and with written off against profits.
In administering this tax relief, the Federal Ministry of Finance shall consult the Federal Ministry of Science and Technology to determine the genuinesss of such R&D activities.
The results of such research could be patented and protected in accordance with internationally accepted industrial property rights.
(iii) Companies Income Taxation Act This act has been amended in order to encourage potential and existing investors and entrepreneurs.
Henceforth the following reliefs and regulations shall apply: (a) Corporate Tax Rate is 40% from 1987; 10 4(b) Penalty for failure to pay on due date is 10% per annum of the outstanding amount; (c) section 49(3) of the Companies Income Tax Act requires companies to submit detailed tax computations along with their returns and audited accounts; and Industrial Inspectorate department acceptance Certificate.
(d) When a tax payer wants to appeal against a court decision, eh disputed tax shall be paid.
The body of Appeal Commissioners as well as the courts have been em- powered to impose a penalty of 10% where an appeal proves to be frivolous or groundless.
(e) power to obtain information by a tax authority on banks’ customers which has been provided in the Income Tax Management Act is also applicable to Companies Income Tax Act 1979.
(f) Capital Allowance: The Current Rates Applicable ‘in Respect of Capital Allowances are: Qualifying Expenditure in respect of: Initial allowance Annual allowance % (a) Building Expenditure 5 (b) Industrial Building 15 10 Expenditure (c) Mining Expenditure 20 10 (d) Plant Expenditure 20 10 (excluding furniture and fittings) (e) Furniture and Fittings 15 10 (f) Motor Vehicle expenditure 25 20 (g) Plantation Equipment 20 331/2 Expenditure (h) Housing Estate Expenditure 20 10 10 5(i) Ranching and Plantation 25 15 Expenditure (j) Research and Development 25 121/ 2 Expenditure The amount of capital allowances to be enjoyed in any year of assess- ment in restricted in Nigeria to 75% of the assessable profits in case of manufacturing companies and 662/ % in case of others, except that 3 companies in agro-allied industry are not affected by this restriction.
If the leased assets are used in agro-allied company, the full 100% capital allowance claimed will be granted.
Moreover, where the leased assets are agricultural plants and equipments, there will be an additional investment allowance of 10% on such expenditure.
(iv) Tax Free Dividends: An individual or a company driving dividends from any company as from 1987 shall enjoy tax free dividends for a period of 3 years of: (a) the company paying the dividends is incorporated in Nigeria (b) the equity participation is imported into the country between 1st January 1987 and 31st December, 1982; and (c) the recipient’s equity in the company constitutes, at least, 10% of the share capital of the company.
In addition to (a), (b) and (c) above, if the company paying (vi) the dividends is engaged in Agricultural production within Nigeria or processing of such Nigerian agricultural products produced within Nigeria or the production of petro-chemicals or liquefied natural gas, the tax free period shall be 5years.
(v) Tax Relief for investments in Economically Disadvantaged Local Government Areas.
Entrepreneurs who invest in economically disadvantaged local government areas are entitled to special income tax and other concessions.
These include: 10 6 (a) Seven years income tax concessions under the pioneer status scheme (b) Special concessions by relevant State Governments Additional 5% over and above the initial capital depreciation allowance under the Company Income Tax Act (Accelerated.
Capital Depreciation).
For the purpose of administering these incentives, the country has been grouped into the following zones: Zone 1 — Industrially and economically developed Local Government Areas, Zone 2 — Less industrially and economically developed Local Government Areas and Zone 3 — Least industrially and economically developed Local Government Areas.
Less industrially and economically developed Local Government Areas are defined in terms of inadequacies of: - Industrial production in gross and per capital basis available - Social and Economic Infrastructures - Level of labour market development.
(vi) Double Taxation (Income Tax Act 1979) By Decree No.
4 1985 (Miscellaneous Taxation Provisions) the Income tax Act of 1979 was amended.
The effect of the amendment was to eliminate double taxation on investment income.
(vii) Group of Companies Taxation Companies can now pay interim company dividends without any double taxation since the amendment on franked investment income came into effect on 1st January 1985.
10 7 3.3.2 Effective Protection Tariff levels provided a simple and straightforward measure of protection against imports but may not provide the total effect an- ticipated.
Government therefore puts in place other measures to ensure that locally produced goods are competitive in both domestic and export markets; (i) Customs and Excise Regime Pursuant to the trade liberalization policies of the Government, a new Customs, Excise Tariff etc (consolidated) Decree has been published and which took effect from 1st January 1988.
The Decree (No.1 of 1988) which repeals those of 1984, makes provisions for the imposition of customs and excise duties payable on goods imported and manufactured in Nigeria basing its classification on the new Harmonized System of Customs Tariff.
The essence of the review is to give effective protection to local industries and to promote further investments, competition and efficiency.
Rather than outright prohibition, the new dispensation favours the use of tariff for the purpose of effectively protecting local industries, enhancing revenue generation, combating smuggling and encouraging exports.
(ii) Dumped and Subsidised Goods The Customs Duties (Dumped and Subsidised Goods) Act 1958 permits when necessary, the imposition of a special duty on any goods, which are dumped in Nigeria or subsidised by any Government or authority outside Nigeria.
The Provision of this act will be invoked if the Government is satisfied that: (a) material injury will be threatened or caused to potential or established industries in Nigeria by the entry of subsidised or dumped goods into the country; and 10 8 (b) the imposition of a special duty will not conflict with Nigeria’s obligations under any international agreement such as the General Agreement on Trade and Tariffs (GATT).
3.3 Export Promotion A variety of measure ranging from export insurance to outright grant to export oriented industries are applicable to manufacturers producing for export.
These have been articulated in Decree No.
18 of 11th July, 1986.
(i) Import Duty Drawback Under the Customs (Duty Drawback), Regulations 1959, importers can claim repayment of import duty paid for materials used in producing export goods.
Repayment will be made in full if materials are imported for use in the production of goods which are exported.
In the partly duty-paid ingredients the Customs and Excise department may grant bona fide applicants a “fixed rate” drawback on proof of exportation of such goods or their disposal in an approved manner.
The objective of the duty drawback is to encourage the production of various export goods as a way of diversifying the economy away from oil.
To encourage non-oil export development and to enable exporters compete effectively on international markets, a duty drawback scheme involving and duty suspension for qualifying exporters backed by bankers’ guarantees, ha been put in place.
(ii) Export License Waiver No export license is required for the export of manufactured or processed products.
Also exports have been exempted from excise tax.
(iii) Export Credit Guarantees and Insurance Scheme In order to make Nigerian products compete effectively in the international market as well as to insure genuine exporters 10 9 against some political and other risks including default in payment, government has approved the establishment of an export credit guarantee and insurance scheme.
Exporters will also be in a position to grant their customers some credit facilities.
(iv) The Export Development Fund shall be used to provide financial assistance to private exporting companies to cover part of their initial expenses in respect of export promotion activities.
(v) Export Expansion Fund The export Expansion Fund shall be used to provide cash inducement for exporters who have exported a minimum of N50,000 worth or semi-manufactured or manufactured products.
(vi) Export Adjustment Scheme Fund has been established to serve as a supplementary export subsidy.
Proceeds will be used to compensate exporters for: (a) high costs of production arising from ii deficiencies (b) purchasing commodities at prices higher than prevailing world market prices but fixed by government, and (c) other factors beyond the control of the exporter.
(vii) Rediscounting of Short Term Bills for Export This facility will enable all exporters to rediscount their short term bills under a scheme provided for in the Central Bank of Nigeria (CBN) (Amendment) Act 1967 (viii) Capital Allowance Additional annual capital allowance of 5% on plant and machinery for “manufacturing exporters” (those that export at least 50% of their annual turnover); provided that the product has at least 40 percent local raw materials content or 35 percent value added.
(ix) Tax Relief on Interest Income The Companies Income Tax Act 1979 has also been amended to 11 0 grant tax relief on interest accruing from any loans granted to aid investment in export oriented industries.
3.3.4 Foreign Currency Facility A new trade and exchange rate regime has been adopted by government to ensure efficient and competitive local production.
Adjustment in the exchange rate regime will provide greater access to external markets than before to industries relying extensively on local resource endowments.
The facility also provides for easier movement of investible funds, goods and services in and out of Nigeria.
(i) Foreign Exchange Market The foreign exchange market came into operation in September 1986 resulting in the abrogation of import levy and import licence.
The market also provides manufactures easy access to foreign exchange.
(ii) Repatriation of Imported Capital An approved “Status” permit for imported capital investment is conferred on companies with non-resident investment in cases where the original investment was imported in the form of equity either by way of cash and/or plant and machinery.
The purpose of this “Status” is to facilitate timely repatriation of remittances or other capital claims.
(iii) Payment of Technology Fees In orders to ensure effective assimilation and diffusion of foreign technology within a specific timeframe at a fiar and equitable contractual and payment terms; the rate for payments in technology transfer transactions have been reviewed.
Fees for technical services are based on net sales (rather than profit before tax).
Furthermore the rates applicable are as follows: (a) Royalty: royalty in respect of know-how, patents and other industrial property rights shall now range from 1 5% of net sales.
(b) Technical/Management services: fees in respect of technical 11 1 assistance/management services shall also range from 1-5% of net sales.
The upper-level of the ranges above will be considered as incentive remuneration or compensations allowed to Observing cases where: (a) the local value added is not lower than 70% or by the products are intended for export market and the fees for these services can be serviced from the export proceeds, or (c) the benefits derived by the enterprises are considered desirable in the national interest, (iv) Foreign Currency Domiciliary Account Banking regulations in Nigeria make it possible for exporters of non-oil products to retain the proceeds of export in bank accounts denominated in foreign currency.
Such accounts are operated at the owners discretion, for external transactions or conversion to Naira but in accordance with existing Central Bank of Nigeria guidelines.
3.3.5 Development Banking Industrial development banks have been set up at both Federal and state levels to offer specialised services to industry.
Paramount among these services is the provision of soft loans and advances to large, medium, small scale and cottage type industries on concessionary terms.
These concessions are reviewed regularly in line with policy objectives of governments.
Development Banks include, among others Nigerian Bank for Commerce and Industry (NBCI), and the Nigerian Industrial development Bank (NIDB), state Investment corporations, etc.
Guidelines to Investors and the Institutional Framework This last is designed to provide investors with information on government requirements for establishing businesses or industries in Nigeria and the relevant government institutions 11 2 involved in the process.
Guidelines to Investors The main requirements for the establishment of business are: (a) Business Permit including permit to employ expatriates (b) Approved status of ensure that imported capital can be repatriated (C) Investment guarantee approvals (d) Approvals covering pre-investment technical fees agreement.
For investment in specific industries such as fishing, pharmaceuticals etc.
additional requirement s are available in the Guide To Investors published by the Investment, information and Promotion centre of the Federal Ministry of Industries.
A new institutional framework has been established by Government to administer the business/industry related approvals listed in paragraph 4.1 (a)-(d).
The one stop approval agency known as the Industrial Development Co-coordinating Committee (IDCC) is located in the Federal Ministry of Industries and consists of seven ministers who are charged with the responsibility to ensure that all required approvals are given within sixty days.
This new arrangement has removed the need to get required approvals from various Government agencies as was previously the case.
(i) Expatriate Quota The IDCC will ensure that expatriate quotas are issued.
Businesses with a capitalisation of five million Naira (N5,000,000.00) and above are entitled to a maximum automatic quota of two positions while those with a capitalisation of ten million Naira (10,000,000.00) and above are entitled to four automatic quota positions.
All other requests for expatriate quota will be considered on merit.
(ii) Product Standards New companies, prior to importation of machinery, are required to lodge copies of the product standards, with the Standards Organisation of Nigeria (SON) for clearance.
11 3 The Federal Government of Nigeria has bilateral arrangements with some countries for the purpose of guaranteeing investments in Nigeria by citizens of those countries.
The aim is to ensure that in the event socio-political changes affecting such investments, the repatriation of the imported capital investment is guaranteed.
The conditions for such investment guarantee approvals are: (a) that the capital required for such investments had actually been imported into the country through the approved status in principle issued by the IDCC.
(b) Evidence of compliance with the provision of the Nigerian Enterprises Promotion Decree.
(C) Submission of a copy of the Business Permit issued by the IDCC and (d) Submission of a copy of the audited account of the company if already in existence.
(iv) Technical fees agreement Applications for Technical Fees Agreement are required to be made to the IDCC.
Investors are advised to abide by the Guidelines on Technical Fees Agreement as published by the National Office of Industrial Property (NOIP).
(v) Management of Industrial Waste (a) All existing industries should treat their waste effluents at least up to the secondary level, (i.e to the state where discharge will not pose danger to life and property), while those industries which produce toxic and hazardous waste should treat their waste beyond the secondary level.
Toxic solid waste should be specially handled, col- lected and disposed off.
Toxic gases should also be specially handled.
(b) New industries should have efficient treatment facilities incorporated into their systems right from inception.
11 4 (c) Industries should set up environmental quality countries.
(d) All major industrial projects should include an Environmental Impact Assessment (ETA) statement.
This would be one of the conditions for permits for establishing such industries.
(e) Effluent discharges of industries will be monitored on regular bases to ensure compliance with the waste disposal regulations.
(f) Emphasis will be placed on recycling of waste from industries, since the waste from one industry could be feedstock for another industry.
ACTIVITY 2 Mention 5 incentives provided by the policy to support, industrial development.
ANSWER 1.
Fiscal measures on Taxation and Interest rates 2.
Effective protection with import tariff 3.
Export promotion of Nigeria products 4.
Development Bank 3.4 Institutional Framework The Industrial Development Co-coordinating Committee (IDCC.)
Initial authorizations for the establishment of new industries were in the past requested from several government ministries and agencies.
The attendant chaos and delays inevitably slowed down the pace of establishment of new industries.
Government has therefore established a new central agency known as the Industrial Development Co-coordinating Committee (IDCC) to oversee required approvals.
The committee comprises ministries 11 5 Finance, Internal Affairs, Trade, Science and Technology, Agriculture; Industries, Employment, Labour and Productivity.
The main objectives for setting up the Committee are to: (a) obviate the delays in granting approvals for the establishment of new industries; (b) create one approval centre instead of the present situation where there is a multiplicity of approving centers with unnecessary costs to prospective investors in terms of tine and financial resources: (c) Obviate the lack of co-ordination among approving ministries; (d) remove the present conflicting and duplicated demands by ministries before approvals are granted; (e) advise on policy review proposals on tariffs, excise duties, various incentive schemes and commodity pricing, as they relate to industrial development; and (f) ensure adequate co-ordination and objectivity in the nations industrial development efforts.
ii) The functions of the new IDCC are as follows: (a) Granting approvals for the commencement of new businesses and relevant expatriate quota for such businesses (expatriate quota approvals by IDCC will be limited, to new businesses only); (b) Granting approved status in principle for imported capital in new ventures; (c) Approving technology transfer agreements as they relate to: - Assistance in procuring machinery, plants, equipments and components; 11 6 - engineering design’ services; - Plant installation and - plant commissioning (d) Advising on the administration of government industrial incentives: (e) Making recommendations on pertinent policies including tariff and various measures aimed at ensuring the, industrial development of the country; f) other relevant functions assigned to the committee from time to time to facilitate meaningful industrial development.
The IDOC Secretariat will function as a co-coordinating centre for receiving applications from prospective investors, channeling such applications to the appropriate ministries for their comments and recommendations, and collating information received for briefing and decision-making.
‘The decree provides that every application shall be processes within two months.
(iii) The Policy Analysis Department (PAD) Government has established an organ known as the Policy analysis Department within the Federal Ministry of Industries.
The functions of this department are to undertake the collection of data, conduct economic research and policy analysis necessary for the evaluation of the effectiveness or otherwise of industrial policy.
(iv) Industrial Inspectorate Department (lID) The Industrial Inspectorate Department of the Federal Ministry of Industries plays a pivotal role in certifying the actual values of capital investments in buildings, machinery and equipment of various industries.
The Department also certifies the date of commencement of production for companies that enjoy pioneer status, and the value of imported industrial machinery and equipment for the confirmation of approved status for non-resident capital investment.
lID also provides in house technical services for the ministry, including negotiations, equipment selection and implementation of public sector projects.
It also plays a key role in the monitoring of the Comprehensive Import 11 7 Supervision Scheme (CISS) to ensure that the operations are in the spirit of the Agreement.
it is the intention of the Government.
to indigenize pre-shipment import inspection currently being undertaken by foreign companies.
The lID, which presently monitors the operations of the inspection Agents is expected to be directly involved in pre-shipment import inspection in due course.
(v) Data Bank An Industrial Data Bank has been established in the Federal Ministry of Industries together, store and retrieve data.
The Bank will provide information on existing industries in the various’ sub-sectors, their production capacities and expansion plans,, production costs, the state of the market, price movement, raw materials available in various parts of the country, etc.
(vi) Raw Materials Research and Development Council A Raw Materials Research and Development Council has been es- tablished and housed at the Federal Ministry of Science and Technology.
The Council will be the umbrella organisation for all the various efforts by public and private sectors in the research and development of local industrial input.
The Council shall work in close collaboration with the Federal Ministry of Industries which has the overall responsibility for the development of incentives pertain- ing to raw materials utilization.
(vii) Investment Information and Promotion Centre In practically all cases, whether the prospective investors are Nigerians or foreigners, it is advisable to contact the Investment In- formation and Promotion Centre of the Federal Ministry of in- dustries for the latest information on procedural matters and the industrial climate in Nigeria.
The Centre can advise and guide investors, free of charge, on most aspects of their investment proposals.
(viii) Industrial Training Fund The Industrial Training Fund, established by Decree No.
47 of 1971. is the body responsible for promoting and encouraging the acquisition of skills in Industry and Commerce.
11 8 In the areas of Industrial Training and development, the Industrial Training Fund will continue to generate indigenous trained man- power sufficient to meet the needs of the economy.
In this wise, the Fund will provide facilities for training of persons employed in in- dustry and commerce; approve courses and appraise facilities provided for training by other bodies, particularly in industry or com- merce; consider, regularly, operational areas of industry or com- merce that require specific man power training and development inputs and recommend kinds of training needed, the standards to .be attained, and ensure that such standards are met.
It would also assist in finding facilities for training for employment in industry and commerce and will conduct or assist others to conduct research into any matter relating to training in industry.
(ix) Standards Organisation of Nigeria The Standards Organisation of Nigeria is the statutory body respon- sible for standardization and quality control in the nation’s economy.
In this connection it will prepare standards for products and proces- ses, ensure compliance with Government Policy on standardization and quality of products both locally manufactured and imported, undertake investigations as necessary into the quality of products in Nigeria and establish a quality assurance system including certification of factories products and laboratories, maintain ref- erence standards for calibration and verification of measures and measuring instruments and co-operate with corresponding national and international organisations with a view to securing uniformity in standards specifications.
2 With the semi-autonomous status now granted to the Standards Or- ganisation of Nigeria (SON), it would henceforth strictly enforce the powers of seizure, confiscation and destruction of sub-standard goods and products and seal up factories which are regularly found to produce sub-standard or defective goods and products.
Equity Structure in Nigerian Enterprises In the years preceding Nigeria’s independence and indeed up to the early 1970s, the predominance of foreigners in industrial activities in the country wits very evident.
There was a felt need to encourage Nigerians to get more in4olved in the economic activities of the country in order to maximize local retention of profit, increase the net industrial contribution to the national economy and avoid unnecessary socio-political problems of absentee control of the 11 9 nation’s industrial sector.
There was also an equal recognition of the need to ensure that greater Nigerian participation in industry should proceed simultaneously with attracting foreign investments on mutually beneficial terms.
Consequently the Nigerian Enterprises Promotion Decree (NEPD) was promulgated in 1972 (amended,’ 1977) to involve Nigerian in the ownership,’ control- and management of certain enterprises.
In the intervening years since the Decree was promulgated, it was observed that total investment as a share of GDP had fallen due to several factors ranging from inadequate foreign capital flow to low levels of internal savings.
This situation has led Government to review the investment environment particularly in the light of the fact that Nigerian’ entrepreneurs have come of age and are able to hold their ground in various types of enterprises.
The review was also necessitated by the fact that demands of SAP impose the spirit of competition and efficiency in production and quality of goods and prices acceptable to consumers.
There is no doubt that the longer, term prospects for growth in output and job creation entails a rise in the overall level of investment especially for purposes of exploiting out vast natural resources.
In order therefore to encourage foreign capital inflow, Government has amended the Nigeria Enterprises Promotion Decree, 1977.
With the amendment, there now exists only one list of scheduled enterprises exclusively reserved for Nigerians for the purpose of 100% equity ownership.
All other businesses not contained in the list of schedules businesses are now open for 100% Nigerian or foreign participation except in the areas of Banking, Insurance, petroleum Prospecting and Mining where the existing arrangement still subsist.
Both Nigerians and foreigners are free to negotiate levels of equity participation in the unscheduled enterprises.
Foreigners are also free to participate even in the scheduled businesses provided: (a) Such participation involves equity capital not below twenty million Naira (N20,000,000.00) and (b) prior approval is obtained from the Industrial Development Co-or- dination Committee (IDCC) The objective of allowing for this special dispensation is to encourage large-scale production/operation in some scheduled businesses not only for the local market but for export.
It must be emphasied for the avoidance of about that the new ownership structure as detailed hereunder applies to new investments only.
This implies that the ownership structure in respect of existing 12 0 enterprises as provided for in the 1977 Decree still subsists.
3.5 Relevant Laws and Regulations To Guide Prospective Investors, The Following Laws And Regulations Related To Industrial Development In Nigeira Are Reproduced Below: (1) Customs And Excise Management Act 1938.
No.
55 Of 1958.
(2) Customs (Drawback) Regulations Legal Notice, No.
70 1959.
(3) Customs Duties (Dumped And Subsidized Goods) Act No.9 Of 1958.
(4) Income Tax Management Act 1961, No.
81.
(5) Factories Act Cap.
66.
(6) National Provident Fund Act 1961, No.
20.
(7) Workmen’s Compensation Act: Cap 222.
(8) Merchandise Marks Act Cap.
117 (9) Registration Of Business Names Act 1961, No.
17.
(10) Trade Marks Act 1965, No.
29.
(11) Immigration Act 1963, No.
6 (12) Exchange Control Act 1962, No.
16.
(13) Companies Act No.51 Of 1968.
(14) Patents And Designs Act 1970, No.
60.
(15) Industrial Inspectorate Act 1970, No.
53.
(16) Industrial Development (Income Tax) Act 1971, No.
22.
(17) Nigerian Standards Organization Act 1971, No.
56.
(18) Industrial Training Fund Act 1971, No.
47.
(19) Wages Boards And Industrial Councils Act 1973, No.1.
(20) National Bank For Commerce And Industry Act 1973, No.
22.
(21) Trade Union Act 1973, No.
31.
(22) Excise Tariff (Consolidation) Act 1973, No.7.
(23) Customs Tariff (Consolidation) Act 1973, No.6.
(24) Labor Act 1974, No.
21.
(25) Trade Disputes Act 1976, No.7.
(26) Trade Disputes Essential Services Act 1976, No.26 (27) Nigerian Export Promotion Council Act 1976, No.
26.
(28) Nigerian Enterprises Promotion Act 1977, No.3 12 1 (29) Productivity, Prices And Incomes Board Act 1977, No.
30.
(30) Pre-Shipment Inspection Of Imports Act 1978, No.36.
(31) Companies Income Tax Act 1979, No.
28.
(32) Industrial Promotion Act 1979, No.
40.
(33) Import Prohibition Order Ln.
10 Or 1979.
(34) National Office Of Industrial Property Act 1979, No.
70.
(35) Securities And Exchange Commission Act 1979, No.
71 (36) The Electricity (Private Licenses) Regulations 1965, L.N.
76.
(37) Bankruptcy Act 1979, No.
16.
(38) Nigerian Export Promotion Council Decree (No.
26) 1976.
(39) Second-Tier Foreign Exchange Market Decree No.23, 1986 (40) Customs, Excise Etc (Consolidated) Decree No.
-1988 (41) Factories Of decree No 16,1987 (42) Workmen’s Compensation Decree No.
17,1987.
(43) Industrial Development Co-Ordinating Committee Decree 1988.
(44) Nigerian Export Credit Guarantee And Insurance Corporation Decree (No 15)1988.
(45) Privatization And Commercialization Decree.
(No.
25)1988.
Source: Habibu, 1999: 264 –303 4.0 Conclusion A Case Study Of Industrial Policy In Nigeria Is Cited In This Unit To Enable You Understand What A Policy Is In Reality And Compare The Policy Intent With Its Implementation To See How Far The Policy Objectives Have Been Achieved After Two Decades Of Its Formation.
You can now know better that there is a wise gap between policymaking and its implementation.
5.0 SUMMARY The last unit of this course has a case study.
If all policies are implemented according, the issue of policy failures could have 12 2 been minimized.
This case study of industrial policy in Nigeria is therefore presented to you for your perusal.
6.0 TUTOR-MARKED ASSIGNMENT (TMA) Mention four main requirement for the establishment of business in Nigeria.
ANSWER a.
Business permit including permit to employ expatriates b.
Approved status to ensure that imported capital can be repatriated c. Investment guarantee approvals; and d. Approvals covering pre-investment technical fees agreement.
7.0 References And List For Further Readings Habibu, A.S., (1999) Public Policy Analysis: theoretical and Applied Approaches.
Okene: Desmond Tutu Publishers.
12 3 UNIT 16 PUBLIC POLICY ANALYSIS AND IMPLEMENTATION Table of Content 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objectives 3.0 Main content 3.1 Conceptual Classifications 3.2 The Policy Making Process 3.3 Impact of the Environmental on Policy Making and Implementation 3.3.1 Social Environment 3.3.2 Political Environment 3.3.3 Economic Environment 3.4 Major Contribution to Public Making and Implementation in Nigeria 3.5 The Situation Today 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutor – Marked Assignment 7.0 Further Readings 1.0 INTRODUCTION In this unit we attempted to relate public policy to the conduct of government business.
Infact we submit that public policy is the first logical step in the conduct of government business.
You should try to understand our position from the point of view of evolving governmental policies from the manifestos of the political party in power.
Hence we adopt policy is a guide or direction for implementing the contents of a manifesto which ought to reflect the needs of the citizen.
This constitutes the bedrock of government business.
2.0 OBJECTIVES At the end of this unit, you should be able to: (i) Explain the concept of public policy (ii) Trace the various stages involved in policy making and implementation, (iii) Identify the impact of the environment in policy making and implementation; and; (iv) Explain the role of the major actors in the public policy making and implementation.
12 4 3.0 MAIN CONTENT The main content of our discussion commences from clarification of the concept of policy and public policy.
This clarification will enable you understand further discussions which is the policy process.
This is explained through a cycle.
Then the environmental impacts on public policy making and implementation.
This is finally followed by identifying the major actors in this enterprise and the role and responsibilities they play in the direction.
3.1 Conceptual Clarifications Public policy could be perceived as a proposed cause of action of a person, group or government within a given environment providing obstacles and opportunities which the policy was proposed to utilize and overcome in an effect to reach a goal or actualize an objective as a purpose.
A vital question that could be asked ie, what makes a policy public?
Thomas Dye (1999: 289) appeases to provide an answer to do or not to do.
Activity: List the distinctive characteristics of Public Policy.
Answer: (i) It is purposive or goal oriented, (ii) It consists of courses or patterns of action by government officials, (iii) It is what government actually does.
(iv) It involves a decision by government officials (v) It is based on law and authority.
The introduction of the term government into the definition gives it a sharper focus.
It could therefore be asserted that, what makes policies distinctively ‘public’ are that they are developed by governmental bodies and officials.
This is directly related to the perception of David Easton (1965) that’ “public policies are formulated by Authorities”, that is , people who are engaged in the daily affairs of a political system and recognized by most members of the system as having responsibility for these matters and take decisions that are accepted as binding, most of the time, by most of the members, so long as they act within the limits of their roles.
This thus, establishes an inextricable linkage between public policy and politics.
However, it must be appreciated that government, in whatever form, cannot be isolated.
Despite the foregoing, the distinctive characteristics further provided by ‘Sina Sambo (1999:283) are illustrating.
12 5 These are: (i) Public policy is a purposive or goal-oriented action rather than a random and chance behavior, (ii) Public policy consists of courses or patterns of action by governmental officials; (iii) Public policy is what government actually does, not what it intends to do, or say it is going to do; (iv) Public policy involves some form of overt government action to affect a particular problem; it also involves a decision by government officials not to take action, to do nothing on some matter on which governmental involvement is sought ; and (v) Public policy is based on law and is authoritative.
In other words, public policy has an authoritative, potentially legally coercive quality that the policies or private organizations do not have.
3.2 Public Policy Making Process Policy making involves the policy cycle which indicates the main phases of this exercise which could be systematically undertaken.
These phases are: Policy initiation, policy formulation; policy implementation; policy monitoring and evaluation; and policy reformation.
They cycle is schematically represented here under POLICY INITIATION POLICY POLICY REFORMATION FORMULATION POLICY MONITORING POLICY AND EVALUATION IMPLEMENTATION Fig.
11.1 Schema of the Policy Cycle 12 6 Each of these phases is further explained hereunder.
(a) Policy Initiation This involves intensive research effort on the nature and substance and purpose of the policy.
This phase is sometimes undertaken by a group of multi-disciplinary experts of “Thank” who generate relevant ideas and provide facts and figures to appraise a proposed policy in terms of its chances of success or otherwise.
At this initial stage, the degree of public acceptability or rejection, possible anticipated problems, costs and benefits, enabling and inhibiting environmental factors and resources available are identified and thoroughly examined in order to facilitate policy formulation and enhance the success of a policy.
(b) Policy Formulation This phase embraces key/critical features such as clear and unambiguous definitions, statement and articulation of the policy content indicating clearly stated implementation policy objectives, plans, programmes, key activities involved, policy priorities and strategies.
Other important features of this phase include resource availability, identification of relevant and core agencies and their roles, and an enabling environment to facilitate policy implementation Although the public servant plays a very active role in policy formulation using his wealth of knowledge, professional competence and experience in government business and the environment in which it operates, the responsibility for formulating any policy rests squarely with the politician or political decision maker.
(c ) Policy Implementation This phase is critical to the success of any policy since it constitutes the epi-centre of the policy process.
This phase involves the identification of policy plans, programmes, projects, activities, clear definition of distinct roles of implementing organizations or agencies, details of strategies and necessary linkages and coordinating mechanisms, resources (human, financial , materials, technological, information) acquisition and utilization.
Efficient and effective policy implementation would require inputs of sound managerial and administrative capabilities in terms of proper activity scheduling, resources mobilization and rationalization , net- 12 7 work analysis, budgeting, supervision, problem solving and decision- making and cost/benefit analysis.
We should also determine at this stage, policy performance standards and targets.
Implementation of policies must be guided by clearly stated policy objectives and in accordance with specified guidelines, plans and time-frame in order to avoid the policy implementation gap which is a common feature of even well formulated public policies in Nigeria.
Policy implementation gap is the difference between well-stated and articulated policy objectives or expected outcomes and the actual outcome which is a consequence of inefficient or poor policy implementation.
We must re-emphasize that it is at the implementation stage that all the plans that are made on the drawing Board are translated into concrete activities.
Equally, the transaction of a policy into concrete projects is done at this stage.
What the citizens see and feel for which the success or failure of a given policy is identified is glaring at this stage.
Infact, it is this stage that provides the bulk of the information needed for policy evaluation.
All these inform the description of this stage as the Epi- Centre of the policy process.
(d) Policy Monitoring and Evaluation The monitoring of policy performance should permeate all phases of the policy cycle and especially all activities planned, programmed and undertaken at various stages of policy implementation.
This approach allows for necessary corrections, modifications and adjustments to be effected towards ensuring the success of a policy in terms f the achievemen of desirable results.
Policy monitoring therefore focuses on compliance with policy implementation specifications, resources rationalizing and adherence to activity planning and time-schedule for all aspects of a policy.
Policy evaluation, on the other hand, should provide clear indicators for the successful implementation of a policy on the basis of well-defined criteria of efficiency, effectiveness, responsiveness, impact and innovation.
Feedback provided by condition guides the future plans of any similar activity or event.
(a) Policy reformation The information emerging from the evaluation will dictate possible policy reformation.
For instance, where a given policy fails to meet the 12 8 objective for its enunciation, this may call for the reformulation of that policy.
3.3 IMPACT OF THE ENVIRONMENT ONN POLICY MAKING AND IMPLEMENTATION Just like anything neither management nor everybody, occurrences, environment within which polices are enunciated and implemented exerts a lot of influence in their making of such polices.
For instance, policy actions are generated in the environment places limits and constraints upon what can be done by policy makers.
The impact of the environment could be perceived from the socio-political and economic factors.
These factors contribute immensely in shaping the nature and direction of policies (Sule, 12003: 172- 175).
3.3.1 Social Environment Here , we have such other factors or sub-factors as: (i) Multi-ethnic delivery in which we have cultural differences within a heterogeneous society as witnessed in Nigeria.
The culture influences the values and life-style of the society.
Since every ethnic group tries to protect its own cultural views and strongly opposes any attempt to sub- sume its culture under others; it becomes difficult to make policies that can take care of the interests of these diverse groups in countries like Nigeria.
(ii) Directly related to ethnic diversity is Religion.
The practice of which in Nigeria is Secular.
Yet, it makes difficult, policy formulation that can take care of every member of the society.
For instance, the policy of SHARIA legal system is highly opposed by Nigerians who practice some other religious faiths.
(iii) Level of Literacy: Here, we find that where the level of literacy is low ignorance is high.
Hence, very few people participate in the policy making process.
By so doing, they capitalize on the ignorance of the society and sometimes makes obnoxious policies that would not be in the interest of many.
For instance, Deregulation of the “Down-stream Oil Policy” in Nigeria is seen as an attempt to impose on Nigerians the will of the International Monetary Fund (IMF) which is not in the overall interest of many, rather, it is in the interest of the few who constitute the Authority and policy makers.
(iv) Dichotomy between the Rich and the Poor: Here, economic disequilibrium often leads to the creation of class distinction among the citizenry.
On the one hand is the very rich group comprising mall 12 9 section of the society, on the other side, is the majority group who are socially and economically under-privileged.
The small but rich group uses its advantageous position to influence policies in order to protect its selfish interests.
Generally speaking, the social environment acts as a Catalyst for positive change in the direction which policies should go.
In the area of provision of social amenities, a lot can be achieved if a responsive government can listen to the yawning of the people by ensuring equitable distribution of social amenities.
Secondly, where there are glaring cases of inequity, certain government policies can be put in place to correct such imbalances.
For instance, in Nigeria, we have the following among others: Federal Character Policy; dimension Polices into Secondary Schools/Colleges; Recruitment in Federal Service Policy such as Catchments Area Policy; National Industrial Policy or Expatriate Quota Policy.
Etc.
3.3.2 Political Environment Here are such sub-factors as: (i) Leadership Style: Here, the nature of public policy could lead to the emergence of political leadership that falls within either of the following – Autocratic (Military or Civilian Dictatorship style); Laissesz-faire; and Democratic.
Similarly, the type of leadership style can influence the type of policy making that a country or society is to embark upon.
(ii) Political System: The nature of a political system could be as a result of the existing public policy.
Thus, a political system could be Capitalist or Socialist; Multi-party or One-party (Unitary); Democratic or Autocratic; Civilian or Military.
Once a particular policy is put in place, it could affect the perpetuity or otherwise of the country’s political system.
The only exception is where the people themselves are dissatisfied with a particular policy and call for a change.
Sometimes, these changes come peacefully or violently through agitation and confrontation.
(i) Political Stability or Instability: Certain obnoxious policies, could lead to political instability.
Yet, we need political stability for orderly progress of the nation both socially and economically.
The political instability which Nigeria has been witnessing since her independence can be attributed as the cause of the deplorable state in which the Nigerian citizen is living.
13 0 3.3.3 Economic Environment Here we have such sub-factors as: (i) Government’s Fiscal and Tax Policy which indicates the rate of socio-economic development; (ii) Employment Opportunities for qualified citizens’ (iii) Technological Development: here , we find that policies are enunciated so that a country at the lower rung of technological ladder can strive to move ahead.
Once a country is developing technologically, he will not only be able to provide the basic infrastructural facilities for the welfare of the citizens, but will also provide the necessary tools for individual development.
In addition, public policies are made more effective by using the instrument of technology though the process of effective data/information gathering analysis and decision-making.
3.4 Major Contributors to Public Policy making and Implementation in Nigeria Policy making is done at the strategic level while policy implementation is done at the Operational level of an organization’s hierarchy.
And those who operate at the strategic Level particularly in government are members of the political class while members of the Bureaucratic class carries out activities at the operational level.
This, therefore, presupposes that the public servant who naturally belongs to the bureaucratic class is not and should not consider himself as a policy maker.
This position could submit itself to debate on two fronts.
First, the public servant is a partner with the politician in the collaborative effort of policy- making ; and secondly, it is the people who decide policy-not the policy servant or the politician.
As earlier posted, public policy is a sanctioned course of action addressed to a particular problem or group of related problems which affect society at large.
Public policy-making, therefore, denotes the whole process of articulating and defining problems, formulating possible solutions into political demands, and channeling the demands into the political system.
Seeking sanctions or legitimating of preferred courses of action, legitimating and implementation, monitoring and review (feedback), and who participates in 13 1 what role in this process all depend to a great extent on the structure of political decision-making.
In view of the foregoing, it was equally posited that a member of the bureaucratic class is not and should not consider himself as a policy-maker.
Admittedly, he has an important role to play in this process.
He can collect, collate and analyze data; and he can pose options or alternative courses, of action.
He can also advise on possible consequences of various options.
But the question of choice of a course of action and the sanctioning of same is political action which is the domain of politicians.
For instance, in Britain today, Ministers are determined to demonstrate that they and not the public servants make policies.
3.5 The Situation Today The democratically elected civilian administration, which came into being in Nigeria in May, 1999, hopefully portends the beginning of an enduring democracy in the country and an apparent movement away from the drift.
This has so ar, justified applicability of our knit arrangement in the levels of operation in policy making and implementation.
A clearer picture is, therefore, emerging.
At the apex of the strategic level of operation are the elected officials or political class” represented by the Legislature.
By convention and constitutional provisions, this group makes laws and passes bills.
The fact that must be appreciated is that each of these members is armed with his party’s ‘manifesto’, which arguably, enhanced his being voted into position.
This, therefore, presupposes that whatever laws make or bills they pass into laws are, to a large extent, influenced by their party’s manifesto.
These laws are then passed on to the executive – a political class comprising of both elected and appointed members , for implementation.
Still operating at that strategic level, the executive translates the laws into policies and passes them down to it machinery of implementation, which is the bureaucratic class.
The bureaucratic class therefore, religiously implements the policies.
The scenario can be schematically represented in the figure below.
Strategic LEGISLATIURE LEVEL Transforms Party manifesto into Laws 13 2 EXECUTIVE Translates laws into policies BUREAUCRATICE CLASS Operational Translates Polices Programmes Levels And to projects for Implementation IMPLEMENTATABLE PROGRAMMES AND PROJECTS Fig 11.2 Schematic Representation of levels of transformation of Party Manifesto to Implementable Policies, Programmes and Projects.
4.0CONCLUSION Public policy making and implementation constitute the bedrock of government business in that it is the first activity that would channel activities of government towards its goal of improving the welfare of the people.
In the conduct of government business numerous other activities take place but these must be determine by the public policy.
For instance, in the pursuit of improving the health care delivery for the citizens, there must be formulated policy such as immunization, roll-back malaria, maternal health; HIV and AIDS etc.
5.0SUMMARY This unit started by explaining the concept of policy which is a guide to action towards pre-determined goals.
It linked the explanation to public policy which is simply put as governmental policies.
The unity thereafter explained the policy cycle with a diagram in which the following are identified; policy initiation, policy formulation, policy implementation, policy monitoring and evaluation and policy reformulation.
The unit equally discusses the contributes of the major factors such as members of the political class and members of the bureaucratic class and how they formulate and implement policies.
13 3 The relationship between the legislative, the executive and the bureaucratic class in this quest is informative.
6.0 TUROR-MAKED ASSIGNMENT Give a detailed explanation of the relationship between the legislature, the executive and the bureaucratic class in policy making and implementation in Nigeria 7.0 FUTURE READINGS 1.
Dye, T. (1997) Understanding Public Policy (New Jersey: Prentice Hall) 2.
Maduabum, C.P (2003) “Policy Making in Nigeria: Implementation Strategies and Cases” in Chuks Maduabum (Ed) Contemporary Issues on Public Policy Analysis in Nigeria (Badagry: ASCON Press) 3.
Sambo, S. (1999) “What is Public Policy?
“ in Remi Anifowose and Francis Enemuo (Ed) Contemporary Issues on Public Policy Analysis in Nigeria (Badagry: ASCON Press) 4.
Sule, J.Y .
(2003) “The Environmental and Policy Making” in Chuks Maduabum (Ed) Contemporary Issues on Public Policy Analysis in Nigeria.
U Badagry: ASCON Press 13 4 UNIT 17 DECISION MAKING IN GOVERNMENT 1.0 INTRODUCTION 2.0 OBJECTIVES 3.0 MAIN CONTENT 3.1 What is Decision Making?
3.2 Multiple Roles of the Decision maker 3.3 Overlap of Politics and Public Sector Decision making 3.4 Sensitivity to the External Environment 4.0 CONCLUSION 5.0 SUMMARY 6.0 TUTOR-MARKED ASSIGNMENT 7.0 FURTHER READINGS.
1.0 IINTRODUCTION When governments or countries make monumental progress and thus improve the quality of life of their citizen, it is a product of enlightened strategic economic decisions made by those who occupy the institutions where public policies are formulated, implemented and affected.
Thus in contemporary times, the quantum jump made by the Asian Tiger countries including Malaysia, Singapore, South Korea etc, are products of fundamental decisions made by their leaders.
On the contrary, when countries experience sharp drastic decline in their development, a phenomenon referred to as” Reversibility of Development,” it is also a manifestation or an outcome of decisions taken by those entrusted with the welfare of their people.
2.0 OBJECTIVES At the end of this unit, you should be able to: (i) explain the concept of Decision Making; (ii) identify the multiple roles of the decision maker; 13 5 (iii) explain the overlaps of Politics and Public Sector Decision making; and (iv) outline the roles of pressure groups and external environment in Decision Making.
3.0.
MAIN CONTENT What is Decision Making?
There is a controversy in the extent literature about what constitutes Decision.
However, we could put together the critical elements in Decision.
We could say that decision is choice making.
To make a choice means that you have several options from which you want to choose one.
Decision is action which is in pursuit of an objective or set of objectives.
Consequently, the choice that is making or the option that is chosen is chosen with the expectation that it and no other option can best lead to the expectation.
Consequently the option that is chosen is the one to which energy and resources are committed.
3.1.1 Why do we study Decision making?
We study decision making for the following reasons: (i) Managers face problems everyday and in solving these problems mangers are taking decisions.
Decision making is so much part of the manager that it is now identified as a major intellectual focus.
It is also pervasive.
(ii) Because of value judgment.
That is, that some bad decisions are good or bad.
People thus, ask, what makes a good or bad decision?
(iii) The need to survive and keep afloat because of the assumption that it is only good decisions that could keep one afloat.
So people now study decision making process to train managers to avoid pit-falls.
13 6 3.2 Multiple Roles of the Decision Making /What Managers do Decision makers (DMs) are organizational planner, leaders and controllers, who perform the following specific roles: (a) DMs balance competing roles and set priorities; (b) DMs must thing analytically and conceptually (c) DMs are channels of communication within the organizations; (d) DMs are accountable and responsible to the organization; (e) DMs are planners (f) DMs are mediators (g) DMs are diplomats (h) DMs are symbols (i) DMs are linkers of resources; (j) DMs are consultants to their colleagues, peers and superiors; (k) DMs are system analysts and advisers/counselors; (l) DMs are identified of alternatives ; (m) DMs are joint problem solvers ; and (n) DMs are joint problem preventers.
Above all, DMs have to make difficult decisions in their effort to achieve a twin objective of cost minimization and profit maximization in the private sector and higher efficiency and effectiveness in several delivery in the public sector.
ACTIVITY QUESTIONS What inform our study of Decision making?
ANSWER The reasons are: (i) Managers frequently encounter problems in their daily operations, therefore need to make vital decisions for resolving those problems 13 7 (ii) Due to our value judgments hence identify good and bad decisions (iii) The need to survive and keep afloat.
Adequately made decisions will enable us avid pitfalls.
3.3 Overlap of Politics and Public Sector Decision Making Decision makers especially those who operates at the strategic apex of corporate outfits need not be carried away by the thoroughness and comprehensiveness or even the reliability of the Rational Models of decision making nor should they confer them with any ‘oracular status” as if they are panacea to all organizational problems.
The reasons for this is simple: there are other equally important variables or extenuating circumstances in the decision environment which a pragmatic decision maker must, for enlightened self- interest , reckon with lest he becomes a brilliant but frustrated decision maker.
The most important of these variables, in our view, especially in the public sectors, is the awareness of the overlap between politics and decision making.
Lack of appreciation of the interplay of the two may be the undoing of an otherwise brilliant, hard working and highly cerebral policy adviser.
Politics is the authoritative allocation o value, it is about what priorities should be pursued by society and by implication how limited and scare resources should b allocate among competing demands.
What determines the priorities of the actors in the political system, s their value system.
“Politics is certainly partisanship meaning political parties, pressure groups, lobbying, public opinion and the power struggle for preferment, dominance, control, influence and position” (Dimock & Dimock, 1953).
But it is through the instrumentality of public policy that political values are express.
In other words, public policy is the handmaid of politics and therefore any attempt to draw a line of demarcation between the two is a meaningless abstraction or an exercise in futility as the two definitely overlap.
We, however, need to emphasize the components of politics as consisting of bureaucratic back scratching, in depth negotiations often resulting in some 13 8 conflicting consensus, bargaining positions and compromises that may be far remote from realities on the ground.
The factors often have overarching influence on the quality of policy that eventually emerges.
In short politics ultimately determines the content of public policy regardless of the imperfections and contractions of the former and the expected rational systematic and logical nature of the latter.
PUBLIC PUBLIC SECTOR POLICY INSTITUTIONS LOBBYING BARGAINING PRESURE GROUPS POLICTICS CONSENSUS COMPROMISE Fig .
4.4: The Relationship between Politics and Public Policy IMPLICATIONS OF THE OVERLAP OF POLITICS AND PUBLIC SECTOR DECISION MAKING The foregoing overlap between politics and public policy has some far reaching implications some of which are indicated below: 3.1. complete rationality in policy making is a myth i.e complete rationality is not possible as some irrational elements, occasioned by the very nature of politics (consensus, bargaining, compromise, lobbying etc) will inevitably creep in during the policy making process.
3.2.
The duty of the public servant is to be aware of the possibility of irrational elements in policy formulation and make concerted effort to point them out at the policy initiation and formulation stage but not to obstruct them.
13 9 3.3.
Policy Implementation Gap (PIG) i.e the differential between the Real and Expected Benefits (REB) is also a fact of life because inbuilt irrationalities will make implementation difficult as they are bound to make their presence felt as this stage of the policy process.
3.4.
Since we know that irrational elements are but a necessity in public sector decision making there is no need for public servants to feel frustrated when public policies cannot be fully actualized.
Adebayo Adedeji sums the overlap up neatly when he asserted in 1982 that: Political leadership without administrative and technical support is power in a vacuum Administration without political leadership is only idleness in stagnation.
Politics and demonstration belong together in the dynamics of a dialectical relationship.
But there is no perfectly ordered model for this relationship, and no perfect delineation of responsibilities of development.
3.4 Pressure Groups and Decision Making One other logical implication of the interplay between politics and public sector decision making is to appreciate the role of pressure groups in decision making.
They exact a lot of influence on public sector decision making in that they are a major source of policy demands and they also present alternatives for policy action which are of interest to the group.
In effect, they carry out what Anderson called” an interest articulation function.
They seek to influence a decision of government without attempting to occupy Political office.” The decision maker needs to appreciate that development administration focus of today, as opposed to law and order, creates a dependency on pressure groups comprising professionals.
Witness the helplessness of policy makers in Nigeria whenever pressure groups such as the Academic Staff Union (ASU) of Nigerian Universities or even their Non-Academic counterparts the Senior Staff Association of Nigeria Universities (SSANU) goes on strike in pressing home their demands.
Ditto for doctors in the Nigeria Medical Association (NMA).
14 0 This is because the formulations and implementation of development oriented public sector decisions inevitably requires the support and approval of professional interest groups such as Doctors, lawyers, Engineers, Pharmacists etc.
Government often goes out of its way, to seek for their cooperation in policy implementation and they, in return, seek to have a say in the formulation of these policies as a price for successful implementation.
Other factors which have made pressure groups indispensable in decision making include: (a) The democratization of public administration as evidenced by policy documents in which government sets out its ideas and proposals and deliberately demands for the inputs from interest groups.
An example of this is the Stakeholders Booklet issued by the Federal Ministry of Education in year 2001 on the Autonomy of the Nigerian Universities and the implications thereof for government and the Academia.
The British government too, whenever it wants to formulate any fundamental decision, circulates what it calls the green Paper which articulates its views on the issue and seeks comments from the Pressure Groups concerned.
These comments are often incorporated in the subsequent White paper of government.
(b) Increase in structural and functional differentiation in society.
As societies become more and more specialized certain functions are carried out by specialized Institutions e.g banking, education, police, the hospitals, military, economic institutions.
A corollary to this development is the factor of indispensability through the acquisition of expertise in these institutions by the professionals within them who can readily form themselves into network of exerts and pressure groups.
And so long as some particular knowledge or expertise reside in the organizations or groups which are not readily available to government before policies are formulated.
In effect, expertise is the source of their power and influence in policy making 14 1 (c ) changes in the political culture: As values and beliefs of people become more sophisticated, attitudes towards authorities becomes less paternalistic .
In other words, as societies grow and become more open you begin to see authority not from the father-like figures to a set up to bargain with.
By implication, therefore, those in decision making positions, have to be more flexible, accommodating and tolerant of the views of interest groups.
(d ) advances in communication technology: This allows people with the same or comparable interest to readily come together to fight or articulate their interests.
In so doing they influence public policy.
Typical examples are the victims of the thalidomide antidepressant drugs and their deformed babies who, through advanced communications, were able , despite their distant locations in various countries in Western Europe, to significantly team-up to fight and influence public policy in their favour.
In Nigeria the recent kerosene explosion in various parts of the country easily got communicated to the general public through Television and this had tremendous effect on the attitude and response rate and the concern of policy makers.
The advent of the internet, with all its domineering and visible impact is even a more aggressive tool in the hands of pressure groups.
For example, the E-MAIL of the President can now easily be bombarded by pressure group on their demands for a change of public policy.
3.5 Sensitivity to the External Environment Modern day decision makers also need to be more sensitive to the turbulence in its environment.
After all, as a boundary manager, he is employed to possess sensitive antennae and rather large ears to convert the threats and prospects.
The decision which makes are ultimately geared towards the production for goods and services which are to be consumed only in the external environment for, as peter Drucker was quoted earlier on this paper: 14 2 It is always somebody outside who decides whether efforts of business becomes economic results or they becomes so much waste and scrap.
Thus, before any manager takes a vital decision, he needs to satisfy himself that he can reasonably predict the acceptability or otherwise of his decision by prospective customers outside his/her organization.
Alvin Toffler would appear to capture the picture vividly when he asserted that: (a) An invisible line divides all mangers today.
It cuts across rank and function to separate those who see today’s economic and technological changes incremental, bit-by-bit extension of the industrial Revolution from those who regard today’s massive changes as truly radical.
There are “Increment list executives” and” radical executives”.
(b) One group assumes continuity; other recognizes the growing importance of discontinuity.
(c) One group tends to formulate straight-line strategies; the thinks in non-linear terms.
(d) One tends to define problems clearly treating each as it comes along, more or less in isolation from the other.
The second group tends to define problems less neatly; but to see them in relationship to one another.
(e) One is good at “thinkable” solutions to problems – a leadership style which may be adequate in periods of environmental stability.
The other is open to “unthinkable” solution- which may be necessary in periods of environmental turbulence (f) The environment determines which particular skills are most needed at any moment.
Unfortunately, an incremental executive 14 3 often reaches the top at precisely the moment when an exploding environment demands the skills of the radical.
The mismatch is often catastrophic.
4.0.
CONCLUSION In view of the criticality of decision making by managers.
It is mandatory that they acquire a thorough understanding of the nature, process and techniques of making decisions becomes herein lies their capability to either achieve or ail to achieve the mandates of their stakeholders.
In this connection, managers should make efforts to be rational, comprehensive and analytical .
The decision makers should also understand the context in which decisions are made especially the overlap between politics and public sectors decision making .
Failure to realize this inevitable overlap and its consequences can only make an otherwise brilliant and cerebral manager a frustrated decision maker.
The modern day decision maker should be conversant with modern management skills the most vital of which is I.T negotiation.
Without sound negotiation ability he cannot readily garner or mobilize resources for the accomplishment of organizational goals and objective.
Neither will he be able to obtain maximum value/utility from the scarce resources under his control.
5.0 SUMMARY In this unit an attempt has been made to high light the critical role of decision making at all levels of organization and show that it is the cumulative effect of the decision that determine the corporate guar vial or collapse of an organization.
It is the quality of decisions made by managers that make “magnificent miracles” or “malevolent monsters’ of organizing and indirectly the quality of life of those that depend on or consume the products or service rendered by them.
Hence we outlined the critical overlap between Politics and public sector in terms of management and decision making.
In Nigeria today, the influence of pressure groups in decision on where the pendulum would wing to cannot be over emphasized.
A clear example is the decision to appoint 14 4 Professor Ataharu Jeja as INEC chairman for 2011 elections was taken by the President of the Federal Republic of Nigeria on the recommendation of the Civil Society .
Influence of the environment is equally inevitable hence decision makers must be less sensitive to the environment.
6.0 TUTOR-MARKED ASSIGNMENT 1.
Give a detailed explanation of the overlap between Politics and the public sector in decision making.
2.
Explain the influence of (a) Pressure group, and (b) Environment in decision making 7.0 FURTHER READINGS 1.
Brown, Geraldine and Brady, Catherine (1991) The Successful Manager, (London: Kofan page) 2.
Daodu, R.O (1991) “Results Oriented Management in the Public Sector” Mimeograph, ASCON 3.
Daodu, R.O (2003) “Fundamentals and Realities of Decision- Making and Implementation” in Chuks Maduobum (Ed)Contemporary Issues on Public Policy Analysis in Nigeria (Badagry: ASCON Press) 4.
Drukea, P, (1980), Management in turbulent times: New Guide for Management today (London: Heineman.
14 5 UNIT 18 COMMUNICATION IN GOVERNMENT TABLE OF CONTENTS 1.0.
Introduction 2.0.
Objectives 3.0.
Main Content 3.1 Definition of Communication 3.2 Functions of Communication 3.3 Communication Process 3.4 Communication in the Public Service 3.5 Barriers to Effective Communication 3.6 Seven Deadly sins of Management Communication 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutor-Marked Assignment 7.0 Further Readings 1.0 INTRODUCTION Most of the time, we find that problem experienced in organization are faceable to poor communication.
This is because communication is the source of information used by managers in making decisions that affects the organization.
In fact communication is perceived as the vehicle for effective operations in organization.
No worker can carry our assigned tasks successfully without effective communication playing a dominant role.
Communication therefore is the vehicle for effective conduct of government business.
2.0 OBJECTIVES At the end of this unit, you should be able to: i.
Define communication; 14 6 ii.
Identify the functions of communication; iii.
Explain the process of communication; iv.
Identify areas of communication in the Public Services , and v. Outline the barriers to effective communication.
3.
MAIN CONTENT 3.1 DEFINITION OF COMMUNICATION Various definitions have been suggested for communication, while some may be convincing, some may also be narrow depending on from which perspective, we are looking at, Randall (1984:156) see communication as the meaningful transfer of information from one person (or group) to another.
In this regard, communication does not occur unless one person transmits a piece of information to another person, who receives the piece of information and the received information has meaning to the receiver.
All these three conditions must be met for communication to have occurred.
Similarly, Cushway and Lodge (1999:189) believe communication can be regarded as effective when the ideas and intentions of one person are successfully conveyed to another.
It is further argued by Obisi (2003:218 – 219) that Communication is generally understood as spoken or written words.
But n reality, it is more than that.
It is the sum total directly or indirectly, unconsciously or consciously transmitted words, attitudes feeling, actions, gestures and tones.
Even twist in the face is often more expressive disapproval than hundreds of words put together.
Tone, very often than not, destroys the meaning of the words uttered .
i.e A causal leave granted with sarcastic slang in the tone, pinches more than the denial of the leave with reasons well explained.
3.2 FUNCTION OF COMMUNICATION Communication has four major functions within the organization.
Robbins (267:1989).
These include: 1.
Information: Communication facilitates decision making.
It provides information that individuals and groups need to make decisions through the provision of data to identify and evaluate alternative choices.
2.
Motivation: Communication fosters motivation by clarifying to employees what is to be done, how it will be done and what can be done.
Communications and praise to employees also motivate and encourage commitment to organizational objectives.
14 7 3.
Control: Communication acts to control member behavior in various ways.
Every organization has authority, hierarchies, Guidelines and Regulations that employees are required to follow.
For instance, employees know how to communicate their grievances, know which procedures to use to enjoy certain amenities or privileges and structures lid on how process various request.
4.
Emotional Expression: Emotive uses o Communication allow for the expression of feeling and the satisfaction of social needs.
Employees within their work groups communicate among themselves to show their frustration o f feelings of satisfaction which ultimately provides a release for their emotional expressions 3.3 COMMUNICATION Communication Process between one person or groups can be thought of as a process of flow that occur in a variety of ways (face to face, written, gesture, phone etc).
All have in common the communication process which starts with a source, which is responsible for selection of an intended message (message you intend to transmit) and encoding (convert the idea of the message into some transmittable form either written, by word, gesture etc).
The encoded message is passed through a medium (channel) which serves as the physical medium for the transmission of the message.
The receiver then translates (decodes) the message from the sender to give it meaning (by reading, listening, seeing feeling etc.
Once the message is decoded, it is accepted as received.
The result is the transference of meaning from one person to another (Robbins 1999:268) see Diagram below.
SOURCE CHANNEL RECEIVER Message Intended Encodes Decodes Perceived Meaning FEEEDBACK NOISE 14 8 The Communication process and possible sources of Noise.
Sources: Schermerhorn, Hunt and Osborn in “Managing Organizational Behaviour, 1985, New York.
John Wiley and Sons, P.501.
3.4.
COMMUNICATION IN THE PUBLIC SERVICE Much of government business is conducted through various Communication processes which may be through meetings, telephone conversations and other forms of electronic communication or face to face.
The most important method of conducting Government business however is through various forms of written communication.
Therefore, Communication is carried out through a variety of channels.
These include the following amongst others: 1.
Minuting in file 2. Letters 3.
Minutes of meetings 4.
Memorandum/memos 5 Telegram 6.
Reports 7.
Circulars 8.
Posters and Bulletins 9.
Periodicals etc 3.4.`1 COMMUNICATION PATTERN Communication patterns encompass the directions that communication takes in groups and in organization as well as the channels by which communications flow.
Communication can flow vertically and laterally.
The vertical dimension can be further divided into downward and upward direction.
ACTIVITY List any six (6) channels through which written communication are carried out in the public service.
ANSWER They are: Minuting in file, letters, Minutes of meeting, memorandum/memos, telegram, Reports, circular, poster and Bulletins, periodicals etc.
14 9 DOWNWARD This is the communication that flows from one level of a group or organization to a lower level.
This involves the dissemination of information from highest hierarchy downwards.
This could be from the top management down to other levels.
It is used by group or organization managers to assign goals, provide job instructions, explain policy direction and procedures, point out problems that need attention and offer feedback about performance, etc.
(see diagram below).
ORGANIZATION TOP MANAGEMENT MIDDLE MANAGEMENT EMPLOYEES UPWARD This is communication that flows to a higher level in a group or organization.
It is used to provide feedback to top management, inform them about progress toward goals.
This method also keeps managers aware of how employee feels about their jobs.
Examples of upward Communication include performance reports prepared by middle management for top management, suggestion boxes, grievance procedures, etc.
(see diagram below) ORGANIZATION TOP MANAGEMENT MIDDLE MANAGEMENT EMPLOYEES LITERAL When Communication takes place amongst members of the same work group, or amongst managers of the same level or among any horizontal equivalent personnel, it is referred to as lateral Communication.
15 0 3.4.2 TYPES OF COMMUNICATION Communication can either be formal or informal.
FORMAL COMMUNCIATION Communication is said to be formal, if the dissemination of information messages and ideas are according to prescribed or fixed rules and customs.
It is external rather than natural because it is not as a result of the intrinsic feelings of the actors but imposed on them by the organization.
(Obisi, 223,2003).
Such Communication is usually very rigid and follows definite pattern and it is official in nature.
It may be oral or written, vertical or horizontal.
They are usually bureaucratic in nature and the directives or instructions are to be carried out.
INFORMAL COMMUNICATION This is described as any interaction or relationship which exists in any organization which is not deliberate, rigid, or structured.
Such interaction and relationship are as a result of natural feelings without any outside interference, constraint or premeditation (Obisi, 224:2003).
It may also be viewed as messages conveyed through body movements, the intonations or emphasis we give to words, facial expressions and the physical distance between the sender and receiver (Robbins, 282:1989).
3.5 BARRIERS TO COMMUNICATION In communication, apart from the general distortions in the Communication process, there are other barriers to effective communication.
As noted by Cushway and Lodge (189:1999).
Barriers to Communication can come from a number of sources.
The problem may be with the sender of the message who indeed unwilling to communicate the necessary message very clearly, or with the receiver who understand the message bring sent, or there may be environmental factors affecting the condition under the message is conveyed, such as noise.
Therefore, we could examine barriers to Communication from the four important levels of Communication i.e (a) Senders’ levels (b) Transmission/Channels levels (c ) Receiver’s level ; and (d) Feedback level.
15 1 SENDER’S LEVEL 1.
Poor Communication skills of the Sender; the sender of any particular message may not be particularly articulate either verbally or in writing, and will therefore fail to convey the information accurately.
2.
Information under load: Where information is too scanty for the receiver to give adequate feedback or take a decision, it becomes a barrier.
3.
Information overload: Many messages get lost because of the sheer volume of information being passed to the receiver.
When someone receives too many Internal Memoranda on relatively trivial issues, the important messages may get unless special attention is drawn to them in some way.
4.
Dislike between Sender and Receiver: Sometimes, when there is dislike between the two, their emotional state will affect the way that message is perceived.
Either the Sender or the Receiver may not listen or pay attention or may not be very objective to what is said on that topic.
5.
Failure to pitch the message at the receiver’s language and experience level; There is no doubt that Communication itself is determined by our skills, knowledge and attitude and who we want to Communicate with.
We can only communicate well, when we adjust out knowledge and skills to the level f the receiver.
Otherwise Communication will not be effective.
TRANSMISSIONAL LEVEL (1) Physical Noise can easily distort Communication (2) Travelling through many links before reaching its destination.
The more levels a message must go through to get to the bottom of the hierarchy, the more likely that a sizeable portion of the original information will be lost or substantially distorted.
(3) Selection of a poor channel/Transmission may also cause distortion RECIEVER’S LEVEL (1) Failure to understand the message by the receiver is a serious barrier (2) Where the receiver is threatened by the message (3) Where the receiver displays impatience for any reasons when receiving the message 15 2 (4) Preoccupation: When the receiver of the message is pre-occupied with other matters, the content of the message being receive may not be fully appreciated.
(5) Where there is a negative attitude towards the receiver himself, the message and the senders, the communication may not likely b effective.
(6) Physical conditions or environmental factors may also prevent the receiver from understanding.
(7) Where the receiver does not understand certain “terms used in the message, Communication becomes ineffective.
FEEDBACK LEVEL 1.
Feedback not provided at all; and 2.
Where feedback is delayed, it may also affect effective communication.
3.5.1 EFFECTIVE COMMUNICATION In view of the barriers to Communication identified and examined, what can individuals do to minimize the problems and attempt to overcome these barriers.
The following suggestions may be helpful in making Communication ore effective.
1.
Be clear about the message you want to convey and the reasons for the message: for example to inform , to amuse, to seek information and so on.
2.
Select the appropriate method of Communication, having regard to content, timescale and target audience 3.
Prepare the message in the appropriate format and language having particular regard to the nature and background of the people to be communicated with.
4.
Where possible, use more than one means of Communication to reinforce the message and be prepared to repeat it if necessary 5. try to ensure that, the sender of the message is someone with credibility in the organization 6. consider, what is in it for those the message is for and highlight the benefits of any particular suggestion.
7 give examples, where appropriate to support the message.
8. try to give factual information and careful explanation where required.
9 structure any argument logically, working up to the conclusions .
10 use any points you know people will agree with t=to reinforce your statements.
11. try to ensure that, the message is interesting.
15 3 12.
Test out your proposed message and take account of any constructive feedback 13.
Know the purpose of Communication 14.
Adopt a communication style 15.
Avoid Communication overload and under load.
16.
Try to get and retain the receive3r’s attention.
17.
Use language that is at the experience level of the receiver 18.
Listen empathetically 19 Make intelligent use of informal Communication 20.
Update and refine your Communication 3.6 SEVEN DEADLY SINS OF MANAEMENT COMMUNICATIONS If you expect to be a successful Manager, you need to be aware of the seven deadly sins (Reprinted from Stephens Robbins (284,1999).
Committing any one of them will lessen your effectiveness.. NOT EXPECTING.
People see the world differently, based on their experiences, values, attitudes, and perceptions.
Expect to be misunderstood and adjust your message anticipating ways your ideas could be misinterpreted.
2.
IMPRESSING INSTEAD OF EXPRESSING.
First and foremost, the objective of communication is to transfer information, not exert power.
Too often managers are more concerned with sounding impressive and appearing knowledgeable than in making sure the ideas get across.
3.
CHOOSING THE WRONG MEDIUM: Its easy to get in the habit of using the same medium over and over again.
You have choices: telephone, memos, letters, interviews, group meetings, electronic mail, etc.
Use the one that will most effectively carry the message you want.
4.
FAILING TO CLOSE THE FEEDBACK LOOP: Effective communication requires understanding by the recipient.
Use feedback to insure that the message received is the message sent.
5.
APPLYING ANONVERBAL VETO: Studies that as much as 78 percent of meaning is transmitted nonverbally through tone of voice.
Appearance, timing and the like.
Consider how these nonverbal messages might distort your intended message.
6.
NOT HELPING YOUR READER OR LISTENER TO GET THE MESSAGE.
Don’t turn your communiqué into an Easter egg hunt.
Clarify the more important points in your message.
15 4 7.
VIEWING OMMUNICATION AS A FRINGE BENEFIT: Communication is the essence of a manager’s job.
It is a morale booster o “icing on the cake” Good communication practices is not just a desirable quality, it’s a requirement for effective management.
4.0 CONCLUSION As earlier explained, communication is one activity that cuts across every activity of human endeavour..
However, quite often we find that it does more harm than good in that mis-understanding that occur due to its ineffectiveness could head to head losses to the organization.
Having identified some of the pitfall, it is hoped that they will serve as lessons to managers particularly in government establishments.
It must also be emphasized that in government business written, either than verbal communication is the bases of approvals, decision making and policy enunciation 5.0 SUMMARY We have so far emphasized that communication is inevitable for the smooth operation of organizations in general and government agencies in particular.
This unit has therefore explained the concept of communication.
If then proceeded to identify the various functions of communication, its process and the mode in which it operates in the public service, Barriers to effective communication were identified.
The unit conclude by outing what it termed as the deadly sins of management of communication 7.0 TUTOR MARKED ASSIGNMENT 1.
Armstrong, Michael (2008): How to be Better Manager.
7th Edition (London; London: Kogan Page).
2.
Barry, C .and Derek Lodge: Organizational Behaviour and Design.
(London: Pricewater House Coopers) 3.
Obiaku, D, (1999) Communication Skills (Lagos: Advertising Practitioners Council of Nigeria APCON) 4.
Obisi, Chris (2003): Organizational Behaviour : Concept and Application:(Lagos: Malt house Press Limited).
5.
Stephen, Robbins (1989) ): Organizational Behaviour : Concepts, Controversies and Applications.
Fourth Edition (London: Prentice-Hall International) 15 5 15 6
