 NATIONAL OPEN UNIVERSITY OF NIGERIA SCHOOL OF MANAGEMENT SCIENCES COURSE CODE: PAD 409 COURSE TITLE: CONDUCT OF GOVERNMENT BUSINESS COURSE GUIDE PAD 409 CONDUCT OF GOVERNMENT BUSINESS Course Team Prof. Chuks P. Maduabum (Course Developer/Writer) – NOUN Prof. B.C.
Nwankwo (Course Editor)- Kogi State University, Anyigba Dr. C. I. Okeke (Programme Leader) - NOUN Mrs. P. N. Ibeme (Course Coordinator) - NOUN NATIONAL OPEN UNIVERSITY OF NIGERIA None PAD 409 COURSE GUIDE National Open University of Nigeria Headquarters 14/16 Ahmadu Bello Way Victoria Island,Lagos Abuja Office 5 Dar es Salaam Street Off Aminu Kano Crescent Wuse II, Abuja e-mail: centralinfo@nou.edu.ng URL: www.nou.edu.ng Published by National Open University of Nigeria Printed 2013 ISBN: 978-058-554-0 All Rights Reserved ii  PAD 409 COURSE GUIDE CONTENTS PAGE Introduction……………………………………………… v What you will Learn in this Course……………………... v Course Aim……………………………………………….
v Course Objectives……………………………………….. vi Working through this Course…………………………….
vii Course Materials………………………………………….
vii Study Units……………………………………………….
vii Textbooks and References……………………………….
ix Assignment File………………………………………….. ix Course Assessment……………………………………….
ix Tutor-Marked Assignment……………………………….
ix Facilitation/Tutors and Tutorials………………………… x Summary………………………………………………….
x iii  PAD 409 COURSE GUIDE INTRODUCTION Conduct of Government Business is a 3- credit unit course consisting of 4 modules broken into 20 units.
Each unit is supposed to be covered in three hours.
It is also a core course.
The course consists of 4 modules and 20 units.
The modules are: Contextual Issues in Government Business (5 units), Communication Procedures in Government Business (8 units), Ethical Behaviour in Government (5 units), and Correlates of Government Business (2 units).
Conduct of Government Business as a course, combines theory and practice although it slants more towards practice.
It exposes students to how government conducts its business particularly in Nigeria.
In addition, it addresses how the operators within and outside government should conduct themselves while discharging their duties.
In the course therefore, you will discover the adoption of both theory and practice.
This Course Guide tells you briefly what the course is about, what course materials you will be using and how you can work your way through these materials.
It also highlighted issues of timing for going through these units, and explains the Self Assessment Exercises and Tutor-Marked Assignments.
WHAT YOU WILL LEARN IN THIS COURSE The overall aim of this course on the conduct of Government Business is to expose the students to the detailed perspectives on Public Sector Management and stimulate your interest in government operations.
It is also to make you appreciate all that culminate in government decisions and inputs towards the delivery of goods and services to the citizens.
You will therefore learn the ideas behind various components and organs of government, what they are really created to do and how they are structured to do it, what type of personnel handle activities in such organs, what are their sources of finance , what type of expenditure do they engage in and what development do they undertake.
COURSE AIM The aim of this course as pointed out earlier is to expose the students of public sector management to the concepts, structure, context and content of government operations.
It is to make you appreciate the scope of government, how it operates and what it is capable of doing.
iv  PAD 409 COURSE GUIDE This will be achieved by aiming to: • introduce you to the basic concepts and principles of government business.
• compare the structures and functions of different tiers and levels of government.
• give an insight into the detailed operations of government.
• assess the patterns of behaviour of operators of government.
• appraise the changes that had taken place over time in this operative mechanism.
COURSE OBJECTIVES To achieve the aims set out above, the course sets overall objectives.
In addition, each unit also has specific objectives.
The unit objectives are always included at the beginning of a unit.
You are advised to refer to them as you study each unit both at the beginning and at the end to ensure that you check your progress and that you have done what is required of you by the unit.
Below are wider objectives of the course as a whole.
By meeting these objectives, you should achieve the aims of the course as a whole.
On successful completion of the course, you should be able to: • identify and explain the main concepts associated with the conduct of government business.
• situate the government business within its contextual limits.
• appreciate the philosophy of government business and how it is conducted.
• describe and compare the structure and functions of the tiers and levels of government, and how these structures are conducted by the overall system of government.
• identify and discuss written communication in various forms, as a veritable tool with which policies are formulated, decisions are made and approvals are given by government operators.
discuss the political class and bureaucratic class as two main • operators in government and their unique functions.
• explain the niceties in government operations and identify the factors that militate against developmental agenda of government.
• read a set of articles and apply these to the concepts and issues covered in the preceding units of the course.
v  PAD 409 COURSE GUIDE WORKING THROUGH THIS COURSE To complete this course, you are required to read the study units and recommended text books and explore more current materials on the internet.
You may also need to visit the organs of governments around you to observe practically some of the things conveyed in this course, for example, services delivered by government.
You could also have a chat with government staff on a wide array of issues including the problems they face.
Note also that government is a living subject and there are developments daily about its organs especially in your country.
So, you are advised to keep abreast of these in the newspapers and magazines and even on the radio and television.
In this course, each unit consists of exercises or activities to test your understanding from time to time.
At a point in your course, you are required to submit assignments for assessment purposes.
At the end of the course is a final examination.
Below, you will find listed all the components of the course, what you have to do and how you should allocate time to each unit in order to complete the course successfully on time.
COURSE MATERIALS Major components of the course are: 1.
Course Guide 2.
Study Units 3.
Textbooks and References 4.
Presentation Schedule Everything is contained in each unit except the text books which you may have to acquire.
You are advised to source current materials on the internet and avail yourself of newspapers, magazines and other publications on government.
You may contact your tutor where you run into problems about recommended text books.
STUDY UNITS There are four modules broken into twenty units in this course as follows: Module 1 Contextual Issues in Government Business Unit 1 Government and Governance Unit 2 Environment and its Influence Unit 3 Public Policy Analysis and Implementation vi  PAD 409 COURSE GUIDE Unit 4 Decision Making Process in Government Unit 5 Constitution and its Provisions Module 2 Communication Procedures in Government Business Unit 1 Communication in Government Unit 2 The use of Nigeria’s LINGUA FRANCA in Government Unit 3 Editing Procedures and Techniques Unit 4 Drafting, Minuting, Memo Writing, Official Letter Writing Unit 5 Preparation of Council/Cabinet Memorandum Unit 6 Report Writing Unit 7 Speech Writing Unit 8 Servicing Meetings Module 3 Ethical Behaviour in Government Unit 1 Handling Official Documents Unit 2 Ethics and Code of Conduct Unit 3 Anti-Corruption Law Unit 4 Public Service Rules Unit 5 Financial Regulations Module 4 Correlates of Government Business Unit 1 Reform of Government Bureaucracy Unit 2 Paperless Administration Each module is representing a homogenous body of issues on conduct of government business.
Module one focuses on contextual issues in government business.
Module two is about communication procedures in government business.
Module three explains ethics and code of conduct expected from public officials and public servants.
The last module (four) looks at reforms and their effect on government and its operations as well as paperless administration as it applies to government operations.
You must read each unit carefully.
The basic knowledge on the topic is conveyed here.
An update of the knowledge is in reference to materials of currency.
Supplementary reading is advised.
As you work through each unit, the core of the unit is at the 3.0 sub heading (Main content).
The conclusion (4.0) helps to round up what has been said so far while “summary” (5.0) gives a brief summary of the major issues discussed.
This is meant to assist you to remember the key issues and simplify the discussions at the end.
vii  PAD 409 COURSE GUIDE At the end of some issues discussed at the 3.0 level in the unit, you will come across “Self Assessment Exercise”.
These are meant to provide simple questions to enable you comprehend or remind yourself of the things discussed before that point.
Answers are directly provided in most cases.
Do not consult the answers until you have attempted the questions.
You may sometimes observe that the answers provided give you more insight than may have been originally conveyed, (especially with the tutor- marked assignments as part of the characteristics of an essay).
TEXTBOOKS AND REFERENCES There is no compulsory textbook for this course.
However, as you go through the course, you will observe that some textbooks are recommended often.
This shows that such books are crucial to a number of units.
Please try and consult these.
Moreover, each unit has its own assigned texts and documents.
You should also lay hands on these for further understanding.
ASSIGNMENT FILE The major assignment required of you is a Tutor-Marked Assignment (TMA) which you are expected to complete at the end of each unit and mail to your tutor.
COURSE ASSESSMENT Your assessment for this course is made up of two components: • Tutor-Marked Assignment • Final Examination TUTOR-MARKED ASSIGNMENT Each unit in this course has a TMA attached to it.
You can only do this assignment after covering the materials and exercises in each unit.
Normally, the TMAs are kept in a separate file.
Your tutor will mark and comment on them.
Pay attention to such feedback from your tutor and use it to improve your other assignments.
You can write the assignment by using materials from your study units, textbooks or other sources.
It is however preferable that, as a graduate student, you should demonstrate evidence of wide reading especially from texts and other sources, something to show that you have researched more widely.
viii  PAD 409 COURSE GUIDE But do remember that copying from any source without acknowledgement is plagiarism and is not acceptable.
You make references properly when you refer to other people’s work.
The assignments are, in most cases, essay questions.
Examples from your own experience or environment are useful when you answer such questions.
This allows you the opportunity to translate theory to real life situations.
FACILITATION/TUTOR AND TUTORIALS There are 20 hours of tutorials in this course.
The dates, times and location of the tutorials will be provided.
As soon as you are allocated a tutorial group, the names and phone numbers of your tutor will be provided.
It is your tutor’s responsibility to supervise you closely in order to ensure your steady progress and resolve whatever difficulties you encounter.
He will give the assignments, mark them and provide you with feedback for corrective actions.
SUMMARY PSM 800: Conduct of Government Business is a course that exposes post-graduate students to the centrality of government operations either in the main stream civil service or other government agencies.
As a core course, mastery of this course is a sure way of building confidence as a master’s graduate of Public Sector Management.
While hoping that you will enjoy your interaction with staffers of NOUN in your quest, we wish you every success in this endeavour.
ix  MAIN COURSE CONTENTS PAGE Module 1 Contextual Issues in Government Business 1 Unit 1 Government and Governance……………… 1 Unit 2 Environment and its Influence…………….. 11 Unit 3 Public Policy Analysis and Implementation 20 Unit 4 Decision Making Process in Government….
39 Unit 5 Constitution and its Provisions…………….
49 Module 2 Communication Procedures in Government Business…………………….. 58 Unit 1 Communication in Government………….. 58 Unit 2 The use of Nigeria’s LINGUA FRANCA in Government……………………………….
69 Unit 3 Editing Procedures and Techniques……… 83 Unit 4 Drafting, Minuting, Memo Writing, Official Letter Writing……………………………… 95 Unit 5 Preparation of Council/Cabinet Memorandum 108 Unit 6 Report Writing……………………………… 118 Unit 7 Speech Writing……………………………… 128 Unit 8 Servicing Meetings………………………….. 137 Module 3 Ethical Behaviour in Government……….
146 Unit 1 Handling Official Documents……………….
146 Unit 2 Ethics and Code of Conduct……………….. 155 Unit 3 Anti-Corruption Law……………………….
164 Unit 4 Public Service Rules………………………… 174 Unit 5 Financial Regulations……………………….
180 Module 4 Correlates of Government Business……… 188 Unit 1 Reform of Government Bureaucracy……….
188 Unit 2 Paperless Administration…………………… 199  PAD 409 CONDUCT OF GOVERNMENT BUSINESS MODULE 1 CONTEXTUAL ISSUES IN GOVERNMENT BUSINESS Unit1 Government and Governance Unit 2 Environment and its Influence Unit 3 Public Policy Analysis and Implementation Unit 4 Decision Making Process in Government Unit 5 Constitution and its Provisions UNIT 1 GOVERNMENT AND GOVERNANCE CONTENTS 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objectives 3.0 Main Content 3.1 The Concepts of Government and Governance 3.2 Government in a Democratic Setting 3.2.1 Branches of Government 3.3 Role of the Constitution in Governance 3.4 Public Administration: A Tool in Governance 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutor-Marked Assignment 7.0 References/Further Reading 1.0 INTRODUCTION This unit explores the basis of governance and the idea of government.
Here, various views on the concept of government and governance are undertaken.
This explanation will help you to appreciate and identify significant parameters for subsequent discussions.
The unit goes further to identify those things that constitute apparatus of government.
The role of the constitution in our quest is clearly explained.
It is usually difficult to talk about government without discussing public administration.
This is because public administration is the main apparatus of government.
The constitution merely provides the legal framework for governance.
1  MODULE 1 2.0 OBJECTIVES At the end of this unit, you should be able to: • explain the concepts of government and governance • identify the branches of government in Nigeria • outline the role of the constitution in governance • discuss the concept of public administration as an apparatus of government.
3.0 MAIN CONTENT 3.1 The Concept of Government and Governance The International Encyclopaedia of the Social Sciences defines governance as “The art of exercising of legitimate authority, and protecting and adapting the community by making and carrying out decisions” (Sills, 1968:214-217).
It further explains that community here refers to a national autonomy community while the use of legitimacy entails a sanction right to exercise practical monopoly of coercive powers while carrying out the process of governance in a sovereign state.
And of course, the body or group of individuals charged with this responsibility, it refers to as government.
From the foregoing, it becomes imperative that a Government must be established as one of the characteristics or features of a Nation State.
This agrees with the conceptualisation of a modern state as a collection of people in a certain territory having an organised government and possessing autonomy with respect to such units.
Other features of a state emerge from this concept as: people; territory; and sovereignty.
The term “Government” would be explained as instrument of a state by which its existence is maintained, its functions carried out and its policies and objectives realised.
The interrelatedness of some of the foregoing “terms” equally makes their demarcation inevitable.
While the term “state” comprises the entire community of people which of course embraces both the government and governed, Government is a mere agency which is constituted by a very small proportion of the population of the state.
It is, thus, one of the several societal organisations, though with its own unique characteristics.
By the popular maxim that “Governments come and go while the State remains” the existence of a state as more or less a permanent entity that survives every government is further elucidated.
Another concept “People” appears to be the most important of all the features of a state.
For it has severally been either questioned or agreed that such other 2  PAD 409 MODULE 1 features like government and the state itself cannot exist without the people because, each of them is made up of people.
Membership of a state therefore, becomes imperative because it is automatic that an individual belongs to a state into which he is born.
Even in situations where a citizen denounces his citizenship of a country, he immediately acquires that of another country.
This, again, underscores the point that nobody can be stateless.
As a concept, “territory” comes to the fore due to the need to demarcate one state from another for mutual co-existence.
Every state in the world is therefore located on a particular area of the earth’s surface with clear-cut boundaries.
The territory of a state therefore features such things as geographical location, resources, technology and climate.
“Sovereignty” on the other hand, entails the supreme and final legal authority on a state above and beyond, which no further legal power, exists.
Thus, a sovereign state is that which is able to conduct its own affairs independently of other states.
These explanations became necessary because of their impact on our subject of discourse.
For instance, Omolayo and Arowolaju (1987:35) explain that government is instituted to maintain peace, law and order in the state, to protect the citizens against external aggression or internal insurrection, to settle disputes between individual citizens, between organisations, or between citizens or organisations and agencies of government, and to provide adequate social services for the welfare of the people.
There are however, different forms of government.
The form of government existing in any state is sometimes used as its identity.
This, therefore, presupposes that different forms of government can be identified in different states.
We have such forms of government as Socialist as practised in the erstwhile USSR and its components of Eastern Europe; Communist as practised in China, Capitalist as practised in the Western world and their former Colonies particularly in Africa; Federal as practised in heterogeneous states such as U.S.A., Canada, Australia, Nigeria, India etc; Unitary - the form introduced by the Military, Aristocratic as witnessed in most Medieval states, Democratic which is gradually taking over from Aristocratic form as the most modern form of government.
Other types of government include: competitive or monolithic; democratic or totalitarian; pluralistic or monolithic; presidential or monarchical.
The overlapping of these forms of government within a given state has however made it difficult to use one of them exclusively to identify a particular state.
For instance, in the United States of America (USA) we find capitalist, federal and democratic forms of government all existing in that state.
Although the military impacted so much on the emerging world, particularly the second and third world countries, our interest here is in the most civilised and modern form of government, which is democracy.
3  PSM 800 CONDUCT OF GOVERNMENT BUSINESS 3.2 Government in a Democratic Setting As earlier stated, the form of government of interest to us is Democracy.
Many commentators and writers have articulated various perspectives of this concept.
However, the common denominator among these perceptions is that this form of government emerges from the people.
The term originated from the Greek words, ‘demos’ meaning “the people; and ‘kratein’ meaning ‘to rule’.
By integrating the two words, democracy means ‘rule by the people’.
It is sometimes defined as ‘government by many’ or ‘Government of the people by the people and for the people’.
Unlike the type of democracy aptly referred to as direct democracy practised in the Ancient Greek-City states, modern day democracy is highly representative.
In fact, this model of democracy is sometimes referred to as liberal democracy.
This form of democracy, according to Heater (1964: 117) should possess five basic elements.
These are: equality; sovereignty of the people; respect for human life; the rule of law; and liberty of the individual.
Held (1993:16) could not agree more for, in his perception, liberal democracy in its contemporary form includes a “Cluster of rules and institutions permitting the broader participation of the majority of citizens in the selection of representatives who alone can make political decisions’.
This cluster, he further explains, includes elected government; free and fair elections in which every citizen’s vote has an equal weight; a suffrage which embraces all citizens irrespective of distinctions of race, religion, class, sex and so on, freedom of conscience, information and expression on all public matters broadly defined ; the right of adults to oppose their government and stand for office; and associational autonomy – the right to form independent associations including social movements, interest groups and political parties.
While articulating the above views the deduction by Enemuo (1999:145) becomes paramount.
And that is, that democracy denotes a set of ideals, institutions and processes of governance that allows the broad mass of the people to choose their leaders and that guarantees them a broad range of civil rights.
Within the democratic form of government are such types as the Westminster parliamentary system once practised by Nigeria as a direct inheritance from the British Colonial Authorities; the presidential-cum- prime ministerial system effectively practised by France; and the presidential system successfully practised by the United States of America (USA) and which Nigeria currently adopts.
3.2.1 Branches of Government The system of government in Nigeria is both vertical and horizontal.
Vertically, we talk of three levels of government viz: federal, state and local governments.
And horizontally, are three arms of government viz: 4  PSM 800 MODULE 1 executive; legislature and judiciary.
All these are fully put in place in order to ensure true representativeness when it comes to protection of interests and ensuring that the government is people-oriented.
These structures ensure minimal dominance, if at all, by any particular arm or level.
For instance, while the legislature which at the federal level in Nigeria is bicameral and makes the laws, the judiciary which is supposed to be independent interprets the laws, while the executive made up of elected chief executives - president or governor as the case may be and his appointed members of the executive council, implements the laws by translating such laws to policies for easy and smooth implementation.
This is what is referred to as” separation of powers” among the three branches of government and which is a sine qua non for a successful operation of this system of government.
The interplay among these branches of government is such that hardly are they totally independent of one another.
The system of checks and balances gives each branch of government the means of checking the power of the other branches in certain circumstances.
These checks enable each branch to keep the power of the others in proper balance with its own power.
Most checks and balances involve a limited sharing of the same power by more than one branch of government.
In a number of ways, the Executive performs legislative and judiciary functions, much the same way that the legislature exercises executive and judicial powers.
The judiciary on the other hand, regulates the activities of the executive and legislative arms of government.
A few examples of the interface in the functioning of the three arms of government will suffice: (i) Executive in a presidential system of government has power of veto bills already passed by the legislature.
A refusal to signify assent prevents a bill from becoming a law unless the veto is overridden by the legislature through two-thirds majority votes.
The veto power is a measure of control by the executive branch over the legislature.
At least this bit was provided for by sections 58 (21), (3) and (4), and 100 (3), (4) and (5) of the 1999 Constitution of the Federal Republic of Nigeria.
(ii) The Legislature is specially empowered by the 1999 Constitution to investigate all activities of the executive.
The Legislature is empowered to direct or cause to be directed an investigation into any matter or thing with respect to which it has the power to make laws and investigate the conduct of affairs of any person, authority, ministry or government department charged, or intended to be charged with the duty or responsibility for executing or administrating laws enacted by the National Assembly.
It should be noted that the power to investigate the executive department is normally a power of the executive branch of 5  PSM 800 CONDUCT OF GOVERNMENT BUSINESS government.
Yet, the constitution specially empowers federal and state legislatures to share in the investigatory power.
Other executive functions performed by the legislative arm of government include: (a) the power of impeachment of executive (section 143 and 188); (b) the power to enact treaties (section 12); (c) control over public revenue (sections 80 and 120); and (d) power over proclamation of emergency (section 305).
(iii) Through the power of judicial review, judges have power to declare unconstitutional and void any executive or legislative action which violates the constitution.
This power serves as check on the excesses of the legislative and executive arms of government and thereby maintaining the balance of power among all branches of government.
SELF-ASSESSMENT EXERCISE List the different branches of government both vertically and horizontally in Nigeria.
Answer Vertically, we have Federal, State and Local governments.
Horizontally, we have the Executive, Legislature and Judicial arms of government.
3.3 Role of Constitution in Governance Different perceptions of this concept inundate the literature on the subject.
Yet, a common denominator existing among these perceptions is that the constitution is a reference point and a legal entity that perhaps surpasses all other legal entities, which regulates the operations of government, or any other body for that matter.
Taking a cue from Omolayo and Arowolaju (1987:52) the constitution can be defined as a body or system of fundamental principles, rules and laws according to which a state is constituted and governed.
The author cited Austin Ranney’s views as “the whole body of fundamental rules written or unwritten, legal or extra legal according to which a particular government operates”.
The foregoing agree with the perception of Anifowose (1999:157) that the constitution is a collection of norms or standards according to which a country is governed.
It contains statements intended to define the relations between rulers and ruled, the basic institutional framework of government, the rights and duties of citizens and many important procedures to be followed in connection 6  PSM 800 MODULE 1 with these matters.
Again, he posits that the constitution defines the conditions for the exercise of legitimate power, who shall exercise political power, how they shall exercise their powers and limits of these powers.
These definitions point up to the fact that a constitution may be embodied in a single detailed document like the 1999 Constitution in Nigeria; constitutions of the United States of America; and most modern states or scattered through various sources and legal documents like the British Constitution.
It could even portend a vague body of unwritten laws taking the form of usages, understandings, customs or conventions which courts do not recognise as laws, but which are not less effective in regulating the operations of government.
Constitutions are therefore universally regarded as embodying the fundamentals of the political system.
These fundamentals have the force of law, enforceable by the courts.
In this wise, the constitution is superior to, and different from ordinary laws.
The constitution is less easily changed and more binding than ordinary laws which are made by a nation’s parliament /State Assembly through the ordinary law-making process and orders, rules and regulations made by any person or authority in accordance with constitutional provisions.
The very fact that parliament or legislature derives its powers from the constitution, places the constitution over and above whatever laws made by the parliament or legislature.
The constitution, merely lays down broad principles guiding and directing the making of ordinary laws with regards to the manner in which they should be made and who should make them.
It is in this sense that a constitution is the fundamental law of the state.
Even military dictatorships which operate with peculiar laws referred to as decrees, quite often recognise the superiority of the constitution by setting aside some sections of the constitution in order to legitimise their relevance in governance.
In fact, some of the decrees are coined from the constitutional provisions but made unique to the whims and caprices of the military authorities.
The point still has to be made that in modern democracies the constitution is a fundamental and highest law of the land hence, governments could hardly operate without recourse to the constitution.
Unlike other laws like decrees which could be a product of a few individuals, the constitution is usually a product of a cross-section of the people (citizens) constituted as representatives of the people either in a committee to draft the constitution or at an assembly to scrutinise a draft constitution and subsequently ratify the document as containing the collective will of the people.
7  PSM 800 CONDUCT OF GOVERNMENT BUSINESS 3.4 Public Administration – a Tool in Governance The concept of public administration attracts several commentaries from different authorities.
Omolayo and Arowolo (1987:366) argue that since “administration” is present in all human organisations, public or private, open or closed, it becomes necessary to begin the definition of public administration from that of ‘administration’ itself.
Accordingly, they define administration as referring to organisation and management of men and materials to achieve the goals of any collectivity of people.
Such collectivity may be social, business, military or public.
From this standpoint, the authors define Public Administration as administration in the public sector, that is, the means, arrangements, actions and processes by which the policies, programmes, purpose and goals of government are realised.
In support, Dimock and Dimock (1969:13) explain that because public administration is problem solving, it is as much involved with the formulation of the policies by which agencies are guided, as it is with the execution of polices through practical, down- to-earth , action-oriented programmes.
Consequently, they opine that public administration is the action, business side of government, employing more than 90% of all public services and programmes.
One name that is so easily associated with the concept that cannot be easily glossed-over is Woodrow Wilson.
In fact, his recognition is in respect of his pioneering the work in the field of public administration.
He stated that public administration is the most obvious part of government; it is government in action; it is the executive, operative and the most visible side of government (Wilson, 1887: 197-222).
The foregoing definitions further confirm the inextricable linkage between government and public administration such that there would be no meaningful discussion on one without recourse to the other.
One other concept however, tends to agitate one’s mind each time public administration is discussed is Private Administration.
This has become necessary in that in a given milieu or modern state are public and private sectors contributing harmoniously together towards the economic growth of the state/nation.
In other words, there are public and private sectors existing side by side when we talk of economic growth or national development.
Whatever is done in the private sector is ascribed by Balogun (1983:11-12) to business and to some extent management.
Hence, we have public administration representing operations of government with a focus on the public, that is, the public sector, while operations in whatever private enterprises is essentially business.
Again, Omolayo and Arowolaju (1987:306-307) dichotomise the concepts this way: 8  PSM 800 MODULE 1 “Public Administration operates in a somewhat different environment from Business Administration.
Public Administration is tightly integrated into the political system with the attendant implication of political involvement, control and influence.
On the other hand, Business Administration runs in a market environment in which the main test of efficiency is profit”.
4.0 CONCLUSION In governance, particularly in a democratic setting like Nigeria, the people or citizens are the focus; the will of the people is usually the guiding principle of the leaders.
Hence, government business is how to implement the will of the people.
The will of the people is interpreted as their welfare.
The question is, what should government do and in what direction, to improve the welfare of the people?
Attempts at providing answers to this question leads us to the issue of public administration and public institutions as a process of ensuring that the welfare of the people are improved upon through provision of education, health, food, housing , infrastructure etc.
5.0 SUMMARY This unit discussed the concept of government and the process of governance.
It explained government as an organ that has the responsibility of managing the affairs of a nation state.
The process of this management, it referred to as governance.
The unit equally identified the constitution as the bedrock of governance particularly in a democratic setting such as ours.
The unit also explained the concept of public administration as an inevitable means of reaching the people, understanding their plight and improving their welfare in order to fulfil the purpose of government.
6.0 TUTOR-MARKED ASSIGNMENT Explain the role of government in Nigeria and how it performs this role.
7.0 REFERENCES/FURTHER READING Anifowose, R. (1999).
“Constitutions and Constitutionalism”, in Anifowose, Remi & Francis Enemuo (Eds).
Elements of Politics.
Lagos: Malthouse Press Ltd. Balogun, M.J. (1983).Public Administration in Nigeria: A Developmental Approach.
London: Macmillan Press Ltd. 9  PSM 800 CONDUCT OF GOVERNMENT BUSINESS Enemuo, F. (1999).
“Democracy, Human Rights and Rule of Law”, in Anifowose, Remi & Francis Enemuo (Eds).
Elements of Politics.
Lagos: Mathouse Press Ltd. Maduabum, C.P.
(2008).
The Mechanics of Public Administration in Nigeria.
Lagos: Concept Publications.
Omolayo, S. & Arowolaju, B.
(1987).
Elements of Government: An Introductory College Text on Political Science.
Lagos: Friends Foundation Publishers Ltd. Sills, L.D.
(Ed.).
(1968).
International Encyclopaedia of the Social Sciences,.Vols.
5 & 6.
New York: The Macmillan Company and Free Press.
10  PSM 800 MODULE 1 UNIT 2 THE ENVIRONMENT AND ITS INFLUENCE ON GOVERNANCE CONTENTS 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objectives 3.0 Main Content 3.1 The Environment 3.2 Historical Antecedents 3.3 Social Factor 3.4 Human Relations Factor 3.5 Language 3.6 Educational System 3.7 Climatic Condition 3.8 Copy Cat Syndrome 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutor-Marked Assignment 7.0 References/Further Reading 1.0 INTRODUCTION In this unit, you will be able to identify variables within the Nigerian environment which impact on government and the conduct of its business.
Government does not exist in a vacuum.
It exists in the social setting of Nigeria, conditioned by history and traditions, and by physical factors of geography, climate and resources which are fundamental to the acquisition of knowledge in this direction.
The setting in this context is what the Social Scientists refer to as ecology.
That setting, we must appreciate is not static.
The dynamic nature of the world in which we exist has instigated efforts towards, coping with the changes that accompany such dynamism particularly in the conduct of government business.
If is from the environment that government perceives the problems to be resolved, the alternatives within which choices can be made, the resources to be employed and the support and opposition to policies and programmes.
Furthermore, within the environment are found the clients to be served or regulated, the market focus which establish costs for the goods and services produced by government, special interest groups that have a particular concern about what the government does and other public and private institutions that may offer support or opposition.
Finally, it is within that environment that the consequences of governance are to be judged right or wrong.
11  PSM 800 CONDUCT OF GOVERNMENT BUSINESS 2.0 OBJECTIVES At the end of this unit, you should be able to: • trace the historical antecedents that patterned the art of governance in Nigeria • identify environmental factors that have smoothening effect on the conduct of government business • analyse the nature of impact which each of the factors has on government and its business.
3.0 MAIN CONTENT 3.1 The Environment The challenges of governance in Nigeria have reached such a crescendo that the subject cannot be meaningfully discussed without a recourse to the concept of Ecology.
This is because, ecology has impacted so much on the act of governance that it has apparently become the dominant factor that shapes and continues to re-shape its complexion at any given time.
As a concept, ecology entails the interactions between government as an organ and the environment within which it operates.
The notion that environment may have any form of relationship and interaction with, or influence on, an organisation is a recent development.
It is now generally accepted by administrators and scholars of administration that the very nature, purpose, activities, structure and behaviour in governance is determined or modified by the social, cultural, economic, political, legal, historical and technological factors in the environment.
3.2 Historical Antecedents It would appear that the influence of colonialism in our national discourse is gradually becoming an over-beaten path, yet it will equally appear fallacious or, should we say, unhelpful for any discussion to be undertaken on the history of governance in Nigeria without recourse to the influence of colonialism.
Simply put, Nigeria’s colonial experience laid the foundation for economic and political underdevelopment of the country.
The structural deformities and contradictions inherited in 1960 have continued to militate directly or indirectly against growth, stability and development.
Political initiatives and regime initiatives have had to  contend with structurally determined and conditioned crises and contradictions while making it possible for new problems to emerge and 12 None PSM 800 MODULE 1 fester.
The post-colonial alignment and realignment of class forces in Nigeria have operated within the overall deformities and distortions introduced and nurtured by the colonial state and the colonial elite.
Political independence which Nigeria earned in 1960 without bloodshed introduced novel institutions, political forces, and patterns into the political terrain of the country.
However, in spite of the alignment and realignment of political and social forces, it would appear that Nigeria’s political development has made very limited progress and it is hardly on the path of addressing the conditions of backwardness, underdevelopment, foreign domination, economic mismanagement, mass poverty, and marginalisation in the global division of labour- conditions which continue to militate against effective development and the concrete development and strengthening of political institutions and processes.
The Nigerian social formation, state and dominant elites appear to have failed woefully in extricating themselves from the imposed distortions, forms of domination, unequal exchange and subservience to foreign tastes, values, relations of exchange and inability to be creative and productive.
The scenario is summarised by Ihonvbere, (2002:112) as follows: • the creation of a weak, repressive, and non hegemonic state • the development of indigenous elites and their marginalisation in the internal production and exchange systems • the promotion and accentuation of primordial loyalties through the ‘divide and rule’ politics and the use of resource allocation to divide the people along primordial lines’ • the unequal distribution of social and other amenities and the use of bureaucratic manipulation to slow down developments in the North and to pitch the North against the South • foreign domination of the local economy and the incorporation of the emerging elites into the structures and systems of the metropolitan elites as junior partners, agents advisers, representatives, etc • through economic, educational, fiscal and administrative policies, the reduction, as much as possible, of contacts between the North and the South • the encouragement of a culture of repression and violence through the creation of a very violent and ruthless security and police force to collect taxes, depose traditional rulers, impose cash crops, and obtain forced labour from communities • the manipulation of the policies of decolonisation to heighten the differences between the emerging elites • the looting of the resources of Nigeria, discouragement of relevant and comprehensive education, the failure to create useful 13  PSM 800 CONDUCT OF GOVERNMENT BUSINESS and democratic institutions, and the failure to build infrastructures that would facilitate mobility and contact amongst peoples; and • the structured incorporation of the Nigerian social formation into an exploitative and unequal international division of labour thus, concretising its marginalisation, vulnerability and dependence, a condition which affects the ability of local elites to run the economy in an autonomous manner beneficial to the local economy and society in the first instance.
The consequence of the foregoing is that Nigeria is yet to recover from that experience.
Many of the leaders in contemporary Nigeria were creations of the colonial system.
Many of the officers in the bureaucracy were recruited and trained under the colonial system.
Several officers in the army, itself originally colonial creations were recruited and trained under the colonial system.
The country’s international trade is largely shaped by economic structures and relations entered into in the colonial era.
The educational and agricultural policies, even legal forms and patterns are structured after those of the British who, ab initio had no positive designs for Nigeria as a colony.
We therefore posit that one of the main predicaments of Nigeria today is the weakness and fragility of civil society, and the fragmentation of people into ethnic, class, gender, communal, religious and regional domains.
3.3 Social Factor The consequences of this factor are enormous.
It in fact, continues to shape and reshape the art of governance in Nigerian.
It has tended to erode the national consciousness of Nigerians.
This is because, within the Nigerian societies, we find that family, local, state and ethnic loyalties compete with and often take precedence over loyalties to the nation.
These are so deeply rooted that they create problems in governance particularly with their attendant nepotism in all its forms.
The consequences are that supervision and control, as management functions, are difficult to exercise.
Directly related to this is corruption which has equally eaten deep into the fabrics of the Nigerian society such that the Transparency International has continuously rated Nigeria for almost ten years as one of the most corrupt nations in the world despite efforts being made by the government to reduce this practice.
The tendency to see Federal Government’s funds or benefits accruing there from as “national cake” that should be sliced from as much as possible is rife.
14  PSM 800 MODULE 1 The situation is even worsened by the recognition accorded such officials who have corruptly enriched themselves within the society.
They are almost always welcomed with such recognitions as chieftaincy titles and the like.
This category of persons is found across and among various classes of the society particularly the “political class’ which appears to be the final point of abode due to the concomitant protection enjoyed within that class.
The truth of the matter is that one can hardly penetrate this class unless one is very rich.
Yet, we find retired military officers, other public officers and professionals, within the rank and file of the political class.
The tendency and trends have equally exposed that fallacy embedded in the art of governance as espoused by the “received wisdom” in the field.
Otherwise, how else can one explain virtually unquestioned belief and sarcastic expressions and with impunity for that matter, that political appointments in a democratic dispensation is an opportunity to recoup electoral expenses rather than to render service to the people in particular, and the nation in general.
Put differently, how else can the pitiable condition of a retired official or successful businessman who sold all his landed properties both at home and abroad in order to penetrate the political class, get nominated by his political party, contest and win an election as a “Senator” or “Local Government Chairman” be salvaged?
In fact, another trend is a situation where corruptly enriched but retired public officials quickly gain entry into the political class to escape being investigated since protection by the political class is guaranteed or by such moves, they succeed in being elected or appointed into positions where they use their new positions to torpedo any move that would make such investigation possible.
Cases abound of “sharp practices” in various forms which influence governance in Nigeria.
3.4 Human Relations Factor As posited by the Udoji Commission (1974:4), governance is primarily about dealing with people in cooperative systems.
However, in Nigeria, due to lack of co-operation and teamwork between superiors and subordinates on the one hand and horizontally among peer mates on the other, animosity, jealousy and conflicts are the in-thing.
The consequence of this is the reluctance of superiors to delegate responsibilities to their subordinates and the reluctance of subordinates to accept responsibilities from their superior officers.
This reluctance results in excessive concentration of decision-making at the top-most levels, and the consequent inefficient use of the talents of both superiors and subordinates.
About this, we made the following observation elsewhere: “The Civil Service today is a total write-off….
You allowed yourselves to be whipped, instead of stopping the act of whipping you inflict injury on yourselves and ask others to wipe your tears” 15  PSM 800 CONDUCT OF GOVERNMENT BUSINESS (Maduabum, 2002:16).
While analysing the foregoing statement, Okigbo (1986:6) was quoted as pointing-out the reality that the bulk of the problems faced by public administrators are ‘self-inflicted’.
This is traceable to the lack of co-operation which exists among the public servants.
Sometimes this uncooperative attitude snowballs to an aggression which is misplaced and transferred to the unfortunate public thereby resulting in poor public relations with its attendant consequences of inefficiency, ineffectiveness, poor performance and poor service delivery as assessed or pronounced by the same public.
3.5 Language Nigeria, just like many other developing and developed countries lacks as indigenous lingua franca.
The implication of this is that below the topmost levels in the various sectors of the society, most people are conducting their business in a language which in varying degrees, they have not mastered.
This adversely affects productivity in the conduct of government business because, quite often, instructions and directives are not fully understood, a situation that correspondingly affects execution of such instructions.
To compound the problem, most managers in public sector organisations, understandably, lack the patience with which to deal with subordinates who lack the required proficiency in the lingua franca, just as most of them are equally poor communicators.
3.6 Educational System This evolved from a colonially – imposed elitist system of education with its focus on liberal arts.
As severally argued, the colonial maters were not interested in educating members of their colonies, yet they required interpreters that would assist them relate with the natives hence the emphasis on reading and writing only.
This patterned what in later years became popular, first , focus on arts and social sciences; and secondly , too much emphasis on “Paper qualifications” rather than acquisition of skills” Such paper qualifications acquired in liberal arts guaranteed Nigerians the much sought after “white collar” jobs.
The result is that today, student’s enrolment in tertiary institutions sleight more in favour of these liberal arts than science and technology.
This encourages “generalists” as against “specialists” in the public service.
As strong apostles of Lord Fulton’s dictum that “the cult of generalists is obsolete at all levels and in all parts of the service” we uphold our support for science and technology which, we do know constitutes a “passport” to economic development all over the world.
It is obvious that a country which de-emphasises science and technology when one considers interests of students in quest of advanced knowledge as demonstrated by the enrolment figures in tertiary institutions in Nigeria, could not be said to be seriously pursuing economic development.
16  PSM 800 MODULE 1 Operations within the public service do not help matters because of the division of the service into air-tight classes which stand in a hierarchy of power and prestige and which is both undemocratic in spirit and an obstacle in efficient management.
The entire educational system of the nation seems to be designed to uphold and reinforce this elitist philosophy to sort out, by stages, the most worthy, who are crowned with the laurels of’ success” certified by diplomas and degrees, from the less worthy who at one stage or another in the educational ladder, are crowned with the cap of “failure”.
This explains the common phenomenon of superior and inferior cadres in the service.
About this, we had severally pronounced that “Bogus certificates do not necessarily make competent officers”.
This is interpreted to mean that possession of chains of degrees and certificates is not synonymous with performance because certificates do not do the job.
The job can only be effectivel y done through demonstration by the individual about his acquired competences and skills.
Akin to this, is lack of congruity between the quality of products of our educational system and the economic direction of the nation as demonstrated by the industrial sector which ought to absorb and utilise these products.
The result appears to be high level of unemployment of educationally qualified Nigerians.
3.7 Climatic Condition Nigeria is situated within a climatic condition that is characterised by ‘heat’ all the year round.
Some of the inefficiencies witnessed in operations in the public service are traceable to health factors resulting from harsh climatic conditions.
Since this is a natural phenomenon, the challenge is to cope with it by establishing a positive co-relationship between climates and working conditions especially hours of work, rest periods, and recreational facilities.
The developed countries of the world have conquered this natural phenomenon which is peculiar to them through various means hence their productivity is hardly affected.
We, too, can do the same with regards to our harsh climate.
3.8 Copy – Cat Syndrome There is that tendency to be too conscious of the way things are done in other countries.
This is particularly so in the public service, whether in the organisation of ministries, the administration of justice, the education of the children or the method of keeping files.
The issue here is that, whereas these “model counties” may have been modernising many of their systems, Nigerians seem to have more reverence for the past than for the present or the future.
Many policies and management practices in particular, are based on experience and guess-work rather than on objective information obtained through, reliable research.
In addition, the tendency to copy from our “model’ nations at the detriment 17  PSM 800 CONDUCT OF GOVERNMENT BUSINESS of our cultural values had brought cultural conflicts in the areas of dress- code, attitude to life, mode of speaking and generally believing that looking like an irresponsible person is by keeping up with the Jones” or “Yankees” of America.
Provocative dressing among the female gender in all walks of life has attracted immense criticisms in recent times leading to public discourse due to its conflict with our cultural values.
These have adverse effect on productivity in the governments’ organs, particularly the distractions they portend SELF-ASSESSMENT EXERCISE List the factors that influence the conduct of government business in Nigeria.
Answer These are: Historical antecedents; environmental factors such as social, human relations, language, educational system, climatic conditions, copy-cat syndrome, etc.
4.0 CONCLUSION As earlier stated, the environment exerts immense influence on the operations within any organisation.
Quite often, we find that there is a mutual relationship between the environment and organisations.
For instance, resources are obtained from the environment by the organisation and the organisation releases its goods and services to the environment.
This is exactly the pattern with the conduct of government business which makes our discussion in this unit a desirable exercise.
5.0 SUMMARY Due to the influence of environmental factors in the conduct of government business, we devoted this unit to its discussion.
In it, we explained the historical antecedents, that is, the colonial administration that patterned the way Nigerian government conducts its affairs.
We equally pointed out how these lead to failure in policy and programme objectives.
Other factors are purely environmental.
They include social, human relations, language, educational system, climatic condition and the copy-cat syndrome.
6.0 TUTOR-MARKED ASSIGNMENT Discuss the environmental factors that influence the conduct of government business in Nigeria.
18  PSM 800 MODULE 1 7.0 REFERENCES/FURTHER READING Adigwe, F.(1985).
Essentials of Government for West Africa.
Ibadan: University Press.
Federal Republic of Nigeria (1975).Main Report of the Public Service Review Commission.
Lagos: Government Press.
Ihonvbere, J.O.
(2002).
Economic Crisis, Civil Society and Democratisation: The Case of Zambia.
Maduabum , C.P.
(2003).
“The Civil Services under Military Rule” in Modupeolu Faseke, The Civil Services in Nigeria: A Historical perspective.
Ibadan: Rex Charles Publications in association with Connell Publications.
Maduabum, C.P.
(2008).
The Mechanics of Public Administration in Nigeria.
Lagos: Concept Publications.
19  PSM 800 CONDUCT OF GOVERNMENT BUSINESS UNIT 3 CONSTITUTIONAL PROVISIONS CONTENTS 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objectives 3.0 Main Content 3.1 What is Constitution?
3.2 Constitutional Development in Nigeria 3.3 Implications for Political and Administrative Development in Nigeria 3.4 The 1999 Constitution 3.4.1 Main Features 3.4.2 Chapters in the Constitution 3.4.3 Schedules in the Constitution 3.4.4 A Critique of the 1999 Constitution 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutor-Marked Assignment 7.0 References/Further Reading 1.0 INTRODUCTION In Nigeria, as in most other successful democracies in the world, the Rule of Law constitutes the overriding factor in enhancing such success.
The constitution is recognised in such democracies as Nigeria, as the most important document upon which her successful democratisation relies.
In fact, some authorities argue that the constitution is the foundation of democracy or, put differently, is the building block of democracy.
This importance which the constitution commands has made it inevitable for a greater emphasis in the study of democratic governance of a Nation.
In conducting its business therefore, governance is guided by laws the highest of which is the constitution.
In the process care is taken not only to ensure fairness at all times, but that justice is seen to prevail.
2.0 OBJECTIVES At the end of this unit, you will be able to: • define the concept ‘constitution’ • trace constitutional development in Nigeria from its inception to the present day • analyse the current constitution (1999) in use in Nigeria 20  PSM 800 MODULE 1 • derive lessons from the analysis for use in the conduct of government business.
3.0 MAIN CONTENT 3.1 What is Constitution?
A constitution is a formal document having the force of law, by which a society organises and limits its powers and prescribes the relations of its various organs, and with the citizen.
(Nwabueze,1973:2).
It could be written or unwritten.
Perhaps, a more comprehensive definition which further expands parameters for analysis is that provided in the Black’s Law Dictionary.
According to the document: Constitution is the organic and fundamental law of a nation, which may be written or unwritten, establishing the character and conception of its government, laying the basic principles to which its internal life is to be conformed, organising the government and regulating, and limiting the functions of the different departments, and prescribing the extent and manner of the exercise of powers.
It is a charter of government deriving its whole authority from the governed….
Agreed upon by the people of the union as an absolute rule of action and decision for all departments and officers of government in respect of all the points covered by it….
and in opposition to which any act or ordinance of any such department or officer is null and void, From the above definition, six cardinal characteristics emerge for a valid constitution namely: Fundamental law of a nation; establishes the government of a nation; lays down the basic principles of government; prescribes the functions and powers of government; regulates the exercise of those powers; and derives its authority from the people.
On the other hand, constitutionalism refers to the application of the spirit and letters of the constitution.
It is the anti-thesis of arbitrary rule.
It follows from the obvious fact that government is universally accepted to be a necessity, since man cannot fully realize himself except within ordered society.
Yet, the necessity for government creates its own problem of how to limit the good of society.
It is this limiting of the arbitrariness of political power that is expressed in the concept of constitutionalism (Nwabueze, 1973, Ibid).
Thus, between constitution and constitutional practice, we observed certain arbitrariness which now shaped the content and character of constitutional amendments in Nigeria.
It is also in the light of this that we shall attempt to explain the 21  PSM 800 CONDUCT OF GOVERNMENT BUSINESS political and administrative implications of the constitutional developments in Nigeria.
3.2 Constitutional Development in Nigeria Constitutional Development in Nigeria refers to the series of constitutional changes, leading to land-mark political and administrative policies and structures from the colonial to the post-independence era.
A summary of these constitutional developments in Nigeria is as follows: (i) The Lugard Council 1914 (ii) The Clifford Constitution of1922 (iii) The Richard Constitution of 1946 (iv) The Macpherson Constitution of 1951 (v) The Lyttleton Constitution of 1954 (vi) The Independence Constitution of 1960 (vii) The Republican Constitution of 1963 (viii) The 1979 Constitution (ix) The 1989 Constitution; and (x) The 1999 Constitution.
The afore-mentioned stages of constitutional development shall be examined but with special emphasis on the significant political and administrative changes introduced by each of them.
(i) The Lugard Council of 1914 The amalgamation of the Northern and Southern Protectorates of Nigeria took place in 1914.
This gave rise to the formation of a legislative council known as the Lugard Council in 1914.
The significance of the Legislative Council was: (a) It was made up of all members of the executive, unofficial members and minority Africans; (b) It brought about a pooling of resources for the two administrations of Southern and Northern Nigeria.
For example, Northern Nigerian administration was sustained by a share of the Southern Nigerian Customs and grant in-aid from the Imperial Treasury (Faseke, 1988:8).
In 1919, educated elite both in Lagos and Calabar criticised the Lugard Council on grounds that the illiterate chiefs and obas in the council could not speak English.
This gave rise to the formation of the Clifford Constitution.
22  PSM 800 MODULE 1 (ii) The Clifford Constitution (1922) Sir Hugh Clifford succeeded Sir Lord Fredrick Lugard as Governor-General of Nigeria in 1922.
The same year, he drafted what became known as the Clifford Constitution.
The significant features of the Clifford Constitution were: (a) It consists of: • Legislative Council (legislate for peace and order and to approve the estimates of expenditures for Northern provinces).
• Executive Council (advisory to the Governor-General) (b) It introduced the elective principle – the electorates in Lagos and Calabar were able to vote for the first time.
In the case of Lagos, the right of franchise was restricted to about 3,000 male tax payers with an income of one hundred pounds and to return three members to the legislative council every five years; (c) Consequent upon the above, political parties were formed.
For example: On June 24, 1923, Herbert Macaulay and his Associates inaugurated the Nigerian National Democratic Party (NNDP) with the aims of attainment of municipal status and local self-government for Lagos and the provision of facilities for higher education in Nigeria etc; (d).
It also led to the development of newspapers such as the Lagos Daily News and the Nigerian Daily Times; and (e) The once German colony, Cameroon, was reintegrated into Nigeria.
The limitations of the Clifford Constitution especially in terms of Africans not being represented in the executive council and limited franchise led to the emergence of the Richard Constitution.
(iii) The Richard Constitution (1964) Sir Arthur Richard became the Governor-General in 1943 after the brief stay of Sir Bernard Bourdillon between 1935 and 1943.
The Richard Constitution which came into effect on 1st January 1947 had the following significant features: (a) Establishment of Regional House of Assembly, also with unofficial majorities elected through Electoral Colleges for the North, West and East.
In addition, the North also had a House of Chiefs.
(b) Introduction of Policy of regionalism with the division of the country into three regions.
23  PSM 800 CONDUCT OF GOVERNMENT BUSINESS (c) It marked the beginning of the regionalisation of the hitherto unitary civil service as some attempts were made to regionalised the central departments such as education, forestry, labour, medical and public relations (Faseke, 198:54).
(d) Arising from the above, Sydney Phillipson was commissioned to “Study comprehensively and make recommendations regarding the administrative and financial procedure to be adopted under the new constitution.” The report which was later adopted, led to the evolution of the policy of establishing Boards and Corporations such as Electricity Corporation of Nigeria (ECN) and the Nigeria Railway Corporation (NCR).
(Faseke, 1988:56).
The limitations of the Richard Constitution include: writing the constitution without consulting the people; division of the country into unequal regions; non-provision of House of Chiefs for the Western and Eastern regions, etc.
These led to the emergence of the Macpherson Constitution.
(iii) The Macpherson Constitution (1951) Sir John Macpherson became Governor-General of Nigeria in 1948.
The significant aspects of the Macpherson Constitution are: (a) For the first time, Nigerians were involved in the Drafting of the Constitution from the grass-root level to the national level.
(b) It established a central legislature and a central executive for the country.
(c) It established a council of ministers charged with the responsibility of formulating policies and directing executive action.
It should be noted here that the ministers together with the Lt.
Governor, the Civil Secretary, Legal, Financial and Development Secretary formed the Regional Executive Council.
Under the new arrangement, Heads of government departments ceased to be members of the Executive Council.
This was a change of great magnitude in the sense that it marked the crucial dividing line between politics and administration.
(d) It provided for supremacy of central law.
The central law is supreme to regional law hence, in the event of a clash between the two over certain constitutional matters, the central law overrides.
24  PSM 800 MODULE 1 The limitations of MacPherson Constitution were: no provision for the post of a Federal Ministers or Regional Premiers; lack of responsible government at the centre; the absence of a federal structure; and problems generated by the Action Group’s move for independence in 1956 by Chief Anthony Enahoro.
All these led to the emergence of the Lyttleton Constitution in 1954.
It is also to be noted that the Northern People’s Congress (NPC) was averse to the Action Group’s motion, and preferred to substitute it with the clause: “as soon as practicable”.
(iv) The Lyttleton Constitution (1954) The Lyttleton Constitution was put in place in October, 1954 following the London and Lagos Conferences held to review the problems which arose as a result of the demand for independence.
The significant features of Lyttleon Constitution were: (a) Federalism was established as a system of government in Nigeria.
(b) It provided for division of powers through the three (3) legislative lists.
(1) Executive Lists: These denote the items on which the Federal Government has power to legislate on i.e university, currency, telecommunication, defence, mines and power.
(2) Concurrent Lists: These specify matters on which the Federal and State governments have powers to legislate on i.e., agriculture, industrial development, insurance, higher education, etc.
(3) Residual Lists: This borders on items or matters not under exclusive ad concurrent lists i.e Local Government, Chieftaincy Affairs, etc (e) There was the establishment of the Supreme Court and Regional Courts.
(d) Premiers and Ministers were appointed in the various regions and ministers at the Federal levels were now given portfolios.
(g) Apart from the institution of the Public Service Commission, other administrative changes took place with the setting up of the Gorsuch Commission, which recommended among 25  PSM 800 CONDUCT OF GOVERNMENT BUSINESS others the introduction of the technical grade.
The civil service was divided into two distinct classes 1.
General Administration 2.
The Professional Class a. Sub-Clerical Minor Technical b.
Clerical Technical c. Executive Higher Technical d. Administrative Professional e. Super scale Super scale The limitations of the Lyttleton constitution which include: its failure to provide for the office of Prime Minister at the Centre, division of the country into three regions without constitutional recognition of the status; problems of the minorities; and the growing yearnings for independence led to the emergence of the independence constitution.
(iv) The Independence Constitution (1960) The Independence Constitution was the outcome of the London Constitutional Conference of 23rd May – 26th June, 1957 and the resumed conference in Lagos between 29th September and 27thOctober, 1958 under Mr. Alan Lennox Boyd, the Secretary of State for the Colonies as Chairman.
The significant features of the Independence Constitution were: • it granted independence to Nigeria.
However, the Queen of England was represented by the Governor-General as Nigerians were still under the Queen; it provided for a parliamentary or cabinet system of government • by which the post of Head of State was distinct from the Head of Government.
For example, whereas Alhaji Tafawa Balewa was made Prime Minister as Head of Government, Rt.
Hon.
Dr. Nnamdi Azikiwe was Governor-General as head of state; • it provided for State Creation to allay the fears of the minorities; • the fundamental human rights were entrenched to safeguard the rights of the citizens; and • it provided for Nigerian citizenship: a.
Those born in Nigeria after 1st October, 1960; b.
Anybody born in Nigeria after 30th September, 1960 where one of the parents was a citizen of Nigeria; and c. Those who have registered as Nigerian citizens and other qualifications etc.
26  PSM 800 MODULE 1 The limitations of the Independence Constitution were: the Queen of England was still the ceremonial Head of Nigeria despite Nigeria’s Independence; the Supreme Court was not the highest court in the land except the Privy Council in London; etc.
These led to emergence of the 1963 Republican Constitution.
(v) The Republican Constitution (1963) Nigeria became a Republic on 1st October, 1963 with adoption of the Republican Constitution.
The significant features of the Republican Constitution were: (a) It brought to an end the dominance of British rule as the Queen of England ceased to be the Head of State of Nigeria.
The Office of Governor-General was changed and replaced by the office of President, who was elected, but was only a ceremonial head.
(b) All appeals, formally going to the Privy Council in London were abolished.
The Supreme Court in Nigeria became the highest court of appeal.
(c) It provided for the establishment of Federal Electoral Commission for the conduct of elections in the country.
(d) Nigeria remained a federation of four regions and a federal territory, with the creation of the mid-west region.
(e) The Federal Government had the power to declare a state of emergency in any region in cases of violence or breach of peace.
With the Republican Constitution in force, Nigeria became a sovereign nation-state.
The politicians of the 1st Republic became political masters, who unfortunately could not manage the transfer of political power to them by the British.
Hence, the mis-rule and the irresponsible manner the politicians conducted the affairs of the nation led to the military take-over of government on 15th of January, 1966.
The bloody coup, which was led by Major Chukwuma Kaduna Nzeogwu was characterised by certain anomalies in terms of its operations.
Thus, contradictions arose within the military class which led to counter coups in military administrations from General Aguiyi Ironsi to General Yakubu Gowon on the one hand, and from General Murtala Mohammed to General Olusegun Obasanjo, with the murder of the latter, on the other.
However, the duo promised and instituted a transitional programme which was to return Nigeria to democratic rule in 1979.
To achieve this lofty aim, the 1979 Constitution came into being as mid- wifed by General Olusegun Obasanjo’s regime through a 50-Man Member Committee headed by Chief F.R.A Williams (Odanye, 2002:5- 106).
27  PSM 800 CONDUCT OF GOVERNMENT BUSINESS (vi) The 1979 Constitution The 1979 Constitution ushered in Nigeria’s second Republic with Alhaji Shehu Shagari as President.
The significant features of the Constitution were: • it provided for a Presidential System of Government.
The President was Head of State and Head of Government as a means of avoiding the conflict of leadership in the parliamentary system of government witnessed in the first republic • it provided for separation of powers between the executive, legislative and judicial arms of government • it created a united Local Government System as the third tier of government in other to bring about development to the rural areas • the House of Chiefs was abrogated in order to insulate Chiefs from partisan politics • it established the Code of Conduct Bureau and Code of Conduct Tribunal • it created a Bi-cameral Legislature at the Federal level (i.e Senate and House of Representatives) and a Unicameral Legislature at the State level (i.e House of Assembly) it proclaimed the Supremacy of the Constitution in order to avoid • conflicts and arbitrariness.
(ix) The 1989 Constitution of the Federal Republic of Nigeria Following the overthrow of the Alhaji Shehu Shagari’s government of the Second Republic by General Muhammadu Buhari led military coup in 1983; the Nigerian State went through another trauma of military rule.
By 1984, when General Ibrahim Babangida overthrew General Buhari’s military government, it was evident that accusation of corruption against over thrown leaders was no longer a factor for military intervention in Nigeria’s politics.
However, it is instructive to note that General Babangida put in place a political transition programme, which manifested in the birth of the 1989 Constitution for Nigeria’s Third Republic.
But this was set aside owing to the annulment of the June 12 1993 Presidential elections.
The 1989 Constitution was a product of the Transition to Civil Rule (political programme) Decree of 1987 which set up the Constitution Review Committee to review the Constitution of the Federal Republic of Nigeria 1979, in line with the accepted recommendations of the Political Bureau inaugurated by the Federal Military Government on 13th January, 1986.
In summary, the 1989 Constitution with slight modifications, adopted, among others the fundamental provisions of the 1979 constitution with respect to: 28  PSM 800 MODULE 1 • that Nigeria remains a Federal State • that Nigeria shall continue to operate the Presidential System of Government • that Nigeria shall apply the Federal Character to promote national unity and national loyalty.
We wish to note that the Nigerian policy, being guided by Constitutional and Transitional Decrees under General Babangida, the military government gave a purposeful direction on the political and ideological commitment of Nigerian politicians without ethnic bias.
This led to the first generally accepted and widely acclaimed free and fair presidential election in Nigeria.
It was rather unfortunate that the acclaimed winner of the presidential election, late Chief M.K.O Abiola was prevented from exercising that mandate, thereby creating obstacles on the path of Nigeria’s stride to democracy and development.
But this contradiction itself has today led to another constitutional experience: the birth of the 1999 Constitution of the Federal Republic of Nigeria as against decrees and edicts (with respect to Federal and States respectively).
(x) The 1999 Constitution of the Federal Republic of Nigeria It is convenient to say that between 1999 to date (2012) Nigeria can be classified as a democratic nation among the comity of democratised nations of the world, principally because, today’s Nigerian’s political leadership is democratically elected, despite the obvious pitfalls, and governance by the 1999 constitution of the Federal Republic of Nigeria as against decrees and edicts (with respect to Federal and States) SELF-ASSESSMENT EXERCISE List the different Constitutions in Nigeria from 1944 till date.
• Answer: i. Lugard Council of 1914 a.
The Clifford Constitution of 1922 b.
The Richard Constitution of 1946 c. The MacPherson Constitution of 1951 d. The Lyttleton Construction of 1954 e. The Independence Constitution of 1960 f. The Republican Constitution of 1963 g. The 1979 Constitution h. The 1989 Constitution i.
The 1999 Constitution.
29  PSM 800 CONDUCT OF GOVERNMENT BUSINESS 3.3 Implications for Political and Administrative Development in Nigeria The totality of Nigeria’s constitutional development experience is the emergence of Nigeria as an independent and sovereign nation among the comity of independent nations of the world.
By this, Nigeria has achieved self-esteem, which is concerned with the feeling of self-respect and independence as espoused by Goulet, an authority on development paradigm, who argued that a society is developed when she has achieved three basic components or core values, which he calls life sustenance, self esteem and freedom (Thirlwall, 1992).
This has some implications for Nigeria’s political and administrative development, some of which are: • Nigeria is governed by her own indigenous leaders with an application of the norms of democracy • Nigeria conducts her external relations in equal terms with other nations of the world, regional and sub-regional bodies like the United Nations Organisation.
(UNO).
Commonwealth, the African Union (AU), Economic Community of West Africa States (ECOWAS) etc • Nigeria has the choice of adopting its economic and political policies, programmes and projects, which are peculiar to her interest despite the odds of globalisation and internalisation Nigeria today has a civil service with an inbuilt bureaucratic and • administrative disposition to serve the political masters.
This separation of administration from Politics is a world standard, which ensures that the civil servants remain the custodians of stability in the Nigerian nation • Finally, the cumulative constitutional experience is a sine-qua- non for a better state policy initiation, formulation, implementation and evaluation for purposes of guaranteeing the unity, peace and progress of Nigeria and her citizens.
The 1999 Constitution in Focus The 1999 Constitution starts with the following preamble: (a) “We the people of the Federal Republic of Nigeria, having firmly and solemnly resolved to live in unity and harmony as one indivisible and indissoluble sovereign nation under God dedicated to the promotion of inter-African solidarity, world peace, international co-operation and understanding; (b) “And to Provide for a Constitution for the purpose of promoting the good government and welfare of all persons in our country on 30  PSM 800 MODULE 1 the principles of freedom, equality and justice, and for the purpose of consolidating the unity of our people; (c) Do Hereby make, Enact and Give to ourselves the following Constitution…” It contains Eight Chapters and Seven Schedules.
They include: Chapter 1: General Provisions.
Chapter II: Fundamental Objectives and Directive Principles of State Policy Chapter III: Citizenship Chapter IV Fundamental Rights Chapter V: The Legislature Chapter VI: The Executive Chapter VII: The Judicature Chapter VIII: Federal Capital Territory, Abuja and General Supplementary Provisions Schedules: (First, Second, Third, Fourth, Fifth, Sixth and Seventh).
3.4.1 The main features of the 1999 Constitution are outlined as follows (a) That the Nigerian Constitution is supreme; (b) That it is written, rigid and federal; (c ) That Nigeria shall operate a Presidential System of Government; (d) That Nigeria shall operate a two-chamber legislature at the federal level and a unicameral at the state level; (e) That there shall be rule of law and constitutional separation of powers; (f) That there shall be an Independent Judiciary; (g) That there shall be code of conduct for public officers; and (h) That the composition of government of the federation or any of its agencies and the conduct of its affairs shall be carried out in such a manner as to reflect the federal character of Nigeria.
A brief analysis of each of the chapters is undertaken subsequently.
3.4.2 Chapters in the Constitution (a) Chapter One This chapter is divided into two parts (Part 1 and Part 2).
Issues treated under Part 1 titled: “Federal Republic of Nigeria” include: Supremacy of the Constitution and the status of the Federal Republic of Nigeria as 31  PSM 800 CONDUCT OF GOVERNMENT BUSINESS well as its components.
It also contains (in terms of making references to) schedules that help to clarify what is treated under this part like schedules 1 and 2 to the Constitution.
Part 2 titled “Powers of the Federal Republic of Nigeria” deals with Legislative Powers; Executive Powers; Judicial Powers; Local Government System; the processes of creating new states and boundary adjustment; mode of altering provisions of the Constitution; prohibition of State Religion; Public Order and Public Security, and Implementation of Treaties.
(Sections 4- 12 of the Constitution).
(b) Chapter Two This section outlines the Fundamental Objectives and Directive Principles of State Policy.
Section 13 of the chapter directs as a matter of fundamental obligation on the part of all those who exercise governmental responsibility to conform to the provisions of the chapter and apply same in the exercise of this responsibility.
Section 14, upholds the principles of democracy and social justice as the basis of the state of the Federal Republic of Nigeria.
In line with the motto of the Federal Republic of Nigeria, which is “Unity, Faith, Peace and Progress” the political objectives are outlined in Section 15 with the promotion of national integration as its focus, by breaking through the visible barriers of language, religion and ethnic diversity of the people.
In Section 16 the economic objectives are geared towards harnessing the resources of the nation through a fair, private and public participation in the economic activities, to promote a planned and self-reliant economy that would benefit the generality of Nigerians in equitable and justifiable order.
Section 17 refers to the social objectives which are to be founded on the ideals of freedom, equality of rights, obligations, and opportunities before the law.
(c) Chapter Three This chapter focuses on citizenship.
Citizenship can be described as the Legal right which an individual acquires to belong to a particular country.
The doctrine of citizenship has far-reaching implications in terms of rights, obligations and status of the citizen.
According to the Oxford English Dictionary, “a citizen is an inhabitant of a city; a person with full rights in a country.” The concept of citizenship therefore deals with the way and manner a country determines who her nationals are.
The chapter is divided into six sub-sections that deal with the various concepts of citizenship.
These include: (i) Citizenship by Birth, (ii) Citizenship by Registration, (iii) Those who naturalise as Nigerians; (iv) Dual citizenship, (v) Renunciation of citizenship, and (vi) Deprivation of citizenship by the President.
32  PSM 800 MODULE 1 (d) Chapter Four This chapter deals with Fundamental Human Rights.
Fundamental human rights complement and enhance our harmonious existence and continuance of the nation –state of Nigeria.
Without citizens there cannot be a country and without these rights, the citizens would be like slaves in their own country.
Freedom from fear and want can be achieved if conditions are created whereby every citizen may enjoy his/her civic and political rights.
Furthermore, these rights guarantee the protection of life and property of every Nigeria citizen (Abdullahi, 2000:41 and Adele, 2003:34.)
Fundamental human rights are basic to the existence of every individual.
They include: the right to life (Sec.
33); right to dignity of human person (Sec .
34); right to personal liberty (Sec.
35); right to fair hearing (Sec.
36); right to private and personal life (Sec.37).
Others are the right to freedom of thought, conscience and religion (Sec.
38); right to freedom of expression and press (Sec.39), the right to peaceful assembly and association (Sec.
40); the right to freedom of movement (Sec.
41); the right to freedom from discrimination (Sec.42); it also dealt with compulsory acquisition of property (Sec.44); restriction on and derogation from fundamental right (Sec 45); and special jurisdiction of high court and legal aid.
(Sec.
46).
(e) Chapter Five The focus of this chapter is the Legislature; the Legislature is the sovereign organ of state powers.
It is the law-making body as far as Nigerian constitution is concerned.
This fact is attested to in Sections 47-129 of this chapter which stated that there shall be a National Assembly for the Federation which shall consist of the Senate and the House of Representatives.
Accordingly, the Senate shall consist of three senators from each state and one from the Federal Capital Territory, Abuja.
While, the House of Representatives shall consist of three hundred and sixty members representing various constituencies of nearly equal proportions in the country.
There shall be a President and a Deputy for the Senate and the Speaker and Deputy Speaker for the House of Representatives who shall be elected from among the members of these two chambers.
(f) Chapter Six This chapter, focuses on the Executive Arm of Government at National and State levels.
Various conditions for the election of the President and State Governors and their removal from office, are clearly enunciated in this chapter.
There are also provisions for the setting up of specific 33  PSM 800 CONDUCT OF GOVERNMENT BUSINESS Federal and State Executive bodies (Commissions and Councils).
Other important provisions are in respect of Public Revenue and the Public Services of the Federation and States.
Part III of this chapter contains supplemental provisions which are in Sections A,B,C and D that pertain to the National Population Commission, the Nigeria Police Force, the Armed Forces of the Federation , and Political parties , respectively.
(g) Chapter Seven Judicature is the subject matter of this chapter and it relates to the judicial system.
It is the body of lawyers, (Judges and Lawyers at the Bench and the Bar respectively) that constitute the third estate of the realm.
In essence, the Constitution of the country is the supreme law meant to regulate the conduct of affairs in both our public and personal lives.
The chapter is divided into four parts.
Part 1 focuses on Federal Courts; Part II, State Courts, Part III, Election Tribunals and Part IV, Supplemental.
(h) Chapter 8 This chapter deals with the Federal Capital Territory, Abuja and general supplementary provisions.
The chapter consists of 4 parts.
Part one is made up of sections 297 to 304.
This part highlights the establishment of the Federal Capital Territory, Abuja, as the capital of the Federal and seat of Government of Nigeria.
This part of the constitution accords the Federal Capital Territory the status of a state.
Additionally, this section provides for the appointment of a Minister of the Federal Capital Territory to oversee the Federal Capital and he/she is to be appointed by the President of the Federal Republic of Nigeria.
The administrative structure and the organs of government in the Federal Capital Territory are enshrined in this portion.
Sections 305 to 308 make up part II of the Chapter.
This part contains miscellaneous provisions.
Some of these provisions include the procedure for declaration of the state of emergency as well as the president’s power to proclaim a state of emergency.
Part III of the chapter deals with transitional provisions and savings and these are contained in Sections 309 to 317.
The concluding part of the Chapter is contained in Sections 318 to 320 and it deals with interpretation, citation and the commencement of the 1999 Constitution on 29th May, 1999.
34  PSM 800 MODULE 1 3.4.3 Schedules in the Constitution The schedules are 1-7, The first schedule has parts one and two whereas part I titled “States of the Federation “ lists the 36 States of Nigeria and Local Government Areas in each state, thus totaling 774 local government areas (including those of the Federal Capital Territory, FCT).
Part II titled: Definition of Federal Capital Territory, Abuja lists the Seven Area Councils in the FCT.
Second schedule has Parts 1 to III.
While Part I addresses Exclusive Legislative list, Part II addresses Concurrent legislative list and Part III addresses supplemental and interpretation.
As explained by Akande (2000:478), in this schedule is the distribution of legislative powers between the Federal and State Governments.
There are 66 numbered items and two items of matters of incidental and supplementary to those mentioned in the Exclusive List and 12 main items on the Concurrent list subdivided into 30 subsidiaries.
The third schedule equally has three (3) parts.
Part I outlines Federal Executive Bodies such as Code of Conduct Bureau; Council of State; Federal Character Commission; Federal Civil Service Commission; Federal Judicial Service Commission; Independent National Electoral Commission; National Defence Council; National Economic Council; National Judiciary Council; National Population Commission; National Security Council; Nigerian Police Council; and Revenue Mobilisation Allocation and Fiscal Commission.
Part II explains the States’ Executive Bodies such as State Civil Service Commission; State Independence Electoral Commission and State Judicial Service Commission.
Part III on the other hand, explains the Executive Body of the Federal Capital Territory, Abuja.
The Fourth Schedule explains the functions of the Local Government Council.
The Fifth Schedule deals with the Code of Conduct for Public Officers which includes the Code of Conduct Bureau and the Code of Conduct Tribunal.
Part II identifies public officers for the purposes of the code of conduct.
The Sixth Schedule dwells on Election Tribunals.
Here are the National Assembly Tribunal and the Governorship and Legislative Houses Election Tribunal.
Finally, the Seventh Schedule focuses on Oaths.
Here, we have Oath of Allegiance; Oath of Office of President; Oath of Office of Vice President, Governor, Deputy Governor, Minister, Commissioner, Special Adviser; Oath of Member of the National Assembly or of a House of Assembly; and Judicial Oath.
35  PSM 800 CONDUCT OF GOVERNMENT BUSINESS 3.4.4 The 1999 Constitution: A Critique Several commentators on the 1999 Constitution had identified certain lapses especially in the drafting of the document.
The common denominator in the criticisms is that the document was initiated and midwifed, by the military and as such, cannot truly and fully reflect the collective aspirations of Nigerians in a democratic setting.
In fact, some views are that the document is skewed towards protection of the military interests as it did not categorically pronounce the illegitimacy of military regimes and outright condemnation of military coup d’ etat.
The fact that the constitution was promulgated by an outgoing military regime without any provision for its “acceptance” either through a resolution of the National Assembly or by a Referendum has generated a lot of debate as to the legitimacy of the document.
Indeed, many eminent jurists have condemned not only the process of its making but also, many of its provisions and called for its abrogation (Akande, 2000: vi).
However, the fact still remains that the present civilian administration has operated the 1999 constitution since assuming power in May, 1999.
Experience garnered while the operation lasted revealed in more practical terms lapses of the constitution.
In recognition of this and in response to the people’s wish for another constitution, the Federal Government inaugurated the Presidential Committee on the Review of the 1999 Constitution on 19th October, 1999.
The report of the Committee was submitted on 30th February, 2001.
On this report, Ibe, (2004: B.6) has this to say: However.
like all committees constituted to serve certain interests, the committee’s report only succeeded in identifying the problems without making any concrete efforts to offer useful suggestions to solve them.
A self-preservation mechanism which they could truly call their own, thus, they established these dreaded “forces”.
These forces sometimes engage in protection of lives and property thereby countering the intention of section 214 of the constitution which insists on the establishment of a centralised Nigeria Police Force.
The point being made is that the burning issues of state police, sharia system, local government creation, resource control and the composition of some bodies like the National Judicial Council are some of the indicators which signalled the morbid inadequacies of the constitution on the issue of true federalism.
The 1999 Constitution, like its predecessors, we aver, is a myth and an expressed elitist document as against that of the people.
Thus, the preamble of the constitution “We the people …” is a charade.
36  PSM 800 MODULE 1 In view of the foregoing, we posit that a more credible constitution is desirable.
The constitution being proposed should be put together by a cross-section of Nigerians and not the National Assembly as presently constituted because, that body is weak, too weak to act independently of Executive interference.
More importantly, the National Assembly is a conglomeration of politicians and the constitution is not that of the politicians alone but that of the Nigerian people.
4.0 CONCLUSION Our proposed constitution must therefore address more adequately such issues as supremacy and defence of the constitution, the structure of the federation, traditional institutions, public revenue (derivation and sharing formula), devolution of powers, local government autonomy, state and religion, legislative/executive relationship, rights, judicial powers and independence of the judiciary , status of the federal capital territory, anti-corruption and transparency, political party system, state police, land use act, and tenure of elective offices.
Above all, no constitution in Nigeria has a legitimacy status hence the move for a “National Dialogue” or “Sovereign National Conference”.
Here, whatever issues that are decided should be subjected to a Referendum in order to get sufficient inputs from generality of Nigerians.
By so doing, the product of such a conference would be a constitution that will for the first time be accorded legitimacy.
5.0 SUMMARY A nation’s constitution, we aver, is the bedrock of a democratically elected government practised in such a nation.
In view of this, this unit set out by explaining the concept of the constitution, traces constitutional development in Nigeria from inception to date.
It identified the merits or inadequacies of each constitution that led to the formulation of other constitutions.
The unit also outlined the implications of the constitutional development for political and administrative development in Nigeria.
The unit thereafter focused its attention on the 1999 Constitution which is currently in use in Nigeria.
It identified the eight chapters and seven schedules of the constitution and briefly explained the provisions of each.
Finally a critique of the constitution was undertaken which led the unit to recommend constitutional review.
It is our belief that acquisition of knowledge in this direction, will assist in the adoption of Due Process in the conduct of government business.
37  PSM 800 CONDUCT OF GOVERNMENT BUSINESS 6.0 TUTOR-MARKED ASSIGNMENT Critique the 1999 Constitution and provide remedial measures.
7.0 REFERENCES/FURTHER READING Akande, J.O.
(2000).
Introduction to the Constitution of the Federal Republic of Nigeria, 1999.
Lagos: M.I.J Professional Publishers Ltd. Faseke, M. (1998).
The Civil Service in Nigeria: A Historical Perspective.
Ibadan: Rex Charles Publishers.
Federal Republic of Nigeria (1999) Constitution of the Federal Republic of Nigeria.
Lagos: Federal Ministry of Information, Printing Division.
Maduabum, C. P. (2008).
The Mechanics of Public Administration in Nigeria.
Lagos: Concept Publications.
Nwabueze , B.
(1973).
Constitutionalism in the Emergent States.
London: C. Hoast and Company.
38  PSM 800 MODULE 1 UNIT 4 PUBLIC POLICY ANALYSIS AND IMPLEMENTATION CONTENTS 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objectives 3.0 Main Content 3.1 Conceptual Classifications 3.2 Public Policy Making Process 3.3 Impact of the Environment on Policy Making and Implementation 3.3.1 Social Environment 3.3.2 Political Environment 3.3.3 Economic Environment 3.4 Major Contributors to Public Making and Implementation in Nigeria 3.5 The Situation Today 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutor – Marked Assignment 7.0 References/Further Reading 1.0 INTRODUCTION In this unit, we attempted to relate public policy to the conduct of government business.
In fact, we submit that public policy is the first logical step in the conduct of government business.
You should try to understand our position from the point of view of evolving governmental policies from the manifesto of the political party in power.
Hence we adopt policy as a guide or direction for implementing the contents of a manifesto which ought to reflect the needs of the citizens.
This constitutes the bedrock of government business.
2.0 OBJECTIVES At the end of this unit, you should be able to: • explain the concept of public policy • trace the various stages involved in policy making and implementation • discuss the impact of the environment in policy making and implementation • state the roles of the major actors in the public policy making and implementation.
39  PSM 800 CONDUCT OF GOVERNMENT BUSINESS 3.0 MAIN CONTENT 3.1 Conceptual Clarifications Public policy could be perceived as a proposed course of action of a person, group or government within a given environment providing obstacles and opportunities which the policy was proposed to utilise and overcome in an effort to reach a goal or actualise an objective or a purpose.
A vital question that could be asked is what makes a policy public?
Thomas Dye (1999: 289) appears to provide an answer.
He defines the concept as whatever government chooses to do or not to do.
The introduction of the term government into the definition gives it a sharper focus.
It could therefore be asserted that, what makes policies distinctively ‘public’ are that they are developed by governmental bodies and officials.
This is directly related to the perception of David Easton (1965) that’ “public policies are formulated by Authorities”, that is, people who are engaged in the daily affairs of a political system and recognised by most members of the system as having responsibility for these matters and take decisions that are accepted as binding, most of the time, by most of the members, so long as they act within the limits of their roles.
This thus, establishes an inextricable linkage between public policy and politics.
However, it must be appreciated that government, in whatever form, cannot be isolated from politics.
Despite the foregoing, the distinctive characteristics further provided by ‘Sina Sambo (1999:283) are illustrative: They are: • Public policy is a purposive or goal-oriented action rather than a random and chance behaviour • Public policy consists of courses or patterns of action by governmental officials • Public policy is what government actually does, not what it intends to do, or say it is going to do • Public policy involves some form of overt government action to affect a particular problem; it also involves a decision by government officials not to take action, to do nothing on some matter on which governmental involvement is sought ; and • Public policy is based on law and is authoritative.
In other words, public policy has an authoritative, potentially legally coercive quality that the policies or private organisations do not have.
SELF-ASSESSMENT EXERCISE List the distinctive characteristics of public policy.
40  PSM 800 MODULE 1 Answer (i) It is purposive or goal oriented; (ii) It consists of courses or patterns of action by government officials; (iii) It is what government actually does; (iv) It involves a decision by government officials (v) it is based on law and authority.
3.2 Public Policy Making Process Policy making involves the policy cycle which indicates the main phases of this exercise which could be systematically undertaken.
These phases are: Policy Initiation, Policy Formulation; Policy Implementation; Policy Monitoring and Evaluation; and Policy Reformation.
They cycle is schematically represented overleaf: POLICY INITIATION POLICY POLICY REFORMULATION FORMULATION POLICY MONITORING POLICY AND EVALUATION IMPLEMENTATION Fig.
1.1 Schema of the Policy Cycle Each of these phases is further explained hereunder.
(a) Policy Initiation This involves intensive research effort on the nature and substance and purpose of the policy.
This phase is sometimes undertaken by a group of multi-disciplinary experts of or “Think -Thank” who generate relevant ideas and provide facts and figures to appraise a proposed policy in terms of its chances of success or otherwise.
At this initial stage, the degree of public acceptability or rejection, possible anticipated problems, costs and benefits, enabling and inhibiting environmental factors and resources available are identified and thoroughly examined in order to facilitate policy formulation and enhance the success of a policy.
41  PSM 800 CONDUCT OF GOVERNMENT BUSINESS (b) Policy Formulation This phase embraces key/critical features such as clear and unambiguous definitions, statement and articulation of the policy content indicating clearly stated implementation policy objectives, plans, programmes, key activities involved, policy priorities and strategies.
Other important features of this phase include resource availability, identification of relevant and core agencies and their roles, and an enabling environment to facilitate policy implementation.
Although the public servant plays a very active role in policy formulation using his wealth of knowledge, professional competence and experience in government business and the environment in which it operates, the responsibility for formulating any policy rests squarely with the politician or political decision maker.
(c) Policy Implementation This phase is critical to the success of any policy since it constitutes the epi-centre of the policy process.
This phase involves the identification of policy plans, programmes, projects, activities, clear definition of distinct roles of implementing organisations or agencies, details of strategies and necessary linkages and coordinating mechanisms, resources (human, financial, materials, technological, information) acquisition and utilisation.
Efficient and effective policy implementation would require inputs of sound managerial and administrative capabilities in terms of proper activity scheduling, resource mobilisation and rationalisation, net-work analysis, budgeting, supervision, problem- solving and decision-making and cost/benefit analysis.
We should also determine at this stage, policy performance standards and targets.
Implementation of policies must be guided by clearly stated policy objectives and in accordance with specified guidelines, plans and time-frame in order to avoid the policy implementation gap which is a common feature of even well formulated public policies in Nigeria.
Policy implementation gap is the difference between well-stated and articulated policy objectives or expected outcomes and the actual outcome which is a consequence of inefficient or poor policy implementation.
We must re-emphasise that it is at the implementation stage that all the plans that are made on the drawing board are translated into concrete activities.
Equally, the translation of a policy into concrete projects is done at this stage.
What the citizens see and feel and for which the success or failure of a given policy is identified is glaring at this stage.
In fact, it is this stage that provides the bulk of the information needed 42  PSM 800 MODULE 1 for policy evaluation.
All these inform the description of this stage as the epi-centre of the policy process.
(d) Policy Monitoring and Evaluation The monitoring of policy performance should permeate all phases of the policy cycle and especially all activities planned, programmed and undertaken at various stages of policy implementation.
This approach allows for necessary corrections, modifications and adjustments to be effected towards ensuring the success of a policy in terms of the achievement of desirable results.
Policy monitoring therefore focuses on compliance with policy implementation specifications, resources rationalisation and adherence to activity planning and time-schedule for all aspects of a policy.
Policy evaluation, on the other hand, should provide clear indicators for the successful implementation of a policy on the basis of well-defined criteria of efficiency, effectiveness, responsiveness, impact and innovation.
Feedback provided by evaluation guides the future plans of any similar activity or event.
(e) Policy Reformulation The information emerging from the evaluation will dictate possible policy reformulation.
For instance, where a given policy fails to meet the objective for its enunciation, this may call for the reformulation of that policy.
3.3 Impact of the Environment on Policy Making and Implementation Just like anything management or everyday occurrences, environment within which polices are enunciated and implemented exerts a lot of influence in the making of such polices.
For instance, policy actions are generated in the environment and transmitted to the political system.
At the same time, the environment places limits and constraints upon what can be done by policy makers.
The impact of the environment could be perceived from the socio-political and economic factors.
These factors contribute immensely in shaping the nature and direction of policies (Sule 2003: 172-175).
43  PSM 800 CONDUCT OF GOVERNMENT BUSINESS 3.3.1 Social Environment Here, we have such other factors or sub-factors as: • Multi-ethnic diversity: In which we have cultural differences within a heterogeneous society as witnessed in Nigeria.
The culture influences the values and life-style of the society.
Since every ethnic group tries to protect its own cultural views and strongly opposes any attempt to sub-sume its culture under others, it becomes difficult to make policies that can take care of the interests of these diverse groups in a country like Nigeria.
• Directly related to ethnic diversity is Religion; The practice of which in Nigeria is Secular.
Yet, it makes difficult, policy formulation that can take care of every member of the society.
For instance, the policy of the SHARIA legal system is highly opposed by Nigerians who practise some other religious faiths.
• Level of Literacy: Here, we find that where the level of literacy is low, ignorance is high.
Hence, very few people participate in the policy making process.
By so doing, they capitalise on the ignorance of the society and sometimes make obnoxious policies that would not be in the interest of many.
For instance, Deregulation of the “Down-stream” Oil Policy in Nigeria is seen as an attempt to impose on Nigerians the will of the International Monetary Fund (IMF) which is not in the overall interest of many; rather, it is in the interest of the few who constitute the Authority and policy makers.
• Dichotomy between the Rich and the Poor: Here, economic disequilibrium often leads to the creation of class distinction among the citizenry.
On the one hand is the very rich group comprising small sections of the society, on the other, is the majority group who are socially and economically under- privileged.
The small but rich group uses its advantageous position to influence policies in order to protect its selfish interests.
Generally speaking, the social environment acts as a catalyst for positive change in the direction which policies should go.
In the area of provision of social amenities, a lot can be achieved if a responsive government can listen to the yawning of the people by ensuring equitable distribution of social amenities.
Secondly, where there are glaring cases of inequity, certain government policies can be put in place to correct such imbalances.
For instance, in Nigeria, we have the following among others: Federal Character Policy; Admission Polices into Secondary Schools/Colleges; Recruitment into Federal Service Policy such as Catchment Area Policy; National Industrial Policy or Expatriate Quota Policy, etc.
44  PSM 800 MODULE 1 3.3.2 Political Environment Here are such sub-factors as: (i) Leadership Style: Here, the nature of public policy could lead to the emergence of political leadership that falls within any of the following – autocratic (military or civilian dictatorship style); laissez-faire; and democratic.
Similarly, the type of leadership can influence the type of policy making that a country or society is to embark upon.
(ii) Political System: The nature of a political system could be as a result of the existing public policy.
Thus, a political system could be capitalist or socialist; multi-party or one-party (unitary); democratic or autocratic; civilian or military.
Once a particular policy is put in place, it could affect the perpetuity or otherwise of the country’s political system.
The only exception is where the people themselves are dissatisfied with a particular policy and call for a change.
Sometimes, these changes come peacefully or violently through agitation and confrontation.
(iii) Political Stability or Instability: Certain obnoxious policies, could lead to political instability.
Yet, we need political stability for orderly progress of the nation both socially and economically.
The political instability which Nigeria has been witnessing since her independence can be attributed as the cause of the deplorable state in which the Nigerian citizen is living.
3.3.3 Economic Environment Here we have such sub-factors as: (i) Government’s Fiscal and Tax Policy: This indicates the rate of socio-economic development.
(ii) Employment Opportunities: Provides equal opportunities for qualified citizens.
(iii) Technological Development: Here, we find that policies are enunciated so that a country at the lower rung of technological ladder can strive to move ahead.
Once a country is developing technologically, she will not only be able to provide the basic infrastructural facilities for the welfare of the citizens, but will also provide the necessary tools for industrial development.
In addition, public policies are made more effective by using the instrument of technology through the process of effective data/information gathering, analysis and decision-making.
45  PSM 800 CONDUCT OF GOVERNMENT BUSINESS 3.4 Major Contributors to Public Policy Making and Implementation in Nigeria Policy making is done at the strategic level while policy implementation is done at the operational level of an organisation’s hierarchy.
And those who operate at the strategic level particularly in government are members of the political class while members of the bureaucratic class carry out activities at the operational level.
This, therefore, presupposes that the public servant who naturally belongs to the bureaucratic class is not, and should not; consider himself as a policy maker.
This position could submit itself to debate on two fronts.
First, the public servant is a partner with the politician in the collaborative effort of policy-making; and secondly, it is the people who decide policy-not the policy servant or the politician.
As earlier posited, public policy is a sanctioned course of action addressed to a particular problem or group of related problems which affect society at large.
Public policy-making, therefore, denotes the whole process of articulating and defining problems, formulating possible solutions into political demands, and channelling the demands into the political system.
Seeking sanctions or legitimating preferred courses of action, legitimating and implementation, monitoring and review (feedback), and who participates in what role in this process all depend to a great extent on the structure of political decision-making.
In view of the foregoing, it was equally posited that a member of the bureaucratic class is not and should not consider himself as a policy- maker.
Admittedly, he has an important role to play in this process.
He can collect, collate and analyse data; and he can pose options or alternative courses of action.
He can also advise on possible consequences of various options.
But the question of choice of a course of action and the sanctioning of same is political action which is the domain of politicians.
For instance, in Britain today, cabinet ministers are determined to demonstrate that they and not the public servants make policies.
3.5 The Situation Today The democratically elected civilian administration, which came into being in Nigeria in May, 1999, hopefully portends the beginning of an enduring democracy in the country and an apparent movement away from the drift.
This has so far, justified applicability of our arrangement in the levels of operation in policy making and implementation.
A clearer picture is, therefore, emerging.
At the apex of the strategic level of operation are the elected officials or political class represented by the legislature.
By convention and constitutional provisions, this  46  PSM 800 MODULE 1 group makes laws and passes bills.
The fact that must be appreciated is that each of these members is armed with his party’s ‘manifesto’, which arguably, enhanced his being voted into position.
This, therefore, presupposes that whatever laws they make or bills they pass into laws are, to a large extent, influenced by their party’s manifesto.
These laws are then passed on to the executive – a political class comprising of both elected and appointed members, for implementation.
Still operating at that strategic level, the executive translates the laws into policies and passes them down to its machinery of implementation, which is the bureaucratic class.
The bureaucratic class therefore, religiously implements the policies.
The scenario can be schematically represented in the figure below.
Strategic LEGISLATURE Level Transforms Party manifesto into Laws EXECUTIVE Translates laws into policies BUREAUCRATIC CLASS Operational Translates Polices to Programmes Level and to Projects for Implementation IMPLEMENTATABLE PROGRAMMES AND PROJECTS Fig.1.2.
Schematic Representation of Levels of Transformation of Party Manifesto to Implementable Policies, Programmes and Projects 4.0 CONCLUSION Public policy making and implementation constitute the bedrock of government business in that it is the first activity that would channel activities of government towards its goal of improving the welfare of the people.
In the conduct of government business, numerous other activities take place but these must be determined by the public policy.
For instance, in the pursuit of improving the health care delivery for the citizens, there must be formulated policy such as immunisation, roll- back malaria, maternal health; HIV and AIDS, etc.
47 None PSM 800 CONDUCT OF GOVERNMENT BUSINESS 5.0 SUMMARY This unit started by explaining the concept of policy which is a guide to action towards pre-determined goals.
It linked the explanation to public policy which is simply put as governmental policies.
The unit thereafter explained the policy cycle with a diagram in which the following are identified; policy initiation, policy formulation, policy implementation, policy monitoring and evaluation, and policy reformulation.
The unit equally discussed the contributions of the major actors, such as members of the political class and members of the bureaucratic class and how they formulate and implement policies.
The relationship between the legislative, the executive and the bureaucratic class in this quest is informative.
6.0 TUROR-MARKED ASSIGNMENT Give a detailed explanation of the relationship between the legislature, the executive and the bureaucratic class in policy making and implementation in Nigeria.
7.0 REFERENCES/FURTHER READING Dye, T. (1997).
Understanding Public Policy.
New Jersey: Prentice Hall.
Maduabum, C.P.
(2003).
“Policy Making in Nigeria: Implementation Strategies and Cases” in Chuks Maduabum (Ed.).
Contemporary Issues on Public Policy Analysis in Nigeria.
Badagry: ASCON Press.
Sambo, S. (1999).
“What is Public Policy?
“ in Remi Anifowose and Francis Enemuo (Eds.)
Elements of Politics.
Lagos : Malthouse Press Ltd. Sule, J.Y.
(2003).
“The Environmental and Policy Making” in Chuks Maduabum (Ed.)
Contemporary Issues on Public Policy Analysis in Nigeria.
Badagry: ASCON Press.
48  PSM 800 MODULE 1 UNIT 5 DECISION MAKING IN GOVERNMENT CONTENTS 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objectives 3.0 Main Content 3.1 What is Decision Making?
3.1.1 Why do we study Decision Making?
3.2 Multiple Roles of the Decision Maker/What Managers do 3.3 Overlap of Politics and Public Sector Decision Making 3.4 Pressure Groups and Decision Making 3.5 Sensitivity to the External Environment 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutor-Marked Assignment 7.0 References/Further Reading 1.0 INTRODUCTION When governments or countries make monumental progress and thus improve the quality of life of their citizens, it is a product of enlightened strategic economic decisions made by those who occupy the institutions where public policies are formulated, implemented and effected.
Thus in contemporary times, the quantum jump made by the Asian Tiger countries including Malaysia, Singapore, and South Korea are the outcomes of fundamental decisions made by their leaders.
On the contrary, when countries experience sharp drastic decline in their development, a phenomenon referred to as “Reversibility of Development,” it is also a manifestation or an outcome of decisions taken by those entrusted with the welfare of their people.
2.0 OBJECTIVES At the end of this unit, you should be able to: • explain the concept of Decision Making • mention the multiple roles of the Decision Maker • discuss the overlaps of Politics and Public Sector Decision making • outline the roles of pressure groups and external environment in Decision Making.
49  PSM 800 CONDUCT OF GOVERNMENT BUSINESS 3.0 MAIN CONTENT 3.1 What is Decision Making?
There is a controversy in the extant literature about what constitutes Decision.
However, we could put together the critical elements in Decision.
We could say that decision is choice making.
To make a choice means that you have several options from which you want to choose.
Decision is action which is in pursuit of an objective or set of objectives.
Consequently, the choice that is made or the option that is chosen is done with the expectation that it and no other option can best lead to the expectation.
Consequently, the option that is chosen is the one to which energy and resources are committed.
3.1.1 Why do we study Decision Making?
We study decision making for the following reasons: • managers face problems everyday and in solving these problems managers are taking decisions.
Decision making is so much part of the manager that it is now identified as a major intellectual focus.
It is also pervasive • because of value judgment.
That is, that some decisions are good or bad.
People thus, ask, what makes a good or bad decision?
• the need to survive and keep afloat because of the assumption that it is only good decisions that could keep one afloat.
So, people now study decision making process to train managers to avoid pit-falls.
3.2 Multiple Roles of the Decision Maker/What Managers do Decision Makers (DMs) are organisational planners, leaders and controllers, who perform the following specific roles: • DMs balance competing roles and set priorities • DMs must think analytically and conceptually • DMs are channels of communication within the organisations • DMs are accountable and responsible to the organisation • DMs are planners • DMs are mediators • DMs are diplomats • DMs are symbols • DMs are linkers of resources • DMs are consultants to their colleagues, peers and superiors • DMs are system analysts and advisers/counsellors 50  PSM 800 MODULE 1 • DMs are identifiers of alternatives • DMs are joint problem solvers ; and • DMs are joint problem preventers.
Above all, DMs have to make difficult decisions in their effort to achieve the twin objective of cost minimisation and profit maximisation in the private sector and higher efficiency and effectiveness in service delivery in the public sector.
SELF- ASSESSMENT EXERCISE What informs our study of Decision making?
Answer The reasons are: (i) Managers frequently encounter problems in their daily operations; therefore they need to make vital decisions for resolving those problems.
(ii) Due to our value judgments hence the need to identify good and bad decisions.
(iii) The need to survive and keep afloat.
Adequately made decisions would enable us avoid pitfalls.
3.3 Overlap of Politics and Public Sector Decision Making Decision makers especially those who operate at the strategic apex of corporate outfits need not be carried away by the thoroughness and comprehensiveness or even the reliability of the Rational Models of decision making nor should they confer them with any ‘oracular status” as if they are panacea to all organisational problems.
The reason for this is simple: there are other equally important variables or extenuating circumstances in the decision making environment which a pragmatic decision maker must, for enlightened self-interest, reckon with lest he becomes a brilliant but frustrated decision maker.
The most important of these variables, in our view, especially in the public sector, is the awareness of the overlap between politics and decision making.
Lack of appreciation of the interplay of the two may be the undoing of an otherwise brilliant, hard working and highly cerebral policy adviser.
Politics is the authoritative allocation of value, it is about what priorities should be pursued by society and by implication, how limited and scare resources should be allocated among competing demands.
What determines the priorities of the actors in the political system, is their value system.
“Politics is certainly partisanship meaning political 51  PSM 800 CONDUCT OF GOVERNMENT BUSINESS parties, pressure groups, lobbying, public opinion and the power struggle for preferment, dominance, control, influence and position” (Dimock and Dimock, 1953).
But it is through the instrumentality of public policy that political values are expressed.
In other words, public policy is the handmaid of politics and therefore any attempt to draw a line or demarcation between the two is a meaningless abstraction or an exercise in futility as the two definitely overlap.
We, however, need to emphasise the components of politics as consisting of bureaucratic back scratching, in-depth negotiations often resulting in some conflicting consensus, bargaining positions and compromises that may be far remote from realities on the ground.
These factors often have overarching influence on the quality of policy that eventually emerges.
In short, politics ultimately determines the content of public policy regardless of the imperfections and contradictions of the former and the expected rational systematic and logical nature of the latter.
PUBLIC PUBLIC SECTOR POLICY INSTITUTIONS LOBBYING BARGAINING PRESURE GROUPS POLITICS CONSENSUS COMPROMISE Fig.
1.3 The relationship between Politics and Public Policy Implications of the Overlap of Politics and Public Sector Decision Making The foregoing overlap between politics and public policy has some far reaching implications some of which are indicated below: • complete rationality in policy making is a myth i.e complete rationality is not possible as some irrational elements, occasioned by the very nature of politics (consensus, bargaining, 52  PSM 800 MODULE 1 compromise, lobbying etc) will inevitably creep in during the policy making process • the duty of the public servant is to be aware of the possibility of irrational elements in policy formulation and make concerted effort to point them out at the policy initiation and formulation stages but not to obstruct them • policy implementation gap (PIG) i.e the differential between the Real and Expected Benefits (REB) is also a fact of life because inbuilt irrationalities will make implementation difficult as they are bound to make their presence felt as at this stage of the policy process • since we know that irrational elements are but a necessity in public sector decision making, there is no need for public servants to feel frustrated when public policies cannot be fully actualised.
Adebayo Adedeji sums the overlap up neatly when he asserted in 1982 that: Political leadership without administrative and technical support is power in a vacuum.
Administration without political leadership is only idleness in stagnation.
Politics and administration belong together in the dynamics of a dialectical relationship.
But there is no perfectly ordered model for this relationship, and no perfect delineation of responsibilities of development.
3.4 Pressure Groups and Decision Making One other logical implication of the interplay between politics and public sector decision making is to appreciate the role of pressure groups in decision making.
They exert a lot of influence on public sector decision making in that they are a major source of policy demands and they also present alternatives for policy actions which are of interest to the group.
In effect, they carry out what Anderson called “an interest articulation function.
They seek to influence a decision of government without attempting to “occupy political office.
The decision maker needs to appreciate that development administration focus of today, as opposed to law and order, creates a dependency on pressure groups comprising professionals.
Witness the helplessness of policy makers in Nigeria whenever pressure groups such as the Academic Staff Union (ASUU) of Nigerian Universities or even their Non-Academic counterparts the Senior Staff Association of Nigeria Universities (SSANU) goes on strike in pressing home their demands.
Ditto for doctors in the Nigeria Medical Association (NMA).This is 53  PSM 800 CONDUCT OF GOVERNMENT BUSINESS because the formulation and implementation of development oriented public sector decisions inevitably require the support and approval of professional interest groups such as doctors, lawyers, engineers, and pharmacists.
Government often goes out of its way, to seek for their cooperation in policy implementation and they, in return, seek to have a say in the formulation of these policies as a price for successful implementation.
Other factors which have made pressure groups indispensable in decision making include: • The democratisation of public administration: As evidenced by policy documents in which government sets out its ideas and proposals and deliberately demands for the inputs from interest groups.
An example of this is the Stakeholders Booklet issued by the Federal Ministry of Education in year 2001 on the autonomy of the Nigerian universities and the implications thereof for government and the academia.
The British government too, whenever it wants to formulate any fundamental decision, circulates what it calls the Green Paper which articulates its views on an issue and seeks comments from the Pressure Groups concerned.
These comments are often incorporated in the subsequent White Paper of government.
• Increase in structural and functional differentiation in society: As societies become more and more specialised: Functions are carried out by specialised Institutions e.g banking, education, police, the hospitals, military, economic institutions.
A corollary to this development is the factor of indispensability through the acquisition of expertise in these institutions by the professionals within them who can readily form themselves into network of experts and pressure groups.
And so long as some particular knowledge or expertise resides in the organisations or groups which are not readily available to government agencies, they are regarded as authorities to be consulted before policies are formulated.
In effect, expertise is the source of their power and influence in policy making Changes in the political culture: As values and beliefs of • people become more sophisticated, attitudes towards authorities become less paternalistic.
In other words, as societies grow and become more open you begin to see authority not from the father- like figures to be obeyed but as a set up to bargain with.
By implication, therefore, those in decision making positions, have to be more flexible, accommodating and tolerant of the views of interest groups.
• Advances in communication technology: This allows people with the same or comparable interest to readily come together to 54  PSM 800 MODULE 1 fight or articulate their interests.
In so doing, they influence public policy.
Typical examples are the victims of the thalidomide antidepressant drugs and their deformed babies who, through advanced communications, were able, despite their distant locations in various countries in Western Europe, to significantly team-up to fight and influence public policy in their favour.
In Nigeria, the recent kerosene explosion in various parts of the country easily got communicated to the general public through Television and this had tremendous influence on the attitude and response rate and concern of policy makers.
The advent of the internet, with all its domineering and visible impact is even a more aggressive tool in the hands of pressure groups.
For example, the E-MAIL address of the President can now easily be bombarded by pressure groups on their demands for a change of public policy.
3.5 Sensitivity to the External Environment Modern day decision makers also need to be more sensitive to the turbulence in its environment.
After all, as a boundary manager, he is employed to possess sensitive antennae’ and rather ‘large ears’ to convert the threats and challenges in the external environment into opportunities and prospects.
The decision which he makes are ultimately geared towards the production for goods and services which are to be consumed only in the external environment for, as Peter Drucker was quoted earlier on in this unit: It is always somebody outside who decides whether efforts of business become economic results or they become so much waste and scrap.
Thus, before any manager takes a vital decision, he needs to satisfy himself that he can reasonably predict the acceptability or otherwise of his decision by prospective customers outside his/her organisation.
Alvin Toffler would appear to capture the picture vividly when he asserted that: • an invisible line divides all mangers today.
It cuts across rank and function to separate those who see today’s economic and technological changes as incremental, bit-by-bit extension of the industrial revolution from those who regard today’s massive changes as truly radical.
There are “Incrementalist executives” and “ radical executives.” • one group assumes continuity; the other recognises the growing importance of discontinuity 55  PSM 800 CONDUCT OF GOVERNMENT BUSINESS • one group tends to formulate straight-line strategies; the other thinks in non-linear terms • one tends to define problems clearly treating each as it comes along, more or less in isolation from the others.
The second group tends to define problems less neatly; but to see them in relationship to one another • one is good at “thinkable” solutions to problems – a leadership style which may be adequate in periods of environmental stability.
The other is open to “unthinkable” solution- which may be necessary in periods of environmental turbulence • the environment determines which particular skills are most needed at any moment.
Unfortunately, an incremental executive often reaches the top at precisely the moment when an exploding environment demands the skills of the radical.
The mismatch is often catastrophic.
4.0 CONCLUSION In view of the criticality of decision making by managers, it is mandatory that they acquire a thorough understanding of the nature, process and techniques of making decisions because herein lies their capability to either achieve or fail to achieve the mandates of their stakeholders.
In this connection, managers should make efforts to be rational, comprehensive and analytical.
The decision makers should also understand the context in which decisions are made especially the overlap between politics and public sector decision making.
Failure to realise this inevitable overlap and its consequences can only make an otherwise brilliant and cerebral manager become a frustrated decision maker.
The modern day decision maker should be conversant with modern management skills, the most vital of which is information technology (IT) and negotiation.
Without sound negotiation ability he cannot readily garner or mobilise resources for the accomplishment of organisational goals and objectives.
Neither will he be able to obtain maximum value/utility from the scarce resources under his control.
5.0 SUMMARY In this unit, an attempt has been made to highlight the critical role of decision making at all levels of organisation and show that it is the cumulative effect of these decisions that determine the corporate survival or eventual collapse of an organisation.
It is the quality of decisions made by managers that make ‘magnificent miracles’ or “malevolent monsters’ of organisations and indirectly the quality of life of those that depend on or consume the products or services rendered by them.
Hence, we outlined the critical overlap between Politics and public sector in terms of management and decision making.
In Nigeria 56  PSM 800 MODULE 1 today, the influence of pressure groups in decisions on where the pendulum would swing to cannot be over emphasised.
A clear example is the decision to appoint Professor Attahiru Jega as INEC Chairman for the 2011 elections was taken by the President of the Federal Republic of Nigeria on the recommendation of the civil society.
Influence of the environment is equally inevitable hence decision makers must be sensitive to it.
6.0 TUTOR-MARKED ASSIGNMENT i.
Give a detailed explanation of the overlap between politics and the public sector in decision making.
ii.
Explain the influence of (a) Pressure group; and (b) Environment, in decision making.
7.0 REFERENCES/FURTHER READING Bown, G. & Brady, C. (1991).
The Successful Manager.
London: Kogan Page.
Daodu, R.O.
(1991).
“Results Oriented Management in the Public Sector,” Mimeograph, ASCON.
Daodu, R.O.
(2003).
“Fundamentals and Realities of Decision-Making and Implementation.” In Chuks Maduabum (Ed.)
Contemporary Issues on Public Policy Analysis in Nigeria.
Badagry: ASCON Press.
Druker, P, (1980).
Management in Turbulent Times: New Guide for Management Today.
London: Heinemann.
57  PSM 800 CONDUCT OF GOVERNMENT BUSINESS MODULE 2 COMMUNICATION PROCEDURES IN GOVERNMENT BUSINESS Unit 1 Communication in Government Unit 2 The Use of Nigeria’s LINGUA FRANCA in Government Unit 3 Editing Procedures and Techniques Unit 4 Drafting, Minuting, Memo Writing, Official Letter Writing Unit 5 Preparation of Council/Cabinet Memorandum Unit 6 Report Writing Unit 7 Speech Writing Unit 8 Servicing Meetings UNIT 1 COMMUNICATION IN GOVERNMENT CONTENTS 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objectives 3.0 Main Content 3.1 Definition of Communication 3.2 Functions of Communication 3.3 Communication Process 3.4 Communication in the Public Service 3.4.1 Communication Pattern 3.4.2 Types of Communication 3.5 Barriers to Effective Communication 3.4.1 Effective Communication 3.6 Seven Deadly Sins of Management Communication 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutor-Marked Assignment 7.0 References/Further Reading 1.0 INTRODUCTION Most of the time, we find that problems experienced in organisations are traceable to poor communication.
This is because, communication is the source of information used by managers in making decisions that affect the organisation.
In fact, communication is perceived as the vehicle for effective operations in an organisation.
No worker can carry out assigned tasks successfully without effective communication playing a 58  PSM 800 CONDUCT OF GOVERNMENT BUSINESS dominant role.
Communication therefore is the vehicle for effective conduct of government business.
2.0 OBJECTIVES At the end of this unit, you should be able to: • define communication • state the functions of communication • explain the process of communication • identify areas and mode of communication in the public service • outline the barriers to effective communication.
3.0 MAIN CONTENT 3.1 Definition of Communication Various definitions have been suggested for communication, while some may be convincing, some may also be narrow depending on which perspective, we are looking at, Randall (1984:156) sees communication as the meaningful transfer of information from one person (or group) to another.
In this regard, communication does not occur unless one person transmits a piece of information to another person, who receives the piece of information and the received information has meaning to the receiver.
All these three conditions must be met for communication to have occurred.
Similarly, Cushway and Lodge (1999:189) believe communication can be regarded as effective when the ideas and intentions of one person are successfully conveyed to another.
It is further argued by Obisi (2003:218 – 219) that Communication is generally understood as spoken or written words.
But in realit y, it is more than that.
It is the sum total directly or indirectly, unconsciously or consciously of transmitted words, attitudes, feeling, actions, gestures and tones.
Even silence is an effective way of communication.
A twist in the face is often more expressive disapproval than hundreds of words put together.
Tone, very often than not, destroys the meaning of the words uttered .i.e A casual leave granted with sarcastic slang in the tone, pinches more than the denial of the leave with reasons well explained.
3.2 Functions of Communication Communication has four major functions within the organisation.
Robbins (267:1989).
These include: 59  PSM 800 MODULE 2 1.
Information: Communication facilitates decision making.
It provides information that individuals and groups need to make decisions through the provision of data to identify and evaluate alternative choices.
2.
Motivation: Communication fosters motivation by clarifying to employees what is to be done, how it will be done and what can be done.
Communication and praises of employees also motivates and encourage commitment to organisational objectives.
3.
Control: Communication acts to control members’ behaviour in various ways.
Every organisation has authority, hierarchies, guidelines and regulations that employees are required to follow.
For instance, employees should know how to communicate their grievances, know which procedures to use to enjoy certain amenities or privileges and structures laid on how to process various requests.
4.
Emotional Expression: Emotive uses of Communication allows for the expression of feelings and the satisfaction of social needs.
Employees within their work groups communicate among themselves to show their frustration or feelings of satisfaction which ultimately provides a release for their emotional expressions of feelings.
3.3 Communication Process Communication Process between two persons or groups can be thought of as a process of flow that occurs in a variety of ways (face- to- face, written, gesture, phone etc).
All have in common the communication process which starts with a source, which is responsible for selection of an intended message (message you intend to transmit) and encoding (convert the idea of the message into some transmittable form either written, by word, gesture etc).
The encoded message is passed through a medium (channel) which serves as the physical medium for the transmission of the message.
The receiver then translates (decodes) the message from the sender to give it meaning (by reading, listening, seeing feeling etc).
Once the message is decoded, it is accepted as received.
The result is the transference of meaning from one person to another (Robbins 1999:268) see diagram below: 60  PSM 800 CONDUCT OF GOVERNMENT BUSINESS SOURCE CHANNEL RECEIVER Message Intended Encodes Decodes Perceived Meaning Meaning FEEEDBACK NOISE Fig.2.1: The Communication Process and possible Sources of Noise Source: Schermerhorn et al (1985) Managing Organizational Behaviour.
New York.
John Wiley and Sons, p.501.
3.4 Communication in the Public Service Much of government business is conducted through various communication processes which may be through meetings, telephone conversations and other forms of electronic communication or face to face.
The most important method of conducting Government business however is through various forms of written communication.
Therefore, communication is carried out through a variety of channels.
These include the following amongst others: 1.
Minuting in files 2. Letters 3.
Minutes of meetings 4.
Memorandum/memos 5 Telegrams 6.
Reports 7.
Circulars 8.
Posters and Bulletins 9.
Periodicals, etc.
61  PSM 800 MODULE 2 3.4.1 Communication Pattern Communication patterns encompass the directions that communication takes in groups and in an organisation as well as the channels by which communications flow.
Communication can flow vertically and laterally.
The vertical dimension can be further divided into downward and upward direction.
SELF-ASSESSMENT EXERCISE List any six (6) channels through which written communication is carried out in the public service.
Answer These are: Minuting in files, letters, minutes of meeting, memorandum/memos, telegram, reports, circulars, posters and bulletins, periodicals etc.
Downward This is the communication that flows from one level of a group or organisation to a lower level.
This involves the dissemination of information from the highest hierarchy downwards.
This could be from the top management down to other levels.
It is used by group or organisation managers to assign goals, provide job instructions, explain policy direction and procedures, point out problems that need attention and offer feedback about performance, etc.
(see diagram below).
ORGANISATION TOP MANAGEMENT MIDDLE M ANAGEMENT EMPLOYEES Upward This is communication that flows to a higher level in a group or organisation.
It is used to provide feedback to top management, inform them about progress toward goals.
This method also keeps managers aware of how employees feel about their jobs.
Examples of upward communication include performance reports prepared by middle 62  PSM 800 CONDUCT OF GOVERNMENT BUSINESS management for top management, suggestion boxes, grievance procedures, etc.
(see diagram below) ORGANISATION TOP MANAGEMENT MIDDLE MANAGEMENT EMPLOYEES Lateral When communication takes place amongst members of the same work group, or amongst managers of the same level or among any horizontal equivalent personnel, it is referred to as lateral communication.
3.4.2 Types of Communication Communication can either be formal or informal.
Formal Communication Communication is said to be formal, if the dissemination of information, messages and ideas are according to prescribed or fixed rules and customs.
It is external rather than natural because, it is not as a result of the intrinsic feelings of the actors but imposed on them by the organisation.
(Obisi, 2003:223).
Such communication is usually very rigid and follows definite pattern and it is official in nature.
It may be oral or written, vertical or horizontal.
They are usually bureaucratic in nature and the directives or instructions are to be carried out.
Informal Communication This is described as any interaction or relationship which exists in any organisation which is not deliberate, rigid, or structured.
Such interaction and relationship are as a result of natural feelings without any outside interference, constraint or premeditation (Obisi, 2003:224).
It may also be viewed as messages conveyed through body movements, the intonations or emphasis we give to words, facial expressions and the physical distance between the sender and receiver (Robbins,1989: 282).
3.5 Barriers to Communication In communication, apart from the general distortions in the communication process, there are other barriers to effective communication.
As noted by Cushway and Lodge (1999189 :).
63  PSM 800 MODULE 2 Barriers to communication can come from a number of sources.
The problem may be with the sender of the message who may be unable or indeed unwilling to communicate the necessary message very clearly, or with the receiver who understands the message being sent, or there may be environmental factors affecting the condition under which the message is conveyed, such as noise.
Therefore, we could examine barriers to communication from the four important levels of communication i.e.
(a) Senders’ level (b) Transmission/Channels levels (c) Receiver’s level; and (d) Feedback level.
Sender’s Level • Poor Communication skills of the Sender: The sender of any particular message may not be particularly articulate either verbally or in writing, and will therefore fail to convey the information accurately.
• Information under load: Where information is too scanty for the receiver to give adequate feedback or take a decision, it becomes a barrier.
Information overload: Many messages get lost because of the • sheer volume of information being passed to the receiver.
When someone receives too many internal memoranda on relatively trivial issues, the important messages may get lost unless special attention is drawn to them in some way.
• Dislike between Sender and Receiver: Sometimes, when there is a dislike between the two, their emotional state will affect the way that message is perceived.
Either the Sender or the Receiver may not listen or pay attention or may not be very objective to what is said on that topic.
• Failure to pitch the message at the receiver’s language and experience level: There is no doubt that communication itself is determined by our skills, knowledge and attitude and who we want to communicate with.
We can only communicate well, when we adjust our knowledge and skills to the level of the receiver.
Otherwise communication will not be effective.
Transmissional Level • Physical noise can easily distort communication.
• Travelling through many links before reaching its destination.
The more levels a message must go through to get to the bottom 64  PSM 800 CONDUCT OF GOVERNMENT BUSINESS of the hierarchy, the more likely that a sizeable portion of the original information will be lost or substantially distorted.
• Selection of a poor channel/transmission may also cause distortion.
Receiver’s Level • Failure to understand the message by the receiver is a serious barrier • Where the receiver is threatened by the message.
Where the receiver displays impatience for any reasons when • receiving the message.
• Preoccupation: When the receiver of the message is pre-occupied with other matters, the content of the message being received may not be fully appreciated • Where there is a negative attitude towards the receiver himself, the message and the senders, the communication may not likely be effective Physical conditions or environmental factors may also prevent • the receiver from understanding • Where the receiver does not understand certain “terms” used in the message, communication becomes ineffective.
Feedback Level 1.
Feedback not provided at all; and 2.
Where feedback is delayed, it may also affect effective communication.
3.5.1 Effective Communication In view of the barriers to communication identified and examined, what can individuals do to minimise the problems and attempt to overcome these barriers.
The following suggestions may be helpful in making communication more effective.
• Be clear about the message you want to convey and the reasons for the message.
For example to inform, to amuse, to seek information and so on’ • Select the appropriate method of communication, having regard to content, timescale and target audience.
• Prepare the message in the appropriate format and language having particular regard to the nature and background of the people to be communicated with.
65  PSM 800 MODULE 2 • Where possible, use more than one means of communication to reinforce the message and be prepared to repeat it if necessary.
• Try to ensure that, the sender of the message is someone with credibility in the organisation.
• Consider, what is in it for those the message is for and highlight the benefits of any particular suggestion.
• Give examples, where appropriate to support the message.
• Try to give factual information and careful explanation where required.
• Structure any argument logically, working up to the conclusions.
• Use any points you know people will agree with to reinforce your statements.
• Try to ensure that, the message is interesting.
• Test out your proposed message and take account of any constructive feedback.
• Know the purpose of communication.
• Adopt a communication style.
• Avoid communication overload and under load.
• Try to get and retain the receiver’s attention.
• Use language that is at the experience level of the receiver.
• Listen empathetically.
• Make intelligent use of informal communication.
• Update and refine your communication.
3.6 Seven Deadly Sins of Management Communication If you expect to be a successful manager, you need to be aware of the seven deadly sins (Reprinted from Stephens Robbins (1999:284,).
Committing any one of them will lessen your effectiveness.
1.
Not realising that your message may get a different response than you expect: People see the world differently, based on their experiences, values, attitudes, and perceptions.
Expect to be misunderstood and adjust your message anticipating ways your ideas could be misinterpreted.
2.
Impressing instead of expressing: First and foremost, the objective of communication is to transfer information, not exert power.
Too often managers are more concerned with sounding impressive and appearing knowledgeable than in making sure the ideas get across.
3.
Choosing the wrong medium: It is easy to get in the habit of using the same medium over and over again.
You have choices: telephone, memos, letters, interviews, group meetings, electronic mail, etc.
Use the one that will most effectively carry the message you want.
66  PSM 800 CONDUCT OF GOVERNMENT BUSINESS 4.
Failing to close the feedback loop: Effective communication requires understanding by the recipient.
Use feedback to ensure that the message received is the message sent.
5.
Applying a nonverbal veto: Studies show that as much as 78 percent of meaning is transmitted nonverbally through tone of voice, appearance, timing and the like.
Consider how these nonverbal messages might distort your intended message.
6.
Not helping your reader or listener get the message; Do not turn your communiqué into an Easter egg hunt.
Clarify the more important points in your message.
As the guide for public speaking reminds us, “Tell ‘em what you’re going to tell’em; tell’em and then tell’em what you told ‘em” 7.
Viewing communication as a fringe benefit: Communication is the essence of a manager’s job.
It is a morale booster or “icing on the cake.” Good communication practice is not just a desirable quality; it is a requirement for effective management.
4.0 CONCLUSION As earlier explained, communication is one activity that cuts across every activity of human endeavour.
However, quite often, we find that it does more harm than good in that misunderstanding that occurs due to its ineffectiveness could lead to head losses to the organisation.
Having identified some of the pitfalls, it is hoped that they will serve as lessons to managers particularly in government establishments.
It must also be emphasised that in government business written, rather than verbal communication is the basis of approvals, decision making and policy enunciation 5.0 SUMMARY We have so far emphasised that communication is inevitable for the smooth operations of organisations in general and government agencies in particular.
This unit has therefore explained the concept of communication.
It then proceeded to identify the various functions of communication; its process and the mode in which it operates in the public service, Barriers to effective communication were also identified.
The unit concluded by outlining what it termed as seven deadly sins of management communication 6.0 TUTOR-MARKED ASSIGNMENT Explain any six (6) barriers to effective communication.
67  PSM 800 MODULE 2 7.0 REFERENCES/FURTHER READING Armstrong, M. (2008).
How to be a Better Manager.
(7th ed.).
London: Kogan Page.
Barry C. & Derek, L. (N.D).
Organisational Behaviour and Design.
London: PrinceWaterHouse Coopers.
Obiaku, D, (1999).
Communication Skills.
Lagos: Advertising Practitioners Council of Nigeria, APCON.
Obisi, C. (2003).
Organisational Behaviour: Concept and Application.
Lagos: Malthouse Press Limited.
Stephen, (1989).
Organisational Behaviour Concepts, Controversies and Applications.
(4th ed.).
London: Prentice-Hall International.
Schermertorn, H. & Osborn (1985).
Managing Organisational Behaviour.
New York:John Wiley and Sons.
68  PSM 800 CONDUCT OF GOVERNMENT BUSINESS UNIT 2 USE OF NIGERIA’S LINGUA FRANCA IN GOVERNMENT CONTENTS 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objectives 3.0 Main Content 3.1 Nouns ad Errors in the Use of Nouns 3.2 Omission/Wrong use of Articles 3.3 Pronouns and Errors in their use 3.4 Errors in the use of Verbs 3.5 Punctuation Marks 3.6 Common Errors in Nigerian English/Standard Expression 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutor-Marked Assignment 7.0 References/Further Reading 1.0 INTRODUCTION English Language is without doubt, one of the most important languages in the world.
It is spoken as a first language in countries such as the United Kingdom and the United States of America and is used as a second in many parts of the world, especially in former British colonies such as Nigeria, Ghana and Kenya It is not only the official language in a multilingual country like Nigeria but also a unifying factor in her heterogeneous society.
English makes communication possible at the national and international levels cutting across ethnic boundaries at home, and linguistic barriers abroad.
Despite the immense importance of English language, it is being used incorrectly almost at all levels.
There is a great hue and cry over the dismal construction of the English language by the users especially our civil servants who are supposed to have got the skills of the use of good English.
2.0 OBJECTIVES At the end of this unit, you should be able to: • identify common errors in the use of English • state appropriate corrections to such errors 69  PSM 800 MODULE 2 • apply correct English grammar in written communications in government business.
3.0 MAIN CONTENT 3.1 Nouns and Errors in the use of Nouns It is usual to define nouns as names of people, places or things.
Nouns cover names like those of institutions, months and days and abstract ideas e.g Sule, Uchenna, Nigeria, school, ox, chair, university, family, January, August, Friday, Sunday, and wisdom, beauty, etc.
Noun can be divided into two large groups namely: Proper nouns and Common nouns.
Proper Nouns These are names of particular people (e.g Shola Balogun); places (e.g Nigeria, Ghana); months and days of the week (e.g May, Tuesday); magazines and newspapers (e.g News watch, The Guardian)etc.
Proper nouns are unique and their first letters are written in capital no matter where the noun occurs in the sentences e.g - She visited Lagos last year.
Paul reads The Guardian every day.
Common Nouns These are names given to a class of persons and to places, things, ideas, etc.
E.g.
boy, box, church, wisdom, etc.
Common nouns are either countable or uncountable.
Collective Noun These are names of groups of people or things.
They are treated as singular or plural nouns depending on whether the group is conceived as a singular entity or as being made up of several members.
The following are some examples of collective nouns: class, committee, crowd, family, gang, jury, flock, congregation, group, community, etc.
Number: Plural of Nouns There are two numbers in English language: Singular and Plural.
Countable nouns have both singular and plural forms, while uncountable nouns have only the singular form e.g Box-boxes, girl-girls, Ox-oxen, 70  PSM 800 CONDUCT OF GOVERNMENT BUSINESS mouse-mice, index-indices, crisis-crises, boyfriend-boyfriends, deer- deer, aircraft-aircraft, series-series, etc.
Some nouns must end in ‘s’ even when they are singular e.g troops, headquarters, particulars, premises, savings, thanks.
Some nouns do not take‘s’ and are treated as plural e.g cattle, gentry, people, police, the poor, the rich etc.
Some nouns are countable and should be used as such, any attempt to use one as the other, causes an error in a sentence.
Unfortunately, using an uncountable noun as a countable is a common error in Nigeria.
Some uncountable nouns which are often misused in this manner are: - staff, news, information, slang, advice, behaviour, equipment, personnel, stationary, luggage, clothing, bedding, treatment, etc.
1.
‘The Staffs of the University are on strike’ The word ‘staff’ should not be pluralised.
This is because; it has a plural connotation, though structurally singular.
The correct sentence reads: The staff of the university are on strike’.
2.
‘I have a good news for you’ This sentence is erroneous because the word ‘news’, an uncountable noun had been used as a countable one by allowing the indefinite article ‘a’ to precede it.
The correct sentence is this: I have good news for you; OR I have a piece of good news for you.
OR I have three pieces of good news, SELF-ASSESSMENT EXERCISE List the different types of nouns and give an example of each.
Answer 1.
Proper Nouns e.g.
Nigeria 2.
Common Nouns e.g.
boy, church 3.
Collective Nouns e.g.
committee, group 3.2 Omission/Wrong use of Articles Articles are words used before nouns.
There are two types of articles, the definite articles, “the” an indefinite article ‘an’ and ‘a’.
The definite article ‘the’ as the name implies is used to make a specific or particular reference while ‘an’ and ‘a’ are used for non-specific reference.
The indefinite article ‘a’ is used with countable nouns which begin with consonant sound (e.g.
p,b,t,k,m) .
I saw a girl, while ‘an’ is used with 71  PSM 800 MODULE 2 singular countable nouns whose pronunciation begins with vowel ‘sound’ (a e i o u) e.g.
She ate an apple.
The major error in the use of articles is mainly with their omission where they are obligatorily needed.
The omission is, no doubt, a result of interference of our mother tongues since most Nigerian languages do not possess any separate morpheme for the articles.
Sometimes the articles are used redundantly and at other times one is used where another is appropriate.
We shall now examine some of these errors.
(i) I find it difficult to express myself in English language’ This sentence is erroneous because of the omission of ‘the definite article which colligates with English language for the sentence to be correct, the article ‘the’ must be inserted accordingly.
I find it difficult to express myself in the English language.
In same manner, you must not omit the definite article in expression such as; the German language, the French language, the Hausa language, the Igbo language, the Abakaliki dialect, the Afikpo dialect, and the Onitsha dialect.
(ii) Majority of our students have ardent keenness in politics.
The word majority is compulsorily used with either of the articles, ‘the’ or ‘a’ preceding it.
In this sentence, “it” has been omitted thereby rendering it erroneous.
When corrected, the sentence should read: The majority of our students have ardent keenness in politics.
3.3 Pronoun and Errors in their use A pronoun is the word used in place of a noun.
The main essence of using pronoun is to avoid repetition of nouns which makes a write up clumsy.
For the appropriate pronoun to be used instead of a noun, the following should be considered.
(1) Gender: There are three genders in English Language: (a) Feminine gender: Used for females e.g she, her, hers (b) Masculine gender: Used for males e.g he, him, his (c ) Neuter gender: Used for animals and inanimate objects e.g.
it, its (2) Number: If the noun to be changed is in singular form then the pronoun to be used will be in singular form too.
E.g John is kind becomes he is kind.
‘he’ is used because it is a masculine singular pronoun.
(3) Function: The function of the noun to be changed must be considered to be able to show a pronoun functioning in the same slot with the noun of “John is kind” becomes ‘he’ is kind”.
John is 72  PSM 800 CONDUCT OF GOVERNMENT BUSINESS the subject of that sentence so ‘he’ is the most appropriate pronoun to use because John is a masculine gender in singular form and performs the function of the subject in the sentence.
Personal pronouns are classified into three persons showing their numbers and functions as illustrated in the diagram table overleaf.
SINGULAR PLURAL Subject Objective Subject Objective First Person 1 Me Me Us Pronoun Second Person You You You You Pronoun Third Person He, she, Him, her, it They Them Pronoun it We shall analyse some of the errors inherent in the use of English pronouns 1.
The boy completed the assignment by himself ‘ The preposition ‘by’ in this sentence is otiose One should simply say: The boy completed the assignment himself, Note that himself, herself, themselves, itself, myself, and yourself are each one word.
2.
I hope the students know themselves.
This sentence, as it is, means that every student knows himself/herself.
This meaning is implied by the wrong use of the pronoun themselves, where each other, or one another is more appropriate.
The sentence should be recast as follows: I hope the students know one another, Similarly, the expression, I hope you know yourselves, possesses the same interpretation as given in the use of ‘themselves’ above.
The use of each or one another should be adopted here, to replace ‘yourselves.’ 3.
Bernard and myself sat together in the exam hall.
Myself was wrongly used here.
It should be replaced with I thus: Bernard and I sat together in the exam hall.
73  PSM 800 MODULE 2 4.
Today’s date is what?
This is an incorrect expression in English language.
We should reconstruct it as follows: What is today’s date?
Similarly we should say: what page is that/and not ‘page what……?’ 3.4 Errors in the use of Verbs A verb is a word or group of words that is used to tell what someone or something is, does or experiences.
It is an obligatory element of a sentence expressing an action done by the subject or a state experienced by the subject or what is becoming of the subject.
It is therefore regarded as the most important part of a speech since no sentence can be acceptable without it.
Some examples are, talk, come, look, close, write, have, do, may, shall, ought to, used to, etc.
Out of all the parts of speech, verbs are the most problematic.
The following constitute the major areas of difficulty: confused verbs, stative verbs, concord, tautology, redundant prepositions, and wrong tense of the verb, etc.
Concord This is the agreement of the verb, in number, with the subject of a sentence.
As a general rule, if the subject is singular, it will take a singular verb; if the subject is plural, it will take a plural verb.
Some nouns always take plural verbs.
They are: police, people, remains, minutes, thanks, etc.
The non-count nouns concur with the singular form of verbs.
Using them with the plural verbs constitute some of the errors in sentences.
Here are other rules to guide and some exceptions to note 1.
Subject joined by ‘and’ generally takes plural verb e.g.
Peter and John are first year students.
(a) But, when the two singular subjects joined by ‘and’ give the impression of a unit the verb is singular e.g.
Bread and butter are my favourite meal.
His wife and boss forbid it.
(b) When each of the singular subjects is considered individually especially after ‘each’ or ‘every' the verb is singular e.g.
Every man and woman is expected to be a good citizen.
74  PSM 800 CONDUCT OF GOVERNMENT BUSINESS (c ) When ‘and’ is replaced by such words or phrases as with, together with, in addition to, including, as well as, no less than or a similar construction, the verb becomes singular.
Such a phrase is not part of the subject e.g The coach with his team was praised.
The secretary as well as the president is kind.
2.
Singular subjects joined by ‘or’, ‘nor’, ‘but’, ‘either’, …nor, take singular verbs e.g.
Either Kosi or Damy was elected.
Not only his wife but even his mother thinks he is selfish.
3.
When one of the subjects connected by the correlatives {‘either….or’ or ‘neither….. nor’ is singular and the other plural, or when they differ in person, the verbs agree with the nearer one.
e.g Either Ade or you are to go.
This should be: Either you or Ade is to go.
4.
A singular subject with a plural modifier still requires a singular verb e.g.
The attitude of these men is hostile.
A list of the successful candidates is on the notice board.
5.
A collective noun modified by plural noun takes a singular verb e.g.
A team of athletes comes here daily.
A flock of sheep is owned by Peter.
6.
A collective noun like family, team, jury, group, takes a singular verb when it functions as a unit and plural verb when the members function as individuals; e.g.
The committee has decided to attend (singular).
The committee has their different opinions (plural).
7.
Nouns which are plural in form but singular in meaning take a singular verb e.g Economics, news, electronics, ethics, mumps, measles, etc Measles is a serious disease.
No news is new.
8.
Periods of time, amounts of money, measurements and weights are generally regarded as a single unit; therefore they take a singular verb e.g Eight hours is the normal working hours.
Ten kilograms of rice is not too heavy.
Other Errors in the use of Verbs are (1) I am now understanding the lecture.
Here is another misuse of a stative verb.
A stative verb cannot be used in the progressive aspect.
But understand, a stative verb, has here been so used.
This renders the sentence ungrammatical in English.
In good English we should have: 75  PSM 800 MODULE 2 I now understand the lecture Some other stative verbs are: resemble, have, lack, fit, contain, measure and suit.
All these behave like verbs hear and understand.
They are not often used in the progressive form.
(2) I prefer living in Enugu than living in Onitsha.
Prefer does not go with ‘than’ but with ‘to’.
The correct version is: I prefer living in Enugu to living in Onitsha (3) Tony has gone to barb his hair: May we reiterate here that the word barb does not mean to cut one’s hair.
It means the point of an arrow, a fish hook, or a remark that is intended to hurt somebody’s feelings.
Barb in this sentence is therefore a misnomer.
What we say in good English is, Tony has gone to have his hair cut.
(4) We must have to travel at 8’0 clock tomorrow.
‘Must’ and ‘have to’ are synonymous.
Therefore allowing both to co-occur causes a problem of redundancy.
The correct construction is: We must travel at 8’o clock tomorrow: OR We have to travel at 8’0 clock tomorrow (5) All that glitters are not gold.
When the construction ‘all that’ is used a singular verb becomes necessary, But when ‘all’ is followed by an object, it takes a plural verb as in: All the students are here.
In the above sentence, therefore, we do not require a plural verb.
The correct version is: All that glitters is not gold.
(6) Her remains was buried in the church yard.
Although the noun remains means, here, the dead body of one person, it always goes with a plural verb.
A good construction reads: Her remains were buried in the church yard.
(7) The minutes of the last meeting was read by the secretary.
Minutes is a plural noun and so should take a plural verb thus: The minutes of the last meeting were read by the secretary.
(8) He can be able to do it.
Similarly, ‘can’ and ‘be able’ are synonymous.
We do not allow them to co-occur in a sentence: It is therefore wrong to say: He can be able to do it.
The correct version is: He will be able to do it.
76  PSM 800 CONDUCT OF GOVERNMENT BUSINESS 3.5 Punctuation Marks Punctuation is a complicated subject and only the main principles can be discussed here.
The discussions are based on practice in British English.
The main headings are as follows: Full stop, Capitalisation, Comma, Colon, Semicolon, Question mark, Exclamation mark, Apostrophe, Quotation marks, Parenthesis (Brackets), Dash, and Hyphen.
General Remarks The purpose of punctuation is to mark out strings of words into manageable groups and help clarify their meaning.
The marks most commonly used to divide a piece of writing are full stop, the semicolon, and the comma, with the strength of the dividing diminishing from the full stop to the comma.
The full stop therefore marks the main division into sentences, the semicolon joins sentences and the comma (which is the most flexible in use and causes most problems) separates smaller elements with the least loss of continuity.
Bracket and dashes also serve as separators often more strikingly than commas.
Full Stop This is used to mark the end of a sentence when it is a statement.
In prose, sentences marked by full stops normally represent a discrete or distinct statement.
Full stops are used to mark any abbreviations (Weds.
Gen.
P.M.) A sequence of three full stops is to make an ellipsis or omission in sequence of words, especially when forming an incomplete quotation.
When the omission occurs at the end of a sentence, a fourth point is added as the full stop of the whole sentence.
He left the room, banged the door… and went out.
A full stop is used as a decimal point (910.5) and to divide units e.g 6.15pm, 6.3kg, etc.
Comma The use of comma is more difficult to describe than other punctuation marks; and there is much variation in practice.
Essentially, its role is to give detail to the structure of sentences, especially longer ones, and make their meaning clear.
The comma is widely used to separate the main clauses of a compound sentence when they are not sufficiently close in meaning or content to form a continuous unpunctual sentence, and are not distinct enough to warrant a semicolon.
A conjunction such as and, but, yet, is normally use 77  PSM 800 MODULE 2 Commas are usually inserted between adjectives coming before a noun: An enterprising, ambitious person.
A cold, damp, badly heated room.
An important role of the commas is to prevent ambiguity or misunderstanding, especially after a verb used intransitively where it might otherwise be taken to be transitive.
With the police pursuing, the people shouted loudly.
Commas are used in pairs to separate elements in a sentence that are not part of the main statement: I should like you all, ladies and gentlemen, to raise your glasses.
There is no sense, as far as I can see, in this suggestion.
Comma is also used to separate a relative clause from its antecedent when the clause is not serving an identifying function.
The book, which was on the table, was a gift.
Commas are used to separate items in a list of sequence.
Usage varies as to the inclusion of comma before and in the last item: the following will report at 9:30 am .Jones, Smith, Peter, Agnes and Paul.
Question mark This is used in place of the full stop to show that the preceding sentence is a question.
Do you want another piece of cake?
It is not used when the question is implied by indirect speech: I asked you whether you wanted another piece of cake.
Julius Caesar, born (?)
100 BC They were then seen boarding a bus (to London?)
Exclamation mark This is used after an exclamatory word, phrase, or sentence expressing any of the following: Absurdity: What an idea!
Command or Warming: Go to your room!
Be careful!
78  PSM 800 CONDUCT OF GOVERNMENT BUSINESS Emotion or pains I hate you!
That really hurts!
Ouch!
Enthusiasm I’d love to come!
Wish or regret Let me come!
If only I could swim!
Wonder, Admiration, or Surprise!
Aren’t they beautiful!
Apostrophe The main use is to indicate the possessive case as in John’s book, the girls’ mother, etc It comes before the ‘s’ in singular and plural nouns not ending in ‘s’ as in the boy’s games and the women’s games.
It comes after the ‘s’ in plural nouns ending in ‘s’ as in the boys’ games.
In singular nouns ending in ‘s’ practice differs between Charles’ and Charles’s, in some cases the shorter form is preferable for reason of sound.
It is also used to indicate a place or business e.g the butcher’s.
In this use it is often omitted in some names e.g Smiths bane.
It is used to indicate a contraction, e.g he’s, wouldn’t Quotation marks The main use is to indicate direct speeches and questions.
A single turned comma (‘) is normally used at the beginning and a single apostrophe (’) at the end of the quoted matter.
She said, ‘I have something to ask you.’ The closing quotation mark should come after any punctuation mark which is part of the quoted matter, but before any mark which is not: they shouted, ‘watch out!’ Punctuation dividing a sentence of quoted speech is put inside the quotation marks: 79  PSM 800 MODULE 2 ‘Go away’ he said, ‘and don’t ever come back’.
Quotation marks are also used for cited words and phrases: What does ‘integrated circuit mean?
A quotation within a quotation is put in double quotation marks: “Have you any idea, he said, ‘what integrated circuit’ means?” Indirect/Reported Speech As the names suggests, the indirect or reported speech reports what a speaker or writer has said without using his exact words.
This is very prominent in minute taking for example.
Direct Speech: Sule said, ‘I will return next month, by the grace of God’ Reported Speech: Sule said that he would return the following month by the grace of God Certain things to Note about the Reported Speech 1.
Usually the reported verb found in the direct speech is used but sometimes it could be changed, if the reporter feels like doing so.
e.g Direct: The man said to us: ‘We have enough accommodation for all of you’.
Reported: The man informed us that they had enough accommodation for all of us.
2.
If the reporting verb is in the past, the verb in the reported speech would change to the past tense.
3.
If the reporting verb is in the present or future, the verb in the reported speech does not change e.g Direct: He says: ‘We have lectures every Friday?
Reported: He says that they have lectures every Friday.
4..
If what is expressed in the direct speech is a universal truth no change take place in the reported speech no matter the nature of the reporting verb.
e.g.
Direct: Our teacher said: ‘The earth is not round but spherical?
Reported: Our teacher said that the earth is not round but spherical.
Please note that what have been said so far on the reported speech are guides, which are not always rigid.
The circumstance of the speech situation determines exactly what the reporter says.
80  PSM 800 CONDUCT OF GOVERNMENT BUSINESS 3.6 Common Errors in Nigerian English/Standard Expression 1.
My wife put to bed last week.
- My wife gave birth to a child last week.
2.
My wife delivered a child last week.
- My wife was delivered of a child last week.
3.
During the course of his lecture.
- During his lecture or in the course of his lecture 4 The man ate our money.
- The man embezzled our money 5.
You have a stranger.
- You have a visitor 6.
The university has a lot of brilliant academicians.
- The University has a lot of brilliant academics.
7 I slept at 10 last night.
- I went to bed at ten o’clock last night 8 May I follow you home?
- May I come home with you 9 A trouble shooter - A trouble maker 10 The lady has bottom power.
- The lady wields undue influence with sex.
11.
The rain beat me.
- The rain fell on me.
12.
The couple love themselves.
- The couple loves each other 13.
I horned.
- I sounded the car horn 14.
Don’t make noise.
- Don’t make a noise 15.
We reached here safely.
- We got here safely 16.
I’ll branch at your place.
- I’ll call at yours 17.
Customer (referring to a customer (refers to the buyer only) Seller from whom one buys regularly) 18.
From the beginning to the end.
- From beginning to end.
19.
He is too nice.
- He is very nice 20 They are my invitees.
-They are my guests 21.
Any place for me in the bus.- Any room for me in the bus 22.
Starting from the scratch.
- Starting from scratch 23.
Don’t put your mouth in this matter.- Don’t interfere in this matter 24.
Like I said earlier.
- As I said earlier 25.
I am coming.
- I will be back soon in a moment 26.
I’ll barb my hair.
- I will have a haircut.
27 Bring my cup.
- Fetch my drinking glass.
28 Deprived from going abroad.
– Deprived of going abroad 29 My house is twenty kilometres to my village.- My house is twenty kilometres from the village 30 Your book is with me -.
I have your book 31.
All what he does.
- All that he does 32.
Globe .
- Bulb 33.
Matured student.
-Mature student 34.
Coloured television.
- Colour television 35.
My business is moving fine .
- My business is thriving.
81  PSM 800 MODULE 2 36 By what time did you come?
- At what time did you come?
37 It does not worth it.
- It isn’t worth it.
38 I am saving against the rainy day.
- I am saving for the rainy day 39 Well done (greeting for someone performing a task).- Not a greeting, rather it means cooked 40 Sorry (when somebody trips without anybody being responsible for it) - Watch out 4.0 CONCLUSION It must be emphasised that wrong use of English in written communication adversely affects the quality of our output in the conduct of government business.
The areas these defects are easily observed are report writing, speech writing, minutes of meeting, memos (council memos) etc.
Factors responsible for poor English grammar include: hostile environment, poor reception of English language at the background, non-challant attitude of the users to make use of good English and the decline in reading culture among the populace.
Sometimes the use of dictionary assists immensely, particularly in correcting spelling errors.
5.0 SUMMARY One major way of the solving the nagging problems of poor English grammar in our operations, is by constant exposure.
Hence in this unit, we identified and discussed some of the areas such as Nouns, Pronouns, Verbs, Preposition, Punctuation marks.
We equally identified common errors in English language which are unique to Nigerians.
6.0 TUTOR-MARKED ASSIGNMENT List any 20 errors in English spoken or written by Nigerians and their corresponding corrections.
7.0 REFERENCES/FURTHER READING Eyisi, J.
(2004).
Common Errors in the use of English.
Ogunsanwo, O. et al.
(1990).Count Down to English Language.
Lagos: Evans Brothers Nigeria Publishers Ltd. Osoba, G. A.
(2001).
English for Effective Communication.
Ibadan: Olu- Akin Publishers.
Oxford Advanced Learners Dictionary (7th ed.).
London: Oxford University Press.
82  PSM 800 CONDUCT OF GOVERNMENT BUSINESS UNIT 3 EDITING AND PROOFREADING TECHNIQUES CONTENTS 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objectives 3.0 Main Content 3.1 What is Editing?
3.1.1 The Art of Editing 3.1.2 Content Editing 3.1.3 Body Paragraph 3.1.4 Sentence Structure 3.2 Qualities of a good Editor 3.3 What is Proofreading 3.3.1 Purpose of Proofreading 3.4 Qualities of a good Proofreader 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutor-Marked Assignment 7.0 References/Further Reading 1.0 INTRODUCTION At various points in the career of the civil servant, he will be called upon to write reports and do one form of writing or the other either by himself or for his superiors.
A good report or writing does not occur by sheer serendipity, but involves good writing and editing competence.
Public servants can win arguments and make personal gains in their respective callings by improving their report writing ability.
Employees with writing skills can gain promotion fast and are apt to be rewarded personally in various ways.
For example, they can impress their superiors by their personal characteristics, appearance, job performance, and intellectual capacity for work.
It should be noted that it is in the area of intellectual capacity for work that effective writing become a sine- qua-non.
Acquiring a satisfactory level of skills for editing one’s work is the purpose of this unit but as an editor, in some cases, you will be called upon to edit the work of others.
This ensures that documentation is of good quality.
In many organisations, experienced writers are dedicated to the editing functions; and peer-edit text produced by their relatively less experienced colleagues.
The editor fixes common errors and has experience in finding these errors.
83  PSM 800 CONDUCT OF GOVERNMENT BUSINESS 2.0 OBJECTIVES At the end of this unit, you should be able to: • explain the concepts of Editing and Proofreading • outline qualities of a good editor and proofreader • proofread and edit government draft documents.
3.0 MAIN CONTENT 3.1 What is Editing?
According to Wikipedia (2008), editing is the process of preparing language, image, or sound for presentation through correction, consideration, organisation, and other modifications.
In other words, the editor corrects misspellings, punctuations, mistakes, grammatical errors, inconsistencies in style, rewrites and improves on the original copy of his work or that of another and puts the typescript into a style satisfactorily presentable to the reading public.
Etymologically, according to the Oxford English Dictionary, the word “editor” comes from the Latin phrase “e ditus” which means ‘to put forward”.
Thus, to edit is to prepare, mostly, literary work for publication, especially to establish or prepare a commentary on a text.
In its broadest sense, the editor is someone who edits a manuscript, book or series of writings, newspaper, periodical, film, radio or television material, etc, for public consumption.
3.1.1 The Art of Editing All writers work with professional editors to improve and refine their work, In many cases, what seems clear and readable to a writer will seem confusing, boring, or lacking to the readers.
Editors identify these problems and work to solve them.
Often enough, the well-balanced prose that ends up in a good book or articles is nearly unrecognisable when compared to the draft the writer originally submitted to the publisher or originally written before editorial work is done.
Unfortunately, most writers do not have access to a professional editor when they are drafting their essays, and many professional writers do not always find themselves working with top-quality editors (and sometimes disagree with their suggestions).
Therefore, all writers need to learn how to effectively edit their own work.
After all, when we are struggling to make sense of badly written prose, we do not blame the editor, we blame the author.
In short, if you want to succeed in any kind of writing, you must acquire solid editing skills.
84  PSM 800 MODULE 2 3.1.2 Content Editing The first thing you should focus on editing is your introduction.
Whether it is one paragraph or an entire chapter, the purpose of the introduction is to grab the readers’ attention and make them want to know more about your subject.
Draw your readers in from the beginning and follow with relevant and interesting supportive information.
If readers are not intrigued from the very beginning of the piece, they will quickly become distracted or bored and avoid reading any further.
Consider every essay assignment an opportunity to show off your story telling skills.
Delight your audience with clear, clever, and creative prose.
It all begins with an effective introduction.
What is the difference between a good and bad introduction?
In short, a bad introduction is misleading, rambling, incoherent, boring, or so hopelessly vague that you know less about the paper afterwards than you did before reading it.
On the other hand, a good introduction gets to the point, gives the reader a reason to keep on reading, and sets the stage for a really exciting performance.
An intro is like a first impression.
Your essay’s intro is your reader’s first impression of your ability as a writer.
State your argument upfront and present a clear thesis right away, then subtly describe your paper’s overall structure.
Try summarising every paragraph into one sentence each, and then put them all together to see if your intro covers each point.
Your introduction should state the issue at hand, establish your position regarding it, describe your paper’s organisation, and identify the scope of your coverage.
Let us take each of these in turn.
Be sure to have a clear thesis.
Simply put, a thesis is your main point, the line of argument that you are pursuing in your essay.
It answers two simple questions: What issue(s) are you writing about, and what is your position on it?
A thesis statement is a single sentence (or sometimes two) that provides the answer to these questions clearly and concisely.
“What is my paper about, exactly?” to help you develop a precise and directed thesis, not only for you reader, but for yourself as well.
How can you be sure your thesis is clear?
Will your reader be able to identify it and see that the rest of your paper is supporting your argument?
Most discerning readers, for instance, expect to see the point of your argument (the thesis statement) within the first few paragraphs.
This does not mean that you have to place it there every time.
Some writers place it t the very end, slowly building up to it throughout their work, so as to explain a point after the fact.
Wherever the appropriate place for your thesis may be, make sure your readers will know that it is, in fact your thesis.
Normally, thesis statement is only a couple of 85  PSM 800 CONDUCT OF GOVERNMENT BUSINESS sentences long.
Try to fit yourthesis into one sentence if possible.
Remember, the harder it is for you to write your thesis statement, the more likely it is that your entire essay is incoherent and unfocussed.
If you are having real problems crafting a good thesis statement, you may need to start over, narrow your topic, or dig even deeper into what you are trying to say and write.
3.1.3 Body Paragraph Another question to ask yourself when editing your paper or another’s is: does the sentence get to the point?
Are they plain and simple sentences?
Good writers avoid long, wordy sentences.
If a sentence is already plain and direct, there is no need to fill it up; rather, you should keep it clear and succinct.
Flowery words and phrases obscure your ideas: when writing, being concise is the key.
For example, why say that “cats have a tendency towards sleeping most of the day “when you could simply say “cats tend to sleep most of the day?
How about changing “the 12th day of the month of April” to April 12th?
The rule is: simply call a spade a spade, rather than “an archaeological implement for excavating the ground”.
Try to pick out such sentences and substitute simpler ones.
Often in writing, less is more.
Fourth, see that there is flawless organisation.
Is your tense consistent throughout the paper (past, present, or future of first, second or third person)?
How about the narrator’s emotion?
Is the academic tone of your narration consistent?
Re-evaluate your claim and make sure it ties in with your thesis.
Each sentence in every paragraph should support your claim.
From one paragraph to the next, the ideas flow into each other so the reader does not feel there are interruptions or delays.
Remind yourself not to get carried away from the original point you are trying to make.
This will also prevent the reader from becoming lost or confused.
Finally, end your thesis with a good conclusion.
The conclusion and the introduction should be similar.
Some people actually restate their entire thesis in the conclusion just to re-establish what the entire paper is about; it becomes a way of tying up loose ends.
The goal is to pull readers in right from the start and keep them hooked until the last sentence.
3.1.4 Sentence Structure Use active verbs: Be-verbs (is, am, are, was, were, be, has/have been) indicate condition, and often require an extra sentence or clause to be sound.
Active verbs allow you to compose sharply without numbering the rhythm of your writing.
Read your writing with an objective eye and think: “How can I 86  PSM 800 MODULE 2 make every sentence and paragraph straight forward and simple?” Below are examples in italics of wordy and confusing verbiage.
Below the italics are the same sentences that have been simplified.
“The sharp rise in fuel prices is a serious challenge to trucking firms.
It makes it hard for them to provide timely service to customers and to meet payroll expenses.
“Sharply rising fuel prices challenges trucking firms by causing delays in customer service and payroll”.
Primary causes of the rise in fuel prices challenge trucking firms are an issue of confusion for many citizens.
They don’t know how to fight the rise because they don’t know its cause.
“Primary causes of rising fuel prices elude many citizens, making them unaware of how to fight the increase”.
Name the people.
Directly state who or what group is acting in your sentences.
Note the contrast in power and clarity in the sentences below: Without people: A citywide ban on indoor smoking in Duluth originally caused a marked drop in bar patronage.
With people: When the Duluth City Council passed a citywide ban on indoor smoking many people stopped going to bars.
Eliminate wordy phrases.
Certain stock phrases are weak and wordy.
They can make you sound stuffy or as though you are just trying to fill up space.
Use these replacements Because, Since, Why: the reasons for, for the reason that, owing/due to the fact that, in light of the fact that, considering the fact that, on the grounds that, this is why.
When: on the occasion of, in a situation in which, under circumstances in which.
About, Regarding: as regards, in reference to, with regard to, concerning the matter of, where ABC is concerned Must, should: it is crucial that, it is necessary that, there is a need/necessity for, it is important that, it cannot be avoided that.
87  PSM 800 MODULE 2 Can: is able to, has the opportunity to, has the capacity for, has the ability to.
May, Might, Could: It is possible that, there is a chance that, it could happen that, the possibility exists for, etc.
Editing Tips Editing is like going over your writing with a fine-toothed comb, scanning the surface and the depths for errors, misstatements, and a lack of clarity.
First, keep resources close.
Gather your writing handbook, dictionary, thesaurus, handouts, and any other editing resources and keep them close.
This way, you will not be tempted to guess at the correct way to do something.
Instead, use your resources when you need them.
Spelling errors can be avoided if you have a dictionary nearby.
Do not rely on a computer spell check.
It will only correct the spelling, not the proper usage of a word.
For example, the word “their means someone’s possession of something, when used in a sentence, “We sat in their chairs”.
On the other hand “there” is used to express an area or place.
When used in sentence, “We sat over there”.
Looking up these words in a dictionary will prevent unnecessary errors from occurring.
Secondly, know your errors; keep a list of the errors you tend to make next to a corresponding list of corrections.
No writer makes unique mistakes at all times; instead, our mistakes may be habitual.
Know what yours are by looking at your instructor’s comments on past papers or by working with a writing tutor.
Thirdly, break it down.
Edit one thing a time.
Instead of reading your paper through from start to finish or twice and trying to catch everything, try searching for one thing at a time.
For instance, you might go through your paper once to tighten up wordiness.
Then read through for mechanical accuracy, another for subject-verb agreement, etc.
Next, reduce visual clutter.
Use two pieces of blank paper to cover up everything but one sentence at a time.
Review your work.
When reviewing, it is important to ensure that the tense you choose remains consistent: present, past, future.
For example, you may tell a story about going to the supermarket in either present or past tense by saying, “I am walking around the supermarket and I see my third grade teacher” or “I was walking around the supermarket when I saw my third grade teacher”.
It could however be confusing to say” I was walking around the supermarket when I see my third grade 88  PSM 800 MODULE 2 teacher.” Keeping your tenses consistent helps your reader to experience what you are writing about.
3.2 Qualities of a good Editor A good Editor: • loves the word and good writing; • brave enough not only to champion the best but have a knack for purity of presentation; • eagle-eyed in spotting mistakes in writing(mechanically accurate); • reads widely and has great curiosity; • can analyse a manuscript even when the subject is unfamiliar, spot difficulties and suggest solutions; • is tactful , and persuasive in working with authors; • is enthusiastic about work and can inspire enthusiasm in others; • has good judgment about what is important and what is not; • has a feel for the language of publication; • keeps secrets; • shows initiative; • is resourceful and enjoys solving problems; • cares about details; • worries about schedules; • understands what happened to a manuscript after it leaves the editorial department design, production, distribution; • gives substantive editing to his work the shape and organsation of the manuscript, making sure that meaning is clear and forcefully expressed; carries out manuscript editing: checking grammar, spelling, • punctuation, consistency of style, accuracy of facts; polishing the language, eliminating ambiguities and repetitions; always remembers the reader but never forgets that the • manuscript belongs to the author.
The publication will carry the author’s name.
The author will get the blame for any faults.
The author’s reputation, not the editor’s, is at stake.
Therefore, a good editor is careful not to introduce errors, or change the author’s message.
A good editor’s work is invisible.
Readers and reviewers will notice if the editing is poor or if there has been no editing.
They will complain about bad spelling, poor tables, sentences that are ambiguous and errors of facts.
A good editor therefore works to eliminate these.
89  PSM 800 CONDUCT OF GOVERNMENT BUSINESS SELF-ASSESSMENT EXERCISE List any five qualities of a good Editor.
Answer i. lover of word and good writing ii.
bravery iii.
eagle-eyed iv.
reads widely v. can analyse any manuscript vi is tactful vii.
enthusiastic vii has good judgment ix shows initiative x is resourceful.
3.3 What is Proofreading To proofread is to compare a manuscript copy or a printer’s proof against the original manuscript in order to locate printing errors.
It is also the act of reading over any written or printed material to correct errors of spelling, grammar, logic, or comment.
The proofreading process normally comes after the manuscript has been edited, typeset and put through the first print run.
Proofreading is also a process of reading printer’s proof and comparing it with the manuscript or copy in order to detect errors in typesetting.
Errors are marked in the proof in accordance with generally accepted signs and the resulting “corrected proof” is returned to the printer to effect the necessary corrections.
In modern practice, proofs are made first from a galley, a long tray holding a column of type, and hence are called galley proofs.
The term is sometimes also used for the first copy produced in photocomposition and other forms of typesetting that do not involve metal type.
Publishers may depend on professionally qualified printers’ proofreaders.
At times, publishers make use of in-house or freelance proofreaders.
In developed book industries it is the publisher who receives the manuscript from the author, after copy editing, the publisher turns it over to the printer and the printer sends proof to the author through the publisher, and receives back the corrected proof by the same route.
90  PSM 800 MODULE 2 In many developing countries, the publisher has no copy editor and often merely refers the author to the printer, leaving it to those two to work out all problems until the book is finished.
3.3.1 Purpose of Proofreading The main purpose of proofreading by the author and publisher,is to give the author a chance to catch the occasional typographical errors missed by the printer’ proofreaders.
The Impact of Technology With the advent of new technology, proofreading a manuscript has become easier.
Once in electronic form, a large manuscript can be checked for spelling just in a few minutes.
Once typed, the work never has to be retyped and editing changes can be added or edited in an instant.
Some word processors have built in spelling grammar checkers, such as Display-Write 3 (IBM) MultiMate, MSWord and WordPerfect, etc.
Others will work with memory resident proofreading programs such as Turbo Lightening 1.02 Word finder (Mirolytics) and Webster’s New World Spelling Checker.
If you prefer to proofread printed manuscripts, consider using a word processor such as Microsoft Windows White, Microsoft Word or other programmes that show different fonts on the screen.
3.4 Qualities of a good Proofreader (a) To qualify as a good proofreader, one should possess the following preliminary qualities : • flare for English (or the language of publication) • an alert and orderly mind • a good memory • a sharp eye for detecting errors.
(b) Other qualities of a proofreader include: • familiarity with type, typesetting methods and procedure to produce artwork • familiarity with marking techniques and various changes that often occur in marking copy for press • must learn to adjust to pressure of deadlines • must cultivate neat work habits 91  PSM 800 CONDUCT OF GOVERNMENT BUSINESS • must have a sense of proportion, a sense of pride in the profession , and • must have good vision and good hearing.
(c ) Procedure for reading page-proofs • Be sure each page leads to the next • Be sure all elements on each page are properly placed e.g captions, head, footnotes and illustrations • Be sure spaces left for artwork are proportioned to the actual sizes of such artwork.
(d ) Queries, tips and cautions Preview queries as you proofread.
At least draw attention to unanswered questions in the dead copy.
(e) Review Review your proofreading by going over the above steps.
However, this must not take more than 1/10th of the time spent on your original proofreading.
Here are suggestions: • Check folios that constitute preliminary pages for completeness; • Verify all forms of measurements for accuracy (us your type gauge); • Review all head levels for consistency; • Be sure each galley runs into the next • Review your marks and queries.
Re-read any line where you have put a mark plus three lines before and three lines after the first paragraph.
It is noticed that proofreaders have a tendency to overlook errors in the beginning of job (where they are most noticeable and embarrassing); and ; • Ensure all pages are sequentially arranged.
(f) The officer should follow the following steps while checking: i.
Read the whole proof again concentrating on prelim pages, making sure you agree with all conventions.
ii.
Read first and last paragraphs of each chapter (or preferably of each section).
iii.
Read first and last sentences of each paragraph to ensure no error, especially in repetition of paragraph or omission of sentences.
iv.
Read first and last line of each page to be sure that each properly leads into the other.
92  PSM 800 MODULE 2 v Read all headings especially running headings for spellings, typographical and layout errors or abnormalities.
vi Read all faces that are different, e.g bold, italic and all caps.
vii Read all types smaller than normal text e.g footnotes, quotations, superscripts and subscripts, etc.
viii Read all lines already marked for corrections.
ix Check the sequence of all numerical and alphabetical listings.
x Check spacing between paragraphs and leading between lines etc.
xi Check again the entire job looking for inconsistencies, deviation from agreed style and improper word division.
xii Check general appearance, misalignments, poor quality, and deviation from format xiii Check tables, charts and figures.
4.0 CONCLUSION From the foregoing, it is established that proofreading is not editing.
It could require some specialist skills not necessarily the same as required for editing.
There are special problems to catch and has its own unique methods and procedures for catching these problems and solving them.
The practitioners are not just a part of untrained individuals; they are trained and highly skilled in the art and craft of proofreading.
Proofreading should develop as printing technologies advance.
This calls for development of new skills, especially in computer operations for example.
In other words, the quality of the billions of printed words that we wade into, and that form part of our environment in Nigeria, and indeed in Africa, will increase progressively as the number of proofreaders goes up.
Editing and proofreading should therefore be developed as important skills of a seasoned public servant.
5.0 SUMMARY Editing and proofreading constitute an indispensable process in written communications that helps the author to present his ideas or points poignantly in such a way that he says exactly what he has to say in the right manner and in the most effective way.
This unit thus discussed editing, art of editing and its procedures.
It equally discussed proofreading and established a relationship between the two concepts 93  PSM 800 CONDUCT OF GOVERNMENT BUSINESS 6.0 TUTOR-MARKED ASSIGNMENT Outline the qualities of a good proofreader.
7.0 REFERENCES/FURTHER READING Avery, C. B.
(1974).
Words Type.
Englewood Cliffs, N.J: Prentice-Hall.
Bentley, T. J.
(1985).
Report Writing in Business.
London: Kogan Page.
Friant, R. J.
(1980).
Preparing Effective Presentations: How to Make Presentations Pay-Off.
New York: Pilot Industries.
Heritage, K. (1998).
Successful Report Writing in a Week.
London: Hodder & Stoughton.
Hihgam, M. (1979).
A Businessman’s Guide to Writing Reports and Making Speeches.
Wellingborough: Thorsons Publishers.
Oxford English Dictionary.
(1973).
Oxford: Clarendon Press.
Smith, P. (1979).
Proofreading Manual and Reference Guide.
Virginia: Editorial Experts.
Wikipedia, (2008).
The Free Encyclopedia on the Internet.
94  PSM 800 MODULE 2 UNIT 4 DRAFTING, MINUTING, MEMO WRITING AND OFFICIAL LETTER WRITING CONTENTS 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objectives 3.0 Main Content 3.1 Drafting 3.1.1 Features of a good Draft 3.2 Minuting 3.2.1 Forms and Content of a Minute 3.2.2 Faults to Guard against in Minute 3.2.3 Hints on Minuting 3.3 Memo Writing 3.3.1 Essence of Memorandum 3.3.2 Format of a Memo 3.4 Official Letter Writing 3.4.1 File Copy 3.4.2 Salutations 3.4.3 Attachments 3.4.4 Re-directed Letters 3.4.5 Endorsements 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutor-Marked Assignment 7.0 References/Further Reading 1.0 INTRODUCTION Administrative Communication is a sine qua non for an effective conduct of government business.
It is the basis for the policy cycle resulting in decisions and consequently, directives for implementation.
At the level of operation, particularly the inter-personal level in the enterprise, administrative communication must be carried out through the use of our Lingua franca- English Language.
Although directives and instructions could be given verbally, that which attracts more seriousness and hence makes immense impact is the directive in writing.
We therefore posit that in organisations, decisions, policy enunciation and more importantly, approvals to carryout actions are usually made in writing.
Some of the forms of writing for the aforementioned purposes constitute the subject of this chapter.
95  PSM 800 CONDUCT OF GOVERNMENT BUSINESS They are: (i) Drafting (ii) Minuting (iii) Memo Writing; and (iv) Official Letter Writing.
2.0 OBJECTIVES At the end of this unit, you should be able to: • explain the terms drafting , minuting, memo writing, and official letter writing • state the various stages of each • outline the format and strategies for writing each of them to acceptable standard.
3.0 MAIN CONTENT 3.1 Drafting A draft is a proposed letter, circular, or minute, report or other document, prepared and sent by a lower officer to his superior for consideration.
The process of preparing a Draft is called Drafting.
If the proposed letter or suggested circular serves the prescribed purpose, it is considered good and approved.
A draft may be amended by filling in the gaps in the efforts of the officer or by the incorporation of additional facts by the senior officer.
A bad draft (e.g one which does not show an appreciation of the point at issue or one hastily put up without taking pains) may be rejected and scrapped.
When to Draft Where an item or correspondence is of a routine nature and calls for a routine reply, a letter ready for signature should be put up to the senior officer for his signature.
Sometimes the writer of a minute has to submit a draft embodying a recommendation in his minute.
Draft replies suggested for consideration may reduce substantially the length of a minute.
When a draft has been approved, it is sent to a typist to be produced in the correct form for issue.
The act of typing the letter in this form is known as ‘fairing’ and the finished document is known as a ‘faired draft’.
96  PSM 800 MODULE 2 3.1.1 Features of a good Draft are as Follows (a) Clarity of thoughts and expression: Say exactly what you wish in simple and direct language.
Avoid repetition.
(b) Accuracy: Verify all facts and figures before writing.
(c) Grammar: Weak or indifferent grammar mars the quality of a draft.
Special care is necessary in the use of punctuation marks, avoid over-worked expressions and titled phraseology.
For spelling errors or any other unsure expression of English, consult your dictionary.
(d) Courtesy: All communication from public servants to persons inside or outside the public service must be polite.
Even the reply to a discourteous writer should be couched in courteous terms.
Typed drafts of minutes, briefs and letters should as a rule, have headings which give an idea of the matter in the drafts.
Reasonable spacing is used in typed drafts so that there is ample space for amendments.
Drafts should be typed only on one side of the typing sheet or sheets used.
For economy, the reverse page of used, clean sheets with discarded typed-scripts at the front may be used for typing drafts.
Discarded papers containing classified information should never be used for drafting.
When drafts of any document are given to typists for fairing, the number of copies required should always be clearly recorded at the top of page 1 of every draft.
Such instructions can, for example take the form of either ‘6 copies’ meaning 6 in all or ‘1+ 5 copies’ meaning an original and five copies.
It is desirable for schedule officers and their typists to agree on the wording to be used in describing the number of copies that should be made in addition to the original so as to save time and avoid waste of stationary.
After drafting a minute or letter for the superior officer, the drafting officer should remember to write the superior officer’s name as the author.
While a superior officer sends a “loose minute”, it is the duty of the subordinate to put it in a file before sending the reply back to him.
The worst that can happen in the absence of the main file is for you to address your superior in a Temporary File (“T” File).
A good draft from a subordinate to a superior officer should be such that the senior has little or no addition to make.
It is important to note that it is an offence in the service to claim credit for a draft you made for your superior officer e.g.
speeches.
97  PSM 800 CONDUCT OF GOVERNMENT BUSINESS 3.2 Minuting A minute could be defined as a communication in writing, usually in files between two or more officials.
This definition does not apply to a letter from one officer to another.
Minutes are normally used to consider and settle matters or to direct what action may be taken in a circumstance.
Minuting is the act of writing a minute.
When not to Minute It may not be necessary to minute on a matter when: (a) The matter can be cleared by discussion either at a meeting (usually informal) or by telephone.
The latter medium should not be used for confidential or secret matters.
(b) The action necessary is routine.
(c) A more senior officer has specifically suggested that the “matter at issue” should be referred to him for further action usually because he is familiar with the background of the subject and /or he wishes to put down some drafting instructions.
(d) The matter is straight forward and no further information or guidance can usually be added.
(e) The subject matter assumed technical or professional or special knowledge which the schedule officer is not familiar with.
In such a case, the matter should be referred as clearly as possible, to a suitable professional or expert for necessary action.
It is instructive to note that the subject matter for which a minute or memo is being written is referred to, in the civil service language, as “Matter at Issue”.
3.2.1 Form and Content of a Minute The top left-hand side of a minute refers to the person, by appointment, to whom it is written.
The text of the minute follows.
It is concluded by the signature or initials of the writer.
Immediately under his signature or initials is the typewritten or stamped name of the officer writing it.
Under his name, the post held is shown and the date of his minute, indicated.
A minute may be built up as follows: (a) State briefly the ‘matter at issue.’ (b) State the present position and focus and facts affecting it, supporting the statement by reference to previous papers.
98  PSM 800 MODULE 2 (c) Verify whether or not the report, proposal or request accords with any laws, public service rules, financial regulations, circulars, or memoranda which have been circulated.
Sometimes, it is helpful to quote the actual words of the public service rules or to attach a copy of the relevant document.
(d) Indicate any previous decisions which may be relevant to the point at issue.
(e) Point out any facts or argument which may influence the action to be taken (or decision to be given) as they occur to you when examining papers, precedents and previous decisions.
Cite relevant authorities.
(f) Finally, suggest what action you propose should be taken.
The substance of a memoranda or letter in reply may be suggested in your minute which should be so drafted that the wording may be incorporated direct into the reply to issue.
3.2.2 Faults to Guard against in Drafting and Minuting • Avoid Slipshod Thinking: If one’s thinking is obscure, one’s drafts and minute may not be clear.
• Bad Hand-Writing: Provided you can write legibly, it is not advisable to type short drafts or minutes.
Unless one’s hand- writing is easily readable, all minutes or drafts covering more than half of foolscap sheet should be typewritten.
• Haste: It is considered bad to defer action on problems requiring considerable effort in drafting and minuting.
A large accumulation of work on files tends to encourage the production of hasty drafts or minutes based on haphazard research.
• Irrelevance: Try to have a grasp of the subject at issue and do not drift away from the question being considered.
• Inaccurate Information: Make sure that you know intimately the provisions of government circulars and regulations.
Make a special note of alterations in the laws, public service rules and other approved authorities.
A conclusion based on an obsolete precedence is likely to be misleading.
• Indecision: If a draft or a minute must solve or advance the solution to a problem, it should not show indecision.
Your summing up or conclusion should, therefore, indicate your stand.
• Stylistic Defects: Avoid repetitions (.e.g return back, can be able, etc) unnecessary airs and graces.
SELF-ASSESSMENT EXERCISE What are the faults to guard against in drafting and minuting?
99  PSM 800 CONDUCT OF GOVERNMENT BUSINESS Answer They are: Slipshod thinking, (ii) Bad hand-writing; (iii) Irrelevance, ; (iv) Haste; (v) Inaccurate information; (vi) Indecision; (vii) Stylistic defects.
3.2.3 Hints on Minuting As earlier stated, a minute is communication in writing mostly in files between two or more officers who may or may not be of equal rank.
A letter on the other hand, is a correspondence from one person, group or organisation to another and it insists on certain formality, which does not necessarily interest the minute.
To write a good minute or a good letter, the following hints are necessary and should be noted: (i) Go through the subject matter files and other relevant documents to ensure you have facts to enable you produce a good minute or write a good letter.
(ii) Make sure you clearly understand the subject matter which should be briefly stated.
(iii) State the previous positions or decisions, if any, which may lead to the present.
(iv) Write in good English with correct spellings and avoid unnecessary flamboyant or journalistic writing.
(v) All the facts should be arranged both logically and chronologically.
(vi) Indicate whether there are laws or past decisions that may affect the present case.
(vii) Identify relevant facts and argue persuasively either for or against the matter at issue, quoting appropriate authorities or laws or precedence wherever necessary.
(viii) Identify the options and make sure your argument is balanced by stressing points for and against the options.
(ix) Highlight reasons why you favour one option rather than the other.
(x) Avoid disjointed presentation.
Ensure that your presentation flows.
(xi) Avoid bad grammar and insist on good punctuation marks e.g the word, however, is always isolated by commas before and after.
(xii) Be exact and precise in your expressions and avoid irrelevant or unnecessary flowery language or journalistic writing.
(xiii) Make sure that the information you give is accurate.
(xiv) Finally, ensure that the line of action you advocate flows from your presentation.
Short titles or abbreviations are tolerated by minute but not by letters e.g Perm Sec., Hon Minister.
100  PSM 800 MODULE 2 (xv) Headings for minutes serve as quick reference points and are encouraged.
For each letter, a heading is a must.
(xvi) Every minute should wherever and whenever possible, be type- written, where, however, a minute is to be submitted in long hand, it should be done neatly, legibly and should not exceed half of one foolscap sheet page.
(xvii) Remember that constant production of bad minutes or drafts could damage the standing of an officer beyond repair, while good minutes produce pleasant reactions.
(xviii) Abbreviations are used in minutes because minutes are supposed to be short and not lengthy.
We have such abbreviations as a b c meaning at back cover of file; fyi – fx for your information; fna – for necessary action; B.U – Bring up etc.
3.3 Memo Writing The word “Memorandum” or Memo is derived from the Latin word” “Memorare” which means ‘to remember’ or ‘to bring to mind’.
The Chambers Twentieth Century defines “Memorandum “as “something to be remembered; a note to assist the memory; a summary of the state of a question,” In its broad and loose sense, a memorandum is used in both the public and private organisations to mean notes, minutes, as well as forms of letters and written documents used informally to convey information, facts or ideas from one person or group to another.
For our purpose, a memorandum will be defined as a specialised and classified government or public agency document used for the presentation of analysed data, facts and ideas to aid government or a particular public organisation’s decisions either for a more vigorous approach to execute established policies, or exploit revision of existing policies.
3.3.1 Essence of Memorandum From the definitions provided above, it would be realised that preparing or writing a memorandum involves key activities such as: sound research into a subject problem or situation; data collection and analysis; and policy initiation and analysis as necessary inputs for decision- making at government level.
Therefore, based on government’s policies and programmes, crucial issues are examined in all their ramifications and presented in a concise, analytical form in a memorandum to facilitate decision-making at the management level (Council, Cabinet etc).
Whatever the subject matter or the purpose, memorandum is a highly classified document.
Normally, it is ‘SECRET’ and regarded as the property of the council or cabinet.
101  PSM 800 CONDUCT OF GOVERNMENT BUSINESS Such memorandum as identified above may be submitted to the appropriate authority in the form of concrete proposals or recommendations for the purpose of obtaining approval or consent, decision or directive on fresh policy or amendment or modification of an existing policy.
Similarly, an internal memo serves the purpose but is restricted to a particular organisation.
3.3.2 Format of a Memo Just like in a minute, a memo starts by addressing the designation of whom the memo is meant.
Thereafter, we have the subject matter of discussion written and underscored so that it will be eye-catchy.
In government business, the subject matter in a memo is referred to as “Matter at issue”.
Introductory aspect of the memo constitutes the first paragraph.
Then major components or interrelated areas in the subject matter are, each, discussed in a paragraph subsequently.
For instance, memo for seeking approval to organise a course for a group of staff will comprise of the following and to be disused in a paragraph each: The course itself; how relevant it is to the job of the staffers concerned?
; the institution to run it-how credible is it and where must it be run?
Is it as implant or off-house etc?
; Then cost-implication which goes beyond course fees that is, all costs attendant to attending the course including “Duty Tour Allowance (DTA)” where applicable etc.
From the foregoing, we already have six (6) paragraphs.
Then comes the PRAYER paragraph which is either the last paragraph or in the last two.
This is a request paragraph in which the approval is sought.
It is important to note that in seeking approval finally, each of the issues discussed in the previous paragraphs should be itemised in the prayer paragraph and a prayer paragraph could look like this: “In view of the foregoing, the Permanent Secretary is requested to kindly consider and approve that: (i) A course on budgeting be organised for the staffers of the Budget office; (ii) The Administrative Staff College of Nigeria (ASCON) be chosen to run the course (iii) The course should take place at ASCON in Topo-Badagry, Lagos State; (iv) Twenty Budget officers between CONTISS 13 and 16 be released to attend the programme; (v) A total sum of three million naira (3, 000, 000:00) as analysed in paragraph 6 be released for the course; 102  PSM 800 MODULE 2 The final paragraph could then be: Submitted please OR submitted for the Perm Sec’s kind consideration and approval please.
Thereafter, the officer forwarding the memo signs his signature and writes his designation and date.
It is important to note the following.
(i) Designations are used in place of names because, in the Service, Officers are known by their designations e.g DFS meaning Director of Finance and Supplies OR Asst.
Director (Training) etc.
(ii) Aside from paragraph one; other paragraphs are numbered for cross-referencing purposes.
Sometimes the ’word PRAYER could be written in that paragraph but the important thing is to understand that it means request.
For instance, an officer who feels unfairly treated in a disciplinary action or loss or promotion opportunity could appeal for a re-consideration of his case.
In this instance, he could use the word Prayer in that paragraph.
On no account should people be praying in this paragraph like this; for the “Almighty God or Allah” to make the approving Authority to grant their request.
3.4 Official Letter Writing As in the case of minutes, the letters we are interested in are those that originate from government offices.
Letters, like minutes, are forms of communication from one individual or group to another.
Letters are used to convey decisions, directives on the required course of action or to let people know of certain new developments.
Letters differ from minutes in that they, unlike minutes, invariably insist on certain formalities such as the inclusion of the addresses of both the author and the addressee, indication of the date of the letter at the right hand side, insertion of headings and so on.
Letters do not also allow the use of abbreviations such as Perm Sec, or Hon Minister.
Words are written in full for letters.
Most letters are written on prepared letter-headed papers which have already printed the address of the sender, columns for Reference Number, and Date.
The format of any letter will, to a large extent, depend on the addressee.
If the letter is from one ministry to anther the format is similar.
But if it is from a ministry or parastatal to an individual or organisation outside government, the format is different.
If a letter is going from one ministry to another, the person who signs it will equally depend on the seriousness of the subject matter and who is supposed to treat it at the other end.
If the subject matter of a given letter is considerably serious, it is normally expected that the letter be signed by a sufficiently high-ranking officer.
103  PSM 800 CONDUCT OF GOVERNMENT BUSINESS In fact, some letters demand that either the Permanent Secretary or the Honourable Minister/Commissioner should sign them.
It is important to stress here, that the mere fact that an officer has been directed in a minute to issue a letter does not mean that he should also sign it.
If the content of the letter is a very serious one e.g, if it is a matter of national importance or if the letter is being made for the attention of an officer much higher than himself, the schedule officer should either prepare the letter for the signature of his superior or suggest that it be signed at a level higher than his own.
The signatory to a letter is perhaps much more serious when it has to do with people in regimented establishments especially the Armed Forces.
A schedule officer should always “use his discretion” to know when a letter should be signed by a higher officer even though he may have been asked to issue it.
When an officer is in doubt as to who should sign an outgoing letter, it is better to have the letter discussed with his superior officer.
Paragraphs are equally numbered in letters including “Thank you”, which, in this instance, appears to be shortest paragraph.
3.4.1 File Copy It is important that a carbon copy of any minute or letter sent out by an officer should be made and put in the file and appropriately paged as a file copy.
This file copy serves many purposes but the most important is that of providing an easy reference point for the subject matter.
It is also an invaluable guide for officers who may be posted newly to any ministry or establishment of government long after the originator of the letter had left the organisation.
In the file copy, should be indicated the date when the file should be brought up (b.u) for a reappraisal of the content of the letter.
It is also necessary for officers to keep their own ‘flimsy copies’ for future reference, if need be.
3.4.2 Salutations In letters from one ministry of government establishment to another, letters are addressed to the Chief Executive, e.g.
Honourable Minister, in the case of ministries or to the General Manager, Managing Director or Director-General for parastatals , as the case may be.
For ministries, it is not usual to start with Dear sir, or Dear xyz.
Sometimes, however, some Permanent Secretaries or Chief Executives are known to put some familiar and personal touches by starting with Dear Colleague or Dear xyz.
The closing is also less formal in that yours faithfully etc., are not included.
This style is not very common outside government establishments.
The style differs remarkably from that of letter going outside government establishments.
Letters from government ministries or departments to outsiders take a more formal format as they are started 104  PSM 800 MODULE 2 with dear XYZ and close with “Yours faithfully”.
As earlier stated, in government to government correspondence, Dear Mr. XYZ may be tolerated at higher levels and where the author and the addressee are fairly familiar; otherwise it is usual not to include these.
3.4.3 Attachments Whether letters are meant for government or non-government addressees, it is necessary that attachments necessary for the circumstance of the given letter should be added.
Such attachments make for faster consideration of the subject or ‘matter at issue’, in addition to assisting better appreciation of the matter at hand.
Attachments should be clearly indicated and signs for them either shown at the left-hand margins or all the enclosures are spelt out at the bottom end of the letter.
3.4.4 Redirected Letters In situations where letters are mistakenly sent by a member of the general public to a ministry that does not deal with the subject matter of the letter, rather than sending back the letter to the author and asking to direct his letter to the appropriate ministry, the correct thing to do is for the ministry that receives the misdirected letter to redirect it to the appropriate destination with a short letter.
The original letter should be attached while photocopy is made and retained in a file.
The appropriate ministry should then be requested to deal directly with the originator.
Subsequently, the author should be informed of the action taken with the advice that he or they should also deal directly with the correct ministry in matters connected with the subject matter of enquiry.
This approach is superior to sending back the letter to the author, which tends to portray government as uncoordinated.
3.4.5 Endorsements An endorsement is letter written at the bottom of an earlier letter to person or persons to which the original one was not addressed.
The purpose is to pass information to the new addressee with the appropriate request or directive as to what he or she is required to do sequel to the body of the main letter.
Since definite actions are often required, unless the endorsement is for information only, it is preferable to draw the attention of the person to whom it is endorsed to the paragraph or paragraphs requiring his action.
An example is, the above is for your necessary action with particular reference e to the issues raised at paragraphs 2 and 3 of my letter or of the ministry xyz letter or circular referred to.
105  PSM 800 CONDUCT OF GOVERNMENT BUSINESS 4.0 CONCLUSION Drafting encompasses all forms of writing if it is appropriately done, others will fall in place.
Minuting, Memo writing and official letter writing are all undertaken for decisions to be made officially, policies to be formulated or approvals to be given officially also.
Whatever actions are carried out subsequently, i.e implementations or executions must conform to the approvals given in writing.
This underscores the importance of discussions in this unit.
5.0 SUMMARY The importance of discussions in this unit is informed by the systematic approach to it in order to avoid confusion particularly with semantics.
The unit therefore started by explaining the concept of draft and drafting which cuts-across other forms of writing.
Thereafter, the unit discussed minuting, memo writing and official letter writing.
It must be noted however, that there are other forms of writing that serve similar purposes such as council memo, report and speech writing, etc.
These will be taken up in other units.
6.0 TUTOR-MARKED ASSIGNMENT i.
Outline the format of a good Memo.
ii.
Differentiate between a Minute and a Memo.
7.0 REFERENCES/FURTHER READING Fadeyi, B.
(1995).
“Minuting , Drafting, Report/Letter Writing,” Paper Presented at an Induction Programme for Newly Employed Officers of the Federal Public Service, Lagos.
Federal Republic of Nigeria (1997) Civil Service Handbook.
Abuja: Office of Establishment and Management Services.
The Presidency.
Little, P. (1975).Communications in Business.
(2nd ed.)
London: Longman Group Ltd. Maduabum, C.P.
(2009).
“Drafting, Minuting, Memo Writing, Official Letter Writing, in Chuks P. Maduabum (Ed.)
Writing Techniques for the Management of Public and Private Affairs Badagry: ASCON Press.
106  PSM 800 MODULE 2 Obiaku, D. (1999).
Communication Skills.
Lagos: Advertising Practitioners Council of Nigeria (APCON).
107  PSM 800 CONDUCT OF GOVERNMENT BUSINESS UNIT 6 REPORT WRITING CONTENTS 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objectives 3.0 Main Content 3.1 Definition 3.2 Types of Report 3.3 Planning a Report 3.4 Purpose of a Report 3.5 Strategy/Structure of a Report 3.6 Writing the Report 3.7 Revision 3.8 Characteristics of Good and Bad Reports 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutor-Marked Assignment 7.0 References/Further reading 1.0 INTRODUCTION Report is a medium/vehicle of communication.
It is a means of generating and presenting information to meet organisational needs particularly that of decision making.
It is grossly and extensively used in a well run organisation; including the Nigeria public service.
The ability to produce a good report indicates the quality of staff in an organisation.
For these reasons, organisations must equip their staff with the knowledge and skills to write quality reports.
2.0 OBJECTIVES At the end of this unit, you should be able to: • define the term ‘Report’ • mention the different types of Report • explain the stages involved in Report writing • state how to write and present good Reports.
108  PSM 800 MODULE 2 3.0 MAIN CONTENT 3.1 Definition Reports are means of generating facts and presenting information to meet organisational needs.
A good number of definitions will be considered for this purpose.
According to Bentley (1978) “reports are means of setting down the facts, opinion and conclusion which the author or (individual/group) wishes to communicate”.
The Oxford Dictionary sees report “as a written document in a given subject to convey information and ideas and at times to make recommendation”.
According to Oxford Advanced Learners Dictionary, Report is “a spoken or written account of something heard, seen, studied.” As contained in the ASCON workshop Manual, “it is a written document produced as a result of procedures undertaken to reveal information”.
3.2 Types of Reports The types of report are largely based on the ministries / departments / agencies in the public and private sectors and their need.
In the context of both public and private sectors, the following formats are common: Viz: (i) Performance (ii) Job/Functional related (iii) Scientific and Technical (iv) Professional / Advisers (v) Government Green and White paper; and (vi) Committee of inquiry.
3.2.1 Report on performance as we do know is of four types.
These are: • Quarterly report • Half yearly report • Annual report • Report on conferences / seminars (a) Quarterly Report – specifies that in every quarter report on the activities of an organisation or its units are written and forwarded to the Chief Executive Officer (CEO).
(b) Half yearly – can be useful in different organisations, departments and divisions to enable the organisational objectives to be properly put in place for the Chief Executive Officer (CEO).
109  PSM 800 CONDUCT OF GOVERNMENT BUSINESS (c) Annual Report – is a report that organisations render to their corporate body or stakeholders annually.
Progress of the organisation can be obtained from this report.
(d) Report on conference / seminar – this is a report usually obtained from personnel who attended seminars and conferences and submitted to the organisation at the end of the event.
Recommendations contained in it become useful for the organisations; and other vital organs such as: • Internal Audit • Accident • Sales • Production • Appraisals • Internal Audit – this provides checks and balance on both administration and financial activities; indeed it is about individuals and papers respectively.
• Accident - this is an unexpected event which comes and goes but the organisation notes such events.
The reports are usually made available after investigation e.g fire, burglary, road accident etc.
• Sales – this relates to cash transaction outfits, e.g the ASCON restaurant where sales report is made formerly to the head of ventures on daily basis.
Appraisal - this involves assessment of individuals • against their productivity.
Report on their performance gives the organisation the opportunity to know how productive the individual/group is.
(i) Scientific and Technical Report: Report on technical contents, emanates from ministries of Health, Science, Education etc.
Diagnosis is incomplete without formal technical report.
(ii) Professional/Advisers: This is a report that takes the form of scientific/Technical.
It emanates from professionals such as accountants, medical and management consultants to the Chief Executive Officer (CEO) for decision making.
(iii) Committee of Inquiry: This is usual with public sector organisations.
It is set up to conduct studies on different issues/problems, according to Mort (1920) to provide recommendations.
(iv) Government’s Green and White Papers: Both are formal reports.
It is green when the contents are still being proposed (policy), while the white paper indicates that a definite decision has been made.
It is then called white paper 110  PSM 800 MODULE 2 3.3 Planning Planning is an essential ingredient in report writing.
Before putting your pen to paper, the planning stage must be well articulated, i.e.
through collection and arrangement of data.
In report writing, which presupposes that thorough collection and analysis have been done and must also be well managed as a matter of fact.
It should be noted that information or data analysed must meet the facts required.
Indeed, the terms of focus or/and are essential for a rational conclusion.
Planning in report, takes cognisance of structure and layout features such as: the title, table of contents and digital system i.e.
the main heading, sub headings e.g.
1.
Main headings 1.1 Sub headings; and 1.1.1 Sub, sub headings Furthermore, the sources of data collection are worthy of mention in planning.
It is important to consider interview or talking to people who are involved, apart from the data collected.
These facts must be devoid of (hear say) when planning.
It is also necessary to appreciate the state of communication today, hence the need for information technology.
Technologies have played roles that are dominant; computer print out brochures and pamphlets can be relied upon when planning to write reports.
The sources of information which include primary and secondary are very germane in writing a good report.
The sources are as follows: Primary: This includes field interview, observation and experimentations.
Secondary: This involves collection of information from books, encyclopedia and computer.
A good planning / preparation provide, in the final analysis, a good report.
At this stage, the write up is said to have fulfilled the reader’s needs.
3.4 Purpose This is a very crucial factor.
The purpose provides the focus and determines the structure and content.
Admittedly, the overall purpose of the report is to communicate.
Under the purpose, the element of 111  PSM 800 CONDUCT OF GOVERNMENT BUSINESS structure is a feature which provides the arrangement of the contents for the readers to comprehend the proper intent of the report.
Why are reports written?
Since a written report is to communicate, it therefore behoves that organisations must have written reports basically to inform its audience and for future purposes.
Every written report is to provide explanation on specific events as well e.g.
“report on burglary”.
It should be further stated that an agreement cannot be reached without a written document.
This enhances discussions or consensus by individuals / groups.
3.5 Stages/Structure Two main stages are to be considered.
These are: - Investigation and Note taking: (i) Investigation: This is carried out to obtain facts, uncover problems and provide gainful insight into the subject.
Information can be obtained from published materials, files or individuals, which must be critically examined to avoid bias.
(ii) Note taking: This is an essential aspect of report writing.
Notes which can be used in writing the report must be taken as the investigation progresses.
It should be stated that under planning there is a need to properly sort out data during this period of note taking as well.
A mention in details should at this point be made of structure.
All organisations as it were should prepare and issue guidelines about the way reports should be structured and ensure strict adherence to them.
The structure will vary with the type of report.
The following are the three basic elements in structuring a report: (i) Structure (ii) Language (iii) Presentation Structure:-As earlier stated, it varies with the type of report.
However, the following headings though not necessarily in the order it is arranged, should be considered and a decision taken on how many sections are required and the order in which they should be arranged.
Sections, Paragraphs, Sub paragraphs etc, should be given headings to refresh the eyes and sustain comprehension.
112  PSM 800 MODULE 2 (a) Preliminaries: This includes (front matter) Title page, Dedication, Acknowledgement, Preface, Foreword, Content page and are numbered in Roman numerals.
(b) Text: This includes the introduction, findings, analysis, recommendations and numbering.
(c) End Matter: This includes the Appendix, Bibliography and References.
Language: -The rules are as follows: (i) The writer should write in lucid prose (ii) The writer should express and not impress (iii) He should employ clearly legible and short sentences (iv) He must observe the rule of the 4C’s i.e.
clear, concise, correct and complete.
Presentation The report must be presented in such a way that will arouse the reader at a glance.
The writer must be very generous with the use of space, and the layout of report must be well set with appropriate margin.
Format, according to Derbyshire (1970) depends on the types and purpose of the report, its reader, and the prescribed convention, and also laid out by the organisation.
In general terms, there are two broad types of format which are differentiated by whether the summary and / or recommendation is placed after the main body of the report, or is placed before the main body.
The eventual choice might be a combination or a condensed version of these two formats.
A typical format of a written report is as follows: (a) Title page (b) Abstract (c) Table of Contents (d) Body of the report (e) Conclusion (and recommendations where applicable) (f) References / Bibliography (g) Glossary (if needed) (h) Appendices.
(i) Title page – State the title, the author e.g.
Report at the end of a five day workshop is prepared by a committee must 113  PSM 800 CONDUCT OF GOVERNMENT BUSINESS have the names of the Chairman, members and Secretary mentioned.
(ii) Executive Summary – It is a report in miniature covering all the sections of the main report with a proportional length.
(Must not be in all reports) but where it is used, it comes immediately after the title page.
(iii) Letter of Transmittal – This is a covering letter forwarding the report which highlights the genesis of the report, the objectives, items of reference and the issues / recommendations.
(iv) Acknowledgement – This acknowledges the help obtained and expresses the gratitude to those who assisted in preparing the report.
This usually comes after the title page.
(v) Table of Contents – This contains the list of headings and pages which will enable the reader to easily grasp and understand the content of the various sections.
(vi) Introduction – The author in this section tries to put the reader fully in the picture.
It highlights the events that led to the writing of the report, how and why he addressed the problem; the way he sees and how successful he was in reaching conclusions.
Materials from the main body may not be part of this section.
(vii) Methodology – This section, which usually features in major reports, explains how the problems/issues were tackled and why particular methods and techniques were used.
(viii) Body of the Report – This is regarded as the heart of the report where all materials gathered during the investigation stage are clearly and logically presented.
The facts / information presented in this section should be objectively stated and the temptation to develop parts, because the writer finds them interesting, must be down- played.
(ix) Conclusion – The placing of conclusion in a report is a matter of convenience.
In some instances, both conclusion and recommendations can be included in the main body.
This section also gives the writer the first opportunity to express opinion as against facts.
The aim should be to  present opinions in such a way that the reader is able to follow the reasoning, even though his interpretation may differ.
114 None PSM 800 MODULE 2 (x) Recommendations - This section is the ultimate goal of the report.
It proffers solutions to the problems/issues that gave rise to the report.
(xi) Appendices – This section is very useful.
It removes detailed statistics, table and volume from the ‘body’ of the report.
While this makes the body of the report more readable, there should be a cross reference in the text to the relevant parts of the appendices.
If a report is brief, it may not need an appendix but if it is complex, appendices are required.
SELF-ASSESSMENT EXERCISE Outline the language of a report.
Answer (i) The writer should write it in lucid prose (ii) The writer should express not impress (iii) He should employ clearly legible and short sentences (iv) He must observe the rule of the 4 Cs i.e.
clear, concise, correct and complete.
3.6 Writing the Report Writing the report can be said to be a complex and rigorous exercise; as the structure, the language and its presentation must be clearly dealt with.
Organising the information requires stating clearly at the beginning what the report is about.
This stage should be organised clearly to communicate the main idea, first, and to provide the supporting details.
The information should be presented in a logical order.
In describing a mechanism; this could move from the general (function and formation of the machine) to the particular (the details of the construction).
The report should state its conclusion clearly and, where appropriate, give the reader information to help him/her make decisions.
Establish the style, based on the information presented as objectively as possible.
Do not allow bias or preconceptions to becloud your judgment.
If you are stating an opinion, make this clear e.g.
“in my opinion” A report is a reflection of you as a professional.
Good report reflects favourably on the author.
Strive for quality, precision and accuracy.
115  PSM 800 CONDUCT OF GOVERNMENT BUSINESS Before proceeding further into a proper report, there are some fundamentals that should be highlighted for the purpose of writing a good report.
It should have the structure, language and presentation as contained in the previous section.
3.7 Revision Before submitting a report, it is important to check through it, section by section, to ensure its coherence, accuracy, logical sequencing and soundness of expression.
The writer should in particular, check spellings (use the dictionary), quotations, punctuations, references, the coverage of certain terms and grammar (particularly consistency of tenses).
Failure to eliminate such mistakes can reduce the quality of a report.
It is very important to edit and proofread the report before submission.
The following questions can assist:- i.
Is the ‘shape’ apparent?
ii.
Is the ‘Body’ consistent?
iii.
Are the introduction, conclusion and recommendations integrated?
iv.
Are there sufficient headings and subheadings?
v. Has the right language and proper punctuates been used throughout?
vi.
Does this report have readability and impact?
It should be noted that there is the need for a gap between the writing and revision.
Not less than 24 hours is necessary, the report should be revised and read through the eyes of the intended reader.
It can also be useful if a colleague assists in reading the report.
3.8 Characteristics of Good and Bad Reports (a) Bad report: - suffers from a failure to recognise that the prime purpose is to communicate.
The language is often verbose and full of jargons.
Important facts are missing and unorganised arrangements etc.
(b) Good report must reflect the following: • Clear • Concise • Complete • Correct • Simple • Focused 116  PSM 800 MODULE 2 It should have a meaningful beginning, which explains the reason for the report and introduces the reader to the subject.
It must equally end by summarising how the report has achieved its objectives.
4.0 CONCLUSION Report is a vital tool or the fifth function in management; and a vehicle to communication.
This unit in the first instance has provided us some fundamental facts which before now have been complex in report writing.
However, the unit has also analysed to its maximum the import of report and its usefulness in decision making.
In this context, organisations shall find it handy in their strategic decision making especially, the public service.
5.0 SUMMARY In this unit, a detailed explanation of all that is involved in report writing was undertaken.
The various stages involved, in addition to the structure / format of a report was equally clarified.
The unit concluded with itemising the characteristics of good and bad reports.
6.0 TUTOR-MARKED ASSIGNMENT Explain the following: i.
The structure of a report; and ii.
The format of a report.
7.0 REFERENCES/FURTHER READING ASCON (1992) “Report Writing” “Workshop on GMC ’92 Manual.
Bentley, T.J. (1978).
Report Writing in Business.
London: Kogan Page.
Bowden, J.
(1991).
Report Writing Format Step by Step.
Oxford: To Books Ltd. Creswell, G. (2005).
Writing For Academic Success.
United Kingdom: Oxford Publishing Ltd. Olivet.
(1973).
Report Writing for Supervisors.
London: G. Bell and Son Ltd. 117  PSM 800 CONDUCT OF GOVERNMENT BUSINESS UNIT 5 PREPARATION OF COUNCIL / CABINET MEMORANDUM CONTENTS 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objectives 2.1 Main Content 3.1 Definition of Memoranda 3.2 Council Note 3.3 Classification of Council Memoranda 3.4 Originating/Processing Memoranda 3.5 Work of the Council Secretariat 3.6 Process involved in writing Memoranda 3.7 Hints on Effective Memoranda writing 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutor-Marked Assignment 7.0 References/Further Reading 1.0 INTRODUCTION All organisations whether in the public or private sector establish organisational policies and advance the implementation of policies, programmes or projects through the use of a variety of official writings.
One such official write-up is the council/cabinet memorandum in the public sector and board memorandum in the private sector.
The focus of this unit, council/cabinet memorandum, is obviously the public sector.
However, the basic issues, concerns and format are also applicable to private sector organisations.
Some of the organs within the public sector that receive, deliberate and take decisions through the use of council memoranda are Federal and State Executive Councils, National Council of State, National Security Council and governing boards of parastatals, etc.
2.0 OBJECTIVES At the end of this unit, you should be able to: define the term ‘Memorandum’ • • identify the various stages of writing an acceptable Council Memo • explain the functions of the Council Secretariat • list the steps to effective memoranda writing.
118  PSM 800 MODULE 2 3.0 MAIN CONTENT 3.1 Definition of Memoranda Cha mbers 21st Century Dictionary (Revised Edition) (1999) defines a memorandum as a written statement or record circulated for the attention of colleagues at work.
Slightly expanding the above definition, Webster Dictionary (International Edition) defines a memorandum as a brief record of an event or analysis of a situation made for one’s future reference or to inform others and sometime convey recommendations or instructions.
The dictionaries mentioned above, provide the indication that memoranda in general, are written documents which provide either records of events for one’s use and that of others, or analysis of events and recommendations or instructions.
Thus, it can be said in this general sense that a memorandum is a note of something to be remembered or a note of some transactions which act as record of the transactions.
Arising from the definitions given above, and considering our point of focus, a memorandum may therefore be defined as a document dealing with a substance subject matter used for presentation of analysed data, facts and figures to aid public sector discussion and decision making with regards to the making of new policies, the implementation or modification of existing policies, and for information purposes.
3.2 Council Note While council memoranda are presented to council for discussion and eventual decision, the Council Note is traditionally presented for information only.
However, questions raised on a council note may give rise to further council memoranda which would subsequently be raised and discussed by the council.
3.3 Classification of Council Memoranda Council memoranda are classified into four broad categories, namely: • Policy making • Legislative and Judicial • Financial • Information 119  PSM 800 CONDUCT OF GOVERNMENT BUSINESS (i) Policy Making Memoranda These are memos that seek approval of council on policy issues and related activities initiated by government agencies.
Policy making memoranda are submitted by virtually all ministries or agencies and parastatals through the Presidency or supervising ministries.
(ii) Legislative / Judicial Memoranda The Legislative / Judicial memoranda are submitted by any ministry wishing to promulgate a new legislation, proposing to amend existing legislation or submitting a memoranda that may have judicial implications.
The council memo submitted in this regard seeks to convince council of the need for the proposed legislation and thus obtains council approval to make drafting instructions to the Ministry of Justice for the preparation of the required draft legislation or amendment.
(iii) Financial Memoranda Expenditure on capital budgets above fifty million naira (N50, 000,000) must have approval of council prior to commencement.
Ministries therefore present memoranda to the council through the coordinating activities of the Ministry of Finance and at times National Planning Commission.
Memoranda that have financial implications are financial memoranda.
(iv) Information Memoranda Some memoranda e.g.
council notes are presented for information, only.
That is to say, council members are informed of happenings, or events that had occurred which are of national or state importance.
Council notes may be circulated to brief council members on actions taken through prior approval or the role played by Nigeria in some international peace-keeping events, or sudden unexpected events such as devastating floods in parts of the country.
SELF-ASSESSMENT EXERCISE List the four broad categories in which council memo are classified.
Answer: They are: (i) Policy making; (ii) Legislative/Judicial, (iii) Financial; and (iv) Information.
120  PSM 800 MODULE 2 3.4.
Originating / Processing Memoranda Each ministry originates and submits memoranda on the subject matter over which it has jurisdiction.
Thus, a minister may direct the permanent secretary to raise a draft memo.
Alternatively, scheduled officers may suggest a course of action which requires council approval; a memo may then be called for.
Whichever way a memo is raised by any ministry, consultations with other ministries or agencies may be required.
For example, if the proposed memoranda have establishment implications such as retirement benefits or recruitment, the originating ministry may have to consult with Federal Civil Service Commission, and Office of Establishment in the office of Head of Service to get properly guided.
In addition to what is stated above, two or more ministries can present a joint memo on issues which cuts across both, or issues of common interest.
When that happens, all ministers of interested ministries must initial the draft memoranda.
Any memorandum raised by a ministry is only a draft until the council secretariat clears it as meeting all format, layout and consultation requirements.
It is then that the secretariat produces a faired copy of the memorandum with appropriate numbering and title, then sends it to all council members as well as pencils it down for discussion during council meeting.
The council secretariat is in the Office of the Secretary to Federal or State Government as the case may be.
3.5 Work of the Council Secretariat The council secretariat headed by a permanent secretary in the Office of the Secretary to the Federal Government performs the important role of ensuring that all draft memoranda meet format and consultation requirements before they can be presented to council.
The council memoranda has a prescribed format.
This will be discussed later.
It is the responsibility of the council secretariat to ensure that the prescribed format is adhered to by ministries wishing to present memos to council.
Secondly, because of the interrelated nature of government operations, draft memoranda from various ministries usually have implications that are outside the jurisdiction of the initiating ministry hence the need to consult with other ministries and agencies to obtain appropriate information and/or advice.
121  PSM 800 CONDUCT OF GOVERNMENT BUSINESS As has been said earlier, a ministry may draft a memorandum with personnel implications.
The council secretariat checks the draft to ensure that the necessary consultation was, indeed, done and that the Civil Service Commission has given clearance / appropriate advice for raising the said memoranda.
In the same vein, where a memo has financial implications, the initiating Ministry must seek clearance from the Ministry of Finance to ensure budgetary provisions among other things and the council secretariat must scrutinise the draft memorandum to satisfy itself that the Ministry of Finance had, indeed, given clearance for financial issues raised in the memo.
It follows from the above that, where a memorandum has international implications, the council secretariat must ascertain, through submitted documents, that consultation was made and clearance/advice obtained from the Ministry of Foreign Affairs.
The same consultation must also be ascertained in relation to the Ministry of Justice if a memorandum has judicial implications.
More often than not, a memorandum has several implications cutting across several ministries.
The council secretariat checks draft of the memorandum and attached document(s) to ensure that the necessary consultations are made and clearances given by relevant ministries or agencies before the draft was submitted for production.
Where such consultations and clearance are deemed not to have been made or are considered to be inadequate, the council secretariat may send the memorandum back to the originating ministry with suggestions as to further consultations and clearance that must be made and obtained before the memorandum can be processed.
Where the council secretariat is satisfied with the format and level of consultation prior to submission of a memo, the memorandum is processed for presentation to the council.
3.6 Processes involved in Writing a Memorandum The first step is a directive by the minister that a draft memorandum be prepared either based on his/her own initiative or through the advice of the permanent secretary.
The permanent secretary then directs a director who may in turn direct a scheduled deputy director to prepare the memorandum.
Lower ranked officers but not lower than a principal officer may be called upon to prepare a first draft which is then subsequently vetted and further inputs made.
122  PSM 800 MODULE 2 Whoever is called upon to develop the first draft must research into the subject matter to gather relevant information and facts on the issue at stake, previous actions taken on the issue, if any, existing policies, laws or programmes that have a bearing on the issue.
Once the necessary information is gathered and collected, request for inputs and consultation must be made in writing to other ministries or government agencies that may be affected by the memorandum.
After due consultations are made, clearance and or advise obtained, the actual drafting of the memorandum commences.
The draft must indicate knowledge of the subject matter, relevant and subsisting regulations, laws, and practices.
It must also highlight the advice of relevant ministries and agencies.
After inputs and vetting from relevant officers in the ministry, the minister initials the memo in a distinct file opened for the purpose.
All annexure and consultative clearance given by other ministries must also be enclosed in the file which is then sent by the permanent secretary of the initiating ministry to the council secretariat for vetting, reproduction and distribution to members of council.
Council Memoranda Layout Once the council secretariat is satisfied that a particular memorandum meets specifications as earlier mentioned, the memorandum is reproduced in the following format.
Heading: The heading indicates that the document belongs to a particular council e.g.
“THIS DOCUMENT IS THE PROPERTY OF THE FEDERAL EXECUTIVE COUNCIL (FEC)” in a single line.
Code: Each memorandum is issued a code number by the secretariat through its register of memos.
The code is followed by date of production.
Copy Number: Council has security numbers for each council member which is put on the right hand side of cover page, e.g.
President has one as his security number.
Title: The title must clearly indicate what the memo is about, e.g.
AMENDMENT OF THE CATTLE FULANI, EDUCATIONAL TRUST FUND.
123  PSM 800 CONDUCT OF GOVERNMENT BUSINESS Author: THIS MEMO IS FROM THE MINISTER OF EDUCATION Ref.
No.
If the memo has been treated previously then a reference of the previous memo is indicated to link the two memos together.
Council Memoranda Format Introduction: This leads readers into the subject matter, the aims and objectives, the author, etc.
If the issue has previously been discussed or decided upon, the introduction should make reference to date of discussion and conclusions if any.
• Main Body: This develops arguments using persuasive facts, and figures to convince members of the merit of the ministry’s position on the issue being raised.
• Conclusion: Summarise the substantive arguments made and then itemise the approvals being sought for in what is usually called “Prayer” to council to enable council members know exactly what they are committing to.
Who presents Memoranda • The President or Vice President may present memoranda that emanates from the Presidency; • The minister with portfolio i.e.
Minister of State presents any memoranda emanating from his/her ministry or parastatal.
The permanent secretary may be required to be present during the presentation of his/her ministry’s memo, therefore the permanent secretary must be carried along in the development of any memo.
Memoranda can also be referred from one council to another e.g.
National Executive Council to the National Council of State.
The President or Vice President may present such memorandum.
3.7 Hints on Effective Memoranda writing Writing memorandum is a practical activity.
Like most practical activities the skills are honed through constant practice.
A major pathway for building the required skills is to consciously develop the ability to absorb and understand the relationship between facts, ideas or events.
In addition, it is also necessary that one be aware of any sensitive issue that borders on economic, political, legal and social occurrences within and outside the country and how these are interrelated.
However, awareness must be tampered with sound judgment, good command of English and basic communication skills.
Apart from what is stated 124  PSM 800 MODULE 2 above, below is a list of issues to deal with in order to produce good memorandum.
(i) Undertake necessary research in relation to the subject matter, read previous memo to know how they were written.
(ii) Make all necessary consultations with relevant ministries and agencies.
(iii) All relevant materials must be included as annexes.
(iv) Draft memoranda MUST be vetted by the top officials of the ministry or agency before the minister initials it for transmittal to council secretariat.
(v) As much as humanly possible, inconsistency, ambiguity or information gaps must be checked and amended before the draft is submitted.
(vi) Ensure that the memorandum is not contrary to the current thrust of government.
But where there is a deviation, it must be acknowledged and explained within the memorandum.
(vii) Ensure that typographical, arithmetic or spelling errors are corrected.
(viii) Ensure that the memorandum is consistent with the standard format of a council memorandum.
(ix) Observe the basic principles of writing such as: • Simplicity • Clarity • Elegance • Completeness • Brevity • Precision (x) If the subject of a memorandum was previously considered by council, references to the previous decisions should be given to make for consistency and to aid decision.
If another council had considered the subject matter earlier, the views of that council should be attached as annexes to the new memorandum.
(xi) Properly number all annexes and sequentially arrange them.
(xii) Ensure that the structure of a memo commences with introduction and ends with conclusions.
The introductory paragraph must contain the aim(s) objective (s) or purpose of author.
Subsequent paragraphs i.e.
the main body of the memorandum must develop convincing arguments supported by facts and figures to convince members of council that the objective(s) of the memorandum has merit.
(xiii) Paragraphs must be numbered in Arabic figures for ease of reference.
(xiv) Each paragraph should convey a full argument or a number of related arguments.
125  PSM 800 CONDUCT OF GOVERNMENT BUSINESS (xv) The last paragraph which is the concluding paragraph provides opportunity for the presenting ministry or agency to make its request.
This is called “prayers”.
Here, the presenting organisation requests council to consider and approve a list of requests which is presented in short sentences with action verbs forming the objective points of request.
For example: • Approve the building of a school in each of the six (6) geo-political zones of Nigeria.
• Direct that the construction be by direct labour.
Agree that negotiations be entered into with states x, y and • z for land to be allocated for the project; and • Council memorandum is a secret document and should be treated as such.
4.0 CONCLUSION The foregoing are some of the issues to consider when writing a council memorandum.
But, as it has been said, diligence and practice vastly improve one’s ability to take care of all the details that go into producing a good memorandum.
5.0 SUMMARY Decision making / taking, policies and approvals of large programmes and projects are done at the highest level of government.
At that level, such actions are equally taken on paper.
The document that facilitates this is council memo.
Hence, this unit identified and analysed the various stages and formats of a good council memo.
It finally provided hints for writing an acceptable cabinet / council memorandum.
6.0 TUTOR-MARKED ASSIGNMENT i.
Explain the lay-out of a council memorandum.
ii.
What is council note?
7.0 REFERENCES/FURTHER READING Ajulo, S.B.
(2002).
The President-in-Council: The Rebirth of Democracy in a Great Nation.
Ibadan: Vantage Publishers.
Ajulo, S.B.
(2002).
“Preparation of Council Memoranda and Notes.” Lecture Notes at the Intensive Training Programme for Federal Civil Servants on Salary Grade Level 12 – 14 organised by Samfort Associates in collaboration with the Office of Head of Civil Service of the Federation.
12th August – 20th December, 2002.
126  PSM 800 MODULE 2 Federal Government of Nigeria (2000).
Civil Service Handbook.
Lagos: Government Printer.
Maduabum, C. P. (2008).
The Mechanics of Public Administration in Nigeria.
Lagos: Concept Publications.
127  PSM 800 CONDUCT OF GOVERNMENT BUSINESS UNIT 7 SPEECH WRITING CONTENTS 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objectives 3.0 Main Content 3.1 Conceptual Clarification 3.2 How to Prepare a Speech 3.3 Structure of a Speech 3.4 Procedure for Writing a Speech 3.5 Hints on Speech Delivery 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutor-Marked Assignment 7.0 References/Further Reading 1.0 INTRODUCTION Speech writing is not just for politicians, it is an activity that is regularly undertaken by officers in government as well as in private employment.
From time to time, it is common place for superior officers to call upon their subordinates to write speeches.
Because of the vital role that speeches play in an organisation and in fact, all spheres of life, it becomes imperative that speech writing be given more attention.
This is particularly so in view of the fact that many people saddled with the responsibility of writing speeches, especially in the public service, are not professional speech writers.
It is no secret that a lot of officers avoid the task of speech writing because of its intricacies.
The reality however remains that not many of these officers can successfully avoid this important activity.
Some who cannot evade writing speeches see it as an albatross to grapple with.
Little wonder then that many people make a huge mess of themselves, their bosses and sometimes, their organisations when they are saddled with the task of speech writing.
Speech writing is dreaded by many executives, and embraced by a knowing few, is such an important tool in the conduct of government business.
2.0 OBJECTIVES At the end of this unit you should able to: • define speech • explain how to prepare a speech 128  PSM 800 MODULE 2 • outline the structure of a speech • state the procedure for writing a good speech.
3.0 MAIN CONTENT 3.1 Conceptual Clarifications Speech A speech is a public performance and the speaker is the performer.
As if sensing the apparent narrowness of this definition, Valde further defined speech as “a powerful communication tool which can persuade and convey information with an immediacy that a press release or white paper doesn’t have”.
Having sampled the foregoing definitions of speech, we can define speech as a talk, prepared or impromptu, delivered to an audience by the writer or principal or as delegated.
Speech Writer According the Free Online Dictionary, a speech writer is a writer who composes speeches for others to deliver.
It is the duty of the speech writer to ensure that a fit and proper speech is prepared as and when due.
Rather than seek to run away from writing speeches, the public officer that is worth his salt’ and ‘knows, his onions’ should face the task and face it squarely.
The speech writer’s duty is not to provide grandiloquent rhetoric, but to express the personality, passions and perspectives of the speaker.
A well-crafted speech can galvanise and mobilise employees around common goals, values and missions.
It can motivate customers.
In a crisis, a well-timed speech can blunt criticism and set the record straight.
The purpose of almost any speech is to move someone or some group to do something.
A speaker might be a great orator and relay facts in splendid fashion.
But if the audience walks away unmotivated to take action, the speaker has failed.
3.2 How to Prepare a Speech Every speech requires preparation, and that preparation should be as careful as possible.
As a matter of great importance, the first step in speech preparation is that there must be a theme for every speech.
Writing speeches is much more than finding inspirational quotes and some funny stories with which to catch the interest of the audience.
The 129  PSM 800 CONDUCT OF GOVERNMENT BUSINESS key to good speech writing lies in the use of a theme.
The audience will respond positively and remember the wordings of the speech if you refer to the theme.
The theme arises from the message the speech is trying to convey.
The message to be conveyed is also determined by the occasion and the audience.
What you say must be in line with the dignity of the occasion itself.
The occasion will dictate not only the content of the speech, but also the duration, the tone and expectations of the audience.
It is thus appropriate to say that speech writing has a lot to do with knowing your audience and addressing their concerns.
Whatever the occasion, your speech must always be targeted at your audience.
Knowledge of who your audiences are will enhance your ability to effectively affect them with your message.
3.3 Structure of a Speech Most good writings must have structure.
A good speech is no exception.
A speech should have a beginning, middle and an end.
Some scholars prefer to refer to these divisions as the opening, the body and the closing.
These divisions ensure that the foundation for a successful speech that fulfils all of your aspirations and especially those of the one you are writing it for, are laid.
It must be mentioned at this point that a good speech must have a heading or title stating what the speech is about, who is delivering it, at what occasion, where it was delivered and the date.
Closely following the title or heading is the salutation or what some refer to as the list of protocol.
It recognises the dignitaries present at the occasion in descending order of hierarchy.
Find an example hereunder.
A SPEECH DELIVERED BY THE DIRECTOR-GENERAL ASCON ON THE OCCASION OF THE INAUGURATION OF THE ASCON GOVERNING BOARD ON 27TH MARCH, 2007, AT THE COLLEGE AUDITORIUM The Head of the Civil Service of the Federation, Alh.
Mahmud Yayale Ahmed, CFR, His Excellency, The Governor of Lagos State, Asiwaju Bola Ahmed Tinubu, etc.
The Beginning or Opening The first and last sentences of a speech are crucial.
The importance of a clear, resounding and striking first sentence and a well rounded peroration or closing cannot be over-emphasised.
The import of this is to 130  PSM 800 MODULE 2 catch the interest of the audience from the beginning and leave them satisfied at the end.
As with any first class book or chapter or article, a good speech should start with a general introductory paragraph which sums what is to come, catches the attention of the audience and indicates what the speaker is thinking about and would cover in the speech.
The general introductory paragraph should cover aspects of thanks, personal remarks, and introduction.
Whatever way one chooses to begin a speech, the primary rule is to keep it short and simple.
It is better not to do something too bizarre.
If you choose to open with a joke for instance, be certain that the story bears some relevance to the occasion.
The Middle The body of the speech is usually the largest part.
At this point of the speech, the audience would have been introduced to the subject of the speech (as set out in the beginning or opening) and will hopefully be ready for the speaker’s arguments, musings or conclusions on the subject of the speech.
The body of the speech is best set out by formulating a series of points that would be raised.
The points should be organised such that related points follow one another so that each point builds upon the previous one.
Doing this will give the speech a more logical progression and make the job of the listener a lot easier.
A point to note here is that your argument must be structured and supported with main points, or reasons and evidence.
A very important rule to remember in writing the body of the speech is that do not try to overwhelm your audience with countless points.
It is better to have fewer points that are properly driven home to the audience than have too many points that are scantily handled.
It is in this vein that Grevile Janner (1981:12) opined that brevity is the soul of success in speech writing.
It is important to spice up your speech with wit, humour and quotations.
This however, would have to be done carefully so as to ensure their appropriateness.
The longer the speech is the more vital the need for some touch of humour.
Humour is a weapon that every speech writer should have readily available.
As for the use of quotations in speeches, it is important to pepper your speech with apt quotations from the thought of others.
Quoting however, has to also be done advisedly or else the speech may be messed up completely.
The importance of humour and quotations notwithstanding, never ‘pad’ your speech with superfluities for the sake of filling time.
Ensure that everything you write is relevant to the matter at hand.
The speech writer must do his best to avoid grammatical errors.
If you are in doubt about the precise meaning of a word, either avoid it or look 131  PSM 800 CONDUCT OF GOVERNMENT BUSINESS it up in the dictionary.
It is better to choose shorter words and sentences as against longer ones.
Exclude swear words and obscenities in your speech, because there will always be those who will get offended.
The Ending or Conclusion There is nothing that so becomes a good speech as a fine ending.
Similarly, nothing can be more ruinous than a weak termination.
Like the opening, the closing of your speech must contain some of your strongest material.
Any speech writer who wants to excel should view the closing of his speech as an opportunity.
It is an opportunity to do the following: • summarise the main points of your speech • provide some further food for thought for the audience • leave the audience with positive memories of your speech; and • choose the final thought/emotion.
A really good ending or peroration should round off the speech, and in most cases, include the following: • a summary, in a sentence or two, of the main purport of the speech; • any proposal or resolution arising out of the body of the speech; and • a call for support or warm words of thanks as the case may be.
3.4 Procedure for Writing a Good Speech Research your Topic Having had a topic or theme for your speech, there may be the need to do research.
According to Allen (1986), this will enable you to study your remarks with specifics.
You will probably get all the information you need from books, newspapers, magazines and the internet.
Such resources can be found in libraries and bookstores.
It is important to note however, that it is ordinarily not necessary to do an enormous volume of research when all you are preparing for is the writing of a speech that would not take more than twenty minutes to deliver.
You may decide to use statistics to spice up your speech where necessary and applicable.
There is the need to visit the library and glean from the encyclopedia, yearbooks, newspaper cuttings, and other works of reference, and from publications dealing specially with your subject.
In addition to this, you will generally be able to get valuable information and statistics from public bodies which concern themselves with the subject on which you 132  PSM 800 MODULE 2 are going to write.
In government circles, the speech writer who wants to succeed must cultivate the habit of consulting files in which past speeches dealing with the subject matter are filed.
This will enable the officer, familiarise himself with how it has been done in the past and even explore the possibility of improving upon the status quo.
Writing the Speech At this stage do not try to compose your speech in a hurry.
The speech writer must give himself time not only to do research, but to clarify his thoughts before proceeding to write.
After completing the first draft, there may be the need to reshuffle some portions of the speech.
For instance, something originally conceived as part of the ending or conclusion might turn out to be more suitable for the opening.
The primary objective when writing your speech should be to express, educate and inform rather than to impress.
Therefore, extreme verbosity should be completely avoided.
Edit the Speech The speech writer must learn to subject his speech to serious scrutiny.
In other words, you should serve as your own editor.
However, the draft can also be given to a colleague who is knowledgeable in editorial work to edit.
This is very important to public servants, as it would be better to reduce errors to the barest minimum before passing draft speeches to superior officers.
It was in this sense that Allen (1986) opined that it is better to be a harsh critic of yourself at this stage when no one but yourself has seen your speech.
Allen added that failure on this point can mean that you will eventually be subject to the judgments of several hundred ‘editors’ comprising your audience, some or all of whom may be more sensitive to your errors than yourself.
The draft speech must be checked and cross - checked for impact and accuracy.
Care must also be taken to ensure that the speech is improved by checking its reasoning and the arguments to see whether they will appeal to the audience.
Typing the Speech Whether you are typing your speech yourself or having it done for you, ensure that it is typed in characters or font sizes that are large enough to be convenient for easy reading of the speech.
Any speech typed in a font size less than 14 is in my opinion, inappropriate.
Never type a speech in single line spacing.
Double line spacing is the norm.
Some public speakers even prefer a line spacing that is higher than double spacing.
This enables the reader of the speech to easily return after looking away 133  PSM 800 CONDUCT OF GOVERNMENT BUSINESS from the script.
You may consider typing important thoughts in separate paragraphs or highlighting them so that it will be convenient for the eye when reading the speech.
The more paragraphs and headings you have in a speech the better and easier it would be to read.
Revise the Speech Revision is essential to good speech writing.
In revising the speech, according to the Microsoft Student 2008 DVD, make sure the following questions can be answered.
• Ideas: Have I written a clear opinion statement?
Do I have enough evidence to support my argument?
• Organisation: Do my main points appear in the best order?
Is it easy to follow my argument?
• Tone of Voice: Does my tone of voice suggest that I am excited about my topic?
Will it appeal to the audience and persuade them to accept my argument?
• Word Choice: Will my audience understand the words I used?
Do I use specific nouns and active verbs?
• Sentence Fluency: Have I written clear, complete sentences?
Remember that the audience will be listening to you, not reading your words.
They may fail to follow your argument if your sentences are complicated and too long.
SELF-ASSESSMENT EXERCISE Outline the procedure for writing a good speech.
Answer The procedure is under the following headings: (i) Research your topic (ii) Writing the speech (iii) Edit the speech (iv) Type the speech (v) Revise your speech 3.5 Hints on Speech Delivery Never begin your speech till you have risen from your seat and taken up your position facing the audience.
Try not to consult your script (speech) before you begin.
You should be able to handle the first few sentences without recourse to your script.
Ensure that your eyes are fixed on the audience.
Not on any particular person but on some points around the 134  PSM 800 MODULE 2 centre of the auditorium.
Carefully watch the way you make use of your hands.
Employ a very moderate use of gestures and note that awkward gestures are far worse than none at all.
Every gesture you make should appear to be natural and should emphasise your words; none should be made for its own sake.
The most boring speeches are probably those that are simply read from a script.
Before delivering your speech, try to make the speech your own regardless of who wrote it.
This is done by familiarising yourself with it through reading and digesting the speech.
Since nobody likes to be bored, put yourself in your audience’s shoes and find an interesting way to start your speech by getting the attention of your audience.
Another point to note about speech delivery is that you cannot just mumble to yourself.
You have to say it out loud.
Remember that you are talking to a group and as such, deliver your speech by talking distinctly and clearly.
Speak naturally and distinctly being careful not to strain your voice.
Clear articulation must be matched with loudness.
A good public address system will be helpful in this regard.
It is better to begin your speech in a comparatively low voice, which rises as you “warm up”.
Make distinct pauses between each clause and wherever else the sense of your sentence or paragraph allows.
Some prefer to read their speech from beginning to the end, but it is better to talk to your script.
However, care must be taken not to get entangled in unnecessary digressions.
There may also be the need to mark up your script (your speech).
Using a pencil, pen or a special marker, make marks on the speech to help you remember how you want to sound or explain some points at particular juncture during your speech delivery.
You can underline words that you want to emphasise by saying them louder or with more energy.
You can also mark places where you want to pause for dramatic effects, or where you need to take a breath.
Finally, it is a good idea to end your speech with a rousing conclusion.
Leave your audience feeling excited and interested in the subject matter of your speech.
For instance, you can close with “Ladies and gentlemen, together we can make this organisation truly great.
And together we can build a better world for our children”.
4.0 CONCLUSION Face-to-face communication is the most powerful weapon in a manager’s skills’ arsenal.
That is why speech writing and delivery can galvanise and mobilise employees around common goals, values and mission, it can motivate customers.
135  PSM 800 CONDUCT OF GOVERNMENT BUSINESS Successful speakers are made and not born, and practice makes perfect.
With the insights provided in this chapter on speech writing and delivery, any manager who gets acquainted with the issues discussed herein coupled with constant practice, will be on the path to good speech writing and delivery.
5.0 SUMMARY Speech writing involves trying to inform an audience and to persuade them to agree with a point of view.
A good speech must be well researched and should present a careful structured argument.
Hence in this unit, time was taken to detail particularly the procedure for the exercise which includes: researching the topic, or theme; writing; editing; typing; and revising the speech.
6.0 TUTOR-MARKED ASSIGNMENT Prepare a speech to be delivered by the Vice-Chancellor, National Open University of Nigeria (NOUN) at the Matriculation ceremony of newly admitted students of the University on September 10, 2012 at the University’s Auditorium.
7.0 REFERENCES/FURTHER READING Greville, A.
(1982).
Janner’s Complete Speech Maker.
London: Business Books.
Samuel, G.
(Ed.).
(1975).
The Book of Ready-Made Speeches.
London: Routledge and Kogan Paul.
Steve, A.
(1986).
How to Make a Speech.
Minsk-Belarus: Print Corp Ltd. 136  PSM 800 MODULE 2 UNIT 8 SERVICING MEETINGS CONTENTS 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objectives 3.0 Main Content 3.1 Definition and Types of Meetings 3.2 Pre-Meeting Activities 3.3 Meeting Activities 3.4 Post-Meeting Activities 3.5 Format of Minutes of Meetings 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutor-Marked Assignment 7.0 References/Further Reading 1.0 INTRODUCTION Meeting is an opportunity for people to come together to share ideas on certain issues.
In management it is identified as a tool for planning.
With this recognition, it becomes apparent that units, departments and organisations should meet from time to time to review their activities and identify the way forward.
And such formal undertaking should have a procedure which we refer to as servicing a meeting.
2.0 OBJECTIVES At the end of this unit, you should be able to: • mention types of meetings • identify the stages involved in meetings; and • outline the format of minutes of a meeting.
3.0 MAIN CONTENT 3.1 Definition and Types of Meetings A meeting can be defined as a gathering of three or more people sharing common objectives, where communication (verbal and/or written) is the primary means of achieving those objectives.
(Haynes, M. E. 1991:9) The above definition shows that participants in a meeting share common objectives.
Discussions and deliberations in the meeting must have a bearing on the shared objectives and goals.
For a meeting to be said to 137  PSM 800 CONDUCT OF GOVERNMENT BUSINESS be effective, therefore, it must achieve its set objectives which have direct relevance to the shared objectives, in minimum time, to the satisfaction of the participants.
The following are the characteristics of effective meetings: • an agenda is prepared prior to the meeting • meeting participants have an opportunity to contribute to the agenda • advance notice of meeting, time and place is provided to those invited • meeting facilities are comfortable and adequate for the number of participants • the meeting begins on time • the meeting has a scheduled completion time • the use of time is monitored throughout the meeting • everyone has an opportunity to present his/her point of view • participants listen attentively to one another • there are periodic summaries as the meeting progresses • no one tends to dominate the discussion • everyone has a voice in decisions made at the meeting • ends with a summary of accomplishments • the meeting is periodically evaluated by participants • people can be relied on to carry out any action agreed upon during the meeting • minutes of the meeting are provided to each participant following the meeting • the meeting leader follows up with participants on actions agreed during the meeting • it is worthy of note that no meeting can have all the qualities or characteristics enumerated above; but any meeting to which 60% of these qualities can be attributed can rightly be described as an effective meeting.
Types of Meeting For the purpose of this chapter, we shall group meetings into two broad types namely; Information meeting and, Decision-making meeting.
The elements listed in the table overleaf will assist us in appreciating the differences between the two types, and therefore enable us to appropriately locate the meetings we attend.
138  PSM 800 MODULE 2 ELEMENTS INFORMATION DECISION- MAKING MEETING Number of attendees Any number Preferably not more than 12. Who should attend Those who need to Those responsible an d know those who can contribute Communication One way from Interactive discussion Process among all attending leader to participants with opportunities for questions Meeting room set-up Participants facing Participants facing front of room- each other – classroom style Conference style Most effective style of Authoritative Participative leadership.
Emphasis should be Content Interaction and on Problem – solving.
Key to Success Planning and Meeting climate that preparation of supports open, free information to be expression presented 3.2 Pre-Meeting Activities By these we mean the activities which the Convener, the Leader, or the Secretary is expected to carry out prior to the day or commencement time of a meeting.
They include:- (a) Establishing the need for the meeting: Even for regular meetings, there is a need for the officer in-charge to ensure that there are cogent issues to discuss in a meeting before a meeting is convened.
A meeting that is called for the mere reason that it is the date or period that such meeting is supposed to be held will end up being purposeless, and nothing is expected to be achieved in such meeting.
For instance, a meeting that holds in a University in April before the first semester examination cannot be justifiably convened in April unless the first semester examinations are completed.
(b) Deciding on who to participate: Depending on the agenda or purposes of a meeting, the secretary or convener decides those that are to participate in the meetings.
The implication of this is that in situations where the extant regulations guiding the operation of a group, provides, the purposes or agenda for the meeting will determine the participants.
139  PSM 800 CONDUCT OF GOVERNMENT BUSINESS (c) Choice of Venue, Date and Time: The convener of a meeting and/or the Secretary chooses the venue of a meeting.
Again, these are sometimes determined by statutory provisions, and sometimes by the purpose of the meeting.
When and where the meeting is held can affect its success.
Many meetings arrange their time and venues.
It must be today and not next week; the conference room is only available at 2.00p.m; and so on.
Within the inevitable constraints of a busy organisation, do what you can to influence these matters for the better (Barker, Alan 1997:24).
(e) Constructing the Agenda: Every meeting has an agenda.
It may not have been written, discussed or even thought about.
But the agenda is there, all the same.
Whoever controls the agenda controls the meeting.
If the agenda is not made public, the meeting may be hijacked by private agendas; the result will be confusion, frustration and failure.
A written agenda allows everyone to focus on what they are to do; before, during and after the meeting.
It acts as: • a plan of the meeting to aid preparation; • an objective control of the meeting’s progress; • a measure of the meeting’s success (Barker, 1997:29).
The contents of an agenda include: a.
Title of Meeting b.
Date, time and venue c. Minutes of the previous meeting d. Reports from sub-committees (where applicable) e. Any other business.
Agenda items are often supported by briefing papers.
These may outline the issues to be discussed in some details, give background information and indicate the preferred direction the ‘task owner’ would like the meeting to take.
They may also form the basis of a formal presentation at the meeting (Barker, 1997:33).
(e) Issuance of notice of meeting: Having taken care of the four pre-meeting activities outlined above, the secretary or convener now goes ahead to issue notice of meeting to the qualified participants.
It is important for the notice of meeting to be sent well ahead of the meeting date.
This will enable those who 140  PSM 800 MODULE 2 cannot attend the meeting for genuine reasons, to send their apologies to the signatory.
(f) Provision of a comfortable meeting venue: As the date of the meeting draws closer, it is the duty of the secretary to provide a very conducive environment for the meeting.
Everything must be done to ensure the comfort of the participants as anything that affects that will make them irritable and ultimately affect their contributions to the meeting.
This also makes some participants to leave the meeting before the end.
To avoid these, participants must be made comfortable throughout the duration of the meeting.
This can be done through: (i) Provision of a clean environment: A filthy irritating venue will make participants frequently look at the clock while the meeting lasts.
(ii) Provision of adequate public address system and audio visual aids: For meetings held in large halls, public address systems and audio visual aids must be used.
A situation where participants can hardly hear themselves or follow the proceedings will defeat the very essence of the meeting.
(iii) Small room conveniences: People who are ‘pressed’ will only be longing for the closing prayer.
This must be guarded against.
(iv) Provision of refreshment: A hungry man is known to be an angry man.
This accounts for the aggressive disposition of some people during meetings.
Depending on the duration of the meeting, therefore, full meal or light refreshment must be provided.
3.3 Meeting Activities Two main activities pre-occupy any person servicing a meeting during the meeting.
These are: (a) Compilation of attendance: An attendance register must be made available for people to sign as they come to the meeting.
This helps to check late coming as no one would like to be recorded as habitual late corner.
(b) Recording of proceedings: This is chiefly the duty of the secretary or his assignee.
Whoever is doing this must ensure that trivial issues are not recorded to the detriment of more fundamental ones.
To avoid this, it is advisable to concentrate on resolutions rather than individual 141  PSM 800 CONDUCT OF GOVERNMENT BUSINESS contributions.
Verbatim recording must also be avoided.
Movers of motions and their seconders must be captured.
3.4 Post Meeting Activities The word ‘post’ means ‘after’.
The expression ‘post meeting activities’ therefore, refer to those activities that are carried out at the end of a meeting, in relation to the meeting.
After your meeting has taken place, perhaps the first question you should ask yourself is whether it was successful.
Bad points as well as good ones can be analysed and used to help plan meetings in the future.
To determine whether the meeting was successful or not, the following questions need to be answered.
• Was the meeting held on the best day and at the best time to achieve a satisfactory out-come?
• Did it start and finish on time?
• Were the desired people in attendance?
• Was the agenda followed in the correct order?
• Were accurate notes taken?
• Were the right decisions taken?
• Did the meeting achieve what it set out to achieve?
The more answers of ‘yes’ you can give, the better.
Any ‘nos’ need to be investigated, so that future meetings stand a chance of being as near to perfect as anything involving the human element can ever be (Bobson, 1999:100).
In addition to what transpired while the meeting lasted, there are, however, certain after-meeting activities which go a long way in determining the success or failure of the meeting.
These are what we refer to in this unit as, the post meeting activities.
They are: Writing of Minutes of Meeting Servicing a meeting is not an activity that begins and ends in the meeting venue.
The proceedings of a meeting are jotted down by the secretary during the meeting but developed into a minute later.
A good secretary does not record discussions verbatim rather, he records resolutions.
The reason is that, if the contribution of every participant in the meeting is recorded, the minutes of the meeting will be unnecessarily voluminous.
142  PSM 800 MODULE 2 SELF-ASSESSMENT EXERCISE Identify the various stages in a meeting.
Answer They are: (i) Pre-meeting Activities (ii) Meeting Activities (iii) Post-meeting Activities 3.5 Format of Minutes of a Meeting Although, the format of minutes varies with the nature of the meeting, most minutes have the following subheads in their formats.
(i) The Title of the Meeting: This comprises the description of meeting i.e the name of the group holding the meeting, the venue and the date.
For instance, Minutes of the meeting of the Association of Licensed Customs Agents of Nigeria, Ikorodu Branch, held on February 12th, 2006 at C.K.C.
Grammar School, Igbogbo.
(ii) Attendance: In most minutes, the attendance section has three parts: (a) Present: this lists all that are present, including those attending in representative capacity.
(b) Apologies or Excused: this contains the names of all those that notified the Secretariat in advance, of their inability to attend the meeting owing to a stated reason.
(c) Absent: here the names of all those that are supposed to be present but are absent without apologies are listed.
(iii) Commencement: This captures the take-off time of the meeting, as well as the welcome remarks of the presiding officer.
(iv) Reading: and Adoption of the Minutes of the Previous Meeting: Under this, inaccuracies in the read minutes and the amendments thereto, are pointed out.
This is followed by the mover and seconder of motion for adoption of the minutes.
(v) Matters Arising from the Minutes: This captures the issues that were raised in the minutes but never concluded.
These are discussed before the substantive issues.
(vi) Agenda: (This is) an itemised list of the business to be transacted at a meeting.
The order of the business should normally be as shown in the agenda, as some members might be inconvenienced if they had made arrangements to attend only that part of a 143  PSM 800 CONDUCT OF GOVERNMENT BUSINESS meeting where the business concerning them was due to be transacted (Austin, 1978:99).
(vii) Any Other Business: Under this heading comes business discussed or validly transacted which has not figured in the agenda.
It will be appreciated that matters of importance may not be validly transacted unless due notice was given in the agenda.
“Any other business” is therefore restricted to minor matters or to the agreement that certain important matters be put on the agenda for the next meeting (Austin, 1978:103).
(viii) Adjournment: This depicts where the day’s business terminates, and states, where practicable, the date, time and venue of the next meeting.
Follow-Up Post meeting activities in servicing meetings do not begin or end with writing of minutes of meetings.
It is rare that meetings end without some need for follow-up activities, including thank you notes, implementing action times, paying bills, catching people up who were not there, phone calls, minutes, etc.
Part of planning any meeting ought to be given to the follow-up after the meeting, so that the meeting was worth having (Schindler-Rainman et al, 1975:18).
4.0 CONCLUSION Servicing meetings is a very interesting but demanding and challenging activity.
The demanding and challenging aspect of the concept emanates from the fact that it is one phenomenon that can make or mar the meeting of very serious minded participants.
This goes to say that the success or otherwise of a meeting and by extension the activities of an organisation or group, depends largely on how the meetings, where the decisions that decide the fate of that organisation or group are taken, are serviced.
Officers that service meetings should therefore, recognise the importance attached to their roles, and do everything possible to ensure that meetings are serviced to the best standard.
5.0 SUMMARY The importance of meetings cannot be overemphasised, so also is adequate procedure for undertaking it.
The unit therefore identified those activities that must be carried out in order to ensure successful meetings.
These include: pre-meeting activities; meeting activities and post meeting activities.
More importantly, records of proceedings at meetings are kept as instruments of implementation of decisions of such 144  PSM 800 MODULE 2 meetings.
Such records are referred to as Minutes.
This unit also explained the format of good minutes of meetings.
6.0 TUTOR-MARKED ASSIGNMENT Outline the format of Minutes of a Meeting.
7.0 REFERENCES/FURTHER READING Austin, E. (1978).
Senior Secretariat Duties and Office Organisation.
Plymouth: Macdonald and Evans Ltd. Barker, A.
(1997).
How to Hold Better Meetings.
London: Kogan Page Ltd. Haynes, M.E.
(1991).
Effective Meeting Skills.
U.S.A: Crisp Publications Inc. Schindler-Rainman, E. et al .(1975).
Taking Your Meetings out of the Doldrums.
California: University Associates Inc. 145  PSM 800 CONDUCT OF GOVERNMENT BUSINESS MODULE 3 ETHICAL BEHAVIOUR IN GOVERNMENT Unit 1 Handling of Official Documents Unit 2 Ethics and Code of Conduct Unit 3 Anti-Corruption Law Unit 4 Public Service Rules Unit 5 Financial Regulations UNIT 1 HANDLING OF OFFICIAL DOCUMENTS CONTENTS 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objectives 3.0 Main Content 3.1 Handling of Files 3.1.1 File Movement 3.2 Handling of Correspondence 3.2.1 Precautionary Measures on Movement of Files and Correspondences 3.2.2 Priority Classification of Correspondence 3.3 Classification of Documents 3.3.1 Security of Classified Documents 3.4 Good Records Keeping 3.5 The Registry 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutor-Marked Assignment 7.0 References/Further Reading 1.0 INTRODUCTION For every activity involving a formal setting, there are expected standards; it does not matter whether the activity is being carried out at a lower or higher level of the organisation.
All that is needed is that the performance of such activity must follow a course, below which the activity becomes unacceptable.
The title of this unit connotes that some documents can be referred to as ‘official’ as against ‘personal’ and that there are prescribed ways for handling such documents.
A document could be referred to as ‘official’ if it contains information on the operations of a corporate organisation, whether public or private.
This unit would focus on public sector official documents but the private 146  PSM 800 MODULE 3 sector reader would find it relevant to a very large extent.
This topic is considered as very vital to the existence of any organisation in view of the fact that official documents contain information which is the life- blood of any organisation.
Considering for example, the essence of blood to living organisms, it becomes imperative that the formation, circulation, storage and use of such vital components must be done in a standardised and systematic manner, to avoid disastrous consequences.
Being the life-blood of any organisation, care must be taken about the way information in the document is generated, collated, stored, retrieved and disseminated.
This would give the organisation the required level of attention and exposure to official documents.
This unit would discuss how official documents are expected to be handled for secure and effective operational performance of the organisation.
2.0 OBJECTIVES At the end of this unit, you should be able to: • explain the term ‘official document’ • discuss the procedure for handling files and correspondences in the office • classify documents • outline the features of good records keeping.
3.0 MAIN CONTENT 3.1 Handling of Files A file is a collection of documents on the same subject, enclosed in a jacket for easy identification, circulation, storage and reference.
In handling of official documents, all matters on related subjects are originated and concluded in the same file.
Files are therefore, the medium through which various forms of written communication are channeled from one officer to the other.
At the end of each transaction, files are stored or kept in the Registry as records of the operations of the organisation.
In the public service, files are classified as open, secret and confidential.
These classifications determine the way such files must be handled.
Files are usually opened and stored in the Registry, making it mandatory for anybody who wants to use such files to observe some procedures.
147  PSM 800 CONDUCT OF GOVERNMENT BUSINESS 3.1.1 File Movement All in-coming and out-going files must be subjected to due registration.
There is usually a ‘File Movement Register’ kept by the Registry.
The register is usually kept in pairs; one is the in-coming and the other out- going register.
It is advisable to maintain separate registers for in- coming and out-going files, to avoid mix-up.
In situations where only one register is used as movement register, in which case the front side is used for out-going while the back side is used as in-coming, the recorder may mistakenly record one under the other.
But when separate registers are kept, the title on the cover of the register guides the recorder.
Both the in-coming and out-going registers are drawn up in columns and for the out-going, the following are written: Date; File Reference Number; File subject; and Destination.
For the in-coming, we require.
Date; File Reference Number; File subject and where it came from.
The essence of the file movement register is to confirm with certainty the location of any file whenever such a file is needed.
Files taken in or out of an office without recording in the file movement register cannot be located with ease.
Each file has an action sheet in which the designation of the officer required to treat the file and the page of the file requiring action will be indicated.
Officers must ensure that the file is sent to the exact officer indicated in the action sheet and that this is recorded accordingly in the File Movement Register.
3.2 Handling of Correspondence By correspondence, we mean letters that come into or go out of the organisation.
Individual organisations receive and send their correspondence in different ways.
In some organisations, they are received in the office of the Chief Executive and can be sent from any Department in the organisation.
From whichever point correspondence is received, there is a standard way of handling them and it runs thus: all letters received are recorded in the Correspondence Register.
The Correspondence Register is drawn up in columns, indicating Reference Number, Subject, Source and Date of receipt.
After the Schedule Officer or Chief Executive must have seen the letter, it is treated according to his directive.
This may require sending such a letter to either a schedule officer that would take further necessary action, or to a head of Department/Division, for further necessary action.
Such outbound correspondence must again be recorded in the out-going Correspondence Register, indicating the Reference Number, Subject, Source, Date and the Destination.
The Correspondence Register is a critical factor in the handling of correspondence in an office because; it 148  PSM 800 MODULE 3 shows the movement of all letters at each point in time.
149  PSM 800 CONDUCT OF GOVERNMENT BUSINESS 3.2.1 Precautionary Measures on Movement of Files and Correspondences Ab initio, it was enough to indicate in the File Movement Register that a particular file was sent to a certain officer for treatment, while only letters were sent by keeping the record in a dispatch book.
In recent times, situations have arisen whereby officers request for a file and deny having ever taken such a file.
Such a file may be potential exhibit for either police investigation or decision on staff matters, bordering on discipline or crucial personnel issues.
To prevent such denials, files are sent to officers with their signature confirming the receipt.
This may be recorded in a dispatch book with a column for signature of receiver, or an additional column drawn on the Movement Register, where receivers of files sign.
Receivers of correspondence in loose form have always been made to sign for their receipt, as a way of compelling the individual to handle the letter with care.
On receipt of a correspondence or file, there are measures of speed with which the document should be treated.
This measure of speed will be the subject of the next section.
3.2.2 Priority Classification of Correspondence Incoming mails are classified immediately on receipt, to denote their degree of urgency and importance.
Not all matters require the same speed for treatment; hence, different ways are used to indicate the speed with which a document should be treated.
According to the Civil Service Handbook (1997), the different systems of denoting priority classifications of correspondence in a government office can be grouped into three (3) namely: (i) Printed Slips (Classification in Words) (ii) Coloured Slips (Classification by Sign) (iii) Red Xs (Classification by Symbols).
These different classifications will be treated in the order given above.
(a) Printed Slips: Printed slips are words printed on paper slips that could be easily attached to any document.
The slips have the following words boldly printed on them: • Immediate or At Once • Today • Urgent (b) Coloured Slips:- Another form of priority classification is by attaching red and green/blue slips to documents requiring speedy attention.
Coloured slips are made from coloured papers, cut into small slips that could be attached to documents.
A red slip 150 None PSM 800 CONDUCT OF GOVERNMENT BUSINESS denotes priority immediate attention; while green/blue slip suggests urgent action.
(c) Red X Markings:- Priority classifications could be denoted by the marking of Xs with a red pen or pencil on the papers or document requiring urgent action.
Three (3) Xs i.e.
XXX mean Immediate, Priority, At Once Two (2) Xs i.e.
XX mean Today One (1) X i.e.
X means Urgent Whether the officer prefers to use the printed slips, coloured slips or Red X markings, the message is for the recipients to treat the accompanying document with a prescribed rate of speed.
The three (3) priority classifications use the following rates of speed: • Immediate or At once or Priority • Today • Urgent When a document bears indications of any of the above three status, certain actions and steps are required of the recipient and they are as follows: Immediate / At Once / Priority If this action is indicated on any document sent to an officer, it means that the receiver should put aside any other job in hand and treat the one with this priority classification.
‘Immediate’ classification is an order, to leave every other job and do the one just received.
This classification takes precedence over others.
If such a classification is attached to a job, it should be handed personally to the officer required to take necessary action.
He should, after completing his action, return it by hand to the officer who had ordered the work.
Today: The next in importance is “Today”.
This takes precedence over a job marked “urgent” and all unclassified work.
The emphasis on this is that the job should be completed and submitted to the officer ordering the work, before the office closes for the day.
Urgent: Urgent classification is superior to all unclassified correspondence.
It also denotes that action should be completed on the file or correspondence within 24 hours of its receipt.
150  PSM 800 MODULE 3 In order to ensure that priority action is taken on files as requested, files with such classifications should NEVER be placed in an officer’s in- Tray with other files, but rather, on the officer’s desk in front of him, to attract his immediate attention.
SELF- ASSESSMENT EXERCISE Name the different systems of denoting priority classification of correspondence in a government office.
Answer They are: (i) Printed slips (classification in words) (ii) Coloured slips (classification by sign) (iii) Red Xs (Classification by symbols) 3.3 Classification of Documents In-coming and out-going correspondences are classified, to determine the degree of security required, according to the degree of their importance and contents.
Classified correspondence means any correspondence which has been accordingly graded as Restricted, Confidential, Secret or Top Secret.
Each of the four classifications calls for the observance of certain different security measures.
The higher the classification, the better the standard or protection required.
The order of superiority is: Top Secret, Secret, Confidential and Restricted.
The sole criterion for deciding on which classification is appropriate is the degree of harm the unauthorised disclosure of the information would cause.
According to the Federal Republic of Nigeria Security Instructions (1987), the definitions given below must be followed by all government ministries and departments.
(i) Top Secret: Information and material, the unauthorised disclosure of which would cause exceptionally grave damage to the nation.
(ii) Secret: Information and material, the unauthorised disclosure of which would cause serious injury to the interest of the nation.
(iii) Confidential: Information and material, the unauthorised disclosure of which would be prejudicial to the interest of the nation.
(iv) Restricted: Information and material, the unauthorised disclosure of which would be undesirable in the interest of the nation.
151  PSM 800 CONDUCT OF GOVERNMENT BUSINESS Official documents should be given appropriate security classification in accordance with their importance so that adequate security protection is provided to safeguard them against espionage, subversion and sabotage.
With the exception of open files containing unclassified correspondence, all other files are always kept under lock and key in a restricted area for security reasons.
3.3.1 Security of Classified Documents (i) The definitions provided in the fore-going section indicate another.
The following hints among others, should always be observed: • All classified documents may be passed directly by hand from one authorised officer to another.
Or in a locked box or by hand of an authorised subordinate and addressed to an individual by name.
• Classified documents could be transmitted in a sealed envelope with the flaps signed.
(ii) Discussion of classified information.
Do not discuss sensitive aspects of your work with unauthorised persons or outsiders.
This includes your spouse or relatives.
In your Ministry or Department discuss classified matters only with officers who need to know such matters for the effective performance of their official duties.
(iii) Storage.
By storage we mean the manner official documents are kept to prevent damage, theft, and pilferage or leakage.
Chapter 6 of the Federal Republic of Nigeria Security Instructions provides detailed guidelines for storage of classified documents.
3.4 Good Records Keeping Official documents constitute the records of the organisation.
The public service operates through extensive use of precedence, decisions and rules.
These are kept in files usually made available on demand.
In order to engender easy access to such authority documents, documents and correspondence are kept in files separated under subject headings.
Hence, all matters of the same subject are put in one file under one subject.
Every subject file is usually given a reference number to facilitate easy identification, storage and retrieval.
There is usually a File Index, containing the reference number of all files opened and their subject.
The File Index serves the purpose of providing information on the existence of a subject file and the last number used for opening files.
152  PSM 800 MODULE 3 Files are stored in metal filing cabinets that are fire-resistant, to prevent total destruction of documents in case of fire outbreak.
The filing cabinets should be fitted with key to prevent access of documents by unauthorised persons.
Files are usually arranged in numerical order in the filing cabinet for easy retrieval.
The hallmark of a good filing system is that which allows quick retrieval of documents.
3.5 The Registry Files are opened, closed and stored in the Registry.
We have the Open and Secret / Confidential Registries.
Documents kept in the Secret Registry are highly classified and officers working in such places are required to swear to an oath in accordance with the Official Secret Act of 1962.
Entry into the Secret Registry is often tightly restricted.
Documents are stored away in metal cabinets with iron bar fitted across the drawers and provided with padlock.
Confidential Registry keeps mostly personal files of staff of the organisation.
This gives it enhanced security.
Whether an open or secret Registry, visitors should not be allowed into them.
Staff of the organisation may be allowed into the Registry strictly on official business.
The purposes of keeping good records in an organisation include: • calculation of staff benefits • showing details of progress in the service e.g.
promotions • determination of Seniority • determination of incremental dates • training and qualifications obtained • tax deductions, salary, leave matters etc.
• discovery of Ghost Workers.
4.0 CONCLUSION Organisations operate by use of information gathered in documents.
The quality of documents available to the organisation would determine its performance and ability to withstand the vagaries of business.
Hence, it is of paramount importance that organisations must take care about how the information in the documents are generated, categorised, stored, retrieved and disseminated.
In doing this, the organisation should have at the back of its mind, its competitors and the general public and ensure that they are not given undue advantage, through improper handling of official documents.
153  PSM 800 CONDUCT OF GOVERNMENT BUSINESS 5.0 SUMMARY Official documents are very vital in the successful conduct of government business.
This is because, most of such documents aid decision making by the government hence some are secret whereas others are confidential.
These are measures to protect government affairs.
The unit therefore explained the procedures for classifying documents in files and treating correspondences.
The unit also outlined the advantages of records keeping and the features of good records keeping.
6.0 TUTOR-MARKED ASSIGNMENT Explain the importance and features of good records keeping.
7.0 REFERENCES/FURTHER READING Ajulo, S. B.
(2002).
The President-in-Council: The Rebirth of Democracy in a Great Nation.
Ibadan: Vantage Publishers.
Armstrong, M. (2008).
How to be an Even Better Manager (7th ed.)
London: Kogan Page.
Austin, E. (1978).
Senior Secretariat Duties and Office Organisation.
Plymouth: Macdonald and Evans Ltd. Avery, C. B.
(1974).
Words into Type.
Englewood Cliffs, N.J: Prentice-Hall.
Maduabum, C.P.
(2008).
The Mechanics of Public Administration in Nigeria.
Lagos: Concept Publications.
154  PSM 800 MODULE 3 UNIT 2 ETHICS AND CODE OF CONDUCT CONTENTS 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objectives 3.0 Main Content 3.1 Conceptual Clarifications 3.2 Code of Conduct in the Public Service 3.3 Institutional Mechanism for Instilling Ethics in the Public Service.
3.3.1 Code of Conduct Bureau 3.3.2 Code of Conduct Tribunal 3.4 Assessment of the Performance of these Institutions 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutor-Marked Assignment 7.0 References/Further Reading 1.0 INTRODUCTION This unit discusses one sure way of determining and guaranteeing an adoption of the right behaviour from the various actors in the conduct of government business.
Every organisation has its norms, values, interests, and acceptable ways of behaviour, otherwise referred to as “standards of behaviour”.
Employees of organisations individually or collectively have their own peculiar behaviour acquired prior to joining the organisation.
The employees’ behaviour reflects and protects their interests, which may be at variance, conflict, or incongruent with the organisational interests reflected in the type of behaviour expected from the employees by the organisation.
The crux of the matter, however, is that for an organisation to continue to survive and grow there must be congruence between organisational interests and those of employees.
Only this, will forestall conflicts, and failures such as lack of productivity, disenchantment and even industrial actions.
This informs the emphasis on Ethics and Code of Conduct.
Simply put, any organisation that does not enforce its ethics and codes for the conduct of its employees is heading for anarchy and doom.
155  PSM 800 CONDUCT OF GOVERNMENT BUSINESS 2.0 OBJECTIVES At the end of the unit, you should be able to: • explain the concept of Ethics, and Code of Conduct • list the elements that constitute Ethics and good conduct • discuss the institutional mechanism for installing ethics in the Public service • assess the performance of these institutions.
3.0 MAIN CONTENT 3.1 Conceptual Clarifications Authorities are unanimous in the perception of the term ‘Ethics’ as an abstract subject, which is regarded as a philosophical discipline.
It is concerned with the application of specific ways of thinking to action (Ikotun, 2004:12; Dwivedi, 1978; Whitton, 2001:13; and T.I.
2001:9).
Fundamentally speaking, Ethics provide good answers to questions such as “What should I do?” and “How should I live my life?” Answers to these questions lead to what is referred to as Professional Ethics.
For instance, “How do I perform my Ethical duty as a Doctor?”.
Sometimes people adopt a set of ethical principles, perhaps set down for them by their religious belief (the Ten Commandments of Christianity, and their equivalents in other religions) or by some other authorities such as the law, or a profession’s code of ethics.
Ethics is therefore considered from a broad perspective as a set of principles, which guide the behaviour of an individual, group of people, organisations and the society in general.
Ethics on the other hand means a set of moral principles or values or a theory of system of moral values.
Discussions on ethics centre on moral principles and values.
While these moral principles or values may not be the same, they are all rooted in public morality.
Functions performed by ethical principles are: • specific values which are important to an individual, such as ‘honesty’, fairness, integrity, reliability, selflessness • principles provide general guidance which assists a person to make decisions • principles which makes other people to trust that the person can be relied on to observe the ethical standard implied by the said principles • principles that impose a standard for judgment so that everyone can make judgment about the ethics of the person.
156  PSM 800 MODULE 3 SELF- ASSESSMENT EXERCISE What functions are performed by ethical principles?
Answer i.
They set down specific values.
ii.
They provide general guidance.
iii.
They ensure that ethical standards are observed.
iv.
They impose standards for judgement.
3.2 Code of Conduct in the Nigerian Public Service An organisation, we aver, is a collection of human beings referred to as staff or employees, coming from different backgrounds with their attendant ethics.
For the organisation to operate as a unit, it is imperative that there should be a uniform ethics for that organisation.
And so, every member is guided to conform with that particular ethics which are peculiar to the organisation.
As an organisation, the Public Service engages in this practice of adoption of uniform ethics.
The Public Service therefore has standard ethics peculiar to it which it refers to as “Ethics”.
And when backed by law it is called Code of Conduct.
Answers to certain questions would however be inevitable.
Such questions are: Who is a Public Servant?
And what will be his code of conduct?
In providing answers to these questions, recourse to the provisions of the parameters inherent in the subject of discourse would be identified.
The Constitution of the Federal Republic of Nigeria, 1999 describes a Public Servant as: an Officer of the Federal Republic of Nigeria employed to serve in any Government Agency which includes: the National or State Houses of Assembly; the Office of the President and Vice President; Statutory Corporations and State owned Companies; Educational Institutions financed wholly or principally by Federal or State Governments; the Judiciary; the Police Force; the Armed Forces; Local Governments etc.
The 1999 Constitution further outlined the following as the Code of Conduct for Public Officers: 1.
A Public Officer shall not put himself in a position where his personal interest conflicts with his duties and responsibilities.
2.
Without prejudice to the generality of the foregoing paragraph, a Public Officer shall not: a. receive or be paid the emolument of any public office at the same time as he receives or is paid the emoluments of any other public office; or except where he is not 157  PSM 800 CONDUCT OF GOVERNMENT BUSINESS employed on full time basis, engage or participate in the management or running of any private business, profession or trade but nothing in this sub-paragraph shall prevent a public officer from engaging in farming.
3.
The President, Vice-President, Governor, Deputy Governor, Ministers of the Government of the Federation and Commissioners of the Government of the States, members of the National Assembly and of the House of Assembly of the States and such other Public Officers or Persons as the National Assembly may by law prescribe shall not maintain or operate a bank account in any country outside Nigeria.
4.
(i) A public officer shall not, after his retirement from public service and while receiving pension from public funds, accept more than one remunerative position as chairman, director or employee of: (a) a company owned or controlled by the government; and (b) any public authority.
(ii) A retired public servant shall not receive any other remuneration from public funds in addition to his pension and the emolument of such remunerative position.
5.
(i) Retired public officers who have held offices to which this paragraph applies are prohibited from service or employment in foreign companies or foreign enterprises.
(ii) This paragraph applies to the Office of President, Vice President, Chief Justice of Nigeria, Governor and Deputy Governor of a State.
6.
(i) A Public Officer shall not ask for or accept property or benefits of any kind for himself or any other person on account of anything done or omitted to be done by him in the discharge of his duties.
(ii) For the purpose of sub-paragraph (i) of this paragraph the receipt by a Public Officer of any gift(s) or benefit(s) from commercial firms, business enterprises or persons who have contracts with the government shall be presumed to have been received in contravention of the said sub- paragraph unless the contrary is proved.
(iii) A Public Officer shall only accept personal gifts or benefits from relatives or personal friends to such extent and on such occasion as are recognised by custom provided that any gift or donation to a public officer on any public ceremonial occasion shall be treated as a gift to the appropriate institution represented by the public officer, and accordingly, the mere acceptance or receipt of 158  PSM 800 MODULE 3 any such gift shall not be treated as a contravention of this provision.
7.
The President or Vice-President, Governor or Deputy Governor, Minister of the Government of the Federation or Commissioner of the Government of a State, or any other public officer who holds the office of a Permanent Secretary or Head of any Public Corporation, University, or other parastatal organisations shall not accept: (a) a loan, except from government or its agencies such as, a bank, building society, mortgage institution or other financial institutions recognised by law; and (b) any benefit of whatever nature from any company, contractor, or businessman, or the nominee or agent of such a person.
Provided that the head of a public corporation or of a university or other parastatal organisation may, subject to the rules and regulations of the body, accept a loan from such a body.
8.
No person shall offer a public officer any property, gift or benefits of any kind as an inducement or bribe for the granting of any favour or the discharge in his favour, of the public officer’s duties.
9.
A public officer shall not do or direct to be done, in abuse of his office, any arbitrary act prejudicial to the rights of any other person knowing that such act is unlawful, or contrary to any government policy.
10.
A public officer shall not be a member of, belong to, or take part in any society the membership of which is incompatible with the functions or dignity of his office.
11.
(i) Subject to the provisions of the Constitution, “every Public Officer shall, within three months after the coming into force of the Code of Conduct or immediately after taking office and thereafter:- (a) at the end of every four years; and (b) at the end of his term of office.
submit to the Code of Conduct Bureau a written declaration of all his properties, assets, and liabilities and those of his unmarried children under the age of eighteen” (ii) Any statement in such declaration that is found to be false by any authority or person authorised in that behalf to verify it, shall be deemed to be a breach of the Code.
(iii) Any property or assets acquired by a Public Officer after any declaration required under the Constitution and which is not fairly attributable to income, gift, or loan approved by the Code unless the contrary is proved.
159  PSM 800 CONDUCT OF GOVERNMENT BUSINESS 12.
Any allegation that a Public Officer has committed a breach of, or, has not complied with the provisions of this Code shall be made to the Code of Conduct Bureau.
13.
A Public Officer who does act in a manner prohibited by this Code through a nominee, trustee, or other agent shall be deemed ipso facto to have committed a breach of this Code.
3.3 Institutional Mechanism for Instilling Ethics in the Public Service That Ethics and Code of Conduct are major missing components of the public service is no longer news.
However, efforts made to set up bodies ostensibly to arrest the drift led to the establishment of: (a) Code of Conduct Bureau - Its functions are fully explained in the Third Schedule, Part I, of the Constitution of the Federal Republic of Nigeria, 1999.
(b) Code of Conduct Tribunal” – Its functions are equally explained in part I of the fifth schedule of the same constitution.
3.3.1 Code of Conduct Bureau In accordance with the provisions of the Third Schedule, Part I, of the Constitution of the Federal Republic of Nigeria, 1999, this body was set up to among others: • receive from every public officer, written declaration of all his properties, assets, and liabilities and those of his unmarried children under the age of eighteen immediately after taking office and thereafter, at the end of every four (4) years, and at the end of his term of office; • examine the declarations in accordance with the requirements of the Code of Conduct or any law; • retain custody of such declarations and make them available for inspection by any citizen of Nigeria on such terms and conditions as the National Assembly may prescribe; • ensure compliance with, and where appropriate, enforce the provisions of the Code of Conduct or any law relating thereto; and receive complaints about non-compliance with breach of • the provisions of the Code of Conduct or any law in relation thereto, investigate the complaint and, where appropriate, refer such matters to the Code of Conduct Tribunal.
160  PSM 800 MODULE 3 3.3.2 Code of Conduct Tribunal This was established by the same Constitution as contained in Part I of the fifth (5th) schedule, to: (i) impose on officers found guilty of contravening provisions of the Code of Conduct Bureau such punishments as: • vacation of office or seat in any legislative house as the case may be; • disqualification from membership of a legislative house and from holding any public office for a period not exceeding ten years; and seizure and forfeiture to the state of any property acquired • in abuse of office, or corruption.
(ii) where the conduct is a criminal offence, the above sanctions will merely be in addition to the penalties that may be imposed by any law.
(iii) where the Tribunal gives a decision as to whether or not a person is guilty of a contravention of any of the provisions of the Code, “an appeal shall lie as of right from such a person to the Court of Appeal at the instance of any party to the proceeding”.
3.4 Assessment of the Performance of these Institutions: The Views of some members of the Code of Conduct Bureau In the course of our research, we captured the views of some members of the Code of Conduct Bureau on our subject of discourse.
Their views are articulated hereunder: • Most scholars and public commentators on the Nigerian Public Service agree that corruption and abuse of office by political office holders are a fall out of the breakdown of moral values and ethical standards in the country.
Corruption has also been identified as one of the major problems confronting the nation today.
The Guardian of 1st March, 1999 puts it this way “Corruption is largely responsible for the seeming collapse of everything we hold dear”.
Public Offices are now seen as avenues for self-enrichment rather than service.
Words like ‘Kola’, ‘upfront payment’, ‘brown envelope’, ‘settlement’, ‘roger’, ‘Nigerian factor’, etc have been added to our already rich national vocabulary.
Public officers now gleefully tell anyone who cares to listen in Pidgin English that “na where man dey work na him e dey chop”.
Important public institutions and parastatals like PHCN, NNPC, WAEC, JAMB, THE POLICE, and UNIVERSITIES have all nearly collapsed because of the pervasive nature of corruption in our public service.
Respectable people in our 161  PSM 800 CONDUCT OF GOVERNMENT BUSINESS country are not exempted from the discriminatory search often conducted on our Nationals at different capitals of the World.
Businessmen are afraid to bring funds to Nigeria because they are afraid of the system we have created.
This picture is vividly portrayed in the Guardian of 18th March, 1999 in the following words: “visiting foreigners are openly asked for bribe at the nation’s ports”.
Year after year, Nigeria is listed as one of the most corrupt nations in the world.
Not too long ago, the former President of the Federal Republic of Nigeria Chief Olusegun Obasanjo made the following pronouncement: Public Offices are the shopping floors of government business.
Regrettably, Nigerians have for too long been feeling short changed by the quality of public service delivery by which decisions are not made without undue outside influence, and files do not move without being pushed with inducements.
Our public offices have for too long been showcases for the combined evils of inefficiency and corruption, whilst being impediments to effective implementation of government policies.
Nigerians deserve better.
And we will ensure that they get what is better.
(Part of an address presented by Mr. President while inaugurating the National Assembly in June, 2003).
4.0 CONCLUSION Ethics and Code of Conduct as explained have sufficiently demonstrated their contributions to the attainment of the goals of organisations.
If we may restate, they channel behaviour and efforts to the activities that will culminate in the attainment of organisational goals.
It is therefore imperative that for a uniform behaviour and activities to be adopted, the public service as an organisation must instill its ethics and code of conduct.
5.0 SUMMARY The importance of Ethics and Code of Conduct to the survival of organisations such as the public service informs our choice of the topic in this unit.
In the unit, we explored areas that constitute ethics and code of conduct.
We then specifically identified the code of conduct for public servants as provided in the 1999 constitution.
In the same vein we explained the concept and functions of (a) Code of Conduct Bureau; and (b) Code of Conduct Tribunal as mechanisms for instilling code of conduct in the public service.
Their performance so far were equally assessed through some media comments.
Other mechanisms such as Anti-corruption laws constitute the topic of unit 3 of this module.
162  PSM 800 MODULE 3 6.0 TUTOR-MARKED ASSIGNMENT i.
List and explain any five (5) codes of conduct for public officers as provided for in the 1999 constitution.
ii.
Distinguish between Code of Conduct Bureau and Code of Conduct Tribunal.
7.0 REFERENCES/FURTHER READING Dwivedi, O.P.
(1978).
“Public Service Ethics”, Report of the Study Group on Ethics in the Public Service.
Belgium International Institute of Administrative Sciences (Lt. 2193 D96).
Federal Republic of Nigeria (1999).
Constitution of the Federal Republic of Nigeria 1999.
Abuja: Government Press.
Ikotun, A.
(2004).
Ethics in the Nigeria Public Service: An Analytical Perspective.
Lagos: Concept and Print Nugalitho Productions.
Murray, D. (1997).
Ethics in Organisations.
London: Kogan Page.
163  PSM 800 CONDUCT OF GOVERNMENT BUSINESS UNIT 3 ANTI-CORRUPTION LAW CONTENTS 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objectives 3.0 Main Content 3.1 Definition of Terms 3.2 What Constitutes Corruption 3.3 Independent Corrupt Practices and other Related Offences Commission (ICPC) 3.4 Anti-Corruption and Transparency Units in MDAs 3.5 Economic and Financial Crimes Commission (EFCC) 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutor-Marked Assignment 7.0 References/Further Reading 1.0 INTRODUCTION Corruption has severally been identified as a canker-worm that has eaten deep into the fabrics of the Nigerian society, particularly officials of government.
The situation is so bad that year after year Nigeria is rated as one of the most corrupt countries in the world by Transparency International.
Its distractive tendencies in the conduct of government business and ensuring good governance informed its choice as a topic of discussion in this course.
Hence this unit is devoted to it.
2.0 OBJECTIVES At the end of this unit, you should be able to: • explain the term ‘corruption’ and what constitutes corruption • identify the functions of ICPC and EFCC; and • analyse the functions of Anti-corruption and transparency units in MDAs.
3.0 MAIN CONTENT 3.1 Definition of Terms The term corruption has so prominently featured in our public domain that a few clarifications are inevitable.
Ikotun (2004:59-61) provides some insight.
According to him, the term corruption comes from the 164  PSM 800 MODULE 3 latin word ‘rumpere’, to break, implying that something is broken.
This something might be a moral or social code of conduct, more often, an administrative rule.
For the latter to be broken, it must be precise and transparent.
Another element is that the official who breaks the rule desires some recognizable benefits for himself, his family, friends, tribe or party, or some other relevant groups.
“Additionally, the benefits derived must be seen as a direct quid pro-quo for the specific act of corruption.” The author further explains that when social relations tend to be close and personal, it may be difficult to establish a direct link between an act that could be assumed to reflect corruption and a particular payment for it.
For instance, an employee who uses his official position to favour acquaintances to help them get a valuable licence, a government contract, or a government job, maybe the compensated, at a much later time, with a generous gift to his daughter when she gets married, or with a good job offer for his son when he completes his studies.
In other words, there may not be any direct, explicit, and immediate compensation for the favour.
The payment may be delayed and, when made, may appear completely unconnected with the favour received.
In many cases, he opines, the “corrupted” and the “corrupter” may never even have discussed payment.
It would simply be understood that a favour granted today creates a presumption or even an obligation for a reciprocal favour tomorrow.
In other words, it contributes to the growth of the giver’s “social capital”.
The Nigeria’s experience in this direction is pathetic in that, despite her wealth, a large proportion of the populace still wallow in abject poverty.
This situation is attributable to large scale corruption which has become endemic in Nigeria.
The situation is such that the Transparency International – a global Non-Government Organisation (NGO) which monitors the trend of corruption world-wide has repeatedly rated Nigeria as one of the most corrupt countries in the world.
At the time she was rated as the 2nd poorest country in the world (only better than Ethiopia) she was the 6th largest exporter of Crude oil in the world from where billions of dollars were earned annually.
3.2 What Constitutes Corruption?
Different forms of corruption abound in Nigeria.
They are so multifarious that they were categorised within the Nigerian context as Father Corruption, Mother Corruption, Baby Corruption, etc.
As posited by the erstwhile Executive Governor of Plateau State, Chief Joshua Dariye, the fight against corruption should start from our individual homes because, if the so many “baby corruptions” living with us can be eliminated, the “Mother corruptions” will fizzle out into oblivion.
What then are the “baby corruptions?” 165  PSM 800 CONDUCT OF GOVERNMENT BUSINESS • The driver who has of the habit of driving ‘one way’ is committing a baby corruption.
• The energy consumer who refuses to put off his outside lights in the afternoon and thus wastes the energy that should have been reserved for evening usage is committing a baby corruption.
• The recruitment consultant who must see what is “under the skirt” is committing a baby corruption.
• The parent who arranges a special centre for his ward where the invigilator will not be able to exercise his statutory powers is committing a baby corruption.
The lecturer whose handout is the licence for a pass-mark is also • in the web of baby corruption.
• The Commissioner who must be “seen” before there will be cash- backing for staff salary cheque is equally in the net of the baby corruption.
The list is endless.
The mother corruption is lack of patriotism and tribal disdain.
“Corruption must be eradicated for Nigeria to be purified for God’s Blessing” (Maduabum, 2002:23).
Lack of corruption is normally demonstrated by such things as non-transparency in operation.
As a concept, Transparency has to do with openness, cleanliness, truth, simplicity, directness and straight-forwardness.
It has a lot to do with sincerity of purpose, accountability and a sense of responsibility.
These are the virtues and values desired in day-to-day operations.
As posited by Okechukwu, (1999:24) any transparent leader will respect truth and fair-play, justice and discipline and sacrifice.
3.3 Independent Corrupt Practices and Related Offences Commission (ICPC) The foregoing scenario informed the enactment of the Anti-Corruption Act in Nigeria as a strategy aimed at stemming the tide.
In fact the Federal Government through the Accountability and Transparency Act, 2000 established the Independent Corrupt Practices and other Related Offences Commission and vested it with the responsibility to investigate public officers and prosecute offenders.
The offences and penalties are: • Any person who asks for, receives or obtains any benefit before doing his/her duty is liable to imprisonment for 7 years; • Fraudulent acquisition of property shall on conviction be liable to 7 years imprisonment; • Any person who corruptly gives or procures any property or benefit to a Public Officer or any other person shall be liable on conviction for 7 years imprisonment; 166  PSM 800 MODULE 3 • Penalty for offences committed through the Postal System attracts 7 years imprisonment; • Deliberate frustration of the Independent Corrupt Practices and other Related Offences Commission’s investigation by any person attracts 7 years imprisonment; • Making of false statement or return by any Public Officer in respect of money and property received or entrusted by one’s care is 7 years imprisonment; Using one’s office or position for gratification attracts 5 years • imprisonment; • Acceptance of bribe by Public Officers for giving assistance with regards to contract award is 5 years imprisonment; • Inflating the price of goods and services above prevailing market price or standard is 7 years imprisonment or a fine of One Million Naira; Signing of contracts by a Public Officer without budget • provision, approval or cash-backing is 3 years imprisonment and a fine of one hundred thousand Naira; and Diversion and spending of money allocated for a particular • purpose or project on a different one is one year imprisonment or a fine of fifty thousand naira.
In addition, the law stipulates that: 1.
Any public officer to whom any gratification is given, promised or offered in contravention of any provision of the Act shall report such gift, promise or offer together with the name of the person to the Commission or a Police Officer; 2.
Any person from whom gratification has been solicited or obtained at or an attempt has been made to obtain such gratification shall at the earliest opportunity report the offender to the Commission or a Police officer; and 3.
Any person who fails, without reasonable excuse to report such corrupt officers or demands of gratification shall be guilty of an offence and shall on conviction, be liable to imprisonment not exceeding two (2) years or a fine not exceeding one hundred thousand Naira or both.
3.4 Anti-Corruption and Transparency Units in MDAs By Circular No.
DHCSF/MSO/192/94 of 2nd October, 2001, the Federal Government established the Anti-Corruption and Transparency Units in the Ministries / Extra-Ministerial Offices / Agencies / Parastatals with the following duties: 167  PSM 800 CONDUCT OF GOVERNMENT BUSINESS (a) The Unit shall perform all the duties detailed in Section 6(a) – (f) of the Corrupt Practices and Other Related Offences Act, 2000, except that of prosecution.
It shall report all alleged / reported cases to the Commission with copies sent to the Minister and Permanent Secretary in the Ministry except where a Minister or Permanent Secretary is involved.
(b) Cases involving Ministers and Permanent Secretaries shall be copied to the Secretary to the Government of the Federation and the Head of Service of the Federation respectively, for the information of the President.
(c) The Unit shall undertake the preliminary investigation of each report with minimum delay and forward its findings to the Commission.
The decision as to whether further investigation and possible prosecution should be undertaken shall be that of the Commission as provided in the Act.
(d) In order to avoid or minimise conflicts arising from overlap of functions with the existing appropriate authorities for discipline in each establishment, official misconduct has been classified into the following three categories.
(e) Misconduct that should be appropriately handled by the Anti-corruption Unit: (i) Suppression of Record: If the suppression is to cover-up fraud or to cover-up “corruption” vide section 15 of the Corrupt Practices and Other Related Offences Act, 2000, hereinafter referred to as the Anti-Corruption Law.
(ii) False Claim: The false claim provided in Public Service Rule 04401 becomes a crime under the Anti-Corruption Law if it was made by an officer in the course of his dut y and against the Government or any of its Agencies.
(iii) Corruption: Public Service Rules 04401 defines “corruption” as a serious misconduct and by virtue of Section 2 of the Anti-Corruption Law, that “act” includes “bribery”, fraud and other related offences”.
This, therefore, amounts to misconduct under the Public Service Rules and is a crime under the Anti-Corruption Law.
(iv) Embezzlement: By virtue of Section 12 of the Anti-Corruption Law, embezzlement is recognised as a serious misconduct in PSR 04401, is equally a crime.
168  PSM 800 MODULE 3 (v) Dishonesty; Dishonesty is a serious misconduct in the service under PSR 04401.
The import of the provisions of Section 19 and 25 of the Anti- Corruption Law is that dishonesty in the discharge of official duty, which may cause the Government financial or proprietary loss, is also a crime.
(vi) Falsification of Records: Falsification of records of any nature is a serious misconduct under Chapter 4 of the Public Service Rules.
However, the falsification of records becomes a crime by virtue of section 16 and 25 of the Anti-Corruption Law, if the “falsification of records” is with respect to government finances or government proprietary interests.
(f) Misconduct that should appropriately be handled by the relevant disciplinary committee: (i) Willful act or omission or general misconduct.
(ii) Conviction on a Criminal Charge: Conviction of an officer for hard crime (other than minor traffic or sanitary offences) puts the integrity and conduct of the officer to question; hence, it is misconduct under the Public Service Rules.
However, such a conviction, simpliciter, does not amount to a fresh crime under the Anti-Corruption Law.
(iii) Absence from Duty without leave: This is a serious misconduct in the service and attracts the summary punishment of dismissal by virtue of PSR 044012.
However, the element of crime required by law for such an officer to be prosecuted under the Anti- Corruption Law may not be available.
Such officers should be dealt with administratively.
(iv) Disobedience of Lawful Order such as Refusal to proceed on Transfer or to Accept Posting etc: This is not only a serious misconduct under the PSR but is abhorrent to the social and moral fibre of a disciplined society.
Yet, it has no element of crime as required by law for it to be brought under the Anti-Corruption Law.
It therefore remains an administrative offence.
(v) Negligence: Negligence, simpliciter, is not a crime and cannot be punished under the Anti-Corruption Law.
However, negligence in the discharge of one’s duty amounts to misconduct under the Public Service Rules.
(vi) Serious Financial Embarrassment: Public Service Rules define “Serious Financial Embarrassment” as 169  PSM 800 CONDUCT OF GOVERNMENT BUSINESS “the state of an officer’s indebtedness which, having regard to the amount of debts incurred by him has actually caused serious financial hardship to him”.
This definition has no required elements of crimes for it to be dealt with under Anti-Corruption Law.
(vii) Engaging in Political Activities: This cannot fall into the definition given to “Corruption” by the Anti-Corruption Law.
(viii) Unauthorised Disclosure of Official Information etc: This act is a crime under the Official Secrets Act, Cap.
335, LFN 1990, but not specifically provided for under the Anti-Corruption Law, hence may not be satisfactorily dealt with by the Anti- Corruption Unit.
Since the act is both an offence under the Public Service Rules and also a crime under an existing law, any officer found guilty of same shall be dealt with administratively while the criminal aspect is reported to the Police for investigation and subsequent prosecution under the appropriate law.
(ix) Fighting on Duty: This may be a breach of peace under the relevant sections of the penal and criminal codes but not under the Anti-Corruption Law.
(x) Membership of Secret Society: This is a crime under the relevant existing laws but not under the Anti-Corruption Law and may be outside the purview of the Anti-Corruption Unit.
Since it is misconduct under PSR 04401, it should be handled administratively and its criminal aspect should be handed over to the Police.
(xi) Contravention of Any Provision of the Public Service Rules and Financial Regulations: This contravention remains misconduct if there are no deliberate financial or proprietary benefits to the officer at the expenses of Government.
(xii) Drunkenness.
(xiii) Insubordination: This deals with willful disobedience and refusal to submit to duly constituted authority.
It is clearly misconduct and not a crime.
(xiv) Failure to keep Records: This failure per se, is an administrative frailty.
However, where it is deliberate with the purpose of attracting inordinate financial or proprietary interest to one or relation at 170  PSM 800 MODULE 3 the expense of Government or its Agencies, the Anti-Corruption and Transparency unit may deal with the matter.
(i) Foul Language: This is purely an administrative misconduct and not a crime to be handled under the Anti-Corruption law.
SELF- ASSESSMENT EXERCISE What is misconduct that should appropriately be handled by the Anti-Corruption Unit.
Answer: They are: (i) Suppression of Records, (ii) False Claim; (iii) Corruption; (iv) Embezzlement; (v) Dishonesty; and (vi) Falsification of Records 3.5 Establishment of Economic and Financial Crimes Commission (EFCC) While it is not our mission in this Unit to make pronouncements with regards to the performance of “ICPC”, we must comment that many Nigerians see it as a “Toothless Bull-dog”.
Perhaps, a more visible organ is the ‘Economic and Financial Crimes Commission (EFCC)’.
At least some of those indicted or prosecuted by this organ could be easily identified.
Some of them are: (i) Former Federal Minister of Education; (ii) Former Federal Minister of Housing; (iii) Former Inspector-General of Police; (iv) Former Senate President; (v) Notable Business Moguls eventually identified by EFCC as 419ers; and (vi) Numerous other fairly lowly placed Nigerians.
EFCC was established by the Economic and Financial Crimes Commission Act 2004 to among others, combat financial and economic crimes.
The Commission is empowered to prevent, investigate, and prosecute and penalise economic and financial crimes and is charged with the responsibility of enforcing the provisions of other laws and regulations relating to economic crimes including: (i) Economic and Financial Crimes Commission Establishment Act, (2004); (ii) The Money Laundering Act (1995); (iii) The Money Laundering (Prohibition) Act, 2004; 171  PSM 800 CONDUCT OF GOVERNMENT BUSINESS (iv) The Advance Fee Fraud and other Fraud Related Offences Act, 1995; (v) The Failed Banks (Recovery of Debts) and Financial Malpractices in Banks, 1994; (vi) The Banks and other Financial Institutions Act, 1991; and Miscellaneous Offences Act.
In addition, the EFCC will be the key Agency of government responsible for fighting terrorism.
Its Mission Statement further provides an insight into the dimension of EFCC’s operations thus: The EFCC will curb the menace of corruption that constitutes the clog in the wheel of progress; protect national and foreign investments in the country; imbue the spirit of hard work in the citizenry and discourage ill-gotten wealth; identify illegally acquired wealth and confiscate it; build an upright workforce in both public and private sectors of the economy; and contribute to the global war against financial crimes.
(www.nigeriadirect.net/reforms-anticorruption- efcc.aspx).
4.0 CONCLUSION Awareness of the adverse effects of corruption in the conduct of government business as identified in this unit is a sure step towards eliminating it.
This is because, many people, particularly government officials may not be conscious of its distractive tendencies rather unconsciously it may be perceived as part of the perquisites of office.
In apparent reference to this misconception, a one-time President of Nigeria pronounced that his administration must not be been as “business as usual”.
5.0 SUMMARY Corruption in whatever form has sufficiently been explained by this unit as an unwanted practice in carrying out the business of government hence the unit explains all that constitute corruption.
In the unit also are detailed the establishment of ICPC; Anti-Corruption and Transparency units in the MDAs; the EFCC; and their functions.
By the outlined functions, it has become clear that these are organs deliberately put in place to stem the tide of corruption.
172  PSM 800 MODULE 3 6.0 TUTOR-MARKED ASSIGMENT State any ten offences and the corresponding punishment as outlined in the Independent Corrupt Practices and Other Related Offences Commission Act of 2000.
7.0 REFERENCES/FURTHER READING Economic and Financial Crimes Commission (EFCC) (2005).“Instruments Setting up EFCC”, Quoted in www.
Nigeria Direct, Net/Reforms-anticorruption-EFCC .aspex See Circular No.
DHCSF/MSO/192/94 (2001) “Establishment of Anti- Corruption and Transparency Units in the Ministries / Extra- Ministerial Offices/Agencies/Parastatals, 2001”.
Transparency International (TI) (1996).
“National Integrity Systems.” The TI Source Book.
Berlin: Transparency International.
173  PSM 800 CONDUCT OF GOVERNMENT BUSINESS UNIT 4 PUBLIC SERVICE RULES CONTENTS 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objectives 3.0 Main Content 3.1 Evolution of the Public Service Rules 3.2 Method of Numbering and Amendments of the Rules 3.3 Application of the Rules 3.3.1 Appointment and Leaving the Service 3.3.2 Leaving the Service 3.3.3 Duty and Courses of Instruction outside Nigeria 3.3.4 Discipline 3.3.5 Salaries and Allowances 3.3.6 Staff Welfare 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutor-Marked Assignment 7.0 References/Further Reading 1.0 INTRODUCTION Public Service Rules may be described as one of the basic instruments for conducting government business.
They help to promote discipline and proper conduct of officers while executing government business, in order to ensure fairness, accountability, transparency and good governance.
The Rules also provide the guidelines for employment into the service, promotion and career development of officers as well as their obligations; rights and privileges.
We shall however, not discuss the detailed content of the Public Service Rules document, rather we shall provide leads that facilitate the use of references to the Rules and other Regulations by Public Servants for the effective performance of their duties.
Some officers believe that the Public Service Rules are meant for the use of officers in the Administrative Departments, to assist them when handling personnel functions.
However, all officers in the service irrespective of the nature of their jobs should thoroughly master the Rules because, they deal with such issues as confirmation of appointment, posting, transfer, secondment, pension and gratuity, promotion, seniority, occupation of government quarters and other issues that govern behaviour of the public servants in order not to commit offences which have corresponding sanctions as contained in the Rules document.
After all, “ignorance of the Law” they say, is no excuse” (Ebegbuna and Chijioke, 2002:51-58).
174  PSM 800 MODULE 3 2.0 OBJECTIVES At the end of this unit, you should be able to: • explain the concept of Public Service Rules • specify how the rules are numbered • categorise the relevant sections of the rules and areas of coverage.
3.0 MAIN CONTENT 3.1 Evolution of the Public Service Rules It should be recalled that Rules governing the conduct of government business as articulated in the Document were inherited along with the public service from the colonial administration in Nigeria.
That administration referred to is as General Orders (G.O).
However, as part of measures put in place to shake-off the shackles of colonialism in Nigeria, the General Orders was re-titled Civil Service Rules (CSR) in 1974.
As the conduct of government business is not a static phenomenon, a rule document is equally not static hence; the document is revised from time-to-time in order to reflect the peculiar circumstances of the time.
Such revisions were witnessed in 1984 and 1990.
In year 2000 however, the document was again re-titled Public Service Rules.
Experience garnered so far, reveals that Public Servants from certain quarters query the change of title.
It is instructive to note that such change was done to accommodate, to some extent, officials outside the civil service who, in the past, claimed that they were not civil servants and were therefore not bound by the provisions of the Civil Service Rules in their operations.
The need therefore, to have a uniform Rule for all employees of government whether in the civil service or out of it may have informed such a change in title more so, if we recall that the constitution of the Federal Republic of Nigeria, 1999, has placed all the employees of government under the canopy of “Public Service”.
3.2 Method of Numbering and Amendments of the Rules Each Rule in the Public Service Rules has been given a number containing five digits.
The first two digits indicate the chapter.
The third digit indicates the section within the chapter while the last two give the number of the individual Rules within the section.
For example, Rule 14211 is the Eleventh Rule in Section Two of Chapter Fourteen.
Amendments to the Public Service Rules are made through circulars from time to time 175  PSM 800 CONDUCT OF GOVERNMENT BUSINESS 3.3 Application of the Rules In accordance with PSR 01001, these Rules apply to all public officers including Mr. President, except where they conflict with specific terms approved by the Federal Government and written into the contract of employment or letters of appointment.
The implication of this provision is that the Rules should apply to the core civil service, parastatals and other public institutions.
However, the special circumstances of some of them as indicated in the instruments that set them up, make it impossible to apply all the rules, all the time.
The parastatals and other government institutions outside the civil service were set up by separate legal instruments.
Their Boards are responsible for the appointment, promotion and discipline of their staff.
To this end, Public Service Rules which empower the Civil Service Commission to carryout similar functions in the civil service should not apply to them.
The following Public Service Rules may be considered for general application 3.3.1 Appointment and Promotions (i) PSR 02205: Eligibility for appointment (ii) PSR 02204: Probationary Appointment (iii) PSR 02108: Personnel Records • PSR 02702/02707 Eligibility for Promotion • PSR 02707: Notional Promotion • PSR 06301 / 06302 Annual Performance Evaluation Report 3.3.2 Leaving the Service (i) PSR 02802: Termination of Appointment (ii) PSR 02804: Resignation (iii) PSR 02807: Retirement (iv) PSR 02808 Guidelines for the payment of retirement benefit.
(v) PSR 02809: Mandatory retirement age or length of service.
(vi) PSR 04406 Dismissal SELF-ASSESSMENT EXERCISE Specifically identify the areas in “Leaving the service” for which the rules are applied.
176  PSM 800 MODULE 3 Answer They are: (i) Termination of Appointment (ii) Resignation (iii) Retirement (iv) Guidelines for the payment of retirement benefit (v) Mandatory retirement age or length of service (vi) Dismissal.
3.3.3 Duty and Courses of Instruction outside Nigeria and Locally (i) PSR 16102: Obtaining Approval for Duty / Course abroad (ii) PSR 16201: Duty visit outside Nigeria (iii) PSR 16301: Conditions for undertaking course of Instruction outside Nigeria.
(iv) PSR 16303: Passages (v) PSR 16308: Certain Courses to be granted as leave without pay.
3.3.4 Discipline The whole of the Chapter Should Be Applicable: (i) PSR 04201/04203: Removal from service due to general inefficiency.
(ii) PSR 04301: Removal from service due to misconduct (iii) PSR 04401: Removal from service due to serious misconduct.
(iv) PSR 04304: Duty to report any case of misconduct.
(v) PSR 04306: Disciplinary procedure (vi) PSR 04433: Prohibition of bribery and Corruption (vii) PSR 04601: Retirement in the Public Interest 177  PSM 800 CONDUCT OF GOVERNMENT BUSINESS 3.3.5 Salaries and Allowances (i) PSR 05104: Salary on promotion within incremental Scales (ii) PSR 05201/05207 Increment (iii) PSR 20001/20005: Duty Tour Allowance (iv) PSR 17604: Rent Subsidy Meal (v) PSR 17601: Subsidy Entertainment (vi) PSR 17602: Allowance Utility (vii) PSR 17603: Allowance (viii) PSR 17610: Domestic Servants of Officers (ix) PSR 17611: Salaries of Domestic Servants 3.3.6 Staff Welfare (i) PSR 09101/09316: Medical & Dental Procedure (ii) PSR 09317/09321: Sick-leave rates (iii) PSR 12101/12306: Occupation of Government Quarters (iv) PSR 13101/13406: Leave Matters (v) PSR 03101/03305: Female Public Servants (See the Public Service Rules, 2000) 4.0 CONCLUSION Rules and Regulations refer to the principles to which actions conform or should conform.
As earlier posited, every communit y social organisation, statutory organisation, and private company has found it necessary to establish rules and regulations to guide and moderate the activities and conduct of its members.
Rules and Regulations are, therefore, necessary to ensure equity, justice and fairness in all human activities and relationships.
Rules and Regulations should not be seen as mere instruments for dispensing justice to offenders; rather, they are blue prints for organising and providing goods and services.
Simply put, strict adherence to government Rules and Regulations guarantees an efficient and effective conduct of government business.
These rules and regulations are articulated in policy documents.
5.0 SUMMARY It has been severally stated that rules and regulations guide the behaviour of people not only in organisations, but in their everyday lives.
This unit, thus explained this concept and went ahead to focus on the public service.
The unit traced the evolution of rules in the public 178  PSM 800 MODULE 3 service from the colonial days when it was referred to as General Orders (G.O) to the present day.
Thereafter, it analysed the current Public Service Rules invoked in the year 2000.
6.0 TUTOR-MARKED ASSIGNMENT: i.
What do you understand by Public Service Rules?
ii.
What is the difference between Public Service Rules and Civil Service Rules?
iii.
Specifically, identify the areas of “Discipline” covered by the Public Service Rules.
7.0 REFERENCES/FURTHER READING Ebegbuna, P. & Chijioke, J.O.
(2002).
“Public Service Rules”.
Lecture Module for the Intensive Training Programme for Federal Civil Servants.
Abuja: Samfort Associates.
Federal Republic of Nigeria (2000).
Public Service Rules.
Abuja: Government Press.
179  PSM 800 CONDUCT OF GOVERNMENT BUSINESS UNIT 5 FINANCIAL REGULATIONS CONTENTS 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objectives 3.0 Main Content 3.1 The Need for Rules and Regulations to Guide the Public Sector Financial Management System 3.2 Highlights of the Financial Regulations 3.2.1 Accountability and Probity 3.2.2 Revenue Accounting 3.2.3 Rendition of Monthly Accounts 3.2.4 The Nature of the Transcripts of Accounts 3.3 Financial Regulations as a Tool for Accounting Control 3.3.1 Purchase Control Objectives 3.3.2 Payments Control Objectives 3.3.3 Salaries and Wages Control Objectives 3.3.4 Control Objectives for Fixed Assets 3.3.5 Loans and Advances Control Objectives 3.4 Other Matters Dealt with in the Financial Regulations 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutor-Marked Assignment 7.0 References/Further Reading 1.0 INTRODUCTION Prior to 1976, the Financial Regulations were called Financial Instructions.
In 1976 the Financial Regulations were reviewed to suit our local needs.
In January, 2000, this important public sector document was further reviewed to update its provisions so as to make it more relevant to the modern developments in our environment.
The Financial Regulations are, therefore, accounting and financial control documents.
Specifically, they provide a body of guiding principles as well as a number of methods or uniformity in the recording of financial transactions, events and positions.
‘As a body of rules, the Financial Regulations are generally expected to aid the achievement of probity and accountability in government.
Parts of the FR also comprise codes of regulations made up of rules, which specify actions acceptable, and those deemed not acceptable in the handling of public finances.
180  PSM 800 MODULE 3 Financial Regulations are made to guide and regulate the actions of executives in order to enable decisions to be rational and non-personal.
The objectives of Financial Management, whether in the public or private sector include the utilisation of available resources in the most efficient manner.
2.0 OBJECTIVES At the end of this unit, you should be able to: • explain the concept of Financial Regulation • discuss the need for Rules and Regulations to guide the Public Sector’s Financial Management System • state some highlights of the Financial Regulations • underline Financial Regulations as a tool for Accounting control • mention other matters dealt with in the Financial Regulations.
3.0 MAIN CONTENT 3.1 The Need for Rules and Regulations to Guide the Public Sector Financial Management System Financial Management in a government environment involves role players on both the administrative and accounting side of a department’s organisational structure.
On the administrative side, there are role players who must make decisions, execute and approve them to incur expenditure to achieve the objectives of the department.
Once such a decision is taken and money gets involved, it becomes an accounting function to ensure that financial rules and regulations and orderly book- keeping practices are applied.
Since the Public Service is a very large and complex organisation where ministries and parastatals are regarded as units of the entire service, there are laid down procedures to ensure effective communication between the functionaries.
In addition, there is a built-in system of internal controls, which is put in place to ensure probity and to safeguard government assets and properties.
In this regard, the Accounting Officer has the task of implementing the internal controls within the Ministry and of implementing the financial rules and regulations in order to ensure that sound financial management is applied by all subordinates.
Consequently, Financial Regulations are issued to: (i) Guide the day-to-day financial operations of Government Ministries/Extra-Ministerial Departments, Agencies and Parastatals; 181  PSM 800 CONDUCT OF GOVERNMENT BUSINESS (ii) Ensure appropriate system of information flow from management to finance and accounts staff; (iii) Provide common standard procedures and guides by which Auditors and Treasury Inspectors can ascertain that Ministries are able to control and maintain up-to-date records of financial transactions; (iv) Promote fiscal accountability, management accountability and programme results accountability in government financial management and control.
SELF-ASSESSMENT EXERCISE Why are Financial Regulations issued?
Answer (i) To guide day-to-day financial operation of Government Agencies.
(ii) To ensure appropriate system of information flow from management to finance and account officers.
(iii) To provide common standard procedures and guides.
(iv) To promote fiscal accountability, management accountability and programme results accountability in government financial management and control.
3.2 Highlights of the Financial Regulations 3.2.1 Accountability and Probity The Financial Regulations are expected to aid the achievement of probity and accountability in Government’s financial transactions.
According to FR.
No.
101, the need and responsibility to establish a sound financial and strict compliance with financial regulations in the achievement of Government objectives rests principally with the Accountant-General of the Federation, and also with the Accounting Officers (i.e.
the Permanent Secretaries / Chief Executives of Ministries / Agencies).
The Accountant- General of the Federation is the Chief Accounting Officer for the receipts and payments of public funds.
He is also responsible for the general supervision of the accounts of all ministries, extra-ministerial departments, agencies and all arms of government within the Federation.
3.2.2 Revenue Accounting The Revised Financial Regulations (2000) comprise two broad sections – viz, Finance and Accounts contains codes of regulations made up of 182  PSM 800 MODULE 3 rules which specify actions acceptable and those not acceptable in the collection, documentation, custody, disbursement etc of public funds.
All Federally collectable revenue, as spelt out in the Constitution of the Federal Republic of Nigeria, are paid into the Federation Accounts, before they may be shared out for use by the various tiers of Government.
The share of the Federal Government is paid into the Consolidated Revenue Fund Account (CRF).
The Financial Regulations require that all revenue collected must be receipted, recorded in the appropriate revenue books and banked.
The Financial Regulations also spell out funds disbursement procedures.
In this respect, the Annual Estimates and Appropriation Act determine the limits and the disbursement of the funds of the Federal Government.
Therefore, no expenditure may be incurred except on the authority of a Warrant duly signed by the Minister of Finance (FR 401).
All expenditure warrants are signed only after the National Assembly has passed the Appropriation Bill into an Act.
3.2.3 Rendition of Monthly Accounts In compliance with the provisions of Financial Regulations No.
208, all Federal Ministries / Extra-Ministerial Departments and Self Accounting Units are mandated to submit their transcript of accounts and returns to the Office of the Accountant-General of the Federation not later than 21st day of the following month of the accounts.
In the case of Nigerian Missions abroad, they are to ensure the dispatch of their accounts within the same period by diplomatic bag or registered Mail.
3.2.4 The Nature of the Transcript of Accounts The monthly transcript of accounts expected to be submitted to Office of the Accountant-General of the Federation by each Ministry / Extra- Ministerial Department consists of:- (a) Original Cash Book Foils arranged in day-to-day order, with cash specifications on the last page; (b) Original and duplicate copies of all Receipts and Payment Vouchers; (c) Certificate or Statement of Cash and Bank Balances; and (d) Bank Reconciliation Statement.
There is also a list of accounting returns which Ministries / Extra- Ministerial Offices or Self-Accounting Units are expected to submit to the Office of the Accountant-General of the Federation on a monthly basis.
183  PSM 800 CONDUCT OF GOVERNMENT BUSINESS 3.3 Financial Regulations as a Tool for Accounting Control The need to establish a sound financial and accounting system, optimal utilization of scarce resources, and compliance with the financial regulations in the achievement of government objectives rest on the conviction that progress in any field requires the creation of an organisation.
This is because the main objective of any financial management is the utilisation of available resources in the most efficient manner.
To achieve optimal utilisation of financial resources therefore, there would be emphasis on expenditure control.
As stated above, Financial Regulations are very useful in providing accounting controls in the management of public finance.
These controls are those built within and around the accounting system to ensure that all financial transactions and events are: (a) recorded in the system properly, accurately, completely and promptly; (b) that there are safeguards over the custody and use of assets held by Ministries / Extra-Ministerial Departments and Parastatals; and (c) that the possibility of the occurrence of errors and improper or illegal financial transactions are reduced to the barest minimum.
Every financial transaction has its own control objectives.
Every financial manager should be familiar with the control objectives of all financial transactions in order to prevent leakages and ensure sound financial management.
Therefore, we shall give examples of such control objectives.
3.3.1 Purchase Control Objectives The Control Objective for Purchase and Contracts are mainly to ensure that: (i) All purchases are properly authorised and approved before goods or services are ordered and that goods received or services rendered are properly checked and authorised prior to acceptance or payment; (ii) Liability for all purchases is accurately recorded in the books of accounts and that suppliers receive payments in accordance with agreed terms; and (iii) Materials purchased and services rendered are actually received and properly analysed and that the appropriate stocks expenses or fixed assets records are up-dated.
184  PSM 800 MODULE 3 3.3.2 Payments Control Objectives (i) To set up liability for payments for goods supplied or services rendered at any given date; (ii) To ensure strict control over payments; and (iii) To accelerate settlement of accounts.
3.3.3 Salaries and Wages Control Objectives In relation to payrolls, the control objectives are: (i) to ensure that only bona-fide employees are remunerated for services; (ii) to ensure that the amounts paid to employees are properly authorised and relate to services actually rendered, e.g.
overtime allowance; and (iii) to ensure that the computation of payments is properly carried out and all statutory deductions have been properly calculated.
3.3.4 Control Objectives for Fixed Assets Fixed Assets include: • Land and Building; • Plant, Machinery and Equipment; • Motor Vehicles; • Furniture, Fixtures and Fittings; and • Tools The control objective is mainly to ensure that capital expenditure is properly incurred and recorded by maintaining Fixed Assets Register.
3.3.5 Loans and Advances Control Objectives To ensure that: (i) all loans and advances are properly approved and authorised before payment is made; (ii) proper records are maintained for all loans and advances; (iii) all loans and advances made are recorded as and when due; (iv) no new loans and advances are given before existing loans and advances of the same class are fully recovered.
All the above measures involve a sound accounting system to permit effective administrative control of funds and operations, cost effectiveness and internal audit appraisal.
Internal and Federal Auditors 185  PSM 800 CONDUCT OF GOVERNMENT BUSINESS should ensure that the accounts of the different organisations are maintained in ways that will facilitate periodic reviews.
3.4 Other Matters dealt with in the Financial Regulations There are several other matters dealt with in the Financial Regulations.
They include the following: (i) Legal authorities for operating government funds; (ii) Responsibilities of key Government Officials such as the Accountant-General of the Federation, Accounting Officers (Permanent Secretaries or Heads of Extra-Ministerial Departments).
Auditor-General of the Federation and other key accounts posts like Sub-Accounting Officers, Federal Pay Officers, Revenue Collectors and Imprest Holders; (iii) The Cash Book and monthly Cash Account, including Bank Reconciliation Statements expected to be operated by Ministries / Units having recognised Pay Offices or Self Accounting Status; (iv) Vote Accounting.
This includes the methods of classification of expenditure and the use of Departmental Vote Books; (v) Payment Procedures; (vi) Adjustment for transactions; (vii) Cash management and operation of Bank Accounts in Ministries and Parastatals; (viii) Security arrangement and custody of public money, stores, security books and documents; (ix) Operation of Imprest Accounts; (x) Treatment of cases of losses of funds i.e.
cash, stores or other assets; (xi) Rules Governing Advances; (xii) Methods of payment of staff compensation such as salaries, pensions, gratuities and necessary controls; (xiii) Internal Audit Functions and Controls; (xiv) Contract accounting as well as procurements, stores procedures, stores accounting, contract and tendering authorities and processes; and (xv) Stock verification and the role of Internal Auditors.
4.0 CONCLUSION It is now clear from the foregoing that Financial Regulations are required in every organisation to act as a control measure of the utilisation of material resources.
It enlightens staff on how to utilise organisational resources most efficiently.
It is therefore an inevitable component of the discussion on the “Conduct of Government Business”.
186  PSM 800 MODULE 3 5.0 SUMMARY This unit has attempted to capture the high points or relevant areas of financial regulations.
Hence the unit covered such areas as the need to guide the public sector managers, highlight of financial regulations such as accountability and probity, revenue accounting, rendition of monthly accounts, the nature of transcript of accounts; etc.
The unit also analysed financial regulation as a tool for accounting control and finally, dealt with other matters which include: responsibilities of key government officials like the Accountant-General of the Federation; the cash book and monthly cash account; vote accounting; payment procedure; cash management and operation Bank accounts among others.
6.0 TUTOR-MARKED ASSIGNMENT Explain any five (5) control objectives in every financial transaction.
7.0 REFERENCES/FURTHER READING Akabueze, P. N. & Oni, A. O.
(2002).
“Financial Regulations”, Lecture Module for the Intensive Training Programme for Federal Civil Servants.
Abuja: Samfort Associates.
Federal Republic of Nigeria (2000) Revised Financial Regulations.
Abuja: Government Press.
187  PSM 800 CONDUCT OF GOVERNMENT BUSINESS MODULE 4 CORRELATES OF GOVERNMENT BUSINESS Unit 1 Reforms of Government Bureaucracy Unit 2 Paperless Administration UNIT 1 REFORMS OF GOVERNMENT BUREAUCRACY CONTENTS 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objectives 3.0 Main Content 3.1 Conceptual Clarifications 3.2 Strategic Focus of Public Service Reforms 3.2.1 The Pensions Reforms 3.2.2 Main Features of the Pensions Act 3.2.3 Service Delivery 3.2.4 Due Process 3.3 Operating Mechanism 3.3.1 Institutional Arrangement 3.4 Unique Features of On-Going Public Service Reforms 3.5 Concrete Achievements of the Reforms 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutor-Marked Assignment 7.0 References/Further Reading 1.0 INTRODUCTION As an organisation, the Public Service is situated within an environment which is in a state of constant flux.
For instance, the public service’s immediate environment involves complex geo-political, social, economic, educational, regional and religious factors, which exert considerable influence on its managers.
The rapid changes in the economy, technology and society have enormous implications for the public service.
The implication of course, is a corresponding change in the service itself in response to such environmental changes.
These changes are what we refer to as Reforms.
Reforms are positive.
They normally usher in re-organisation, and in the Public Service, this is occasioned by gradual but steady increase in the complexity of government business which has shifted its focus from “Law and Order Administration” to “Development Administration”.
This shift, pre- supposes an overall management efficiency and effectiveness as well as 188  PSM 800 MODULE 4 increased efficiency in the implementation of Government policies and programmes.
2.0 OBJECTIVES At the end of this unit, you should be able to: • explain the concept of reforms • indicate the strategic focus of the public service reforms • analyse the operating mechanism of the reforms • state the unique features of the on-going public service reforms; and • mention the concrete achievements of the reforms in Nigeria so far.
3.0 MAIN CONTENT 3.1 Conceptual Clarification The extant literature on Nigerian public administration has referred to all efforts made at improving the administrative capability for the public service as administrative reforms.
In an apparent confirmation of this position, John-Quah (1976:17) refers to efficiency and effectiveness engineering in the public service as a deliberate attempt to change both the structures and procedures of the public bureaucracies involved, in order to promote organisational effectiveness and attain national developmental goals.
In support, Haln Been (1970) argues that administrative reform is an effort to apply new ideas and combination of ideas to the administrative system with a view to improving the system for positive goals of national development.
Administrative reform actions are thus, needed for developmental processes designed to give the administrative capability needed in the public service, as a common denominator to all development efforts.
Hence, Jelawick (1982) consequently outlined components of administrative reforms upon which the prospect of any reform action could be evaluated as: • definition of the objectives, aims and areas of reforms; • collection of maximum amount of information on the areas to be reformed; • critical analysis and appreciation of the situation; • drafting projects of alternative solutions; • choice of best solutions; and • application of the solutions selected and observation of the result of the reform.
189  PSM 800 CONDUCT OF GOVERNMENT BUSINESS All the foregoing listed processes are vital ingredients to the success and acceptability of any meaningful reform action.
It could therefore be simply put that reform actions are fundamental changes that have taken place over the years.
In subjecting the public service to various reform actions from colonial days to date, it was rationally thought that it could not be isolated from the wind of change which societal ideals were susceptible to and which must be managed by the various structures of government to the benefit of the society.
3.2 Strategic Focus of the Public Service Reforms The on-going reform focuses on four key areas namely: (i) Budget and Financial Management • Procurement system review; • Institutionalisation of fiscal responsibility; and • Accounting reforms.
(ii) Accountability Issues • Installation of due process, transparency and accountability in government transactions; • Establishment of service charters; and • Institutionalisation of compliance enforcement.
(iii) Human Resources Management • Personnel records and payroll cleaning; • Staff cadre review; Remodelling of recruitment and promotion procedures, • including injection of competent professionals, young and bright people as well as experts with rare skills into the service; • Installation of a new performance management scheme; • Transformation of the present administration departments into professionally manned human resources management departments with competencies for strategic functions such as manpower planning, career and succession planning, training and development, etc.
; • Understanding pay reform as one of the strategies of attracting and retaining talents in the service; • Massive capacity development and training; • Organisational culture change.
190  PSM 800 MODULE 4 (iv) Operation and System • Organisational restructuring and right-sizing; • Work process re-design; and • Information technology applications.
(v) Parastatals Reform and Management Parastatals reform is a core component of the public service reforms in recognition of the need to curtail the waste in government parastatals and reposition them for greater effectiveness and service delivery.
Some of the emerging structural / institutional reform strategies are: (a) Accelerated privatisation through the strengthening of the Bureau for Public Enterprises (BPE); (b) Scrapping and / or merger of some parastatals; (c) Review of mandate and amendment of legal instruments through the adoption of incorporated legal form to replace the statutory corporation legal status; (d) Strengthening of some existing parastatals through enlargement of their functions; (e) Conversion of some parastatals into executive agencies; (f) Re-orientation of the management of parastatals towards self- sustenance, profit-making, cost effectiveness and cost consciousness; (g) Total removal of subvention from certain categories of parastatals; (h) Setting benckmarks, recruitment / overhead ratio to capital expenditure; (i) Right-sizing and elimination of redundancy in management; (j) Re-professionalisation; (k) Strengthening of evaluation and monitoring mechanism of parastatals through the introduction of such accountability instruments as service charter, stakeholders perception survey service delivery surveys, and peer reviews, as well as league ranking of parastatals based on pre-determined corporate performance indicators.
3.2.1 The Pensions Reform It will be recalled that on the 25th of June, 2004, the then President of the Federal Republic of Nigeria Chief Olusegun Obasanjo, signed into Law the Pension Reform Act 2004.
By this action, the pension reform became fully legalised.
Consequently, implementation of the reform has since commenced.
191  PSM 800 CONDUCT OF GOVERNMENT BUSINESS 3.2.2 Main Features of the Pension Act As indicated in the Act, the scheme: i.
Is a contributory pension scheme, which makes it mandatory for both the employer and employee to contribute equally a minimum of seven and half percent (7½%) of monthly remuneration to the employees retirement benefits; ii.
Applies to all employees, whether permanent, temporary, casual, or contractual, in both the public and private sectors of the economy; iii.
Makes it compulsory for every person in employment in Nigeria to save towards catering for his livelihood during old age; iv.
Provides for a uniform set of rules, regulations and standards for the administration and payments of retirement benefits for the public and private sectors.
For instance, the Act provides for the establishment of the National Pension Commission (NPC), which is empowered to register and license corporate organisations that will act as a Pension Fund Administrators (PFA) and each PFA, in turn, selects a Custodian which manages the fund on its behalf; v. Stipulates 50 years as the age at which an employee is entitled to pension; vi.
Mandates all employers to maintain life insurance policy in favour of the employee for a minimum of three times the annual total emolument of the employee; vii.
Allows for increase in the rates of monthly contributions, subject to agreement between the employer and the employee; viii.
Directs every employee to maintain Retirement Savings Account (RSA) in his name with any Pension Fund Administrator (PFA) of his choice; ix.
Makes pension deduction transferable from one employer to another because accounts once opened, becomes personalised to the individual who can move it in and out of employment within the same sector or across sectors.
Current contributors to Nigeria Social Insurance Trust Fund (NSITF), who are mainly private sector workers, are required to continue till the next five years by which time they are at liberty to choose their own PFAs or stick to the PFA that would be registered by the National Pension Commission (PENCOM).
In addition, the Labour Reform Act 2005 was put in place with the sole aim of democratising the labour movement such that every employee would be at liberty to belong to, and engage in such labour activities that would be to his utmost benefit.
192  PSM 800 MODULE 4 3.2.3 Service Delivery This is directly related to the public service reforms.
It has certain key elements such as creating a citizen charter.
A good citizen’s charter should have the following components: • Vision and mission statements of the organisation.
• Details of business transacted by the organisation.
• Details of citizens or clients.
• Statement of services including standards, quality, time-frame etc provided to each citizen / client group separately and how/where to get the services.
• Details of grievance redress mechanism and how to access it.
• Expectations from the citizens or clients.
• Additional commitments such as compensation in the event of failure of service delivery (see Service Delivery Document 2004:4A).
3.2.4 Due Process This is another component of the reform agenda.
“Due Process” as a mechanism is a key element in the management of public finance which ensures that requisite standards are maintained and transparency, accountability and the elimination of wastes are guaranteed.
Due Process was introduced in order to rejuvenate an otherwise decayed and near collapse system of managing public finance.
Prior to its introduction, laid down rules and financial regulations were, most of the time, neglected in the quest for and release of funds.
Sometimes, funds were released for projects not executed.
By the introduction of “Due Process”, appropriate levels of respect for rules, regulations and procedures relating to management of public funds are to be adopted.
In the process, the all encompassing budget cycle which is drawn by genuine consultations, realistic prioritisation and steadfast funding of approved budget items are institutionalised.
SELF-ASSESSMENT EXERCISE Discuss the strategic focus of the public service reforms.
Answer They are: Budget and Financial Management; Accountability issues; Human Resources Management; Operation and System; Parastatals.
Reform and Management, Pensions Reforms, Labour Reforms, Service Delivery and Due Process.
193  PSM 800 CONDUCT OF GOVERNMENT BUSINESS 3.3 Operating Mechanism This refers to the mechanisms and organs put in place for implementing the reform agenda.
3.3.1 Institutional Arrangement The institutional arrangement so far undertaken as articulated by Adegoroye (2004:4-5) are: (a) Establishment of the National Council on Reforms with the President of the Federal Republic of Nigeria as Chairman.
Other members are: Vice President, Senate President, the Speaker of Federal House of Representatives, Chief Justice of Nigeria, Secretary to the Federal Government of Nigeria, Head of Service of the Federation, Accountant-General of the Federation, Honourable Minister of Justice, Honourable Minister of Finance, Chairman, Independent Corrupt Practices and Other Related Offences Commission.
(b) Establishment of a “Steering Committee” on Reforms under the Chairmanship of the Honourable Minister of Finance.
(c) Establishment of the Bureau of Public Service Reforms to serve as the coordinating and operating member of the public service reform agenda of government as well as serving as secretariat to both the steering committee and the National Council on Reforms.
(d) Establishment of a service delivery unit to, among others, monitor adherence to the service delivery charter freely subscribed to by all public sector institutions.
(e) Establishment of a policy and programme monitoring unit, in the office of the President, to among others, build a comprehensive policy data base for monitoring the process of implementation of government policies and programmes.
3.4 Unique Features of the On-going Public Service Reforms The most salutary aspect of the on-going initiative apparently is that it is being internally driven by the public as opposed to past initiatives which were either driven by the political leadership or fostered by donors as part of the requirements of structural adjustment.
While the main driver of the reform is undoubtedly the President, the attitude of the civil service has changed from initial cynicism to an appreciation of the opportunities inherent in change to improve the effectiveness of the service.
Consequently, the popular notion that the public service cannot reform itself is not totally reflective of the Nigerian situation.
The main instrument for driving the reform of the civil service today is the Reform 194  PSM 800 MODULE 4 Implementation Committee under the chairmanship of the Head of the Civil Service of the Federation.
The committee comprises 14 permanent secretaries, Accountant-General of the Federation, Auditor-General of the Federation, and Director-General, Bureau of Public Service Reforms as members.
The other uniqueness of the current process is the establishment of the Bureau of Public Service Reforms which is unprecedented in Nigeria’s history.
This is to ensure a sustainable mechanism for the integration of the culture of reform into the public service.
At present, the bureau provides the platform for integrating the various reform initiatives which are located in different cells into the public service.
These include: (i) Budget reform in the Budget Office (ii) Procurement reforms in the Budget Monitoring and Price Intelligence Unit (iii) Tax reforms in the Federal Inland Revenue Service (iv) Accounting and auditing reforms in both the office of the Accountant-General and that of the Auditor-General of the Federation; and (v) Anti-corruption, transparency and accountability reforms in both the Independence Corrupt Practices and Other Related Offences Commission and the Economic and Financial Crimes Commission.
Judicial, legislative and armed forces reforms are directly linked to the President through appropriate institutions.
Another significant feature is that under the present initiative, the public service is vision and mission driven.
This is to emphasise the new orientation of the service towards outcomes rather than processes and the institution of performance management practices from within to reinforce the new orientation of delivering service to the people.
Accordingly, the vision of the Office of the Head of Service, which translates to the overall vision of the public service, is to “build a Public Service that works for the people.
; while the Mission Statement is to: “build a Public Service that is performance and results-oriented, customer-driven, investor-friendly, professional, technologically sensitive, accountable, fostering partnerships with all stakeholders and committed to a continuous improvement in Government business and the enhancement of overall national productivity.” The operations of each individual ministry, department and agency are also now driven by their respective vision and mission statements as well as enforceable service charters, which they are obliged to fulfil in rendering service to the public.
195  PSM 800 CONDUCT OF GOVERNMENT BUSINESS 3.5 Concrete Achievements of the Reforms in Nigeria The following significant gains have been recorded under the present initiative: (i) Implementation of the monetisation policy in the core civil service and extension of the policy to parastatals; (ii) Introduction of a contributory pension scheme which is a radical departure from the hitherto pay-as-you-go-system; (iii) Sensitisation of the ministries, Extra-Ministerial Departments, and Agencies (MDAs) on the new concept of service delivery by the establishment of Ministerial Service Units (MSUs) and the appointment of Nodal officers amongst others to ensure that the MDAs undertake management innovation for enhancing quality service to the public; (iv) Institution of a more transparent and open procurement system as one of the means of curtailing wasteful expenditure and ensuring value for money; (v) Rightsizing the civil service, (vi) Review of public service rules, regulations and procedures; (vii) Implementation of capacity building initiatives across the service including organisation of a two-week Commonwealth Secretariat-facilitated study programme for serving permanent secretaries and selected heads of core agencies in London, United Kingdom; (viii) Greater collaboration between the economic team and the civil service in fast-tracking the process; (ix) Implementation of the National Health Insurance Scheme; (x) Implementation of the pensions reform; (xi) Collaboration with international development partners notably the World Bank, Department for International Development (DFID) and the Commonwealth secretariat under various initiatives to deepen the process and fast tract it (Adegoroye, 2005:22).
(xii) The application of “Due Process” led to savings of a colossal sum of N160 billion for Nigeria as at December, 2005 (Quoted in Sanni, 2006:8).
(xiii) Nigeria’s Foreign Reserve reached an all time height of 43 US Dollars as at March, 2007.
To the foregoing we add that the implementation of SERVICOM (Service Compact with all Nigerians) had taken a firm root.
On 16th January 2006, the SERVICOM Office in the Presidency signed a Memorandum of Understanding (MOU) with ASCON on incorporation of all the elements of service delivery, in ASCON’s programmes.
The aim being to inculcate in the public officers that attend ASCON’s 196  PSM 800 MODULE 4 courses the behavioural change needed for service delivery.
This exercise was immediately followed by a workshop involving 230 staffers of Ministerial Service Units (MSUs) at the federal level.
The workshop was held from 16th through 20th January, 2006 at ASCON.
A similar workshop was held between 28th August and 1st September, 2006 which involved 200 staffers mainly from the parastatals.
4.0 CONCLUSION The overriding objective of the reform agenda, we must emphasise, is fundamental restructuring to unleash the potential of the nation, but a restructuring by itself will not bring the desired change.
There is need for behaviour change as well, since the structure per se cannot deliver value.
For example, there has been much focus on the headcount reduction in the Public Service as the high point of reform in that sector.
Merely reducing numbers will not make a difference.
5.0 SUMMARY Changes brought about by reform actions in the public service ensure its positioning and repositioning to deliver valued services to the citizens.
Hence the unit discussed: the concept of reforms; identified the strategic focus of the public service reforms; explained the pensions and labour reforms; identified the unique features of the on-going public service reforms; and outlined the concrete achievements of the public service reforms so far.
6.0 TUTOR-MARKED ASSIGNMENT Outline the concrete achievements of the current public service reforms in Nigeria.
7.0 REFERENCES/FURTHER READING Adegoroye, G. (2004).
“Vision to Action: Background Document on Current Reforms in Nigeria.” Paper presented at the Retreat for Federal Permanent Secretaries, ASCON, Badagry, 5th – 8th August, 2004.
Alao, O.
(2004).
“Current Pension Reforms: Implication for Career Development in the Public and Private |Sectors.” Paper presented at the 2nd State Conference of the Lagos State Branch of the Chartered Institute of Personnel Management of Nigeria (CIPMN) ASCON, Badagry, 30th July, 2004.
197  PSM 800 CONDUCT OF GOVERNMENT BUSINESS Baba-Ahmed, H. (2004).
“Public Service Reforms: Limitations and Challenges of the Civil Service.” Paper presented at the Retreat for Permanent Secretaries, ASCON, Badagry, 5th – 8th August, 2004.
Been, I. H., (1970).
“An Application of Innovation Theory to the Strategy of Administrative Reforms in Developing Countries”, Policy Science, Vol.
1, No.
2 Federal Republic of Nigeria (2004) Nigeria: National Economic Empowerment and Development Strategy (NEEDS), NEEDS Secretariat, National Planning Commission, Federal Secretariat, Abuja.
Jelavick, M. S. (1982), “Strategy and Policy of Administrative Reforms,” International Review of Administrative Sciences, Vol.
XI VIII, No.
1.
Maduabum, C. P. (2006).
Reforming Government Bureaucracies in Nigeria: The Journey so far.
Badagry: ASCON Press.
Quah, S.L.
I. T. (1976).
“Administration Reforms: A Conceptual Analysis,” Journal of Public Administration, Vol.
XX, No.
1.
198  PSM 800 MODULE 4 UNIT 2 PAPERLESS ADMINISTRATION CONTENTS 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objectives 3.0 Main Content 3.1 Conceptual Clarifications 3.1.1 E-Governance 3.1.2 E-Governance Model 3.1.3 Experience from Elsewhere 3.2.
ICT Initiative in Nigeria 3.3 Government Website 3.4 Benefits of ICT in Public Administration in Nigeria 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutor-Marked Assignment 7.0 References/Further Reading 1.0 INTRODUCTION By paperless administration, we refer to the minimal use of papers, documents, file jackets etc in carrying out the various forms of administrative practices.
Modernity has provided alternative and more convenient methods of undertaking such functions as records keeping and official interactions without the use of file jackets.
That is, through electronic devices which are facilitated by Information Technology.
Although, availability of information and its utilisation for carrying out specific endeavour is as old as man, dearth of adequate information as well as wrongful application of such information if, and when available, had hampered developmental processes of many nations.
The search for a means of ameliorating this problem may have led to the development witnessed in this enterprise within the last few decades.
That development is more fashionably referred to as ICT, which is an acronym for Information and Communications Technology.
2.0 OBJECTIVES At the end of the unit, you should be able to: • define the concept of paperless administration • explain the concept of E-Governance and its experiences elsewhere • analyse the ICT initiative in Nigeria 199  PSM 800 CONDUCT OF GOVERNMENT BUSINESS • identify the government WEBSITE; and • list the benefits of ICT in public administration in Nigeria.
3.0 MAIN CONTENT 3.1 Conceptual Clarifications The low level of ICT application to production processes has been identified by Abdullah, (2005:2) as one of the two key factors responsible for low productivity of the Nigerian worker.
The other factor however, is attitudinal.
Consequently, he posits that ICT continues to direct and dictate the way people think, conduct business, communicate, trade, provide services etc.
There is therefore no doubt that Information and Communication Technology is increasingly becoming the key driver for increased productivity and in consequence, improved socio- economic development of the country.
The author insists that a nation’s capacity and capabilit y to accelerate its socio-economic development, gain competitive advantage, and improve the well being of its people depends very much on the extent to which it can adopt and adapt ICT tenets in all its ramifications.
The time has therefore come for the Nigerian Public Service to imbibe ICT principles and practices for efficiency, effectiveness and higher productivity.
In his own contribution, Emadoya (2002:2) defines Information Technology (IT) as computing and telecommunication technologies that provide automatic means of handling information.
And that IT here, is taken to represent tangible hardware and intangible software.
The author also defines Information System (IS) as systems of human and technical components that may be based on any combination of human endeavours, insisting that whereas it, on its own, does not do anything useful, that in order to do anything ,it must become part of an IS.
That IS does not necessarily involve computers and telecommunication equipment; and that even when they do information systems are much more than just IT because they involve people and their actions (Heeks, 1998).
Information Systems therefore are more than just technology and information.
It involves the technology itself and the information on which it operates, and processes of purposeful activities, that is, actions and people to undertake those processes.
All these must exist within an environment of institutions and influencing factors such as economic, political and legal system, etc.
ICT in governance can be defined as “the use of Information and Communication Technologies to support the act and process of governance through the provision of improved administrative systems within and without government’ (Dunconbe, 1999).
This process can be referred to simply as “e-Administration”.
To perfectly describe or 200  PSM 800 MODULE 4 translate this to a single project for a country’s governance, we must consider the entire society and its citizens.
When this is taken as a whole, we have complete electronic governance which we could refer to as e-Governance.
This brings us to the concept of e-Governance.
3.1.1 E-Governance Perhaps, our discussions on the concept of e-Governance could be approached from the perspective of a paradigm shift.
This is because, governments around the world have been battling with issues regarding how to streamline processes and improve the channels of service delivery to the citizenry.
In this effort, there is a convergence between a paradigm shift and the delivery of public services to the people.
These include: the Legislature-Citizenry interface as well as Executive- Citizenry interface.
This will necessarily acquire the evolution of the e- government internets into extranets.
The concepts of e-government and e-governance are complementary and mutually exclusive.
It would probably be difficult to jump straight to e- governance without having first stabilised your e-government efforts.
(ii) According to Ajayi, (2004:3-6) e-Government means: • deploying ICT tools and processes for efficient administration and enhanced revenue generation for better governance; ICT in government operations will promote more efficient • and effective governance; • facilitate more accessible government service; • allow greater public access to information; and • make government more accountable to the people.
E-governance is well beyond the scope of e-government; it allows the citizens to participate in government decision-making processes, reflecting their true needs and welfare in the process and taking governance to the doorstep of the citizenry.
Objectives of e-government are: • to replace traditional governance with electronic governance • to create knowledge-based governance • to enhance Simple Moral Accountable Responsive and Transparent (SMART) governance.
• to reduce bureaucracy • to maximise productivity and quality 201  PSM 800 CONDUCT OF GOVERNMENT BUSINESS • to eliminate waste • to increase efficiency • to create an easy and free access to government information • to reduce the cost of service delivery.
3.1.2 E-Government Model The three main target groups that can be distinguished in e-governance concepts are represented in the table here-below: Table 1: Categories of e-governance S/No.
Category Interaction Model 1.
Government (Federal, State, Local) G2G Govt-to-Govt.
2.
Citizens G2C Govt.-to-Citizen 3. Business (Corporate Bodies-includingG2B Govt.-to- NGOs Business Source: Ernest Ndukwe (2004) “Infrastructural Requirements for e- Government”, Paper delivered at the Seminar on e-Governance, ASCON, Badagry, 24th and 25th.
Government G2G Central Govt.
G2C G2G G2B Business NGOs Citizen Local Govt.
G2G Fig 5.1: The Four Phases in e-Governance Model 1.
In the first phase, e-governance means being present on the web, providing the public (G2C & G2G) with relevant information.
Typically, the format of early government websites is similar to 202  PSM 800 MODULE 4 that of a brochure or leaflet.
The value to the public is that government information is publicly accessible, processes are described and the institution becomes more transparent (which improves democracy).
Internally (G2G), the government can also disseminate static information with electronic means such as internet.
2.
In the second phase, interaction between the government and public (G2C & G2G) is stimulated with various applications.
People can ask questions via e-mail, use search engines, and download forms and documents.
These save time.
Infact, the complete intake of simple applications can be done online, 24 hours per day.
Normally, this would only have been possible at counter during opening hours.
Internally (G2G), government organisations use LANs, Intranets and e-mail to communicate and exchange data.
3.
With phase three, the complexity of the technology is increasing, but customer (G2C & G2B) value is also higher.
Complete transaction can be done without going to an office.
Examples of online services include; extending / renewal of licenses, visas and passports etc.
Phase three is made complex because of security and personalisation issues.
On the business side, the government is starting with e-procurement applications.
In this phase, internal (G2G) processes have to be redesigned to provide good quality service towards the direction of paperless transactions.
1.
The fourth phase is when all information and interactions are integrated and the public can get (G2C & G2B) services at one consolidated (virtual) counter called the Portal.
One single point of contact for all services is the ultimate goal.
The challenge in reaching this goal is mainly on the internal side.
Example – the necessity to drastically change culture, processes and responsibilities within the government institution (G2G).
Government employees in different departments have to work together in a smooth and seamless way.
SELF-ASSESSMENT EXERCISE Identify the categories of e-governance using the Interaction model Answer: They are: (i) G2G i.e.
Government-to-Government (Federal, State, Local); (ii) G2C i.e.
Government-to-citizen; and (iii) G2B i.e.
Government-to-Business 203  PSM 800 CONDUCT OF GOVERNMENT BUSINESS 3.1.3 Experience from Elsewhere It must be mentioned that the model does not suggest that all institutions have to go through all phases at the same time.
On the contrary, in advanced industrialised nations, government institutions are in various phases (1, 2 or 3) of implementation.
The Board of Internal Revenue can be phase three, while Ministry of Works is just starting phase one.
It all depends on where the benefits are highest and most urgent.
Similarly, more than 11 million income tax forms were submitted via internet representing 90% of the total amount.
The use of software made this simple and reduced cost significantly In addition, Brazil is rated as the third largest country in e-banking operations with an estimated amount of 10 million internet users and transactions amounting up to US$10 billion in e-commerce in the year 2003 (Prates, 2001:4-5).
Singapore’s e-Citizen portal where the citizens are able to access about 1,600 services is provided online by the Government.
China’s Golden customs programme connecting foreign trading companies, banks, customs and tax authorities.
It speeds up customs clearance and collection of taxes and duties.
Mississippi, USA’s payroll Information Self-Service allows government employees to view payroll and tax information record online.
Phillipine, Bureau of Internal Revenue – utilises fully electronic payment of taxes, bills etc (Ajayi, 2004, op.
cit).
Chile’s Internal Revenue Service has taken a typical three-step approach to web-enable improvements in services to the public.
The first step – publishing – involved static presentation of information on taxation rates, procedures and plans.
The second step – interactions allows citizens to enter a personal ID card number, tax return ID card number and password.
The third step – transaction – allows citizens to file tax returns online and to make subsequent online corrections etc (Heeks op cit.).
3.2 ICT Initiative in Nigeria ICT Initiative in Nigeria started in the 1950s with a focus on print and electronic media.
No major policy or result was achieved because of Government’s strict control of all production variables.
The full awareness of the importance of ICT was therefore lacking.
The private sector was the only area where some ICT initiatives were attempted thereby leaving a large and growing opportunity gap around the 204  PSM 800 MODULE 4 government, which is responsible for over 80% of all data.
The print media is the only means of information dissemination that attained early and reasonable vibrancy in Nigeria.
ICTs initiative in Nigeria actually started with the establishment of the National Broadcasting Commission (NBC), and the Nigeria Communication Commission (NCC).
Both commissions were formed in 1992.
While the NBC was able to achieve some successes by licensing private operators commencing in 1993, the NCC could not function as the NBC until 1997 when few wireless operators were licensed to provide telephone services mainly in Lagos.
The NCC could not function as a commission properly until the Obasanjo administration came in 1999 and was properly constituted as a commission in April 2000 (Ndukwe, 2002).
The successes of these private radio and television stations have helped in no small way in setting the pace for the deregulation in other sectors of the economy.
It must be noted that if the sector had been left in the hands of Government alone, the poor in the society would have been left on the wrong side of an ever-widening digital divide and development.
E-Governance must be seen to encompass all ICTs.
The key innovation however is computer network, connecting people and governments and both the public and private sectors within the same country, and / or different race, and nations.
E-Governance has its firm root in the power of ICTs which provide three basic change potentials for good governance for development.
These change potentials can in turn, bring five main benefits to a developing economy: Benefits - Government that is cheaper - - Producing the same outputs at lower cost.
- Government that does more - Producing more outputs at the same total cost.
- Government that is quicker - Producing the same outputs at the same total cost in less time.
- Government that works better - Producing more outputs at lower total cost in less time and to a higher quality standard.
- Government that is innovative - Producing new outputs 205  PSM 800 CONDUCT OF GOVERNMENT BUSINESS The first three groups of benefits could be classified as the efficiency gains while the last two could be regarded as the effectiveness gains.
Computerising Government The list of application areas for computerisation in government is endless.
This should guarantee continuous employment for a large number of Nigerian youths that are in the labour market.
The unfortunate story however, is that the average Nigerian manager would prefer to hire a European chauffer driver as a computer expert if only to justify the excessive, unreasonable and fraudulent cost of computerisation contracts.
Voters Registration Initiative A vast array of information is held and mainly available within Government.
In Nigeria, the absence of this has serious implication on the development of the country.
In most cases, the information available with the National government is stored in forms and files rather than electronic.
Availability of exchangers is greatly hindered.
Data held by the government can be of immense value not just to business but also to individual citizens.
The recently concluded electronic voters’ registration is one of such data which will add value to life and economy by helping citizens to obtain.
3.3 Government Website Many governments today operate in an environment of ever-increasing public needs and declining, or at best, stable revenue streams.
Citizens, taxpayers and all sorts of government constituents and special interest groups are crying out for increased government accountability.
They want government to improve services, cut waste, streamline existing activities, and provide greater public access to information.
The use of the Internet is already beginning to change the way government operates in response to these constituent mandates (Linda Deconti 1998:16).
To understand more of the benefit of the Web to good governance and development, the goal statement of the Commonwealth of Kentucky’s website in the USA contains a concise example of the philosophy and commitment governments are making to Internet technology as a way of improving government services.
The goals are: (i) To develop the Commonwealth’s public sector communications network as a widely accessible, affordable infrastructure resources, which can be used to break through the barriers 206  PSM 800 MODULE 4 traditionally imposed by geography, demography or ability to pay; and (ii) To provide the capability to transport information in any electronic form (voice, video, data, image or radio) among public sector agencies, educational institutions, economic development interests and governmental institutions”.
(Linda Deconti-IDPM, (1998): Op.
Cit) The Internet offers a unique opportunity to streamline the delivery of government services, enhance communication with citizenry (State government, LGA, traditional rulers, etc), and serve as a catalyst for empowering citizens to interact with government.
Intranet on the other hand, will be useful for reducing paper work within government for constant and quick dissemination of information to government offices.
It is hoped that the government of Nigeria would make public information available to its citizens through the Internet.
Accessing ICT – carried information requires a lot of overt resources including a telecommunications infrastructure to provide network access, electricity infrastructure to power and make ICTs work, and skills infrastructure to keep all the technology working, money to buy or access ICTs, usage skills to use the ICTs, and literacy skills to read and understand the end results.
The poor simply do not have these resources.
In a world where 80% of the population have no access to reliable telecommunications, and one third have no access to electricity, it is hardly surprising that the Internet reaches fewer poorer people.
There are more account holders in London than in the whole of Africa and many of the latter are affluent, white urban South Africans.
Likewise, more than half of the low-income countries’ population is illiterate, with a greater proportion unable to read English, the language that dominates digitalised information (UNDP, 1998a).
3.4 Benefits of ICT in Public Administration in Nigeria Examples of ways in which ICTs can be harnessed to enhance governance are: 1.
An e-police system with access via SMS, WAP, Internet and PDAs.
This system would include modules for stolen / wanted cars, wanted suspects / criminals as well as a module for information dissemination.
This could also be designed to allow citizens to make tip-offs to the police quickly and securely.
An example of such an e-police system is in place in Dubai, United Arab Emirate (UAE).
207  PSM 800 CONDUCT OF GOVERNMENT BUSINESS 2.
A criminal records system comprising a criminal information system, driving and motor licence information and personnel management.
3.
Providing information to the public about government and private sector employment opportunities, examination results, hospitals (e.g.
availability of beds and specialist services), airline, railway and road transport time-tables and schedules; information about charitable trusts, government notifications, government forms; and information about government schemes.
4.
Utility (electricity, water and telephone) billing and payment systems.
5.
Use of simple, touch-sensitive information kiosks in public places as a means of quickly deploying information to the public.
6.
Because government information and services are available online round-the-clock-citizens get a perception of “a government that never sleeps”.
7.
“Digital democracy” is achieved by supporting e-mediated exchanges of value in the democratic process by way of facilitating dissemination of political information, opinion polling, campaigning, contributions, and voting.
8.
Enhancing economic development: regions and states can more effectively compete to attract local and foreign investment.
Local businesses are also, by their interaction with the technology, enabled for the new digital economy and can eventually compete more favourably with foreign companies.
9.
E-communities: e-governance allows for the evolution of virtually all communities of citizens and businesses, without the difficulties imposed by distance, culture, language, etc.
10.
Policy formulation is greatly improved since information gathering and analysis are more timely and accurate.
Assimilation and decision-support is enhanced resulting in an overall better quality of government.
11.
Successfully implemented e-government demonstrates the benefits of ICTs to the wider population, thus becoming a catalyst for the local IT industry and ultimately encouraging foreign investment.
Nigeria, as a nation, will derive maximum benefits from e-governance at the national, state and local government levels because it can: • provide citizens both access to information and knowledge about the political process, services and choices available; • eliminate waste, reduce bureaucracy, reduce cost of service delivery and increased efficiency; 208  PSM 800 MODULE 4 • fulfill the public needs and expectations satisfactorily by simplifying the interaction with various online services; • facilitate a speedy, transparent, accountable, efficient, effective process for performing government administrative activities; • provide very significant cost-saving (per transaction) medium in government operations as a result of on-line business practices; • simplify and support governance for all parties (government, citizens and business) • pave way for a smooth and faster development of a Public- Private Partnership.
4.0 CONCLUSION In order to implement e-governance in Nigeria, a policy statement included in the Nigeria IT policy says: The nation shall use IT as the major driving force to re-engineer and rapidly transform governance to interface with the needs of the citizenry by establishing transparent Government-Wide Information System (GWIS) at the national, state and local government level.
5.0 SUMMARY This unit has so far outlined the benefits of paperless administration hence its acceptance and application in the conduct of government business.
In more specific terms, the unit explained the concepts of Paperless administration, ICT, Governance and model of e-government.
It equally traced the ICT initiatives in Nigeria, e-governance experience from a few countries and finally specified the benefits of the use of ICT in administration in Nigeria.
6.0 TUTOR-MARKED ASSIGNMENT Outline the benefits of ICT in public administration in Nigeria.
7.0 REFERENCES/FURTHER READING Abdullah, S. A.
(2005).
“Improving Productivity through the Application of Information and Communication Technology in the Nigerian Public Service.” Paper presented at the Workshop on ICT: A Tool for Effective Service Delivery, ASCON, 9th – 11th November, 2005.
209  PSM 800 CONDUCT OF GOVERNMENT BUSINESS Bellamy, C. (2003).
“E-government: Managing ICTs in Public Sector Organisation”, in Tony Bovaird & Elke Loeffler (Eds).
Public Management and Governance.
London: Routledge.
Bekkers, V.J.J.M.
& Zoucidis, S. (1999).
“Electronic Service Delivery in Public Administration: Some Trends and Issues,” International Review of Administrative Sciences, Vol.
65.
Dunconbe, R.(1999).
Information, ICTs and Small Enterprise: Findings from Botswana (Unpublished).
Emadoye, J. O.
(1989).
“CPMs, International Seminar on Computers for Census and Election,” NIIA, Lagos.
210
