 NATIONAL OPEN UNIVERSITY OF NIGERIA SCHOOL OF MANAGEMENT SCIENCES COURSE CODE: PAD 412 COURSE TITLE: NIGERIAN ADMINISTRATIVE SYSTEM 1  NIGERIAN ADMINISTRATIVE SYSTEM PAD412 Course Guide Course Developer/Writer: Osabiya Babatunde NOUN Course Editor: Dr. A. Eneanya NOUN Programme Leader: Dr.
I. D. Idrisu NOUN Course Coordinator: Osabiya Babatunde NOUN 2 CONTENT Introduction Course Aim Course Objectives Study Units Assignments Tutor Marked Assignment Final Examination and Grading Summary 3 INTRODUCTION You are holding in your hand the course guide for PAD 412‐Nigerian Administrative System.
The purpose of the course guide is to relate to you the basic structure of the course material you are expected to study as a Public Administration Student in National Open University of Nigeria.
Like the name ‘course guide’ implies, it is to guide you on what to expect from the course material and at the end of studying the course material.
COURSE CONTENT The course content consists basically of the Nigerian Administrative System, definition and meaning of the civil services, functions of the civil service, structure and organization of the Nigerian civil service, personnel administration in the civil service, meaning and functions of civil service commission, relationship between the civil servant and the political executives, overview of Nigerian public service reforms, meaning and definition of public corporations, comparison between the organisational structure of public corporations and the civil service, problems of public corporations and their solutions, the role of the local government administrative system, public service rules, ethics accountability and problems of public service and the relationship among the three tiers of government – federal, state and local government.
4 COURSE AIM The aim of the course is to bring to your cognizance the relevant knowledge in respect of Nigerian Administrative System that would enhance your preparation as a public administrator.
COURSE OBJECTIVES At the end of studying the course material, among other objectives, you should be able to: 1. define and explain the meaning of the civil service 2. explain the functions of the civil service 3. explain the structure and organization of the Nigerian civil service 4. the personnel administration in the civil service 5. explain the meaning and functions of civil service commission 6. state the relationship between the civil servant and the political executives 7. explain in details the general overview of Nigerian public service reforms 8. explain the meaning and definition of public corporation 9. comparison between the organisational structure of public corporations and the civil service 10.
Explain the problems of public corporations and their solutions.
11.
The role of the local government administrative system 12.
Ethics accountability and problems of public service 13.
The relationship among the three tiers of government.
5 COURSE MATERIAL The course material package is composed of: The Course Guide The study units Self‐Assessment Exercises Tutor Marked Assignment References/Further Reading THE STUDY UNITS The study units are as listed below: MODULE 1: THE CIVIL SERVICE Unit 1: definition and meaning of the civil services Unit 2 history of public services Unit 3: functions of the civil service Unit 4 features of civil service Unit 5: structure and organization of the Nigerian civil service Unit 6: personnel administration in the civil service Unit 7: meaning and functions of civil service commission Unit 8: relationship between the civil servant and the political executives 6 MODULE 2‐ THE GENERAL OVERVIEW OF SOME OF THE NIGERIAN PUBLIC SERVICE REFORMS‐(FROM PRE‐ INDEPENDENCE TO POST INDEPENDENCE PERIOD) UNIT 1: Sir Walter Harragin Reforms of 1946 UNIT 2: Sir H.M.
Foot Reforms of 1948 UNIT 3: Sir Gorsuch L.H.
Reforms of 1954 – 1955 UNIT 4: Newns A.F.F.P.
Reforms of 1959 UNIT 5: Justice I.N.
Mbanefo Reforms of 1959 MODULE 2‐ OVERVIEW OF NIGERIAN PUBLIC SERVICE REFORMS‐POST INDEPENDENCE UNIT 1: Morgan Commission (1963 – 1964) UNIT 2: Elwood Team (1966) UNIT 3: Adebo Commission (1970 – 1971) UNIT 4: Udoji Commission (1972 – 1974) UNIT 5: Falae Committee Report (1976) UNIT 6: Dotun Phillips Study Team (1985) UNIT 7: Ayida Panel Report (1994) UNIT 8: Obasanjo Reforms MODULE 3: PUBLIC CORPORATIONS UNIT 1‐ Meaning and Definition of PUBLIC CORPORATIONS UNIT 2: REASONS FOR THE ESTABLISHMENT of PUBLIC CORPORATIONS 7 UNIT 3: THE CONTROL of PUBLIC CORPORATIONS UNIT 4: COMPARISON BETWEEN THE ORGANISATIONAL STRUCTURE OF PUBLIC CORPORATIONS AND THE CIVIL SERVICE UNIT 5: PROBLEMS OF PUBLIC CORPORATIONS AND THEIR SOLUTIONS .
UNIT 6: – ETHICS AND ACCOUNTABILITY IN THE PUBLIC SERVICE MODULE 4‐ LOCAL GOVERNMENT SYSTEM IN NIGERIA UNIT 1‐ THE EVOLUTION OF LOCAL GOVERNMENT SYSTEM IN NIGERIA Unit 2: THE GENERAL OVERVIEW OF LOCAL GOVERNMENT ADMINISTRATION UNIT 3‐ THE RELATIONSHIP AMONG THE THREE TIERS OF GOVERNMENT – FEDERAL, STATE AND LOCAL GOVERNMENT.
ASSIGNMENTS Each unit of the course has a self assessment exercise.
You will be expected to attempt them as this will enable you understand the content of the unit.
TUTOR MARKED ASSIGNMENT The Tutor Marked Assignments (TMAs) at the end of each unit are designed to test your understanding and application of the concepts learned.
Besides the preparatory TMAs in the course material to test what has been learnt, it is important that you know that at the end of the course, you must have done your examinable TMAs as they fall due, which are marked electronically.
They make up to 30 percent of the total score for the course.
8 SUMMARY It is not enough to get the course material, it is most imperative you commit adequate effort to the study of the course material for maximum benefit.
Good luck.
NIGERIAN ADMINISTRATIVE SYSTEM PAD412‐ MAIN CONTENT 9 Course Developer/Writer: Osabiya Babatunde NOUN Course Editor: Dr. A. Eneanya NOUN Programme Leader: Dr.
I. D. Idrisu NOUN Course Coordinator: Osabiya Babatunde NOUN TABLE OF CONTENT MODULE 1: THE CIVIL SERVICE Unit 1: DEFINITION AND MEANING OF THE CIVIL SERVICES 10 UNIT 2 HISTORY OF PUBLIC SERVICES Unit 3: FUNCTIONS OF THE CIVIL SERVICE UNIT 4 FEATURES OF CIVIL SERVICE Unit 5: STRUCTURE AND ORGANIZATION OF THE NIGERIAN CIVIL SERVICE Unit 6: PERSONNEL ADMINSTRATION IN THE CIVIL SERVICE Unit 7: MEANING AND FUNCTIONS OF CIVIL SERVICE COMMISSION Unit 8: RELATIONSHIP BETWEEN THE CIVIL SERVANT AND THE POLITICAL EXECUTIVES MODULE 2‐ THE GENERAL OVERVIEW OF SOME OF THE NIGERIAN PUBLIC SERVICE REFORMS‐(FROM PRE‐ INDEPENDENCE TO POST INDEPENDENCE PERIOD) UNIT 1: Sir Walter Harragin Reforms of 1946 UNIT 2: Sir H.M.
Foot Reforms of 1948 UNIT 3: Sir Gorsuch L.H.
Reforms of 1954 – 1955 UNIT 4: Newns A.F.F.P.
Reforms of 1959 UNIT 5: Justice I.N.
Mbanefo Reforms of 1959 MODULE 2‐ OVERVIEW OF NIGERIAN PUBLIC SERVICE REFORMS‐POST INDEPENDENCE UNIT 1: Morgan Commission (1963 – 1964) UNIT 2: Elwood Team (1966) 11 UNIT 3: Adebo Commission (1970 – 1971) UNIT 4: Udoji Commission (1972 – 1974) UNIT 5: Falae Committee Report (1976) UNIT 6: Dotun Phillips Study Team (1985) UNIT 7: Ayida Panel Report (1994) MODULE 3 PUBLIC CORPORATIONS UNIT 1‐ Meaning and Definition of PUBLIC CORPORATIONS UNIT 2: REASONS FOR THE ESTABLISHMENT of PUBLIC CORPORATIONS UNIT 3: THE CONTROL of PUBLIC CORPORATIONS UNIT 4: COMPARISON BETWEEN THE ORGANISATIONAL STRUCTURE OF PUBLIC CORPORATIONS AND THE CIVIL SERVICE UNIT 5: PROBLEMS OF PUBLIC CORPORATIONS AND THEIR SOLUTIONS .
UNIT 6: – ETHICS AND ACCOUNTABILITY IN THE PUBLIC SERVICE MODULE 4‐ LOCAL GOVERNMENT SYSTEM IN NIGERIA UNIT 1‐ THE EVOLUTION OF LOCAL GOVERNMENT SYSTEM IN NIGERIA Unit 2: THE GENERAL OVERVIEW OF LOCAL GOVERNMENT ADMINISTRATION 12 UNIT 3‐ THE RELATIONSHIP AMONG THE THREE TIERS OF GOVERNMENT – FEDERAL, STATE AND LOCAL GOVERNMENT.
Module 1 – THE CIVIL SERVICE UNIT 1 DEFINITION AND MEANING OF THE CIVIL SERVICES CONTENTS 13 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objectives 3.0 Main Content 3.1 Definition and Meaning of Civil Service 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutor‐marked Assignment 7.0 References/Further Reading 1.0 INTRODUCTION The Civil service is the umbrella organisation in which the executive arm of government utilizes to implement the rules and regulations as made by the legislatures.
2.0 OBJECTIVES At the end of this unit, a student should be able to: Define and state what a civil service is all about.
3.0 MAIN CONTENT 3.1 The Definition and Meaning of Civil Service The civil service is a term used to cover these civil servants who are direct employees of the federal and state governments, other than the 14 police, the armed forces personnel, tile judicial personnel and the teachers.
Its usage excludes also employees of statutory corporations and boards (Nwosu 1977).
According to Adebayo (1986) the civil service comprises all servants of the state, other than those holding political appointments, who are employed in a civil capacity and whose remuneration is paid out of (money voted by the legislature.
Adamolekum (1983) sees the civil service as "the body of permanent officials appointed to assist the political executive in formulating and implementing governmental policies".
He also sees the second usage of the term as referring to "the ministries and departments within which specific aspects of government are carried out".
Though people often see the civil service and the public service as the same thing, they are technically, not the same.
Public service as a term is broader in scope than civil service.
Hence it includes not only those who work in the regular government ministries and departments but also statutory cooperations, boards and the armed forces.
Hence Adamolekun (1983) defines it as the totality of services that are organized under government authority.
It can therefore be said that civil service is narrower in scope and excludes some government employees who are public servants.
(Obikeze & Anthony, 2004:140) Meaning of Civil Service The civil service is the administrative structure employed in civil capacity to fulfill government policies and programmes.
This can be viewed in terms of structures i.e.
ministries, departments, etc.
or the 15 human occupants of public offices i.e.
permanent secretaries, ministers, and higher administrative staff.
The Nigerian Interpretation Act of 1964 does not expressly define the term civil service.
However, section 2 of the pensions Act of 1951 defines the 'civil service, as the service in a civil capacity under the government of the federation or in a college University or a pensionable employment under local authority."
The civil service is distinguishable from the military service and police service in that while the latter two are principally concerned with the safeguard of the country from external and internal dangers, the former is concerned with purely civil and non‐technical affairs of the state.
Members of the civil service are employed in a civil capacity as distinguished from military, judicial or police capacity.
Military officers, judicial officers, police officers and many other technical officers like doctors, engineers, and draughtsmen are, strictly speaking, not civil servants.
Civil servants are mainly of two categories: lower clerical staff and higher administrative staff.
The higher administrative staff is directly responsible to the political head of department.
The lower clerical staff helps the administrative staff and works under its direct supervision and control.
The State reaches the citizens through the civil servants who are well trained, skilled and permanent body of professional class of officials, and who have taken government service as a career.
(Ekhator, 2003: 254) SELF ASSESSMENT EXERCISE Explain the meaning of civil service in your own way.
4.0 CONCLUSION 16 The definition and meaning of civil service introduced you to the concept.
More analysis of civil service shall be discussed in subsequent units.
5.0 SUMMARY The concept of civil service is briefly discussed hereby discussing its definition and meaning.
6.0 TUTOR – MARKED ASSIGNMENT Explain the different between definition of Adamolekun and Adebayo in details.
7.0 REFERENCES/ FURTHER READING Ademolekun, L. (1983).
Public Administration: A Nigerian and comparative perspective.
London: Longman Adebayo A.
(1986).
Principle and practice of public Administration in Nigeria (Revised ed).
Ibadan : spectrum Books Ltd Nwosu, H. N (1977) Political Authority and the Nigerian Civil Service Enugu: Fourth Dimension Publishers Obikeze, S.O.
and Obi, E. A.
(2004): Public Administration in Nigeria: A Development approach.
Onitsha Book Point Ltd. UNIT 2 HISTORY OF PUBLIC SERVICES TABLE OF CONTENTS 1.0 Introduction 17 2.0 Objectives 3.0 Main Content 3.1 History of Public Service in Nigeria 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutor‐Marked Assignment 7.0 References/Further Readings 1.0 INTRODUCTION Since the time immemorial, human beings have existed in groups and have subsequently managed their affairs through one form of leadership or another.
Peaceful coexistence usually requires an acceptable mode of common resource sharing and protection of lives and property.
Resources, whether rightfully or wrongly acquired, need to be managed.
This need led to the emergence of machinery to be responsible for ensuring the management of common resources as well as the protection of lives and properties.
This unit gives you a brief history of the origin of public service in Nigeria.
Being your home country, an extensive history of public service in Nigeria is provided as follows: 2.0 OBJECTIVES After studying the unit, you should be able to: 18  (c) Enumerate the main features of the Nigerian Civil Service from the colonial era to the present civilian administration.
3.0 MAIN CONTENT 3.1.
History of Public Service in Nigeria This section is discussed under the following subsections: Nigerian civil service under the British rule, the Nigerian civil service in the first republic, Nigerian civil service under the military and the Nigerian civil service of the 4th republic.
3.1.1 Nigerian Civil Service under the British Rule Kirk‐Greene (1968) explains that the evolution of the public service in Nigeria is in five stages.
These are: (1) The Law and Order Stage of 1890s – 1910 – Balogun (1983) reports that the British government on New Year’s Day in 1900 assumed the responsibility for the administration of Nigeria.
The major role of the British Administration was the maintenance of law and order.
(2) The Consolidation Stage of 1910 – 1925 – This period was the beginning of a legal – rational order and a modern bureaucratic system (Balogun, 1983).
This was the period of allegiance of traditional rulers to British Crown.
(3) The Economic Development Stage of 1925 – 1945 – During this period, the colonial bureaucrats constructed roads, bridges and railway 19 networks.
Other developments include construction of dispensaries and provision of pipe borne water.
(4) The Political Development Stage of 1945 – 1952, and (5) The Transition to Independence and Stage of rapid Nigerianization from 1952 – 1961.
The last two stages witnessed the end of the Second World War which opened the eyes of Nigerians to the values of political independence.
There were demands for the Nigerianization of the public service and independence for Nigeria.
These demands were met.
In October 1, 1960, Nigeria became independent and became a Republic in 1963.
A republic is a political system or form of government in which people elect representatives to exercise power for them (Post, 1964).
3.1.2 Nigerian Civil Service in the First Republic At independence, the federal government was under the Prime Minister and the Governor General was appointed by the Queen.
At that time, there were still British officials as permanent secretaries and professional heads of departments with a few Nigerians.
In 1963, the Nigerian constitution was changed and Nigeria became a republic; the president was no longer appointed from abroad.
He was chosen in Nigeria but didn’t have executive powers which then resided with the Prime Minister and ministers.
In the North, a lot of expatriates were retained as permanent secretaries and professional heads of departments for five, up to seven years on contract basis.
The civil service was allowed to function in its traditional British form and almost throughout the period of nine years that Generals Aguiyi Ironsi and Yakubu Gowon ruled Nigeria as military heads of state, the 20 system was allowed to work.
Every civil servant was employed by the Civil Service Commission or the Public Service Commission as it used to be called.
At that time, workers were vetted, recruited, appointed, graded, disciplined by the Commission.
Minister could neither appoint nor remove civil servants and could not directly discipline them.
Things started to change after the coup that overthrew Gowon in 1975, when thousands were summarily dismissed without the benefit of defending themselves.
(Wikipedia 2011).
The Public Service Commission was the buffer that separated the civil service from the political leadership and it also shielded the service from undue meddling from politicians.
It was a big factor; as it had people who were respected in the society.
As such the civil servants were outstanding, they did their work, they told the truth and if you wanted them to do what was not right, they will tell you that this is wrong.
In the first republic, the politicians and civil servants worked towards the same objective but the method and approach may be different.
However, the minister had the right to decide against the recommendations of the permanent secretary not withstanding all evidence.
The first republic commenced on October 1, 1960 and ended on 14th January, 1966.
3.1.3 Nigerian Civil Service under the Military If you are old enough, you would know that from 1960 to the end of 1990, the military ruled Nigeria for 21 years.
Altogether, there were five 21 coups de’tat involving change of government.
According to the U.S. Library of Congress (2011), these were in January 15, 1966; July 29, 1966; July 29, 1975; December 31, 1983; and August 27, 1985.
There was an unsuccessful coup in February 1976 and another unsuccessful one in April 1990.
The military intervention was attributed to the mismanagement of the Nigerian economy.
The civil service played a prominent role in Nigerian economic development under the military.
Until the 1988 reforms, the civil service was organized strictly according to British traditions.
It was a political, civil servants were expected to serve every government in a non‐partisan way.
The norms of impersonality and hierarchical authority were well entrenched (U.S. Library of Congress, 2011).
By 1990, the civil service had been politicized to the extent that most top officials openly support the government of the day.
The introduction of the Federal Character Clause into recruitment and promotion eroded the culture of meritocracy from the civil service.
3.1.4 Nigerian Civil Service in the Fourth Republic Just to take you back to the memory lane, December 5, 1998, January 9, 1999, February 20 and February 27, 1999 respectively, the then National Electoral Commission (NEC) successfully held elections in Nigeria.
This led to the swearing in of former President Olusegun Obasanjo, as the new Civilian President on May 29, 1999.
Since then, Nigeria has not had any military intervention in politics.
This is the fourth republic.
Since 1999, the Executive arm of government had been run by: 22 (a) Former President Olusegun Obasanjo May 29, 1999 – May 29, 2007 (b) Umaru Yar’Adua 29 May, 2007 – 5 May, 2010 (c) Goodluck Ebele Jonathan 6 May, 2010 – to date The 1999 Constitution Chapter VI, Section D, Para.
169 ( Federal Government of Nigeria 1999) state that there shall be a Public Service of the Federation.
The Principal Officers of the Public Service are: (1) Secretary to the Government of the Federation (2) Head of the Civil Service of the Federation (3) Ambassador, High Commissioner or Other Principal Representative of Nigeria aboard (4) Permanent Secretary in any Ministry or Head of Extra‐Ministerial Department; and (5) Any Officer or the Personal Staff of the President.
The Constitution, specifically, states that an appointment to the Office of the Head of Civil Service of the Federation shall be made except from among Permanent Secretaries or equivalent rank in the Civil Service of the Federation or of a State.
An underlying principle is in paragraph 171 of the 1999 Constitution which states that in exercising his powers of appointment, the President shall have regard to the federal character of Nigeria and the need to promote national unity.
23 4.0 CONCLUSION Civil service in respect of the scope is aimed at implementing government roles and regulation.
In all the civil services discussed, appointment by merit is advocated as the best way to get the needed human resources into the system.
While the basic structure of minister, permanent, secretary and other civil servants remains constant, reforms are periodically undertaken to keep the structure, systems procedures commensurate with current needs 5.0 SUMMARY The unit discussed the history of public service in Nigeria.
In Nigeria, there was the progression of the civil service from the law and order stage in the 1890s‐1910.
To rapid Nigerianization stage from 1952‐ 1961.
There were five military coups.
Since 1999, Nigeria has not had any military intervention in politics.
6.0 TUTOR‐MARKED ASSIGNMENT Explain the 5 stages of evolution of public service in Nigeria.
7.0 REFERENCES/FURTHER READINGS Kirk‐Greene, A.H.M.
(1968).
Lugard and the amalgamation of Nigeria.
London.
Frank Case 24 Post, K.W.J.
(1964).
The Nigerian Federal Elections of 1959.
London.
Oxford University Press.
UNIT 3 FUNCTIONS OF THE CIVIL SERVICE TABLE OF CONTENTS 1.0 Introduction 25 2.0 Objectives 3.0 Main Content 3.1 History of the Nigerian Civil Service 3.2 Organization of the Nigerian Civil Service 3.3 Functions of the Nigerian Civil Service 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutor‐Marked Assignment 7.0 References/Further Readings 1.0 INTRODUCTION The civil service is the organ of government that is responsible for the implementation of government policies.
You should realize that this is an enormous task and would have many sub‐functions.
Even though the civil service is primarily to implement government policies, it also provides policy inputs in form of data and information.
The civil service is the link between one government and the other.
It is the custodian of all records of government activities.
The policy implementation function of the civil service requires a skilled and well‐motivated workforce.
Various reforms have aimed at ensuring a professional and well‐ motivated civil service.
This unit examines the functions of the Nigerian civil service in details.
2.0 OBJECTIVES 26 After studying this unit, you should be able to: Enumerate the functions of the Nigerian Civil Service; 3.0 MAIN CONTENT 3.1 History of the Nigerian Civil Service The Nigerian Civil Service consists of employees in Nigerian government agencies other than the military.
Most employees are career civil servants in the Nigerian ministries, progressing through the ranks on the basis of qualifications and seniority.
The Nigerian Civil Service has its origins in organizations established by the British during the colonial times.
Nigeria gained full independence in October 1960 under a constitution that provided for a parliamentary government and a substantial measure of self‐government for the country’s three regions which where the Eastern, western and Northern region.
Since then, various panels have studied and made recommendations for reforming of the Civil Service, including the Morgan Commission of 1963, the Adebo Commission of 1971 and the Udoji Commission of 1972 – 74.
A major change occurred with the adoption in 1979 of a constitution modeled on that of the United States.
The Dotun Philips Panel of 1985 attempted to reform the Civil Service.
The later report of the Ayida Panel made recommendations to reverse some of the past innovations of the Dotun Phillips panel in order to have a more efficient civil service (Office of Head of Service of the Federation, 2009).
The Civil Service has been undergoing gradual and systematic reforms and restructuring since May 29, 1999 when the 27 military handed over to the civilian government of President Olusegun Obasanjo, after decades of military rule.
In August 2009, the Head of the Civil, Stephen Osagiede Oronsaye, proposed reforms where permanent secretaries and directors would spend a maximum of eight years on the post.
The reform, approved by President Umaru Yar’Adua would result in massive retirement of Permanent Secretaries and Directors within a short time.
Stephen Oronsaye has said that his goal is for the Nigerian civil service to be among the best organized and managed in the world (Adeniyi, 2009) 3.2 Organization of the Nigerian Civil Service The federal civil service, from which the state civil services take cue, is mainly organized around the federal ministries, headed by a minister appointed by the President.
The president’s cabinet must include at least one member of each of the 36 states in his cabinet.
The Senate of Nigeria confirms the President’s appointments.
In some cases, a Federal minister is responsible for more than one ministry (e.g.
Environment and Housing may be combined), and a minister may be assisted by one or more ministers of State (Commonwealth of Nations, 2009).
Each ministry also has a Permanent Secretary, who is a senior civil servant.
The ministries are responsible for various parastatals (government‐ owned corporations).
The Ministry of Education has the Universities as its parastatals.
The National Broadcasting Commission is under the Ministry of Information.
Other Parastatals are the responsibility of the Office of the President (The Presidency), such as the Independent 28 National Electoral Commission, the Economic and Financial Crimes Commission and the Federal Civil Service Commission.
The service has six additional units, which provide services to all departments on the Civil Service (Office of Head of Service of the Federation, 2009).
They are: • Establishment and Record Office (E&RO) • Career Management Office (CMO) • Manpower Development Office (MDO) • Management Services Office (MSO) • Common Services Office (CSO) • Bureau of Public Service Reforms (BPSR) Self Assessment Exercise Briefly trace the history of civil service in Nigeria.
How is the civil service organized in Nigeria?
3.3 Functions of the Nigerian Civil Service Ezeani (2006) discusses five functions of the Nigerian Civil Service, which are explained in this unit to enhance your knowledge.
The functions are: 29 (1) Policy implementation (2) Provision of inputs for policy formulation (3) Investigative and regulatory functions (4) Ensuring continuity of public administration (5) Informative function (1) Policy Implementation The major function of any civil service including that of Nigeria is to implement the policies of any government in power, whether military or civilian.
Irrespective of their political leanings, civil servants are expected to serve the government of the day.
The success of any government in power is a function of the expertise, skills and knowledge of the civil servants.
As you are aware, good government policies can be poorly implemented.
Ezeani (2006) reinforces this when he notes that the function of the civil service is to close the gap between the expression of government intention as represented by their vision, national plans or agenda and their actual accomplishment.
(2) Provision of Inputs for Policy Formulation Nigerian civil servants provide inputs for decision making by the political class.
Through memoranda to their ministers and permanent secretaries, they provide information, data and informed opinions to the political class.
The preparation of the nation’s plans which could be 30 called many names such as Vision 2020, Agenda (7‐point Agenda), National Economic Empowerment and Development Strategies (NEEDS) had a lot of inputs from civil servants and government consultants.
(3) Investigative and Regulatory Ezeani (2006) discusses the investigative and regulatory function of the Nigerian civil service.
According to him, there are many organs of government that are responsible for investigating unacceptable behaviour and also for suggesting appropriate regulations to government.
Such organs are: the National Drug and Enforcement Agencies, Economic and Financial Crimes Commission, Internal Revenue Board, and Independent Corrupt Practices and Miscellaneous Offences Commission.
(4) Continuity of Public Administration As you have read in the definition of civil service, it never dies.
It is a continuous organ irrespective of changes in government.
Civil servants may retire or disengage their services, but there are others who have been groomed to take over from them.
Ezeani (2006) notes that the civil service is a store of knowledge of past government decisions and procedures.
They therefore play an educative role by assisting the political class to realize their roles in governance.
(5) Information Dissemination This function, as you can perceive, is very close to the continuity function.
The difference is that the focus here is on the gathering of data and information which provide a databank for national and non‐ 31 nationals.
The civil service, through the Ministry of Information, is responsible for informing the public about the decisions of government as well as the achievements, activities and major events.
4.0 CONCLUSION The unit discussed the functions of the Nigerian civil service.
You can see that there are similarities and dissimilarities in the functions of the civil services discussed.
However, in respective of the country, the civil service remains the government policy implementation organ.
5.0 SUMMARY The Nigerian Civil Service has its origins in organizations established by the British in colonial times.
Nigeria gained full independence in October 1960 under a constitution that provided for a parliamentary government and a substantial measure of self‐government for the country’s three regions.
Nigerian Civil Service consists of employees in Nigerian government agencies other than the military.
The civil service is mainly organized around the federal ministries, headed by a minister appointed by the President.
(Pierce et.
al., 2009).
6.0.
TUTOR‐MARKED ASSIGNMENT List and briefly explain the functions of civil service in Nigeria.
7.0.
REFERENCES/FURTHER READINGS Adeniyi,Olusegun(2009).The new tenure for permanent secretaries and director in the federal civil 32 service.www.economicconfidential.com/web/index.php7.option=com content & view.
Commonwealth of Nations (2009).
Government ministries in Nigeria.
Ezeani, E.O.
(2006).
Fundamentals of Public Administration.
Enugu.
Saap Press Limited.
McDowell, S.K.
and Beliles, M.A.
(2008).
The Mandate – The Five Functions of Government.
Office of the Head of Service of the Federation (2009).Restructuring of the Head of civil of the federation.www.hosf.gov.ng/node/354.
Pierce, Richard; Shapiro, Sidney A.; Vertcuil Paul (2009).
Administrative Law and Process, Section 4.4 Ib p. 101.
Foundation Press ISBN 1‐59941‐ 425‐2.
UNIT 4 FEATURES OF CIVIL SERVICE CONTENTS 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objectives 33 3.0 Main Content 3.1 Features of Civil Service 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutor‐marked Assignment 7.0 References/Further Reading 1.0 INTRODUCTION Since the Civil service serve as the umbrella organisation in which the executive arm of government utilizes to implement the rules and regulations as made by the legislatures.
So therefore, in order for this umbrella organization to performed beyond expectations, it must be guided by some features and this is the focus of this unit.
2.0 OBJECTIVES At the end of this unit, a student should be able to: Explain in details the features of civil service 3.0 MAIN CONTENT 3.1 The Features of the Civil Service Anonymity:‐The principle of Anonymity states that civil servants should be seen and not by principle be heard.
Though they advise political office holders on issues relating to government they neither take the 34 blame nor the glory of such policies.
They are not expected to be seen defending such policies.
That job is better than left for political office holders and not the career officers.
Civil servants as far as possible, are anonymous, and should not be seen as craving for publicity.
Neutrality: The civil servant must be politically neutral.
His job is to serve the government of the day with full dedication irrespective of what he feels about that particular government.
He ought not allow personal prejudices to colour his dedication to his duty.
He is not expected to be a card carrying member of a political party or get involved in partisan politics though he is expected to vote at election times.
The essence of making the civil servant politically neutral is hinged on the fact that since he does not leave with a change in government, he is not expected to have a strong attachment to any particular government so as to enable him give his best to make government policies succeed irrespective of his personal feelings towards such policies or government.
Impartiality:‐Civil servants are paid from tax payer money which does not belong to anybody or group in particular.
They are therefore expected to discharge their duties without fear or favour.
Since the constitution emphasizes the equality of all citizens, they are supposed to be treated equally by the civil servants.
In rendering service to the public, the civil servant is expected to treat everybody with a high degree of impartiality.
Permanence:‐The civil service is often defined as a permanent body of officials that carry out government decisions: It is permanent and it's 35 life is not tied to the life of any, particular government.
Governments come and go but the service remains, or to use the; Nigerian Jargon, `soldier go, soldier come but barrack remains'.
The civil service in this '' regard, is the barrack that remains.
(Obikeze & Anthony:2004) SELF ASSESSMENT EXERCISE How many features of Civil service are mentioned in this unit.
4.0 CONCLUSION In the civil service or public service of Nigeria, the officer are guided by these features of the civil service.
It was based on these features that they will responsible for the implementation of the government policies and programmes.
5.0 SUMMARY The features of civil service and their meaning are discussed in details.
6.0 TUTOR – MARKED ASSIGNMENT Mention and explain three main features of civil service 7.0 REFERENCES/ FURTHER READING Ademolekun, L. (1983).
Public Administration: A Nigerian and comparative perspective.
London: Longman Adebayo A.
(1986).
Principle and practice of public Administration in Nigeria (Revised ed).
Ibadan: spectrum Books Ltd 36 Nwosu, H. N (1977) Political Authority and the Nigerian Civil Service Enugu: Fourth Dimension Publishers Obikeze, S.O.
and Obi, E. A.
(2004): Public Administration in Nigeria: A Development approach.
Onitsha Book Point Ltd. UNIT 5: STRUCTURE AND ORGANIZATION OF THE NIGERIAN CIVIL SERVICE CONTENTS 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objectives 3.0 Main Content 37 3.1 The structure of Nigerian civil service 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutor‐marked Assignment 7.0 References/Further Readings 1.0 INTRODUCTION Nigeria was colonized by Britain and the civil service in Nigeria was modelled after that of Britain.
The evolution of the civil service in Nigeria started from colonial period and has undergone many processes.
You are being treated to these process to enable you know how the civil service had evolved over the years.
2.0 OBJECTIVES • To enable you know the evolution of Nigerian Civil Service; • The Structure of the Nigerian Civil Service.
3.0 MAIN CONTENT 3.1 The Structure and Organisation of the Nigerian Civil Service Prior to the Udoji Commission Report of (1974), the Nigerian civil servants were divided into two separate groups ‐ the Administrative group and the professional group.
Both groups were hierarchically organized.
While the administrative group was made up of the administrative class, the executive class the clerical class and the manipulative class, the professional group consisted of the professional 38 class, the technical class, the auxiliary class and the minor technical class.
Each of the classes within the two groups operated so rigidly that it was very difficult for a civil servant to move from a lower to a higher class.
This implied that a civil servant once recruited remained in the same class or grade throughout his service career.
However, in 1974, based on the recommendations of the Udoji Commission on the re‐organization of the civil service, the Federal Government of Nigeria abolished the former four classes and replaced them with a unified grading system in which all the jobs or positions in the service were graded from levels 01‐17, grade level 01 being the lowest while grade level 17 represents the highest position in the civil service.
With this development, an employee can now join the service at level 01 and climbs upwards to his ability before retirement.
In spite of this significant change, five main classes of civil servants still exist today in Nigeria, though not officially: These include the administrative class, the professional class, the executive class, the clerical class, and the manipulative class.
Let us briefly explain each of these classes; 1.
The administrative class: This is the most prestigious and remunerative class in the civil service.
Civil servants in this class are very close to the political head, i.e., the ministers/commissioners.
Their main function is to advise the political head on policy matters.
To be recruited into this class, the applicant must possess at least a second class honours degree from a recognized University and must in addition pass the interview conducted by the civil service commission.
39 2.
The professional class: This class consists of specialists like doctors, lawyers, engineers, surveyors, architects, etc., who are charged with the responsibility of advising the government on technical matters.
These experts help the government in construction of roads, houses, run hospitals, engage in agriculture, etc.
3.
The executive class: The executive class consists of such positions as the executive officer, higher executive officer and senior executive officer.
Civil servants in this class are involved in general administration and are charged with the actual implementation of government policies and programmes.
The executive class used to be recruited from among people with good Higher School Certificates or General Certificate of Education, Advanced Level or a Diploma in Public Administration.
These days, however, it has become the preserve of the people with less than a second class lower degree as well as that of Higher National Diploma Holders in the relevant fields.
4.
Clerical class: This class is made of a large number of subordinate staff who perform supportive functions to the government.
5.
The manipulative or Auxiliary class: This class is made up of all the skilled and semi‐skilled workers who abound in the various ministries and departments.
These include the drivers, cleaners, guards postmen, gardeners, etc.
who represent the manual labour forces of the government.
(Ekhator, 2003:259‐261).
SELF ASSESSMENT EXERCISE 40 What are the 5 main classes of civil servant 4.0 CONCLUSION The evolution of civil service in Nigeria started in 1900 when Britain formally colonized Nigeria.
Since then many reforms had changed the structures of the civil service in Nigeria.
You are treated to these changes in the civil service to enable you know its evolutionary process.
5.0 SUMMARY In this unit, we discussed the evolutionary and structural processes of the civil service in Nigeria.
Main features and events were highlighted and discussed.
6.0 TUTOR‐MARKED ASSIGNMENT Who were the field officers during colonial administration?
7.0 REFERENCE/ FURTHER READING Ekhator, V.E.
(2003), Rudiments of Public Administration.
Kaduna: Joyce Graphic Printers & Publishers Ferrel, H. Civil Service in David L. Skills (ed) (1968), International Encyclopedia of the Social Sciences.
Vol.
2.
New York: McWilliams.
Kingsley, J.O.
(1953), “Bureaucracy and Political Development with Particular Reference to Nigeria” in Joseph, L. (ed) Bureaucracy and Political Development.
New Jersey: Princeton University Press.
41 Nwosu, H.N (1977).
Political Authority and the Nigerians Civil Service.
Enugu: Fourth Dimension Publishers.
Obikeze, S.O.
and Obi, E.A.
(2004) Public Administration in Nigeria: A developmental Approach.
Onitsha: BOOK POINT LTD. Odumosu, O. I.
(1963), Nigerian Constition.
London Sweet and Maxwell Riggs, F.G. (1964).
Administration in Developing Countries The Theory of Prismatic Society.
Boston: Houghton Mittin and Co. UNIT 6: PERSONNEL ADMINSTRATION IN THE CIVIL SERVICE CONTENT 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objectives 3.0 Main Content 3.1 Definitions of Personnel Administration and Civil Service.
3.2 Personnel Administration in the Civil Service 42 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutor Marked Assignment 7.0 References/Further Reading 1.0 INTRODUCTION The coexistence of any group of people anywhere in the world requires some form of personnel administration and division of labour in order to maintain the existence of the group.
The main purpose of this unit is to enable you to know that personnel administration denotes the process of recruiting, deployment and developing human resources for the effectiveness of an organization.
2.0 OBJECTIVES After studying this unit, students should be able to: Mention matters relating to personnel administration Mode of appointment of personnel into the civil service Define personnel administration Define civil service – civil service commission 3.0 Main Content 3.1 Definitions of Personnel Administration and Civil Service.
3.2 Personnel Administration in the Civil Service In the civil service of most countries, matters relating to personnel administration are recruitment, promotion, transfer and discipline of 43 official employees, are the responsibility of the civil service commission, which is usually an independent, non‐partisan body.
Appointment of personnel into the civil service may be through the “spoils” system, a “merit” system or a combination of both, as in the United States.
The spoils system refers to a general removal of civil servants whenever a new party comes into power, followed by a wholesale redistribution of offices to loyalists to reward them for their roles in ensuring the electoral success of the new party.
A glaring disadvantage of this system is that the civil service may become filled with unqualified and incompetent people, to the exclusion of many qualified ones.
The merit system of recruitment is based upon candidate demonstration of suitability for public office.
The civil servant is recruited because of his educational qualifications and satisfactory performances in competitive examinations and interviews.
Under the civil service system, the civil servant has a career job.
He cannot be removed simply on partisan grounds.
In return, he is expected to be politically neutral and impartial.
4.0 CONCLUSION The federal and State governments in Nigeria adopt the merit system of selection into the civil service.
The system is operated by the civil service commission of each state.
The process of recruitment includes the advertisement of vacant public posts, conduct of written examinations, tests and interviews for candidates.
44 5.0 SUMMARY The entry into the civil service is based on general educational qualifications of the applicants and not on the knowledge of the work to be done in the organization.
The structure of the civil service is roughly linked to that of the educational system itself.
The entry requirements for the administrative class correspond to a first or second class honours University degree, entry requirements for the executive class correspond to the GCE Advanced level while those for clerical staff are equivalent to the GCE Ordinary Level.
Promotion from one grade or class to another is possible.
Thus, promotions can be made from the executive to the administrative class.
There is good deal of interchange at the top grades.
A civil servant is likely to work in many departments during the course of his career.
Finally, upon recruitment, apart from acquiring the necessary on‐thejob experience, civil servants are also exposed to opportunities for systematic training and periodic refresher courses and seminars in institutions in Nigeria and abroad.
Such opportunities enhance the efficiency of the civil services.
6.0 TUTOR MARKED ASSIGNMENT Explain in detail the mode of entry into the civil service in Nigeria.
What are the responsibilities of the civil serves commission?
45 What are the processes of recruitment into the civil service in Nigeria?
7.0 REFERENCES/FURTHER READINGS Federal Republic of Nigeria (1997); Civil Service Handbook, Lagos, Federal Government Press.
Remi Anifowoshe (2001); Government, Lagos, Longman.
Chuks Maduabum (2006); Reforming Government Bureaucracies in Nigeria, Lagos, ASCON Press.
UNIT 7: MEANING AND FUNCTIONS OF CIVIL SERVICE COMMISSION CONTENT 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objectives 3.0 Main content 3.1 Meaning of the Civil Service Commission 3.2 Functions of the Civil Service Commission 4.0 Conclusion 46 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutor Marked Assignment 7.0 References/Further Readings 1.0 INTRODUCTION The main purpose of this Unit is to give you full meaning of civil service commission.
The unit covers the functions of the civil service commission in details.
The other sections are the conclusion and summary.
Self assessments exercise and tutor marked assignments are also included for yourself developed.
2.0 OBJECTIVES: After studying this unit, you should be able to:‐ Explain meaning of civil service commission Explain the composition of the board of the commission Explain the functions of the commission Explain the tenure of office of the board of the commission.
3.0 Main Content 3.1 Meaning of the Civil Service Commission The civil service commission is an independence body, the primary role of the commission is to handle recruitment into the civil service centrally.
The body consists of a chairman and other members who are appointed by the President or Governor, as the case may be.
They are not responsible to any minister or commissioner.
They can only be 47 removed as a consequence of misconduct or proven inability to do their job.
The commission is insulated from political influence, and therefore does not take orders relating to its duties from the government or any political party.
The 1989 constitution of Nigeria provides for the establishment of a Federal Civil Service Commission.
This body is empowered to appoint persons to offices in the Federal Civil Service and to exercise disciplinary control over civil servants without being subject to the direction or control of any other person or authority.
Section 151 of the constitution provides that the commission should be composed of a chairman and not more than nine (9) members.
Members are to be appointed by the President and should, in hi opinion, be persons of unquestionable integrity and sound political judgement.
The tenure of members is for five years in the first instance.
The president can only remove the chairman or member (s) of the commission if acting on an address supported by a two thirds majority of the senate and arising from the inability of or misconduct of such chairman or member(s).
Self Assessment Exercise 1.
Explain the following in your own words:‐ 48 2.
Meaning of the civil service commission 3.
Composition of the board of the commission 4.
Functions of the civil service commission 5.
Tenure of the board of the commission 3.2 Functions of the Civil Service Commission.
(a) It recruits qualified people into the civil service.
The recruitment is based upon the qualifications and performance of the candidates in competitive written examinations and interviews.
(b) The promotion of senior civil servants form one class to another is the responsibility of the commission.
(c) The movement or transfer of civil servants form one department to the other is also controlled by the commission.
(d) The civil service commission takes disciplinary action against civil servants who misbehave or infringe on the regulations in the civil service Rules, formerly known as the General Orders.
(e) It gives advice to the government on the appointment of the suitable individuals to full certain top public offices e.g.
top management positions of public corporations and agencies.
(f) The commission places new entrants in the departments for which their qualifications and aptitudes bear most appropriate.
(g) It cooperates closely with Treasury division of the ministry of finance in matters dealing with the pay, conditions of service and allocation of civil servants to ministries.
49 4.0 CONCLUSION In the federal civil service of Nigeria, the Civil Service Commission is responsible only for civil servants of Grade Level 08‐17.
For officers on grade level 07 and below.
The commission, under legal notice No.
24 of 1977, has delegated to Directors – General, Registrar, Meaning Director, Executive Secretary and Heads of extra‐ministerial departments to powers to appoint, promote and discipline.
5.0 SUMMARY The meaning of civil service commission and its functions are discussed in details.
6.0 TUTOR MARK ASSIGNMENT What are the main functions of the Civil Service Commission.
Explain the meaning of civil service commission in details.
7.0 REFERENCES/FURTHER READING Federal Republic of Nigeria (1997); Civil Service Handbook, Lagos, Federal Government Press.
Remi Anifowoshe (2001); Government, Lagos, Longman.
Chuks Maduabum (2006); Reforming Government Bureaucracies in Nigeria, Lagos, ASCON Press.
50  UNIT 8: RELATIONSHIP BETWEEN THE CIVIL SERVANT AND THE POLITICAL EXECUTIVES CONTENT 1.0 introduction 2.0 Objectives 3.0 Main Contents 3.1The Relationship between them 51 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutor Marked Assignment 7.0 References/Further Readings 1.0 Introduction There is a relationship between the civil servants and the political executives.
This is discussed in this unit for your understanding.
2.0 Objectives At the end of this unit, you will know the relationship between them.
3.0 Main Content 3.1 RELATIONSHIP BETWEEN THE CIVIL SERVANT AND THE POLITICAL EXECUTIVES Constitutionally, the civil servant is a servant who carries out the directives of his political master (the Minister, the Commissioner), whatever his own views on the matter may be.
In practice, however, the higher civil servants, who constitute a minority of officials in the service, have considerable influence on, and play a significant part in deciding the policies of government.
This is 52 because of the relationship between the Minister and senior civil servants.
The views of the experienced civil servants are bound to carry a lot of weight with the minister.
He is usually not a civil servant himself and therefore, needs the advice of his expert officials.
The Minster is often appointed to the office because he is an active and loyal member of a political party and a member of the legislature, not because he possesses specialized knowledge of the affairs of a particular department of government.
For example, it is useful but not obligatory for the minister of Health to be a medical doctor by training.
A civil servant will probably have spent his whole working life in government service and thus have detailed knowledge of the particular department.
A minister who may be new on the job will have to look to such experienced officials for advice on the technical and administrative details of his work.
He has to rely on them to supply him with facts and arguments, which will probably influence his own views and through him, those of the cabinet.
As remarked by notable British Scholar, the great advantage of having permanent officials at the highest levels of government is that they make available to new minister’s an unrivalled fund of experience.
The extent to which the views of the civil servant affect the decisions of the Minister depends upon the nature of the decision, as well as the personalities of both the civil servant himself and the Minister.
The top civil servant’s influence may be nil where the minster is of strong character, with definite views of his own.
He may come to his office with a clear idea of what he wants to achieve and how he intends to do it.
On the other hand, the influence may be considerable if the minster 53 is susceptible to argument and persuasion and the senior official is able to provide these.
What is important is harmony between the minister and the civil servant for the smooth running of the government.
A civil servant will always have his sympathiers and, if he is a strong personality, may press them vigorously to the extent that official views prevail over those of the minister, yet he must learn to subjugate his own views.
He must keep to the broad lines of cabinet policy, knowing that his minster will have to defend this at the legislature.
The Minister, unlike the civil servant, is responsible to the electorate through the legislature.
Being the mandated representative of the people, it is necessary for him to tell the civil servants what the public will not accept.
Maladministration of the ministry is, in the final analysis, to be blamed on the government of the day and not on the civil servant who hides under the cloak of anonymity.
4.0 Conclusion The relationship between civil servants and the political executives has been analysed in details for you to understand how the system operates.
5.0 Summary Extensive analysis of the relationship between are discussed in this unit.
6.0 Tutor‐Marked Assignment 54 (a) Who is a civil servant?
(b) Discuss in details the relationship between them.
7.0 References/Further Reading Federal Republic of Nigeria (1997); Civil Service Handbook, Lagos, Federal Government Press.
Remi Anifowoshe (2001); Government, Lagos, Longman.
Chuks Maduabum (2006); Reforming Government Bureaucracies in Nigeria, Lagos, ASCON Press.
MODULE 2‐ THE GENERAL OVERVIEW OF SOME OF THE NIGERIAN PUBLIC SERVICE REFORMS‐(FROM PRE‐ INDEPENDENCE TO POST INDEPENDENCE PERIOD) UNIT 1: Administrative/Salary Review of Established Staff (alias Harragin Commission) TABLE OF CONTENTS 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objectives 55 3.0 Main Content 3.1.1 Sir Walter Harragin Reforms of 1946 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutor‐Marked Assignment 7.0 References/Further Readings 1.0 INTRODUCTION The antecedent to the Harragin Commission could be traced to the end of the second world war in 1945 and the attendant problems of that war such as inflation, scarcity of essential food items , and astronomical rise in cost of living and these issues compelled the eventual setting up of the Harragin Commission.
The main purpose of this Unit is to give you details of the Harragin Commission .The unit covers the commission terms of reference and its recommendations The other sections are the conclusion and summary.
Self assessments exercise and tutor marked assignments are also included for yourself developed.
2.0 Objectives After studying this unit, you should be able to:‐ 1.
Mention the terms of reference of the commission 2.
Mention its recommendations.
3.0 Main Content 3.1 Sir Walter Harragin Reforms of 1946 56 These reforms was to review the salary and administrative structure of established staff at that time, that is, the four west African colonies.
The Harragin Commission was eventually set up in 1945 with terms of reference and to make recommendations (Maduabum, 2006).
The Commission terms of reference are as follows: (1) The General standards of remuneration and superannuation payments; (2)The relationship of salaries and conditions of service of locally recruited and externally recruited officers, (3) The Machinery for adjusting remuneration to variations in the cost of living; (4)The provision of suitable arrangement for consultation between the government and organizations representing the interests of the staff on matters relating to salaries and conditions of service; and (5) The provision , by means of Public Service Commission or otherwise, of suitable machinery , where this is not already in existence , for regulating the selection and promotion of candidates for posts, the filling of which is not subject to the approval of the Secretary of State.
The Commission made 65 recommendations, prominent among those which had a great impact on the service are: (1) Award of substantial increase in salaries by way of Cost‐of‐Living Allowances; (2)The creation of higher entry point of salaries for African Technical Staff; 57 (3) The creation of a two‐service structure known as “Senior Service” and “Junior Service” respectively.
It furthermore created within the junior service category a dichotomy between the pure clerical grade and the technical grade: (4)The introduction of civil service examinations in the junior service and emphasis on non‐monetary Benefits as an important factor in the area of Personnel Management.
(5) The establishment of Advisory councils patterned after the Whitley Councils in the United Kingdom to offer advice to the government on all issues relating to the salaries and conditions of employment of civil servants 4.0 CONCLUSION A significant structural change brought by The Commission was the setting aside of the old system of African and European Posts and the replacement of this with the Senior and Junior Services with the same basic salary for both Europeans and Africans, and in addition expatriation pay for Europeans.
Prior to the setting to the setting up of the Harragin Commission, however, government employees were classified under four categories: Group 1: Mostly Senior Administrative and Professional Officers: Group 2: Technologists and Technicians: 58 Group 3: African Officers holding senior posts in the junior service (for example Office and Secretarial Assistants and Chief Clerks) Group 4: All Subordinate Posts in the Junior Service The above four categories were merged into two by the Harragin Commission.
Group 1 and 2 were merged and referred to as senior service while Group 3 and 4 were similarly merged and referred to as junior service.
5.0 SUMMARY The search for a more responsive public service for Nigeria culminated in the setting up of several commissions at various times and dating back to the period of colonial administration.
In this unit, we discussed the terms of reference and recommendations of the commission in details.
The recommendations of the commission was applied to the established staff of four west African colonies (Nigeria, Gold Coast now Ghana, Sierra‐Leone and Gambia) 6.0.
TUTOR‐MARKED ASSIGNMENT 1.
What are the terms of reference of the commission 2.
What are the recommendations of the commission.
7.0.
REFERENCES/FURTHER READINGS 59 1.
Adegoroye A.S(2006).
Public service Reform for sustainable development: The Nigerian experience.
Www.
Victoria.
Ac.
N2/…/ 2006/ Nigeria/% 20 Adegoroye % 20.
2.
Ayeni, V.A.
(1987).
“The Civil Service and Policy Process” in Sanda, O.A., Olusola, O., and Ayeni, V.A.
(eds.).
The Impact of Military Rule on Nigeria’s Administration.
Ile‐Ife: University of Ife Press Limited.
3.
Balogun, M.J. (1983).
Public Administration in Nigeria: A Developmental Approach.
Lagos: Macmillan.
4.
Federal republic of Nigeria (1997).
Civil service Handbook.
Lagos: Federal Government Press.
5.
Maduabum,(2006), Reforming Government Bureaucracies in Nigeria: The Journey so far.
Topo Badagry.
Administrative staff college of Nigeria.
6.
Okereke, O.O.
(2003).
“The Nigerian Civil Service after the Structural Adjustment Programme: Some Critical Reminiscences”, Nigerian Journal of Politics and Administration, Vol.
….
No.3.
UNIT 2: The Commission on Recruitment and Training of Nigerians for Appointments to Senior Posts in the Civil Service (a.k.a Foot Commission) TABLE OF CONTENTS 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objectives 3.0 Main Content 3.1 Sir H.M. Foof Reforms of 1948 60 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutor‐Marked Assignment 7.0 References/Further Readings 1.0 INTRODUCTION The antecedents and stimulus to setting up the Foot commission were the need to offer opportunities to Nigerians to occupy the upper reaches of the service which, as were earlier stated, were predominantly occupied by the expatriates (British) Hence, the Foot commission is sometimes referred to as the Nigerianization Commisssion.
It all began as a protest by the nascent nationalist movement of the 1920s against discriminatory practices in the employment, placement, privileges, and career advancement of Nigerians based solely on racial considerations.
Following relentless pressure by the nationalists, the Legislative Council in 1947 appointed a Commission on the recruitment and training of Nigerians for appointment to senior posts in the Civil Service.
The Commission was headed by Mr H. M Foot, the then Chief Secretary to the Government.
The main purpose of this Unit is to give you details of the Foot Commission .The unit covers the recommendations and other sailent points.
The other sections are the conclusion and summary.
Self assessments exercise and tutor marked assignments are also included for yourself developed.
2.0 Objectives 61 After studying this unit, you should be able to:‐ To discuss at length the background and recommendations of the Foot Commission.
3.0 Main Content 3.1 Sir H.M.
Foot Reforms of 1948 This reform was on the recruitment and training of Nigerians for appointments into senior posts in the civil service.
Because of this, it is often referred to as the Nigerianisation Commission (Maduabum2006).
Some of the recommendations were; (1) Certain principles of policy should be accepted, chief amongst which is that No Non‐Nigerian should be appointed to any Government post except where there are no suitable and qualified Nigerians was available; (2) Departmental Selection Board should be appointed to make recommendations for promotions to the senior service; and for selection of junior officers for training with a view to ultimate promotion to senior posts; (3) The system of study leave should be opened to junior staff.
(4) Public Service Board with non‐official majorities should be appointed to select candidates for senior services posts as well as for scholarship and training schemes: (5)385 scholarships and training awards should be made within the next 3 years to bring the total estimated cost of scholarships and training schemes during that period.
62 (6) An experimental system of additional secondary school scholarships be introduced: (7) Special consideration be given to applicants for scholarships and training courses from the northern provinces (8) Local training facilities be enlarged and improved: (9)A special additional allocation of 30 scholarships be made for women (10) Members of the staff of Native Authorities, Local Government Authorities and Voluntary Agencies be considered on the basis of equality with Government offices for Government scholarships and training schemes.
4.0.
CONCLUSION The Foot Commission which was popularly known as the Nigerianization observed that the training and recruitment of Nigerians for posts in the Government Services were not only necessary to enable Nigerians to take on increasing share in management o f their affairs and to allow the service to keep with the pace of constitutional advancement, but also essential for the development and progress of the country.
We can conclude that through this commission, a new development was emerged on the horizon destined to further augment the number and power position of Nigerians in the civil service.
It was the founding 63 of the University College, Ibadan now University of Ibadan, in 1948, following the acceptance by the British Government of the recommendations made by two commissions it inaugurated in 1943.
5.0 SUMMARY This commission recommended the institution of special training schemes for higher grades to facilitate speedy take‐over from the remaining European officials.
Another success that was recorded by this commission was the establishment of Yaba Higher College and later the Northern Regional Institute of Administration –The two pioneer higher institutions, as a strategy for implementing the Nigerianization policy in the civil service.
Despite these achievements, the Foot Commission could not address the structural imbalance of the civil service.
The lack of intermediate categories between the two services‐ senior and junior implied that the important middle management functions were either done at the senior level or inefficiently done at the junior level.
6.0.
TUTOR‐MARKED ASSIGNMENT 1.
What are the recommendations of the Foot Commission.
2.
What are the achievements of the Foot Commission 7.0.
REFERENCES/FURTHER READINGS 64 1.
Adegoroye A.S(2006).
Public service Reform for sustainable development: The Nigerian experience.
Www.
Victoria.
Ac.
N2/…/ 2006/ Nigeria/% 20 Adegoroye % 20.
2.
Ayeni, V.A.
(1987).
“The Civil Service and Policy Process” in Sanda, O.A., Olusola, O., and Ayeni, V.A.
(eds.).
The Impact of Military Rule on Nigeria’s Administration.
Ile‐Ife: University of Ife Press Limited.
3.
Balogun, M.J. (1983).
Public Administration in Nigeria: A Developmental Approach.
Lagos: Macmillan.
4.
Federal republic of Nigeria (1997).
Civil service Handbook.
Lagos: Federal Government Press.
5.
Maduabum,(2006), Reforming Government Bureaucracies in Nigeria: The Journey so far.
Topo‐Badagry.
Administrative staff college of Nigeria.
6.
Okereke, O.O.
(2003).
“The Nigerian Civil Service after the Structural Adjustment Programme: Some Critical Reminiscences”, Nigerian Journal of Politics and Administration, Vol.
….
No.
3.
65  UNIT 3: The Commission on Public Service of the Governments in the Federation of Nigeria (a. k. a Sir Gorsuch L.H.
Reforms of 1954 – 1955) TABLE OF CONTENTS 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objectives 3.0 Main Content 3.1 Gorsuch L.H.
Reforms of 1954 – 1955 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutor‐Marked Assignment 66 7.0 References/Further Readings 1.0 INTRODUCTION This commission came about as a result of problems that arose from constitutional changed through which there is a need to look into the structure and remuneration of the public service and examine the problems from the individual aspect of the future federal and regional governments in the light of all the factors involved both of similarity and divergence and make recommendations in a form suitable for submission to the future governments of the federation and of the regions.
The main purpose of this Unit is to give you details of the Gorsuch Commission .The unit covers the recommendations and other points.
The other sections are the conclusion and summa ry.
Self assessments exercise and tutor marked assignments are also included for yourself developed.
2.0 OBJECTIVES After studying this unit, you should be able to: To discuss at length the background and recommendations of the Gorsuch Commission 3.0.
MAIN CONTENT 3.1 Gorsuch L.H.
Reforms of 1954 – 1955 The Gorsuch Commission was set up to inquire into the structure, remuneration of the public service and examine the problems of the 67 future Federal and Regional governments.
The Commission recommended that the Public Service Commission was to be solely responsible for the appointments, promotion and discipline of public officers.
In terms of structure, the Commission recommended five grades of administrative officers and five grades of professional officers( Table 2) as follows (Maduabum, 2006): Table 2: Five Grades of the Gorsuch Reforms Administrative 1.
Sub‐Clerical 2.
Clerical 3.
Executive 4.
Administrative 5.
Superscale Professional/Technical 1.
Minor Technical 2.
Technical 3.
Higher Technical 4.
Professional 5.
Superscale Source: Maduabunn (2006: 43).
The consequence of the Gorsuch commission recommendations could be identified in two basic directions; 68 1.
Emphasis on the rule and modus operandi of the public service commission, that is, it is only serving officials that should be cease as soon as possible to serve on the public service commission and to ensure the neutrality of the commission and also ensure that it commands the confidence of the public.
2.
That the individual public servant is bound to serve the government of the day with unvarying loyalty, whatever its political complexion or constitution may be.
Thus, the public service commission was in effect to be a body whose sole purpose was to ensure that appointments to the service, promotions and disciplinary control in respect of inefficiency or misconduct, were dealt with on a continuing standard of detached impartiality and fairness, uninfluenced by political changes or pressures.
4.0.
CONCLUSION We can conclude by saying that in the area of structure, the Gorsuch commission observed that the rigid division of the service into Senior and Junior Services was defective in view of the absence of an adequate middle part and to bridge the gap between the junior and the senior services.
This remained the basic structure of the civil service until the public service review commission of 1972‐1974 introduced a unified salary grading structure in 1975.
Finally, this Gorsuch structural arrangements were organised along two parallel hierarchies of professional and administrative classes in the departments and secretariat which were merged under the 1954 ministerial system.
69 5.0.
SUMMARY This section deals with the background to the setting up of the commission, its terms of reference and its recommendations.
This unit also look at consequences of the commission recommendations to the government of the federation.
6.0.
TUTOR‐MARKED ASSIGNMENT 1.
What are the recommendations of the Gorsuch Commission.
2.
What are the achievements of the Gorsuch Commission 7.0.
REFERENCES/FURTHER READINGS 1.
Adegoroye A.S(2006).
Public service Reform for sustainable development: The Nigerian experience.
Www.
Victoria.
Ac.
N2/…/ 2006/ Nigeria/% 20 Adegoroye % 20.
2.
Ayeni, V.A.
(1987).
“The Civil Service and Policy Process” in Sanda, O.A., Olusola, O., and Ayeni, V.A.
(eds.).
The Impact of Military Rule on Nigeria’s Administration.
Ile‐Ife: University of Ife Press Limited.
3.
Balogun, M.J. (1983).
Public Administration in Nigeria: A Developmental Approach.
Lagos: Macmillan.
70 4.
Federal republic of Nigeria (1997).
Civil service Handbook.
Lagos: Federal Government Press.
5.
Maduabum,(2006), Reforming Government Bureaucracies in Nigeria: The Journey so far.
Topo‐Badagry.
Administrative staff college of Nigeria.
6.
Okereke, O.O.
(2003).
“The Nigerian Civil Service after the Structural Adjustment Programme: Some Critical Reminiscences”, Nigerian Journal of Politics and Administration, Vol.
….
No.
3.
7.
Taylor,(2011).
Articulating Reform and the Hegemony Game.http://Louisville.
Edu/ journal/ workplace./ issue 5p2/taylor,html.downloaded.
21 March,2011.
UNIT 4: Integrating Ministries and Departments (a.k.a Newns A.F.F.P.
Reforms of 1959) TABLE OF CONTENTS 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objectives 3.0 Main Content 3.1 Newns A.F.F.P.
Reforms of 1959 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutor‐Marked Assignment 7.0 References/Further Readings 71 1.0 INTRODUCTION Since the service was mainly constituted into departments that were manned and headed by professionals / Technicians.
The generalist administrative officers were very few and concentrated mainly in the Chief Secretary Office.
However, the bold step taken by Gorsuch to dislodge the two service structure still left the service with a parallel arrangement.
An attempt to intergrate these two parallel arrangement into one led to the setting up of the Newns Commission of 1959.
2.0 OBJECTIVES After studying this unit, you should be able to: (a) explain the roles and functions of the permanent secretary in details (b) identify its recommendations 3.0 Main Content 3.1 Newns A.F.F.P.
Reforms of 1959 This Commission was set up to work out modalities for the integration of Ministries and Departments, to define the roles and functions of Permanent Secretaries and evolve administrative machinery for the operations of the Ministries.
The Commission recommended the merger of the professional and administrative divisions.
The Commission also gave the Permanent Secretary the power of general 72 supervision of the Ministry and to act as the link between the Minister and the Heads of Departments.
4.0.
CONCLUSION By Newns integration, the permanent secretary was given the power of general supervision of the ministry functions and was link between the minister and the ministry though the heads of departments were allowed access to the minister.
In its recommendations, the commission merged the professional departments with the administrative divisions and gave the permanent secretary an edge professional counterparts.
Among the functions of the permanent secretary arising from the recommendations is that of Accounting Officer of the ministry.
5.0.
SUMMARY This section deals with the genesis of the system of integration in the Nigerian public services life.
This commission was put in place to work out modalities for the integration of ministries and to define the role and functions of the permanent secretaries, and evolve an administrative machinery for the operations of the ministries.
Their objectives and recommendations were stated.
6.0.
TUTOR‐MARKED ASSIGNMENT 1.
Explain the roles and functions of the permanent secretary in details 2.
What are its recommendations 3.
Explain the relationship between the professional and administrative class.
73 7.0.
REFERENCES/FURTHER READINGS 1.
Adegoroye A.S(2006).
Public service Reform for sustainable development: The Nigerian experience.
Www.
Victoria.
Ac.
N2/…/ 2006/ Nigeria/% 20 Adegoroye % 20.
2.
Ayeni, V.A.
(1987).
“The Civil Service and Policy Process” in Sanda, O.A., Olusola, O., and Ayeni, V.A.
(eds.).
The Impact of Military Rule on Nigeria’s Administration.
Ile‐Ife: University of Ife Press Limited.
3.
Balogun, M.J. (1983).
Public Administration in Nigeria: A Developmental Approach.
Lagos: Macmillan.
4.
Federal republic of Nigeria (1997).
Civil service Handbook.
Lagos: Federal Government Press.
5.
Maduabum,(2006), Reforming Government Bureaucracies in Nigeria: The Journey so far.
Topo‐Badagry.
Administrative staff college of Nigeria.
6.
Okereke, O.O.
(2003).
“The Nigerian Civil Service after the Structural Adjustment Programme: Some Critical Reminiscences”, Nigerian Journal of Politics and Administration, Vol.
….
No.
3.
74  MODULE 2‐ THE GENERAL OVERVIEW OF SOME OF THE NIGERIAN PUBLIC SERVICE REFORMS‐(FROM PRE‐ INDEPENDENCE TO POST INDEPENDENCE PERIOD) UNIT 1: Commission on review of wages and salaries and other conditions of service of the junior employees in the public and private sectors of the Nigerian economy (a.k.a.
Morgan Commission 1963 – 1964) TABLE OF CONTENTS 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objectives 3.0 Main Content 3.3.1 Morgan Commission 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 75 6.0 Tutor‐Marked Assignment 7.0 References/Further Readings 1.0 INTRODUCTION Since independence, a number of commissions have been set up to review salaries and wages and other terms and conditions of service in the public service.
The first of these commissions was the commission on the review of wages and salaries and conditions of service of the junior employees in both the public and private sectors.
The commission which was set up in 1963, was headed by Justice A. Morgan.
Its emergence was as a result of the continued agitation by junior officers for the introduction of a National Minimum Wage, the abolition of the daily wage system and for a general improvement in conditions of service.
2.0 OBJECTIVES After studying this unit, you should be able to: (a) explain the commission terms of reference (b) identify its recommendations 3.0.
MAIN CONTENT 3.1 Morgan Commission (1963 – 1964) This Commission was set up to review the wages, salaries and conditions of service of junior employees in both public and private sectors.
The Commission recommended Daily Wage System, Payment 76 for all on public holidays and national minimum wage.
The commission was however primarily concerned with the review of salaries and wages as could be seen from its terms of reference inter‐alia: (a) To investigate the existing wage structure, remunerations and conditions of service in wage earning employment in the country, and make recommendations covering suitable new structure, as well as adequate machinery for a wage review on a continuing basis: (b) To examine the need for: 1.
A general upward revision of salaries and wages of junior employees in both government and private establishments: 2.
The abolition of the daily wage system: and 3.
The introduction of a national minimum wage and to make recommendations.
Based on the foregoing, the commission made some recommendations, among which were: Daily Wage System: That employers (public and private) should thereafter distinguish persons employed on a seasonal basis from those engaged for an indefinite period.
It also recommended that an employee should be transferred to the established permanent post if he or she has served an aggregate of three out of five years.
Conditions of service in wages‐earning employment: That compensation for Sundays and public holidays should be paid to new and departing employees whether they are on daily wage, hourly or piece‐rate during their establishment.
Furthermore, all employers were given the statutory obligation to publish conditions of employment and 77 benefits which should be made available to each worker on appointment.
National Minimum Wage: It proposed what it termed the living wage through which the minimum wage scheme was to be achieved.
According to the commission , the living wage was one high enough to enable a wage earner who does a full day work to support himself and his family out of his wages.
It was to take into consideration rent, transportation, costs and prices of consumer goods.
4.0.
CONCLUSION When government issued its white paper, the increases recommended were scaled down.
This, with the delay over the release of the report , infuriated the workers and consequently, the various Trade Unions which had hitherto been divided on ideological lines, temporarily shelved their differences and formed the Joint Action Committee.
This committee succeeded in calling workers out in 1964 on a nationwide strike which crippled major services.
It should be noted that the Morgan commission introduced for the first time, a minimum wage in the country, but on geographical basis.
5.0.
SUMMARY This section deals with the genesis of the review of wages and salaries and other conditions of service of the junior employees in the public and private sectors of the Nigerian economy.
78 This section deals with the background to the setting up of the commission, its terms of reference and its recommendations.
This unit also look at consequences of the commission recommendations to the government of the federation.
6.0.
TUTOR‐MARKED ASSIGNMENT 1.
What are the commission terms of reference 2.
What are its recommendations 7.0.
REFERENCES/FURTHER READINGS 1.
Adegoroye A.S(2006).
Public service Reform for sustainable development: The Nigerian experience.
Www.
Victoria.
Ac.
N2/…/ 2006/ Nigeria/% 20 Adegoroye % 20.
2.
Ayeni, V.A.
(1987).
“The Civil Service and Policy Process” in Sanda, O.A., Olusola, O., and Ayeni, V.A.
(eds.).
The Impact of Military Rule on Nigeria’s Administration.
Ile‐Ife: University of Ife Press Limited.
3.
Balogun, M.J. (1983).
Public Administration in Nigeria: A Developmental Approach.
Lagos: Macmillan.
4.
Federal republic of Nigeria (1997).
Civil service Handbook.
Lagos: Federal Government Press.
79 5.
Maduabum,(2006), Reforming Government Bureaucracies in Nigeria: The Journey so far.
Topo‐Badagry.
Administrative staff college of Nigeria.
6.
Okereke, O.O.
(2003).
“The Nigerian Civil Service after the Structural Adjustment Programme: Some Critical Reminiscences”, Nigerian Journal of Politics and Administration, Vol.
….
No.
3.
7.
Taylor,(2011).
Articulating Reform and the Hegemony Game.http://Louisville.
Edu/ journal/ workplace./ issue 5p2/taylor,html.downloaded.
21 March,2011.
UNIT 2: Grading Team for Grading of Post in the Public Service (a.k.a.
Elwood Grading Team 1966) TABLE OF CONTENTS 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objectives 3.0 Main Content 3.1 Elwood Team 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 80 6.0 Tutor‐Marked Assignment 7.0 References/Further Readings 1.0 INTRODUCTION Arising from the Morgan commissions report, the government appointed a grading team named Grading team for grading of posts in the public service in 1966 and was headed by Mr.
I. Elwood thus popularly referred to as the Elwood Grading Team of 1966.
This unit will take you through the salient features of this team.
2.0 OBJECTIVES After studying this unit, you should be able to: To discuss at length the background of grading of posts in the Nigerian public service and their requirement.
3.0.
MAIN CONTENT 3.1 Elwood Team (1966) This grading team was to inquire into any anomalies in the gradings and other conditions relating to all posts in the public service of the federation with a view to determining appropriate gradings and achieving uniformity in the salaries of officers performing identical duties.
The Elwood report observed that the requirements regarding educational qualifications for direct entry at various levels in the public service had been more or less standardised and that the underlying reasons for these requirements was the reasonable assumption that a certain standard of basic education is necessary at each level to equip 81 the officer for the job.
Schemes of service now exist of course, which specify the duties of each post, method of entry including qualification requirements and advancement within and beyond cadres.
The combination of the morgan and Eiwood exercises gave the civil service some motivation through improved compensation for services rendered and created an impetus for civil servants to strive for advancement to higher graded positions.
4.0‐Conclusion The government of the federation in Nigeria adopted the grading system of the commission into the Nigerian public service.
The grading system is now operated by all the governments of the federation.
The Elwood report observed that the requirements regarding educational qualifications for direct entry at various levels in the public service had been more or less standardised and that the underlying reasons for these requirements was the reasonable assumption that a certain standard of basic education is necessary at each level to equip the officer for the job.
5.0.
SUMMARY This unit deals with the grading of posts in the public service.
The entry requirements for the administrative class correspond to a first or second class honours University degree, entry requirements for the executive class correspond to the GCE Advanced level while those for clerical staff are equivalent to the GCE Ordinary Level.
Promotion from 82 one grade or class to another is possible.
Thus, promotions can be made from the executive to the administrative class.
There is good deal of interchange at the top grades.
A civil servant is likely to work in many departments during the course of his career.
Finally, upon recruitment, apart from acquiring the necessary on‐the‐ job experience, civil servants are also exposed to opportunities for systematic training and periodic refresher courses and seminars in institutions in Nigeria and abroad.
Such opportunities enhance the efficiency of the civil services.
6.0‐ Tutor Marked Assignment.
Discuss at length the background of the Elwood Team.
7.0.
REFERENCES/FURTHER READINGS 1.
Adegoroye A.S(2006).
Public service Reform for sustainable development: The Nigerian experience.
Www.
Victoria.
Ac.
N2/…/ 2006/ Nigeria/% 20 Adegoroye % 20.
2.
Ayeni, V.A.
(1987).
“The Civil Service and Policy Process” in Sanda, O.A., Olusola, O., and Ayeni, V.A.
(eds.).
The Impact of Military Rule on Nigeria’s Administration.
Ile‐Ife: University of Ife Press Limited.
3.
Balogun, M.J. (1983).
Public Administration in Nigeria: A Developmental Approach.
Lagos: Macmillan.
4.
Federal republic of Nigeria (1997).
Civil service Handbook.
Lagos: Federal Government Press.
83 5.
Maduabum,(2006), Reforming Government Bureaucracies in Nigeria: The Journey so far.
Topo‐Badagry.
Administrative staff college of Nigeria.
6.
Okereke, O.O.
(2003).
“The Nigerian Civil Service after the Structural Adjustment Programme: Some Critical Reminiscences”, Nigerian Journal of Politics and Administration, Vol.
….
No.
3.
UNIT 3: Salaries and wages commission (a.k.a.
Adebo Commission 1970 – 1971) TABLE OF CONTENTS 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objectives 3.0 Main Content 3.1 Adebo Commission 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutor‐Marked Assignment 84 7.0 References/Further Readings 1.0 INTRODUCTION Following the rise in cost of living, the need for remunerations in posts with comparable responsibilities in the private sector, the requirement for the rapid development of the national economy and the adequate development and deployment of efficient manpower and other factors.
This unit will take you through the features of this commission.
2.0 OBJECTIVES After studying this unit, you should be able to: (a) explain the commission terms of reference (b) identify its recommendations 3.0.
MAIN CONTENT 3.1 Adebo Commission (1970 – 1971) The Adebo Commission was set up in July 1970 to among others: Review the existing wages and salaries at all levels in the public service, and in the statutory corporations and state‐owned companies: Examine the areas in which rationalization and harmonization of wages, salaries and other remuneration and conditions of employment were desirable and feasible as between the public and private sectors of the national economy: and , Consider the need to establish a system for ensuring that remuneration in the public services, the statutory corporations and state‐ owned 85 companies was periodically reviewed and kept in proper national balance.
The commission major recommendations include: (1) Three levels of enforceable minimum wage should be established by zones: (2) Government should make its declared policy to abolish the differential treatment meted to unskilled and semi‐skilled labour so that this class of workers can be paid the same scales throughout the country without any geographical differentiation (3) More attention should be paid to the quality of the individual and his on‐ the – job performance and less to seniority or paper qualification.
(4)Arrangements should be made to give professional officers the opportunity of exposure to the kind of experience and training that fit a person for the highest managerial position.
(5) For the purpose of pay and other conditions of service, a distinction should be made between public corporations which are regulatory or welfare / service agencies and those which are commercial or industrial.
(6)State – owned industries and companies should have complete freedom to operate outside civil service regulations and procedures and should be assessed or judged solely on the basis of their performance as business enterprise.
4.0.
CONCLUSION 86 One of the most significant results of the commission work derived from the observation in its report that although it had not been asked to review the organisation or the structure of the public service but only the existing wages and salaries , it was of the opinion that a review of the structure of the civil service should include exhaustive consideration of issues like the role of the public service commission, the head of service, the permanent secretary vis‐a‐vis the professional officers in his department and the role of the ministry in relation to a public corporation or state‐owned companies reporting to it.
Finally, upon the Adebo commission view that a public service review commission be set up to review the structure of the service which will make grading and salary awards more meaningful, government eventually set up the review commission.
5.0.
SUMMARY This unit deals with the background to the setting up of the commission to review of the existing wages and salaries and other conditions of service of all levels in the public service, and in the statutory corporations and state‐owned companies and consider the need to establish a system for ensuring that remuneration in the public services, the statutory corporations and state‐ owned companies was periodically reviewed and kept in proper national balance and also look at its terms of reference and its recommendations.
Finally, upon the Adebo commission view that a public service review commission be set up to review the structure of the service which will 87 make grading and salary awards more meaningful, government eventually set up the review commission.
6.0.
TUTOR‐MARKED ASSIGNMENT 1.
What are the commission terms of reference 2.
What are its recommendations 7.0.
REFERENCES/FURTHER READINGS 1.
Adegoroye A.S(2006).
Public service Reform for sustainable development: The Nigerian experience.
Www.
Victoria.
Ac.
N2/…/ 2006/ Nigeria/% 20 Adegoroye % 20.
2.
Ayeni, V.A.
(1987).
“The Civil Service and Policy Process” in Sanda, O.A., Olusola, O., and Ayeni, V.A.
(eds.).
The Impact of Military Rule on Nigeria’s Administration.
Ile‐Ife: University of Ife Press Limited.
3.
Balogun, M.J. (1983).
Public Administration in Nigeria: A Developmental Approach.
Lagos: Macmillan.
4.
Federal republic of Nigeria (1997).
Civil service Handbook.
Lagos: Federal Government Press.
5.
Maduabum,(2006), Reforming Government Bureaucracies in Nigeria: The Journey so far.
Topo‐Badagry.
Administrative staff college of Nigeria.
6.
Okereke, O.O.
(2003).
“The Nigerian Civil Service after the Structural Adjustment Programme: Some Critical Reminiscences”, Nigerian Journal of Politics and Administration, Vol.
….
No.3.
88 7.
Taylor,(2011).
Articulating Reform and the Hegemony Game.http://Louisville.
Edu/ journal/ workplace./ issue 5p2/taylor,html.downloaded.
21 March,2011.
UNIT 4: The Public Service Review Commission (a. k. a UDOJI COMMISSION 1972‐1974) 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objectives 3.0 Main Content 3.1 The Udoji Commission 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 89 6.0 Tutor‐Marked Assignment 7.0 References/Further Reading 1.0 INTRODUCTION The significant milestone in the reforms of the civil service comes with the Udoji Commission of 1972.
It was a thorough –going Public Service review which introduced a unified salary grading system and advocated new management techniques.
It also introduced the open report system to replace the age old confidential reporting, sought to make prescriptions for optimum utilization of manpower and to evolve a development oriented public service.
The commission also undertook the regarding of all posts in the public service, job evaluation of all posts and recommended salaries applicable and payable to each post 2.0 OBJECTIVES • To review the Udoji commission • To enable you understand the Udoji commission • To enlighten you on the contributions of Udoji Commission to the development of Civil Service in Nigeria.
3.0 MAIN CONTENT 3.1 The Udoji Commission of 1972 A Public Service Review Commission was set up in September 1972 to carry out comprehensive review of the nation Public.
The commission 90 was later customarily referred to as the Udoji Commission, after its chairman is Chief Jerome O. Udoji.
More than any other commission before it, the Udoji Commission had the highest wide ranging terms of references.
The commission was mandated:‐ (i) To examine the organization and structure of the public services.
(ii) To investigate and evaluate their methods of recruitment, conditions of service and staff development programmes; (iii) To examine existing pension and superannuation schemes in the public and private sector; (iv) To make recommendations that would facilitate inter‐sectoral mobility, without detriment to the retention of efficient and qualified personnel in the public services; and (v) To undertake regarding of all posts in the public services and establish appropriate salary scales.
Many scholars who studied the commissions report felt that the terms of references was too broad, and it affected the quality of work done by the commission connecting on this, Williams (1979) said that; Whilst there is much sympathy for a reform that is based on a careful consideration of inextricable bound social factors, a commission that has an elastic terms of reference increase the likelihood that myriad social factors would intervene to distort objectives.
Williams further asserted that the commission regards development as its main concern and viewed the reform of the public services as 91 instrumental to this.
Consequent upon this, the commission terms of references can be seen as consisting of two parts; i.
The fundamental and effective – which seeks to facilitate social development and ii.
The incidental and effective which seeks to renovate the public services a instrument for development.
The commission submitted its report on 25th September 1974, exactly two years after it was established.
True to its terms of reference, the commission reviewed every aspect of the country’s public service including: Recruitment, Career and staff development superannuation, and salary, grading.
Every sector of the public services, the Public Enterprises, the teaching service, and the various Local Government Administrations.
The report was released in December 1974, with the Government white Paper on it (entitled Government views on the Report of the public service review Commission) A summary of the Commission report is as follows; i.
That the concept of result – oriented management be adopted ii.
That a unified structure be introduced iii That Administration be transformed into ‘management’ iv.
That pay be dependent upon job content and performance v. That promotion be based on merit and not seniority vi.
That public sector compensation be related to private sector compensation vii.
That financial management be strengthened and modernized 92 viii.
That personnel management practice be modernized.
(Obikeze and Obi; 2004:153) SELF ASSESSMENT EXERCISE 1 Mention 2 of the major contributions of Udoji Commission to Civil Service reforms in Nigeria.
ANSWER i.
Unified salary grading system; and ii.
New management techniques.
Incidentally immediately the report was released, several groups in the public sector, raised a lot of dust about it.
The private sector that was not covered by the public sector would cause them.
The mass discontent and industrial unrests which the report caused made the government to set up a new Review Panel to handle public discontent on the government white paper on Udoji Report.
The committee was headed by Mr. Akintola Williams, the doyen of the accounting profession in Nigeria.
In a nutshell, the Udoji Commission in its pursuit of a development oriented public service recommended the adoption of modern management techniques like the Planning, Programming, Budgeting Systems (PPBS), Management by Objectives (MBO) and project management in the Nigerian Civil Service.
It equally advised that the dual hierarchies in ministers be abolished, while training should be intensified in order to make workers suitable to handle senior management positions.
It reviewed and simplified the wage scales in 93 the public service and reduced if from over a hundred to just seventeen.
It must be pointed out that despite the fact that the issue of wages was the fourth issue in the commission’s term of reference; the issue of wages almost over‐shadowed the other aspects of the commission work and report.
The result is that today, whenever Udoji Commission is mentioned, people think more about ‘salary awards.’ Perhaps the fact that many previous commission before Udoji Commission into a wage commission.
Also the fact that the awards had very adverse effect on the economy in terms of inflation has left most analysis of the commission in most texts to concentrate on the awards.
By way of innovations, the Udoji Commission introduced a number of key features in the Civil Service, notably the opening of the post of Chief Executive of the Ministry referred to as permanent secretary, to both administrative and professional/specialist staff; the harmonization and unification of job grading and salary system throughout the service; the introduction of a new code of conduct for all public officers.
Since the commission work was mainly on increasing efficiency and effectiveness of the public service, one will conclude by saying that though some minor improvement were made, the public service remained almost what is was before Udoji in terms of service delivery.
(Obikeze and Obi; 2004:154) 94 SELF ASSESSMENT EXERCISE 2 How did the Udoji Commission contribute to the development oriented programmes in the public service?
ANSWER By prescribing optimum utilization of manpower and to evolve a development oriented public service.
4.0 CONCLUSION The Udoji Committee has been analysed for you to understand the past efforts of government in improving the civil service in particular and public service in general.
5.0 SUMMARY The Udoji Commission which was set up in 1972 made far reaching recommendations to enhance the civil service, which this unit has highlighted.
6.0 TUTOR‐MARKED ASSIGNMENT When did Udoji Commission set up and submitted its report?
7.0.
REFERENCES/FURTHER READINGS Obikeze, S.O.
and Obi, E.A.
(2004) Public Administration in Nigeria: A developmental Approach.
Onitsha: BOOK POINT LTD. 95 Udoji, J.
(1995), Under Three Masters: Memoirs of an African Administrator.
Ibadan; Spectrum Books.
UNIT 5: Committtee on the Re‐appraisal of the Civil Service (a.k.a.
Falae Committee 1976) TABLE OF CONTENTS 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objectives 3.0 Main Content 3.3.5 Falae Committee Report 96 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutor‐Marked Assignment 7.0 References/Further Readings 1.0 INTRODUCTION This committee was put in place to checkmate or to look into the poor attitude of civil servants to work inspite of the windfall from the Udoji commission, the then Secretary to the Federal Military Government set up in September, 1976, a committee on re‐appraisal of the civil service under the Chairmanship of one of his top Permanent Secretaries‐ S. O. Falae.
You would recall that many Commissions were set up to review aspects of the civil service.
Some were set up to review salaries and wages, while others were set up to review the administrative machinery processes, structure and functions of the various arms of government.
This unit will take you through the salient features of this re‐appraisal committee.
2.0 OBJECTIVES After studying this unit, you should be able to: (a) explain its term of references (b) identify its recommendations 3.0.
MAIN CONTENT 3.1 Falae Committee Report (1976) 97 The specific terms of reference of the committee were: (1) To undertake a critical examination of the attitudes, approach to work and performance of public servants, and determine the extent of improvement, if any, since July 29, 1975; (2) To determine the causes of any observed fall in the standards of performance of public servants and make suitable recommendations in this regard: (3) To make any recommendations designed to enhance the image and sustain the morale of the public service and make it even more effective as the instrument for policy formulation and execution of the decisions and programmes of government: and (4) To make any other suggestions for the improvement of the public service generally.
The committee major recommendations include: (1) The need to focus training on all staff irrespective of status and roles: (2) The need to decentralise training so as to let each ministry or department plan and implement its own training: (3) The need for the establishment of a training and career board, a sort of committee in each ministry or department; (4) The need for each ministry to be given adequate funds for training; and (5) The need for the establishment of a national body to co‐ordinate training and development.
98 The Falae Committee was set up to re‐appraise the civil service due to the prevailing poor attitude to work at that time.
The Committee was also to determine the fall in standards of performance of public servants and make appropriate recommendations.
The Committee recommended the need to focus on training of all staff irrespective of status and roles.
It also recommended the need to decentralize training to the level of each Ministry.
4.0 CONCLUSION The Falae Committee has been analysed for you to understand the past efforts of government in improving the civil service in particular and public service in general.
5.0 SUMMARY The Falae Committee which was set up in 1976 made far reaching recommendations to enhance the civil service, which this unit has highlighted.
6.0.
TUTOR‐MARKED ASSIGNMENT 1.
What are the commission terms of reference 2.
What are its recommendations 7.0.
REFERENCES/FURTHER READINGS 1.
Adegoroye A.S(2006).
Public service Reform for sustainable development: The Nigerian experience.
Www.
Victoria.
Ac.
N2/…/ 2006/ Nigeria/% 20 Adegoroye % 20.
99 2.
Ayeni, V.A.
(1987).
“The Civil Service and Policy Process” in Sanda, O.A., Olusola, O., and Ayeni, V.A.
(eds.).
The Impact of Military Rule on Nigeria’s Administration.
Ile‐Ife: University of Ife Press Limited.
3.
Balogun, M.J. (1983).
Public Administration in Nigeria: A Developmental Approach.
Lagos: Macmillan.
4.
Federal republic of Nigeria (1997).
Civil service Handbook.
Lagos: Federal Government Press.
5.
Maduabum,(2006), Reforming Government Bureaucracies in Nigeria: The Journey so far.
Topo‐Badagry.
Administrative staff college of Nigeria.
6.
Okereke, O.O.
(2003).
“The Nigerian Civil Service after the Structural Adjustment Programme: Some Critical Reminiscences”, Nigerian Journal of Politics and Administration, Vol.
….
No.
3.
7.
Taylor,(2011).
Articulating Reform and the Hegemony Game.http://Louisville.
Edu/ journal/ workplace./ issue 5p2/taylor,html.downloaded.
21 March, 2011.
UNIT 6: Study Team on the Structure, Staffing and Operation of the Nigerian Federal Civil Service (a.k.a.
THE 1988 CIVIL SERVICE REFORM OR DOTUN PHILIPS STUDY TEAM) CONTENTS 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objectives 3.0 Main Content 100 3.1 The 1988 Civil Service Reforms 3.2 An evaluation of the 1988 Reforms 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutor‐Marked Assignment 7.0 References/Further Reading 1.0 INTRODUCTION The 1988 Civil Service Reform was to professionalize the Civil Service.
The position of permanent secretary became political and was designated Director‐General.
Ministers became the accounting officers instead of permanent secretary as it used to be before them.
These features of the 1988 Civil Service Reform and other major changes in it are discussed in this unit.
2.0.
OBJECTIVES The objectives of this unit are: • To analyze the 1988 Civil Service Reform for your understanding.
• Do an evaluation of the 1988 Reform for your better comprehension 3.0 MAIN CONTENT 3.1 The 1988 Civil Service Reforms 101 The Federal Military Government in 1984 set up a panel to study the structure, staffing and operations of the Federal Civil Service and make appropriate recommendations which will enhance efficiency, effectiveness and productivity in the service.
The panel equally submitted its report in 1985.
SELF ASSESSMENT EXERCISE Mention one fundamental factor that attributed to the failure of Civil Service Reforms.
ANSWER Corruption it had becomes deep in the Civil service that the 1988 reforms could not change it, more so, the military regimes were highly corrupt themselves.
Military President, General Ibrahim Babangida announced the reform package.
As at the time the reforms were introduced in 1988, the Civil Service was already in a terrible state characterized by: Over‐centralization; incessant conflicts between the cadres; 102 Scant emphasis on results and concrete performance; excessive focus on compliance with regulations, forms and procedures, counter‐ productive separation of authority from responsibility at the top of the Civil Service hierarchy; dangerously low staff morale and productivity: inappropriate stuff deployment practices which often ignored the profession or specialization of staff, thereby putting square pegs in rounds holes in critical areas outside of the traditional registrable profession fields; and increasingly patent inability to cope effectively with the challenges of modern, complex and development hungry society (Philips).
The above inevitable state of the nation civil service resulted from long years of neglect by successive government that never bothered to invest in the civil service in the forms of office space, equipments materials, staff training, modern operational techniques, adequate staff remuneration and so on.
The 1975 civil service purge by Murtala Mohammed equally adversely affected the civil service.
These coupled with the fact that the Babangida regime embarked on a socio‐economic restructuring of the nation through SAP and the fact that it was realized that a presidential system of government cannot be run successfully with a white hall civil service necessitated the reforms.
The reform sought to; i Considerably enhance the degree of professionalism in the civil service; ii.
Align the service with the form and spirit of presidentialism; 103 iii.
Ensure that its management and control systems are such as would no longer separate responsibility from authority at the top of the civil service hierarchy; iv.
Install accountability (not only for money, but also for performance) as the unmistakably hallmark of the civil service systems; iv.
Ensure that the systems significantly enhance the degree of efficiency, effectiveness, promptness and speed of civil service operations vi.
Introduce considerable delegation of functions and power not only at the top but further down the line in the service; vii.
Install appropriate checks and balances to prevent misuse or abuse of authority, but without jeopardizing the efficiency, speed and effectiveness of the service; viii.
Minimize, if not eliminate, areas of conflict, particularly at the top of the civil service; ix.
Significantly insulate the civil service from partisan politics, but at the same time, erect a smooth and efficient bridge between the civil service and the political/ruling class x) Put the civil service in a form and shape which would enable it to meet the challenges of the modern age, with its emphasis on high technology, speed of decision‐making, efficient information systems and achievement orientation; xi Implement the reforms without jeopardizing the unity and integrity of the civil service.
(Philips 1988).
104 In order to achieve the above aims, the, reform emphasized four main elements.
There were; i. enhanced professionalization of the civil service; ii.
rationalization of authority and responsibility at the top level of a ministry by making the minister instead of the permanent secretary as hitherto the Chief Executive and Accounting officer of his ministry; and re‐designating the permanent secretary as Director‐General who will now serve as the minister's deputy iii.
installation of a strong scheme of checks and balances to prevent misuse or abuse of power especially on the part of the minister iv.
enhancement and strengthening of the economic and financial management apparatus of the presidency by placing the Central Bank of Nigeria and the planning and budget office directly under the president.
The plank on which the entire reform rested was on the professionalization of the civil service, for the Dotun Philips report recommended an enhanced professionalization of the civil service through the following measures: i.
The staff structure has been changed, so that there now existed in the civil service three basic staff categories, namely; Assistant, Officer and Director, (each at different grades); the Assistant is a sub‐professional, the officer is a full professional, and the Director is a full professional with general management responsibilities; ii.
Staff nomenclatures have been changed to reflect areas of specialization, profession or basic function; 105 iii.
The horizontal and vertical structures of the ministry have been changed to reflect processional and specialized operational areas; iv.
The central pooling and central deployment of staff have been discontinued; v. Each staff is now to spend his entire career in his ministry or extra, ministerial department; vi.
Much greater emphasis is now to be placed on staff training, which is now to be obligatory and systematically periodic for every staff in the civil service; vii.
Performance evaluation schemes at institutional and individual levels are being revamped to reflect overriding emphasis on concrete performance and accord less weighty than hitherto to politics, seniority and subjective factors viii.
Much greater decentralization is being introduced in personnel, finance and operational matters (Philips 1988) (Obikez and Obi 2004: 155‐157) SELF ASSESSMENT EXERCISE 2 Who became the accounting officer in a ministry after the 1988 Civil Service Reforms?
ANSWER The Minister before then, it was the Permanent Secretary 3.2 Art Evaluation of the 1988Reforms The reform package despite its lofty look failed almost completely in achieving its aims people now remember it mainly for the change in the 106 nomenclature of permanent secretaries to Director‐Generals and for politicising the civil service.
Many factors have been adduced as reasons behind the failure of the reforms.
We look at a few of them.
The first facto is corruption.
This corruption ate deep into the civil service and rendered it impotent.
The civil service became a hot bed for corruption and as such the efficiency and effectiveness which the reform sought to achieve remained a pipe dream.
Nobody, : was interested in the lofty ideals of the reforms.
People were more interested in lofty ideas of the reforms.
People were more interested in looting the public treasury.
Another factor that accounts for the failure of the reform is the politicization of the appointment of Director‐Generals.
Through the reforms objective of trying to “align the service with the form and spirit of presidentialism might look lofty; its implementation left much to be desired.
If was hoped Governors who were now empowered to appoint Director‐General from where they deemed fit, would consider merit in exercising such powers.
However in actual practice, they saw it as an opportunity to reward political lackeys and errand boys.
The position of Director General became highly politicized.
In some cases, fresh university graduates who had no experience at all were appointed to head ministries that had craked and experienced civil servants, who in some cases had over thirty year experiences.
As expected, there were a lot of frictions.
This manner of appointments naturally affected morale of the top echelon of the civil service.
Some of them felt that politics and politicians have invaded and desecrated the hallowed grounds of 107 the service.
Accusations of insubordination, sabotage, and lack of commitment became the order of the day.
In such circumstances the reform couldn't have achieved anything meaningful.
Thirdly, the reform according to Okoli and Onah like its predecessors was based on faulty assumptions.
The liberal approach of the reforms focused on the perceived problems of the civil service which were lack of appropriate managerial and professional skills, absence of organizational machineries needed for social change lack of appropriate management techniques, antiquated personnel and financial management strategies and techniques, poor wages and inadequate incentives, inefficiency, ineffectiveness and low productivity.
By focusing on these problems the reform failed to ask the important questions of: a) Why many professionalized and well trained public officers failed to perform in the past b) Why existing machineries for public accountability were weak, c) Why corruption persists d) Why existing punitive measures were ineffective e) Why existing management practices and techniques do not work satisfactorily, and f) Why some civil servants misused their enormous administrative powers.
The reform simply failed to address these issues and could not see the limitation: of the civil service in a neo‐colonial capitalist state.
108 Another factor which was reinforced by the corruption of that era was Executive job insecurity.
Citing Abubakar (1992) Okoli and Onah (2002) see the Babangida's government penchant for frequent change in executive leadership as a factor for the failure of the reform.
Due to the fear of job security, those that occupied executive positions were much more pre‐occupied with how much they will make before they will be removed, than with implementing government policies.
The frequent changes which were necessitated by the need to allow the pie go round the `boys' made every top government functionary believe that the position he is occupying.
is meant for him to better himself through corrupt practices and that he had just a little time Could do this before it gets to another person turn.
Under this `chop and go' attitude, it was just not possible to achieve the activities of the reform 4.0 CONCLUSION The unit has discussed the features of the 1988 Civil Service Reforms for you to know its problems and prospect.
The reform had since be Reformed by the Ayida panel of 1994 which is the next and last unit to be discussed in the course.
5.0 SUMMARY The 1988 Civil Service Reform and its evaluation were disused since no reform has overall solution to problems, the 1988 reforms was not an exception, and therefore, its shortcomings were remedied by the 1994.
6.0 TUTOR – MARKED ASSIGNMENT 109 In the 1988 reforms what was the new name and role of permanent secretaries.
7.0 REFERENCES /FURTHER READINGS Abubakar H.I (1992).
The philosophy and Rationale for the civil service (Reorganization) Decree No.
43) Yahaya, A.D. Ceds, New Trends in Personnel Management.
Ibadan: Spectrum Books Ltd. Okoli, F.C.
and Onah, F.O.(2002).
Public Administration in Nigeria: Nature, Principles and Application.
Enugu John Jacob’s Classic Publisher Ltd. Obikeze, S.O.
and Obi, E..A (2004).
Public Administration in Nigeria; A Developmental Approach.
Onitsha: Book point Ltd. Report: Federal Government of Nigeria, Lagos (1985) “The Nigerian Civil Service in the mid 80s and Beyond (Dotun Philips Report) UNIT 7: THE 1994 REVIEW PANEL ON CIVIL SERVICE REFORMS (a. K. a. AYIDA PANEL) CONTENTS 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objectives 3.0 Main Content 3.1 Civil Service Reforms of 1997 3.2 Morale and Corruption in the Public Service 3.3 Other Matters 110 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutor‐Marked Assignment 7.0 References/ Further Reading 1.0 INTRODUCTION The 1994 Review Panel on civil service reform which was referred to as the Ayida Panel, named after its chairman.
Alison Ayida, actually submitted its report in June 1995.
It was later in 1997 that the government began to gradually implement its recommendations.
According to Otoba (2002) the two key features of the 1988 reforms which the Panel reaffirmed were the personnel management board in each ministry and the devolution of authority to incur expenditure to certain categories of senior management staff specifically to the level of assistant director and above.
The Panel also made a case for upward review of pay and other incentives for civil servants in view of the serious decline in the value of the naira caused by Inflation and devolution The Panel also addressed the issue of federal character and corruption in the bureaucracy.
The abuse of the federal character principle had led to low morale and performance in the civil service, thus making One panel to recommend that recruitment into the civil service, especially 111 at the entry grades of professional cadres, should as much as practicable be based on a combination of merit and federal character so that the best candidates from each state are selected on a purely competitive basis.
It equally recommended that in order to eradicate the wide spread corruption in the civil service, strict sanctions be applied against those caught in corrupt practices, while the remuneration of civil servants should be sufficient enough to discourage corruption.
It needs be pointed out that politicization of the civil service, as regards appointment of Director‐Generals has since been reversed to the status quo‐the career permanent secretaries have since been restored.
(Obikeze and Obi, 2004:158‐9) 2.0 OBJECTIVES To enable you know: • Why Ayida Panel was set up in 1994 • Civil Service Reforms as a result of the panel’s recommendations in 1997 • Other features of the reforms.
3.0 MAIN CONTENT 3.1 Civil Service Reforms of 1997 112 The following are the decisions of the Federal Government from the white paper published in June, 1997 on the recommendations earlier submitted to it by the Ayida Panel in June, 1995. i. Ministries and extra‐ministerial departments should be structured according to their objectives, functions and sizes and not according to a uniform pattern.
ii.
The Minister should no longer be the accounting officer of the ministry.
This function now becomes the responsibility of the director‐ general.
The Minister should continue to be the head and chief executive of the ministry while the director‐general is the chief adviser to the Minister and the accounting officer.
iii.
Government accepted the recommendation that the title of director general should revert to permanent secretary.
This will remove the confusion between the directors‐general of ministries and those of parastatals and myriads of government agencies.
iv.
Government accepted the recommendation that the post of permanent secretary should be a career post.
Appointments will be made from among serving senior officers in the civil service on the advice of the Head of the Civil Service and the Chairman of the Civil Service Commission.
v. Government accepted the recommendation that the post of Head of Civil Service should be restored, and that he should be from among permanent secretaries or officers of equivalent ranks.
The panel had recommended that both the post of Head of Civil Service and that of the Secretary to the Government should be filled from among the permanent secretaries or officers of equivalent rank.
While government 113 accepted the commendation on the appointment of the Head of Civil Service it rejected the recommendation on the‐ Secretary to the Government.
This latter post will remain a political appointment to be filled at the discretion of the President.
vi.
The panel recommended and government accepted that the following parastatals be scrapped: (i) National Council on Inter‐governmental Relations (ii) National Committee Against Apartheid (iii) Centre for Democratic Studies.
vii.
The Panel had been astonished to discover that the Office of the Secretary to the Government of the Federation supervises about forty parastatals and agencies.
This has made the office complex and unwieldy and has led to duplication of functions, lack of clearly defined lines of authority and conflict of roles.
Besides, parastatals and agencies prefer to hide‐ under the Presidency to avoid close scrutiny and supervision by ministries and to facilitate, obtaining funds through the Presidency.
Apart from the three agencies approved for scrapping above, government approved that twelve other parastatals and agencies be transferred to relevant ministries connected with the functions of each agency.
viii.
Government accepted the recommendation that the Federal Executive Council should meet at least fortnightly so as to enhance the coordination of government policies.
The panel got to know that the Federal Executive Council hardly ever met.
114 There was no coordination of policy, there were frequent frictions between Ministers and each Minister contrived to see the Head of State and get approval for whatever he wanted, while there were some Ministers who never succeeded in getting to the presence of the Head of State.
ix.
Government accepted the recommendation that the "Guidelines of Administrative Procedure of the Federal Government" should be updated and applied in the conduct of government business.
The document stipulates the procedures and rules for the conduct and interrelationship of various arms of government.
x.
Every ministry and extra‐ministerial department should have the following staff committees for dealing with personnel matters: (a) Management Staff Committee for officers on G.L.
14‐17; (b) Senior Staff Committee for officers on G.L.
07‐13; (c) Junior Staff Committee at Headquarters for officers on G.L.
01‐06; (d) Junior Staff Committee at out‐stations for officers on G.L.
01‐06.
xi.
Recruitment into the civil service at the entry grades should be based on a combination of merit and federal character, but for further progression thereafter it should be based normally on merit.
xii.
Maturity period for promotion of staff should be: G.L.
01‐06 ‐ 2 years.
G.L.
07‐14 ‐ 3 years.
G.L.
15‐17 ‐ 4 years.
115 xiii.
The Pool System which was abolished by the 1988 Reforms was restored in respect of the following cadres: Accountants, Administrative Officers, Auditors (External), Executive Officers (Account and General Duties), Information Officers, Legal Officers, Librarians and Library Officers, Medical, Health and Auxiliary Officers, Engineers, Architects, Surveyors, Technicians, Secretarial and Typist cadre.
xiv.
Government observed that the present 10 per cent of annual personal emoluments, set aside for training appears grossly inadequate.
Government therefore directed that adequate provision be made in each department's budget until the training need of the civil service is well addressed.
xv.
A senior management course should be introduced for all officers who are expected to attend it before entering the senior management category on G.L.
14. xvi.
Study leave without pay was restored as a way of encouraging offices to improve themselves to render valuable service.
xvii.
Government accepted the recommendation that the Centre for Democratic Studies be scrapped, As for the recommendation that the premises be converted to start a Civil Service College, government noted that the premises had already been handed over to the Nigerian Law School.
However, government directed that the development of a Civil Service College at Abuja should be given priority attention.
xviii.
Ministries and extra‐ministerial departments should set targets for themselves, their departments and divisions as well as individual staff, 116 and each ministry should submit an annual report of its activities to the government within the first quarter of the succeeding year.
xix.
Retirement age in the civil service should be 60 years irrespective of the length of service.
xx.
Government accepted the recommendation that there should be no retirement of any civil servant without following all laid‐down procedures.
This is to prevent indiscriminate and arbitrary retirement of civil servants.
xxi.
Pensions should continually be reviewed upwards immediately salaries and allowances are reviewed, and in particular government accepted the recommendation that pension rates of those who retired since 1991 be harmonized.
xxii.
A funds Allocation and Budget Committee should be established in every ministry, extra‐ministerial department and parastatal and its recommendations should be submitted to the Minister of Chairman, as the case may be for approval.
xxiii.
Powers to approve expenditure should be devolved down to G.L.
14 officers and heads of out‐stations.
xxiv.
Government approved that tenders procedures should be followed strictly in the award of contracts.
(Adebayo, 2000:217‐8) SELF ASSESSMENT EXERCISE 1 Why was Ayida Panel set up?
ANSWER To correct the inadequacies of 1988 Civil Service Reforms.
117 3.2 Moral and Corruption in the Public Service The major problem in the civil service in Nigeria today and even in the past has remained corruption.
Instituting various reforms without tackling this monster called corruption will simply remain an exercise in futility.
It is only when corruption is eradicated that we can talk about actually reforming the civil service to be people‐oriented and capable of living up to its billing as it is in other parts of the world.
The Nigerian Civil Service today has both the managerial and the technical capacity to excel to very high standards, but that will be only and surely if corruption that has been applying the brakes on this reservoir of human knowledge and intellect is given a killer punch.
The following are further recommendation of Ayida Panel accepted by the Federal Government; a.
Government approved the recommendation that job security should be restored in the civil service and that normal disciplinary procedures should be followed in dealing with erring staff.
b.
Basic facilities like stationery, typewriters, telephones, photocopiers, etc., should be made‐available to enable staff perform their duties efficiently.
c. The problem of transportation affects efficiency when staff find difficulty in being punctual because of transportation problems or have to spend so much of their merger salary on buses and taxis.
This leads to truancy and absenteeism.
118 To remedy the situation, "Government agrees to provide adequate and coordinated transportation facilities by road, rail and waterways for Civil Servants and other urban dwellers.
In the meantime, government directed that each ministry/extra ministerial department should provide and maintain adequate staff bus services for its staff.
Furthermore, government will encourage the administration of the Federal Capital Territory and other major cities improve mass transit services in the nation's urban centres."
d. Merit awards should be instituted for long‐serving and outstanding civil servants.
But government will no longer allow public officers to accept traditional titles in any form.
e. The panel had recommended that there should be upward review of Housing loans and motor vehicle advances in view of the high rate of inflation in the country.
Government, on its part, said that it is aware of the present high cost of building houses and purchase of vehicles in the country and that it has become increasingly difficult to fix adequate level of housing and vehicle loans because of the recovery terms.
In view of this, government directed a comprehensive review of the existing situation by the Ministries of Works, Finance and National Planning, and the Head of Civil Service and a Report to be submitted to government for consideration and approval.
f. Government accepted the recommendation that the suspension placed on promotion be lifted.
g. In order to improve morale and reduce corruption, the panel recommended that salaries and allowances of civil servants should be substantially reviewed upwards.
Government said that it "is aware that 119 the public officer is the least paid worker in the economy" and that "consequently adequate measures will be taken to redress the situation."
h. On the recommendation that civil service salaries should be adjusted annually to accord with inflation in the economy, "Government accepts in principle, the idea of annual 'review of salaries and allowances in the civil service, and directs the National Salaries, Income and Wages Commission to advise accordingly, taking into account productivity and government revenue profile to support the policy."
i.
The panel .recommended‐ that education allowance should be Introduced as an item in the pay package of civil servants.
Government noted ‐this ‐recommendation and directed the National Salaries, Income Commission to advise‐accordingly.
j.
The.
panel recommended that government should embark on a commitment to eradicate corruption both in the public service and in the larger society.
Government accepts this recommendation" and also observed that "as a matter of fact government has put in place a policy on War Against Indiscipline‐and Corruption which Should be intensified."
k. Government accepted the recommendation that government leaders, should lead by example.
L. Government‐accepted the recommendation that political office holders and other public functionaries should be made to adhere strictly to the rules and regulations guiding the conduct of government business.
120 m. The panel recommended and government accepted the strict sanctions should be applied against those found to have engaged in corrupt practice and they should be publicly exposed.
n. Government accepted the recommendation that public functionaries found to have corruptly enriched themselves in the past should not be appointed to any public post or fraternized with by government.
(Adebayo 2000:219‐220) SELF ASSESSMENT EXERCISE 2 Mention 2 decisions of 1988 reforms reverted by 1997 reforms ANSWER a.
Director – General reverted to permanent secretaries and no politicisation.
b. permanent secretaries once again became accounting officers which were given to ministers in the 1988 reforms.
3.3 Other Matters Other recommendations of the Panel accepted by the Federal Government were: i.
Government accepted the recommendation that basic working too and facilities should be adequately provided to enhance efficiency in the civil service.
ii.
Government accepted the recommendation that the housing loan entitlement of civil servants should be increased substantially and the fund allocation to the staff housing scheme should be increased.
121 Government accordingly directed‐the Federal Staff Housing Loans Board to liberalize its terms.
iii.
In the spirit of deregulation of labour whereby each tier of government is independent and is required to negotiate with its staff based on its ability to pay, government decided that the decisions of the Federal Government on the panel's report should not be made mandatory on state and local governments.
State and local governments should be free to adopt or adapt any of the recommendations in the report‐as they may deem suitable.
iv.
Government accepted the, recommendation that an implementation committee be constituted to implement the accepted recommendations of the panel's report.
4.0 CONCLUSION The 1997 reforms of the civil service went to the roots of the problems militating against efficiency and devotion to duty in the civil service.
However, it is another to ensure that the prescription are carried out.
Compliance with any reforms of civil service must spring from the mental attitudes of the civil servants.
It must be informed by a conscious determination on the part of the rulers to the state and federal levels to maintain and uphold an enlightened and honest public service.
5.0 SUMMARY 122 Irrespective of the different orientation of the various civil service reforms in Nigeria in both pre and post independence the basic fact remains that the main aim of all of them had always been to make the civil services more efficient, effective and result oriented.
However, it quite appealing that despite all the resources sunk into the civil service in Nigeria, it has failed to live up to expectations of the people as the engine of growth and development.
The various reforms of the service have not helped in any significant way in brining about the desired state.
Worse still, some have even seen the reforms as a way of creating jobs for retired bureaucrats and political cronies of the governments that interest such reforms.
6.0 TUTOR‐MARKED ASSIGNMENT What is the major problem of the civil service?
7.0 REFERENCES/FURTHER READING Adebayo, A (2000), Principles and Practice of public Administration in Nigeria.
(2nd Edition) Ibadan: Spectrum Books Limited.
Obikeze, S.O.
and Obi, E..A (2004).
Public Administration in Nigeria; A Developmental Approach.
Onitsha: Book point Ltd. 123  MODULE 3‐ PUBLIC CORPORATIONS UNIT 1‐ Meaning and Definition of PUBLIC CORPORATIONS CONTENTS 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objective 3.0 Main Content 3.1 Definition of a Public Corporation 3.1.1 Meaning of Public Corporation 124 3.1.2 Origin of Public Corporation 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutor‐Marked Assignment 7.0 References/Further Reading 1.0 INTRODUCTION In this Unit, students would be introduced to the concept of Public Corporations.
This is to enable you know the definition, meaning and the origin of public corporation.
The comprehension of any concept depends on the analysis, its features, problems and prospects.
2.0 OBJECTIVE At the end of this Unit, a student should be able to: • know the definition of public corporation • trace the origin of public corporation • know the concept behind pubic corporation.
3.0 MAIN CONTENT 3.1 Definition of Public Corporation A Public Corporation can be defined as “financially semi‐autonomous body created by an Act of Parliament to provide goods and services on 125 a commercial basis and is ultimately responsible to the minister through the parliament and the general public.” It is an organization that is set up as a corporate body and as a part of the governmental apparatus for entrepreneurial or entrepreneurial‐like objectives.
Public enterprises are organizations which merged as a result of government acting in the capacity of an entrepreneur.
Public enterprises also known as public corporation can also be defined as publicly‐owned enterprise that has been chartered under Federal, State or Local Government law for a particular business or financial purpose.
It is a body framed for the purpose of enabling a number of persons to act as a single person.
3.1.1 Meaning of Public Enterprises A public enterprise is viewed as an artificial person which is authorized by law to carry on particular activities and functions.
It essentially has the features of several individuals who act as one.
It is described as a corporate body created by the legislature with defined powers and functions and independently having a clear‐cut jurisdiction over a specified area or over a particular type of commercial activity.
It is a part of government apparatus and three implications are hereby highlighted.
Public Enterprise, by virtue of its intricate relationship with government, is an instrument of public policy and its primary mission is 126 in connection with governmental objectives and programmes.
It is, therefore, naturally under governmental control.
Second, a public enterprise by its nature mostly manages public resources, especially public money and this means that attention must be paid to mechanisms for enforcing accountability.
Third, the combination of financial and economic objectives with social and political arms invariably makes it difficult to devise appropriate performance measurement instrument.
Self Assessment Exercise Define the term “Public Corporation.” 3.1.2 Origin of Public Corporation The origin of public enterprises could be traced to early 20th century when government intervened in economic management through departmental organizations, which did not involve creating autonomous public bodies.
In the alternative, it granted license to private enterprise for the management of natural or national monopolies and where public bodies were involved in managing economic ventures, such bodies did not enjoy financial autonomy.
Public corporations made a very strong appearance after World War I for a variety of reasons including managing the consequences of the war especially the economic crisis of the 1930s.
127 However, public enterprises sector developed rapidly because of the spread of Keynesian Interventionist.
Between the two world wars political and ideological consideration prompted the establishment of parastatals in the former colonies.
The movement toward the establishment of public enterprises received new impetus after the World War II for reasons related to both ideological and political considerations and economic efficiency.
Economic nationalism and the success of the sonnet revolution paved the way for nationalization and the strong state intervention in national economic management.
When the former “European colonies in Africa became independent in the late 1950s and the 1960s, they were only a few public enterprises in different countries.
The public enterprises sector then developed at a tremendous pace in the immediate years after independence through the 1980s and a huge public enterprise sector was firmly established in most of the countries.
The weakness of the private sector, the lack of infrastructure, the low level of social and human development and the unfavourable social, economic and financial environment are some of the reasons given to explain the proliferation of public enterprises in all areas of economic and social development.
Other reasons include the urge to generate revenue to limit foreign economic domination and to provide a substitute for private initiative where it was not forthcoming.
Public enterprises in Nigeria dates back to the colonial era when the colonial government established some public enterprises to private essential services like electricity, railway and water.
The post‐ 128 independent era marked a watershed in the growth and spread of public corporations.
At independence in 1960, Nigeria had 50 public enterprises, 200 in the 1970s and 500 in 1987, when government embarked upon economic reform programmes.
The factors that account for the phenomenal increase include the evolution of the Federal administrative structures from four units in the 1950s to twelve in 1976, twenty‐one in 1987, thirty in 1991 and thirty‐ six in 1996 and the oil boom and successive governments commitment to making public enterprises an instrument of state economic intervention in the 1970s.
Self Assessment Exercise State two main factors for the establishment of public enterprises.
4.0 CONCLUSION This Unit dwelt mostly the Definition of Public Corporation, Meaning of Public Enterprises and Origin of Public Corporation 5.0 SUMMARY This Unit was able to analysis all the definition, origin of public corporation in details and it further discuss the meaning of public enterprises.
6.0 TUTOR‐MARKED ASSIGNMENT 1.
Define Public corporation in your own way.
129 2.
Trace the origin of Public Corporation.
3.
Answer to Self Assessment Exercise Public Corporation is an organization that is set up as a corporate body and as part of government apparatus that has entrepreneurial objectives.
7.0 REFERENCES/FURTHER READING Akpan, U. N. (1982).
Public Administration in Nigeria.
London: Longman Ujo, A.
A.
(1994).
Understanding Public Administration.
Kaduna: Solmora Ventures Ltd Fubara, B.
A.
(1983).
Government in Business Management in Nigeria.
Lagos: Spectrum Sexty, R. W. (1985).
Currency Issues in Public Enterprises, Commercialisation and Privatisation.
Public Sector, 8 (4) UNIT 2: Reasons for the Establishment of Public Corporations CONTENTS 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objective 3.0 Main Content 3.1 Reasons for the Establishment of Public Corporations 3.1.1 Classification of Public Corporation 3.1.2 Characteristics of Public Corporation 130 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutor‐Marked Assignment 7.0 References/Further Reading 1.0 INTRODUCTION In this Unit, students would be introduced to the Reasons for the Establishment of Public Corporations.
This is to enable you know its purpose and its justifications in details and even the roles it suppose to play in management of the economy.
2.0 OBJECTIVE At the end of this Unit, a student should be able to: •The Reasons/Purposes for the Establishment of Public Corporations •The Classification of Public Corporation • The Characteristics of Public Corporation 3.0 MAIN CONTENT 3.1 Reasons/Purposes for the Establishment of Public Corporations There are many reasons for the establishment of public enterprises.
They include: 131 • The desire to use the public enterprise as an instrument of effective plan implementation in a context where it appears a futile devise; a development plan for the private sector.
• The need to secure economic independence.
• The urgent desire to assure government control over “strategic” sectors of the economy, e.g.
the Central Bank.
• The need to separate some activities from the civil service and allow more autonomy in their running.
• The perceived need to provide employment for the citizens in context where the private sector offers very lucrative employment opportunities.
• The need to ensure state control of key profitable enterprises with a view to generating revenues that will add to available national capital for financing development programmes and projects.
• The desire of some socialist‐oriented regimes to use sate control of key profitable enterprises to pursue the objectives of preventing the concentration of wealth or of the means of production and exchange in the hands of few individuals or of a group, i.e., promoting equitable distribution of wealth.
3.1.1 Classification of Public Corporation Public Corporations are classified into three: • Public/Statutory; • State‐owned; and • Public/Private Partnership.
132 Public/Statutory Corporations These are enterprises which arise when the government assumes responsibility for the management of an economic or social pursuit through a special entity that has its own legal personality and still keeps some of the special prerogatives or privileges associated with a governmental organization.
The blend of these features is aimed at enabling the organization to function effectively as an autonomous body while it remains an instrument of government policy.
Enterprises that fall under statutory corporations include Central Bank of Nigeria (CBN) and Nigerian Television Authority (NTA).
State‐Owned Companies These are companies created by the government under the provisions of ordinary company law, though they belong entirely to the government.
They are registered in the registry of companies, with the government as the sole proprietor.
Government, therefore, appoints the Board of Directors as is customary in private companies, e.g., the New Nigeria Development Company, Odua Investment Company Limited, etc.
Public/Private Partnership These are enterprises where the government is the majority shareholder in a partnership with private entrepreneurs.
In such companies government usually dominates the board since it is the major shareholder.
An example is the Peugeot Automobile Nigeria (PAN).
133 3.1.2 Characteristics of Public Corporation Public corporation came into existence as a result of an Act passed by the legislature or a decree under a military rule.
Public enterprise also defines its aims and objectives, powers and duties, immunities, the form of management and relationship with established departments and ministries.
It is a legal person, capable of suing and being sued, entering into contracts, acquiring and owning property in its own name and can also dispose of property in its own name and can also dispose of property than ordinary government departments.
It is wholly owned by the state.
Except for appropriations to produce capital or to cover losses, a public enterprise is usually independently funded or financed.
It obtains its funds from the treasury or the public and from revenues derived from the sale of goods and services.
It is authorized to use and re‐use its revenues.
It is generally exempted from most regulatory and prohibitory statutes applicable to expenditure of public funds.
There are no hard and fast rules behind them in the matter of making contracts of buying and selling, works, etc.
Thus a great deal of liability and discretion is left for the management in the matter of procedure.
It is ordinarily not subject to the budget, account and audit laws and procedures applicable to government departments.
Their audit is done by the Accountant‐ General of Nigeria or any other person appointed by him.
However, both account and audit are commercial in nature.
134 Excluding the offices taken from government departments on deputation, the employees of public corporations are not civil servants and are not governed by government regulations in respect of conditions of service.
The recruitment is not subject to civil service rules, promotion is by seniority and personnel can be fired easily, if they are incompetent.
Corporations are free from the control of the legislature.
4.0 CONCLUSION This Unit discuss extensively on the Reasons for the Establishment of Public Corporations and on the Classification of Public Corporation before it concluded it with the Characteristics of Public Corporation 5.0 SUMMARY This Unit was able to analysis the Reasons for the Establishment of Public Corporations and on the Classification of Public Corporation before it concluded it with the Characteristics of Public Corporation 6.0 TUTOR‐MARKED ASSIGNMENT •What are the justifications for the Establishment of Public Corporations •What are the Classification of Public Corporation • What are the Characteristics of Public Corporation 135 7.0 REFERENCES/FURTHER READING Akpan, U. N. (1982).
Public Administration in Nigeria.
London: Longman Ujo, A.
A.
(1994).
Understanding Public Administration.
Kaduna: Solmora Ventures Ltd Fubara, B.
A.
(1983).
Government in Business Management in Nigeria.
Lagos: Spectrum Sexty, R. W. (1985).
Currency Issues in Public Enterprises, Commercialisation and Privatisation.
Public Sector, 8 (4) UNIT 3‐ The Control of Public Corporations Contents 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objective 3.0 Main Content 3.1 The Control of Public Corporations 3.3.1 Management and Control of Public Enterprises 3.3.2 Performance, Probes and Commissions of Enquiry into Public Corporations 3.3.3 Privatization and Commercialization of Public Corporations 136 3.4 Analysis and Types of Organisations 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutor‐Marked Assignment 7.0 References/Further Reading 1.0 INTRODUCTION In this Unit, students would be introduced to the concept of management and control of Public Corporations.
This is to enable you know how the means and medium through which public corporations are control.
2.0 OBJECTIVE At the end of this Unit, a student should be able to: • Explain who Manage Public Corporations •Explain who Control Public Corporations 3.0 MAIN CONTENT 3.1 Management and Control of Public Corporations 3.3.1 Management of Public Corporations The management of public corporations are necessary in order to have effective and efficient public enterprises.
The management of public corporations is done through the management boards and the policy board.
137 The Executive Board In the executive board, majority of the board are staff of the organisation.
They are usually the heads of the various departments of the organization.
However, a few outside representatives are brought to be in charge of some outside interest.
The Policy Board Majority of the members of the policy board are from outside the organization with few members from within the organization.
The policy board is responsible for managing all the policy decisions of the organization, but the implementation of policies and the day‐to‐day operation of the organization are carried out by the Managing Director.
This method is applied to most public corporations in Nigeria.
3.3.2 Control of Public Corporations Even though public corporations are created to enable them have some degree of freedom to manage their affairs, they are still subject to various levels of control.
Ministerial Control The supervising minister controls the public corporations under his portfolio in the following modes: 1.
By the appointments of Board members Since the minister is politically responsible for appointing members of the board, he can dissolve it, if he is not satisfied with their performance.
These controls may include the appointment of external 138 auditors to audit the account of public corporations, reorganisation of the dept and controls on borrowing.
ii.
Parliamentary Control This control is necessary to ensure that the operation of public corporations is in accordance with public policy.
Such a control is through the Annual Report.
Public corporations are expected to submit comprehensive annual reports of their activities to the parliament through the minister and such reports are tabled before the parliament.
4.0 CONCLUSION This Unit take a look at the Management and Control of Public Corporations and the unit enable us to know that despite the fact that public corporation were put in place to see the growth of economy, it must be placed under management and control of the desired authority.
5.0 SUMMARY This Unit was able to explain in details how public corporation needs an efficient and effective management to be in place and with control from the side of government in order for them to achieve the desired objectives.
6.0 TUTOR‐MARKED ASSIGNMENT • Explain who Manage Public Corporations •Explain who Control Public Corporations 139  7.0 REFERENCES/FURTHER READING Akpan, U. N. (1982).
Public Administration in Nigeria.
London: Longman Ujo, A.
A.
(1994).
Understanding Public Administration.
Kaduna: Solmora Ventures Ltd Fubara, B.
A.
(1983).
Government in Business Management in Nigeria.
Lagos: Spectrum Sexty, R. W. (1985).
Currency Issues in Public Enterprises, Commercialisation and Privatisation.
Public Sector, 8 (4) UNIT 4: COMPARISON BETWEEN THE ORGANISATIONAL STRUCTURE OF PUBLIC CORPORATIONS AND THE CIVIL SERVICE Contents 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objective 3.0 Main Content 3.1 The Control of Public Corporations 3.3.1 Management and Control of Public Enterprises 140 3.3.2 Performance, Probes and Commissions of Enquiry into Public Corporations 3.3.3 Privatization and Commercialization of Public Corporations 3.4 Analysis and Types of Organisations 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutor‐Marked Assignment 7.0 References/Further Reading 1.0 INTRODUCTION In this Unit, students would be introduced to the COMPARISON BETWEEN THE ORGANISATIONAL STRUCTURE OF PUBLIC CORPORATIONS AND THE CIVIL SERVICE.
This is to enable you to know the different between the public servants of the public corporations and the civil servants of the civil service in terms of organisational structure.
2.0 OBJECTIVES At the end of this unit, a student should be able to: • Discuss at length the COMPARISON BETWEEN THE ORGANISATIONAL STRUCTURE OF PUBLIC CORPORATIONS AND THE CIVIL SERVICE 3.0 MAIN CONTENT 141 3.1 The COMPARISON BETWEEN THE ORGANISATIONAL STRUCTURE OF PUBLIC CORPORATIONS AND THE CIVIL SERVICE The followings are the comparison between are as follows:‐ (a) Public Corporations are operated like commercial enterprises.
They should be able to operate at a slight profit, but certainly not at a loss.
Government departments, however, are organized to provide services and are not expected to show a profit.
(b) Public Corporations are managed by Boards whose members are appointed by the Minister while government departments are directly controlled by the Minister.
(c) The staff of Public Corporations, except the Managing Directors (or Directors‐General) and a few top managerial staff, are appointed by the Board, whereas in the Civil Service, appointments, promotions and discipline are the responsibility of the civil service commission.
(d) Public Corporations are relatively autonomous.
They are freer than government departments form direct legislative or executive control, legislative appropriation of funds, executive supervision, and in the determination of staff salaries and conditions of service.
(e) Government departments are direct agencies of government operating strictly within the official laws establishing them.
Public Corporations, on the other hand, are less subjected to the strict routines and procedures which dominate the Civil Service.
They tend, therefore, to be more flexible and efficient in their operations.
142 4.0 Conclusion The comparison between them has been analysed in details for you to understand how the system operates.
5.0 Summary Extensive analysis of the comparison between are discussed in this unit.
6.0.
Tutor‐Marked Assignment Discuss the detail the comparison between them.
7.0 Reference/Further Reading.
Federal Republic of Nigeria (1997); Civil Service Handbook, Lagos, Federal Government Press.
Remi Anifowoshe (2001); Government, Lagos, Longman.
Chuks Maduabum (2006); Reforming Government Bureaucracies in Nigeria, Lagos, ASCON Press.
143  UNIT 5: PROBLEMS OF PUBLIC CORPORATIONS AND THEIR SOLUTIONS.
CONTENT 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objectives 3.0 Main Content 3.1 Problems of Public Corporations 3.2 Solutions to Problems of Public corporations 4.0 Summary 5.0 Conclusion 6.0 Tutor Marked Assignment 7.0 References I.0 Introduction 144 The performance of Public corporations in Nigeria remains far below the hopes and expectations of many people.
There are problems within the public corporations in Nigeria.
This is discussed in this unit for your understanding.
2.0 Objectives At the end of this unit, you will know the problems of Public corporations and their solutions 3.0 Main Content 3.1 Problems of Public Corporations 3.2 Solutions of Problems of Public Corporations 3.1 Problems of Public Corporations The following/the problems of Public Corporations are as follows:‐ a).
Lack of adequate finance:‐ The inability of some public corporations to operate profitably or secure the necessary subsidy from the government causes inefficiency and low productivity.
b).
Bad Management and impropriety:‐ Poor financial management, misuse of funds, bribery and corruption among officials, and waste of scarce resources lead to the inability of many corporations to be viable and efficient.
c).
Inadequate control and accountability i.
Problems arise over what should be the boundary of relationships between the minster and the Board.
The minister may, by using his powers and influence excessively, destroy the raiso d’etre (i.e.
reason for existence) of the Board.
145 ii.
Problems also arise over the boundary and relationship between the minister and the legislature.
Since the legislature often does not known where their minster’s control begins and ends, it finds it difficult to apportion blame.
As a result, its supervisory begins and supervisory role may become weak and ineffective.
d).
Ineffective Supervision and control by the legislature:‐ As a consequence of its unwieldy size, excessive load of work, crippling time constraints and lack of appropriate technical expertise, the legislature is not a suitable body for the effective supervision of industrial or commercial enterprises such as public corporations.
e).
Political Interference:‐Some ministers and politicians may use the corporations for undue partisan interests.
In some cases, personnel may be political appointees who are not professionally qualified.
f).
Inconsistent policies:‐A corporation’s Board of Directors may change rather rapidly, resulting in frequently changing, inconsistent policies.
g).
Nepotism and favouritism:‐These vices, when they are indulged in by the Boards, contribute to the inefficiency of the corporations.
3.2 The solutions to the problems of Public corporation are as follows;‐ 1.)
Appoint only suitable members to the Board:‐The Board of a public corporation, being a policy making organ, should be composed of men of suitable educational qualifications, ability, experience and integrity.
They should not be selected primarily on the basis of their political standing or affiliation.
2.)
Strengthen autonomy of Board:‐The autonomy of the Boards in personnel matters, particular staff recruitment, salaries and conditions of services, should be strengthened.
This is necessary to attract 146 experienced and qualified staff into public corporations, in order to achieve efficiency.
3.)
Provide adequate financial base:‐An adequate financial base for public corporations should be provided by the government.
This will enable the corporations to operate at optimum level and to minimize the frequency with which they ask the government for funds.
Also, commercially‐oriented corporations should be made less dependent on government funding, but encouraged to finance their operations and expansion programmes from profits generated by them.
4.)
Tighten up control and accountability:‐There is need to tighten up control and accountability.
Public corporations should be compelled to regularly render proper audited reports and accounts to the government.
This will ensure a greater degree of financial responsibility.
The annual reports and accounts laid before the legislature should be given more attention and discussed in greater detail.
4.0.
Conclusion The problems of Public corporation and their solutions has been analysed in details for you to understand how the public corporations can be more effective and productive in their service delivery.
5.0.
Summary Extensive analysis of the problems and solutions to the problems of Pubic corporations are discussed in this unit.
6.0.
Tutor Marked Assignment 1.
Discuss the major problems facing public corporations in Nigeria.
147 2.
What are the possible solutions to the problems facing the public corporations?
7.0.
References/Further Reading Federal Republic of Nigeria (1997); Civil Service Handbook, Lagos, Federal Government Press.
Remi Anifowoshe (2001); Government, Lagos, Longman.
Chuks Maduabum (2006); Reforming Government Bureaucracies in Nigeria, Lagos, ASCON Press.
UNIT 6 – ETHICS AND ACCOUNTABILITY IN THE PUBLIC SERVICE TABLE OF CONTENT 1.0.
Introduction 2.0.
Objectives 3.0.
Main Content 3.1.
Definition of Ethics and Accountability 3.1.1.
Definition of Ethics 148 3.1.2.
Definition of Accountability 3.2.
Ethical Theories 3.3.
Bureaucratic Ethics and Corruption 3.3.1.
Bureaucratics Ethics 3.3.2.
Corruption 3.4.
Impact of Accountability on Public Service Delivery 3.5.
Problems of Nigerian Public Service 3.6.
Nigerian Government’s Efforts towards the eradication of unethical, poor Accountability and Corrupt Practices 4.0.
Conclusion 5.0.
Summary 6.0.
Tutor Marked Assignment 7.0.
References and Further Readings 1.0 Introduction The various reports from the electronic and print media especially in the last decade have exposed the unethical behaviour and poor accountability exhibited by Public Service holders in most Countries of the World.
Even the developed countries are no longer immune to greedy politicians who make fake claims or blatanthy spend government money.
Sexual abuse is also becoming an act exhibited by high profile Public Office holders.
The fact that Public Service employees come from varying social backgrounds make it necessary for government to enforce the Ethical Codes of Conduct as enunciated in 149 Public Services rules and regulation.
The civil Service Handbook in Nigeria provides a reference book.
The irony of this situation is that most newly recruited public servants are not aware of the handbook until there is a promotion examination coming up.
The procedure of early induction of Public employees to acquiant them with rules, procedures, ethos and values of the Public Service is been jettisoned for no reason.
This unit discusses the characteristics of ethical behaviour and accountability in the Public Service.
2.0.
OBJECTIVES After studying this unit, you should be able to: (a) Define Ethics; (b) Define Accountability; (c) Explain Factors Influencing bureaucratic ethics and corruption; (d) Enumerate the Code of Conduct for Public Servants; (e) Explain the roles of Government Machineries in Preventing Unethical and Non‐ Accountable Behaviour; and (f) Identify the Impact of Accountability on Public Service Delivery.
3.0.
MAIN CONTENT 3.1.
Definition of Ethics Ethics is generally considered as moral principles that govern a person’s behaviour.
Lacey (1976) defines ethics as an inquiry into how men ought to act in general, not as a means to a given end, but as an end 150 itself.
Machan (1979) in Ezeani (2006) states that ethics is the study of whether there are any values each and every person should pursue, whether there is a set of virtues as a Code of Principles of Conduct for everyone and what these are if they do exist.
A simple definition of Ethics was provided by Walkings (1956), when he defines it as a system of moral principles, a definition adopted by most dictionaries.
Ethics is therefore a moral issue often times culture specific and time specific For example, different types of marriage raise differnt moral issues, depending on which one a society or a group in a society adopts.
Ethical behaviour explains how a public servant or Public office holders should behave.
3.1.2.
Definition of Accountability The Free dictionary (2011), defines Accountability as the obligation unposed by law or lawful order or regulatiion on an officer or other person keeping accurate record of property, documents or funds.
The person having this obligation may or may not have actual possession of the property, documents or funds.
Accountability is concerned primarily with records.
It involves being answerable for the utilisatiion of resources and assignments delegated to an officer.
Most of the time it involves report writing.
Public accountability is the obligation of public office holders/ Public Servants to be answerable for fiscal and social responsiblities to those who have assigned such responsibilities to them (Business Dictionary 2011).
Public accountability therefore rests on giving an account and on being held to account (Raka and Taylor 2011).
3.2.
Ethical Theories 151 In order to grasp the importance of ethical behaviour in the public service operations, it is relevant to know some ethical theories and their application in the public service.
Ezeani (2006), discusses extensively three theories of ethical behaviour.
These are: justice – as – fairness theory, intitionism perfectionism and Utilitarianism.
This section is largely drawn from his work.
Justice – As – Fairness Theory Ezeani (2006), states that Rawls (1971) argues that public interest rests on the principles of justice.
Public interest theory stipulates that all resources should be utilised in the interest of citizens.
The first principles of justice states that each person is to have an equal right to the most extensive basic liberty compatible with a similar liberty by others.
The second is that social and economic inequalities are to be arranged so that they are to everyone advantage; and attached to offices and positions open to all.
In short, the principle of justice is that of equal opportunities for all.
The principle of Federal character is embedded in the 1999 Nigerian Constitution is based on these two principles.
Henry (2002) states that Government owes people who have suffered injustices in form of lack of educational opportunity, or social prejudice special chances to get ahead.
(a) Intuitionism Henry (2002), also states that Intuitionist Theories Administrators take decisions on the basis of what seems to be to them most nearly right on an individual basis and given circumstances.
152 Ezeani (2006), states that this theory has been critized on the ground that it provides no guideline for rational decision making.
(b) Perfectionism This theory advocates that the Public Administator should always strive to support the upper intellectual crust of his or her society.
The focus is on the best members of the society.
This theory is in conflict with the Justice – As – Fairness Theory.
(c) Utilitarianism The Utilitarian Theories believe that an act should be judged right or wrong according to the pleasure or happiness produced or the pain avoided (Ezeani 2006).
They think that happiness and pleasure are related.
The focus of these thinkers is on the consequencies or effects of an action not the motive or intention from which it was done.
Popular theorists of this view according to (Ezeani 2006) are Jeremy Bentham (1748 – 1832) and John Stuart Mill (1808 – 1873).
SELF ASSESSMENT EXCERCISE 1.
Define Ethics and Accountability.
2.
What are the factors that should be considered in making ethical decision?
3.
Explain the Justice – as – fairness Ethical Theory.
3.3.
Bureaucratic Ethics and Corruption 153 3.3.1.
Bureaucratic Ethics Agara and Olarinmoye (2009), explain the perspectives on bureaucratic ethics and corruption.
Professionalism in the Public Service determines how the activities of the Public Service will be carried out.
Components of professionalism according to the two authors, are values such as loyalty, neutrality, transparency, diligence, effectiveness, impartiality and such values as may be peculiar to individual countries.
These are all ethical values that are expected of bureaucrats in the Public Service.
Rohr (1976), states that members of the public expected public servants to act with unwavering integrity, absolute impatiality and devotion to public interest.
But this is not usually the case as partisan behaviours are rampantly exhibited, bribes are taken as normal way of conducting business, punctuality at work becomes a rare occurence and who you know matters more than who you are.
Changing of dates of birth influence the recent directive in the Nigerian Public Service that directors cannot spend more than eight year on their post (Office of the Head of Service of the Federation, 2009).
You may add a few more unethical practices you have expaned.
These are all signposts of a corrupt public Service.
Corruption Benson (1976), defines corruption as all illegal or unethical use of Government authority for personal or political gain.
Hope (1985), states that political corruption laid down the ground rules for bureaucratic corruption in the third world.
Nwabuzor (2003), states that political corruption is the fraudulent or forceful acquisition of power over a 154 group of people.
If we take Hope (1985)’s stand, it means that if the political class is not corrupt the corrupt practices in the public service can be checkmated.
Bayley (1966) defines corruption as a general term covering misuse of authority as a result of consideration of personal gains, which need not be monetary.
3.4.
Impact of Accountability on Public Service Delivery Now that you have been informed of the unethical practices which include lack of or poor accountability, the impact of accountability on public service delivery will now be discussed.
Being accountable requires a set of behaviour which public servants should comply with for effective service delivery.
(Raga and Taylor, 2011).
Khoza (2000), talks about the Batho Pele principles which impact on accountability of Public Servants to the citizens.
These principles are: 1.
Consultation: Citizens should be consulted about the quality of the services they receive.
2.
Service Standards: Communities should be informed what level and quality of service they will receive so that they know what to expect.
3.
Access: All citizens should have equal access to the services they are entitled to.
155 4.
Courtesy: All members of the community should be treated with courtesy and consideration.
5.
Information: Communities should be given full and accurate information about the public services they are entitled to.
6.
Openness and Transparency: Citizens should be informed on how local authorities function and the information they are entitled to.
7.
Redress and Handling of Complaints: If community members do not receive promised services, they should be entitled to a full explanation and also to a speedy remedy.
8.
Value for Money: Services should be provided economically and efficiently in order to provide citizens with the principle of best value for money.
3.5.
Problems of the Nigerian public Service There is no doubt that there have been a lot of improvements in the management of the Nigerian Public Service from what it used to be in the 1960s’ and early 1970’.
Among such improvements are the equitable compensation and treatment of public officers, open performance evaluation system, monetization of fringe benefits and the contributory pension scheme.
Despite these modest achievements the public service is still beset with a number of problems.
156 Some of these problems are: Inadequate implementation of the principle of meritocracy; unstable pay policies and structure; inadequate training and development, job insecurity and general indiscipline.
Inadequate Implementation of the Principles of Meritocracy The public service, oftentimes pay lip service to merit.
The merit principle has been laid aside for political considerations.
For example, the Federal Character Principle entrenched in the Constitution, puts representativeness above merit in appointments, promotion and placement of public officers.
2.
Unstable Pay Policies and Structure in the Public Sector Compared to the organised Private Sector such as the banking, oil and insurance industries, Public servants are poorly paid.
As reported by Fapohunda (2002).
Parris (1973), identifies three approaches to fixing compensation for public employees: 1.
To pay as little as possible to reduce the burden on tax payers.
2.
To pay enough and more than the private sector in order to set a good example.
3.
To pay the same as the private sector employees In the past, prior to 2004, the first approach was adopted in the Nigerian Public Service.
But the current remuneration seems to be the first aspect of the second approach, which is to pay just enough.
Currently, the ‘take 157 homepay of Public Servants is just enough to take them home.
To meet the rate of inflation, public service pay structure needs to be regularly reviewed upwards.
The review of wages and salaries is usually very complicated unlike in the Private Sector.
Cabinet approvals have to be sought and cash backing must be ensured.
The discrepancy in the pay between the Federal and State Civil Servant is also typical of personnel administration in Nigeria.
Salary increases are determined by the Salaries and Wages Commission rather than by Collective bargaining.
Although Labour Unions may protest but their views are inconsequential.
The increase or non‐ increase in public service salaries is due to the whim and caprice of the government of the day.
3.
Inadequate Training and Development Education is expected to provide several skills and knowledge that can be applied to many jobs or occupation.
Training and development on the other hand are job specific.
In the Public Service with the exception of the Armed Forces, training and development are not carried out systematically.
The last overall training needs assessment for the Nigerian public Service was last carried out in 1968 by Professor Wolle.
Since then, the MDAs have 158 been training and developing their officers based on informal identification of training needs.
So far, a systematic evaluation of the training and development programmes undertaken by public servants have not been carried out to identify their impact on job performance.
3.
Job Security It is the general believe that Government jobs are available for 35 years of service.
(Except in the University and the Judiciary).
This is no longer the case.
Many public servants have been disengaged for reasons of a lean civil service and dwindling resources.
Retirement in public interest is also admissible as a reason for relieving an officer of his/her job.
4.
General Indiscipline Inadequate performance standards and performance targets for public servants have contributed immensely to the general indiscipline in the Public sector.
Also contributing to the general indiscipline is the long disciplinary procedures.
Rampant lateness to work, laziness, violation of rules and corruption are among examples of acts of indiscipline.
3.6.
Nigerian Government Efforts Towards the eradication of Unethical, Poor Accountability and Corrupt Practices Fagbemi (2006), discusses efforts of the Federal Government Nigeria towards effective service delivery that are aimed at eradicating unethical practices and corruption.
These include: 159 1.
The creation of the SERVICOM office in Abuja.
SERVICOM is the acronym for Service Compact With All Nigerians; 2.
The signing of the Anti‐Corruption Law on June 13, 2000.
It is a law to prohibit and prescribe punishment for corrupt practices and other related offences; 3.
The creation of the Economic and Financial crimes Commission (EFCC) by Act No.
5 of November 14, 2002; 4.
The creation of the Independent corrupt Practices and other related offences Commission; and 5.
The Code of Conduct Tribunal.
You may wish to read more about these organs of the Federal Republic of Nigeria.
4.0.
CONCLUSION This unit has stressed the need for ethical practices and accountability in the Public Service.
The various organs of Governments available for eradicating unethical and corrupt practices by both Public and Private Sector employees should perform their roles without fear or favour.
To build public service accountability, both capacity and capability of public servants and institutions need to be built incrementally to cope with the improved tactics of fraudulent officers who specialize in 160 stealing from the public.
The Ethical Code of Conduct for Public Servants need to be enforced in all Public Institutions.
There should also be continued research in ethical and accountability management.
5.0 SUMMARY Ethics, in this unit, has been defined as a system of moral principles which are oftentimes culture and time specific.
Accountability on the other hand is the obligation of public office holders/public servants to be answerable for fiscal and social responsibilities.
Four Ethical theories were discussed.
The theories are the Justice – as‐ fairness theory, intuitionism, perfectionism and utilitarianism.
The impact of accountability on public service delivery could be seen in the way public services are delivered.
Among the expected results are: Consultation with citizens, having service standards, equal access of citizens to services and full and accurate information.
In order to minimize unethical behaviour, poor accountability and corruption: the Nigeria Government passed the Anti‐Corruption Law; set up the Code of Conduct Tribunal; and various Acts of money Laundering and Advance Fee Fraud and other related offences.
In November, 2002, the Federal Republic of Nigeria established the Economic and Financial Crimes Commission.
Also established was an Independent Corrupt Practices and other Related Offences Commission.
6.0.
TUTOR MARKED ASSIGNMENT 1.
Compare and contrast the four Ethical theories discussed in the unit.
161 2.
Explain the functions of at least two organisations created to minimize unethical practices, poor accountability and corruption in Nigeria.
7.0.
REFERENCES AND FURTHER READING Adamolekun, L. (1974).
Accountability and Control Measures in Public Bureaucracies: A Comparative Analysis of Anglophone and Francophone.
Africa International review Administrative Science.
15:4.
Agarah, T. (1995).
Political corruption, Bureaucratic Corruption and Corruption of the Bureaucratic Process: An Assessment of the Military in Nigeria Politics.
African Administrative Studies (CAFRAD, No.
44).
Agara I and Olarinmoye O.
(2009:011‐018).
Ethics and Accountability in Nigeria’s Public service: An historical overview.
Journal of public administration and policy research.
Vol (I) I. Aina, S. (1982).
Bureaucratic Corruption in Nigeria: the Continuing Search for Causes and cures.
International Review Administrative Science I. Bayley, D. H. (1966).
The effects of corruption in a Developing Nation.
Western Political Quarterly.
No.19.
Benson, G. (1978).
Political Corruption in America.
Mass Lexigton.
Business Dictionary (2011).
http://www.businessdictionary.com.definition/publicaccountability.ht ml.
Ezeani, E. O.
(2006).
Fundamentals of Public Administration.
Enugu.
Zik‐ Chuks publishers.
162 Fagbemi, A. O.
(2006).
Customer Service Delivery in Public Sector Management.
Lagos Concept Publications Ltd. Hejka – Ekins A.
(1988).
Teaching Ethics in Public Administration.
Public Administration Review.
Vol.48.No.5.
Henry, N. C. (2002).
Public Administration and Public Affairs.
New Delhi: Prentice Hall.
Hope, K. R. (1985).
Politics, Bureaucratic Corruption and Maladministration in the Third World.
International Review Administratiive Science No.
1.
Lacey A. R. (1976).
A Dictionary of Philosophy.
London: Routledge and Kegan Paul.
Machan, T. R. (1979).
Introduction to Philosophical Inquires.
Boston: Ally and Balon Inc. Nwabuzor, E. J. O.
(2003).
Corruption and Democracy in F. E. Iyioha, V. O. Aghyere and P. O. Ovia Suyi (eds).
Rethinking Governance and Development in the 21st Century.
Ekpoma Institute for Governance and Development.
Ambrose Ali University.
CSF/061/s.l/iii/ 68 dated August 27, 2009.
Office of the head of civil service of the federation(2009).
The tenure of office of Directors/ Permanent Secretares Circular Referee number, HCSF/061/s.l/iii/68 dated August 22, 2009.
163 Olowu, D. (1983).
Some causes of bureaucratic Corruption in Nigeria: implications for the search for a Panacea.
Kaduna.
NASMET.
Raga, K. And Taylor, D. (2011).
Impact of Accountability and Ethics on Public Service Delivery.
http://www.walkings,m.(1956).modernethics.philadelphia:varsitypress.
Rawls, J.
(1971).
A Theory of Justice.
Cambridge MA.
Harvard University Press.
Rohr, J.
(1976).
The Study of Ethics in Public Administration Curriculum.
Public Administration Review.
July/August.
The free Dictionary (2011).
Definition of Accountability.http://www walkings 1956 .the free dictionary.com.accountability.
Thompson, D. F. (1985).
The Possibility of Administrative Ethics.
Public Administrative Review.
September/October.
MODULE 4‐ LOCAL GOVERNMENT SYSTEM IN NIGERIA UNIT 1‐ THE EVOLUTION OF LOCAL GOVERNMENT SYSTEM IN NIGERIA TABLE OF CONTENT 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objectives 164 3.0 Main Content 3.1 The Evolution of Local Government System in Nigeria 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutor‐Marked Assignment 7.0 References/further Readings 1.0 INTRODUCTION The first governments on Nigeria soil were those of the states and kingdoms.
There were also village or clan governments in some places.
When British took over Nigeria, there was the question of how best to govern the country.
In organization of government, the first problem was to determine the number of administrative units in the country.
The use of Nigerian rulers and institutions was introduced by colonial masters to govern at the local level which was called the Native Authority system.
The situation remained the same up to the period of independence in 1960 and extended to 1966 when the military took over power.
The major reform of local government system came in 1976 which produced a national system of local government administration with common structure sources of revenue and personal management system.
A presidential system was introduced into the Local Government system in 1991.
165 2.0 OBJECTIVES At the end of the lecture, you should be able to: i.
Know the evolutionary processes of Local Government system in Nigeria; ii.
Understand the law‐making process in Local Government legislative system.
3.0 MAIN CONTENT 3.1 The Evolution of Local Government system in Nigeria The Evolution of Local Government system in Nigeria in organization of government, the first problem was to determine the number of administrative units in the country.
From the beginning in Nigeria, there were three political divisions.
(a) The colony of Lagos; (b) The oil Rivers protectorate, and (c) The territories in the centre and along the Niger River administrated by the Royal Niger Company.
In 1900 the responsibility of running the administration of Northern Nigeria passed from the Royal Niger Company; the Southern most tip of the Northern territory was merged with the Niger coast protectorate to form the protectorate of Southern Nigeria.
In the same year (1900), Lugard was appointed higher commissioner and in 1906 the colony of Lagos was joined with the protectorate of Southern Nigeria under a single administrator.
The new unit, with headquarters in Lagos, was called the colony and protectorate of Southern Nigeria, both North and 166 South were administrated as separate political entities but each sector was divided into provinces for administrative convenience.
In the areas, later known as the Northern and Western Regions, provincial boundaries roughly followed those of the governing units established before the advent of the British, but in the east, where the indigenous social organization was fragmentary, artificial boundaries were created, each province was in charge of a British resident, whom were other administrative officials (district officers and as district officers) in charge of subdivisions of the province; all of them were responsible to the chief executive of the territory.
In 1910, there were thirteen provinces in the Northern protectorate namely: Sokoto, Kano, Katsina, Bornu, Bauchi, Zaria, Yola, Muri Kotangora, Ilorin, Nassarawa, and Munshi, the West was divided into five provinces: Abeokuta, Benin, Ondo, Oyo, and Warri.
They were however, modification later made in the boundaries of such provinces (AWA: 1964:6).
At the local level, Lugard retained and strengthen the government organizations that had been built up in the North.
While the British formulated policies and the empowered Northern emirs admired then and investing each ruler with enormous authority.
The Nigerian rulers and institutions to govern at the local level was the native Authority system.
The system functioned under limitations: (a) native rulers were not allowed to raise and armed forces, or to grant permission to carry arms; (b) the right taxes was made the prerogative of the British authorities; (c) the right to legislate and to appropriate land for public and commercial purpose were vested in the British authorities; (d) the 167 British had the right to confirm or reject the people’s choice of a successor chieftaincy, and the right to depose a ruler for misconduct.
The native authority system was subsequently established in the East.
After some initial difficulties, it worked well in the West.
The East where British authorities, influenced by the social structure the North and the West, created automatic paramount chief with displacement of the natural rulers and the novelty reconcile the system with their own largely democratic institutions.
The natural rulers in the town were paid a stipend and were not assigned any political functions, a practice that negated the principles of governing through African rulers and or using indigenous social institutions.
Thus, Local government system is as old as the creation of Nigeria.
With the amalgamation of the Northern and Southern protectorates in 1941 and the Native Authority Ordinance of 1916, Lugard was empowered to create a Native Authority.
However, the Richard’s constitutions of 1946 which restructured Nigeria into three regions transferred the Native authorities to their respective regions.
Each region assumed the responsibility of the power to reform the Native Authority system.
The situation remained the same up to the period of independence in 1960 and extended to 1966 when the military took over power.
(Ibrahim: 2003: 400).
Self Assessment Exercise 1 How did Local Government system start in Nigeria?
Answer 168 Through Indirect Rule and Native Authority system.
The coming of military in 1966 into governance of Nigeria brought more reforms into local government system, the major one being that of 1979 which produced a national system of Local Government Administration with common structure, sources of revenue and personal management system.
A presidential system was introduced into Local Government system in the 1991 Local Government reform by Babangida regime (Abdullahi;2005:2‐4) Self Assessment Exercise 2 When the major reform of Local Government system did took place in Nigeria?
Answer: in 1976 when the Local Government system had common structure sources of revenue and personal management system.
4.0 CONCLUSION Before the evolution of a Native Authority and Local Government system in Nigeria, the country was divided into provinces during colonial rule.
Each province was under the control of a British Resident officer, below him were other administrative officials such as: District officer and Assistant District officer who were in charge of subdivisions of the province.
All the officers were responsible to the chief executive of the territory – the governor of a region.
5.0 SUMMARY In this unit you have learnt the evolutionary and law‐making processes of Local Government system in Nigeria.
The importance of local government system could be noticed even in the beginning of colonial 169 administration when indirect rules was practiced, later transformed to Native Authority system in the North and its modified version in the West and East.
Local Government system became unified in the 1976 Local Government Reform and the presidential system was introduced into Local Government administration during the 1991 reform.
All the evolutions in the local government system were undertaken to make the rural dwellers feel the impact of governance and also perform their civic responsibilities to their country.
6.0 TUTOR‐MARKED ASSIGNMENT 1.
Discuss the uniformity features introduced into Local Government system in Nigeria in 1976.
2.
Identify and analyse the 1991 major points of Local government Reform.
7.0 REFERENCES/FURTHER READINGS Abdullahi; M.Y.
(2005).
Comparative Local Government.
Abuja: B/ANNY PRINTS PRODUCTION.
Awa, E (1964).
Federal Government in Nigeria.
California University press.
Ibrahim, B.y.
(2003) “Local Government and the 1999 constitution “in kwannashie, M.(ed) Politics and Political power Relationships in Nigeria Lagos: Dat & Partner Logistics Ltd. 170  Unit 2: GENERAL OVERVIEW OF LOCAL GOVERNMENT ADMINISTRATION Table of Content 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objective 3.0 Main Content 171 3.1 Definition and Concept of Local Government Administration 3.1.1 Reasons for the Creation of Local Government 3.1.2 Principles Underlying the Creation of Local Government Institution 3.1.3 Legal Framework of Local Government 3.1.4 Functions of Local Government 3.2 Local Government Finance 3.3 Controls of Local Governments 3.3.1 Legislative Controls 3.3.2 Judicial Control 3.3.3 Administrative Control 3.3.4 Financial Control 3.4 Problems Facing Local Governments in Nigeria 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutor‐Marked Assignment 7.0 References/Further Reading 1.0 INTRODUCTION This Unit will introduce a student to some basic concepts that describe local governments on the basis of how much power local governments enjoy vis‐à‐vis the central government.
172  2.0 OBJECTIVES By the time you go through this Unit, you should be able to: • Explain the concept of Local Government.
• State explain the legal framework and control in Local Government Administration • Reasons for the creation of Local Government • Highlight the principles behind the creation of Local Government institutions.
3.0 MAIN CONTENT 3.1 Definition and Concept Classification in Local Government Administration Local Government is the closest tier of government to the people.
In a unitary system, power is shared between the central government and the local government.
In a Federal system, power is shared between Federal, State and Local Governments.
Local Governments are grass root governments recognized by law.
It is further defined a ognized by law.
It is further defined as a subunit of government controlled by a local council which is authorised by the central government to pass ordinances having a local application, levy taxes, or exact labour and within limit specified by the central government which by implication the constitution, vary centrally decided policies in local applications.
3.1.1 Reasons for the Creation of Local Government 173 The reasons for the creation of local governments include the following: • The consideration and the making of recommendations to a state commission on economic planning or any similar body on the economic development of the state, particularly in so far as the area of authority of the council and of the state are affected and proposals made by the said commission or body.
• Collection of rates, radio and television licenses; • Establishment and maintenance of cemeteries, etc.
; • Licensing of bicycles, trucks, etc.
; • Registration of births and deaths; • Provision and maintenance of health services; • Naming and numbering of streets.
3.1.2 Principles Underlying the Creation of Local Government Administration In establishing local units and in assigning powers to them a state should observe the following norms: • Firstly, it should attempt to set units that have homogenous populations whose affairs need common local management.
• Secondly, it should retain the two to rearrange the units when local conditions change.
174 • The state should guard against designating an excessive number of units as this would result in overlapping powers, duplication of functions and consequent wastage of public funds.
• It should centre the responsibility clearly within each unit, so that separately appointed officers will not abscond or relegate their duties.
The central government should reserve the executive power to appoint and certainly to remove officers entrusted with the administration of state laws.
• It should properly supervise the exercise of power within the local government by working towards the prevention of dishonesty and inefficiency.
3.1.3 The Legal Framework of Local Government Local authorities are “corporations with perpetual succession.” This means that: 1.
They have a legal existence like an ordinary individual.
They can sue and be sued in the courts of law as if they are individuals.
2.
Unlike individuals, they never die.
They are continually in existence, though all the counselors may change owing to death or defeat in the council polls.
3.
Local Councils can only act within the framework of the law.
4.
The law which binds local authorities may be either mandatory or permissive.
A mandatory law is one which orders a local authority to do something and a permissive law permits if it wishes.
175 5.
Local authorities may pass bye‐laws which have the full force of laws with the authority areas to enable them to carry out their responsibilities.
3.1.4 Functions of Local Government The functions of local governments are usually spelt out by the central government and the local units are expected to operate within the framework of the statutes establishing it.
That is to say that local government functions are contained in the constitution of the Federal Republic of Nigeria, which pronounces their existence.
The functions or services provided by local authorities include the provision of the followings: (a) Health and environmental services such as public health, etc.
(b) Personal services, e.g.
church, school, hospital, market, etc.
(c) Protective services like fire fighting (d) Trading services, e.g.
bus transport (e) Economic ventures.
(f) Legal services – marriage services, etc.
It is pertinent to restate that the functions are of two main types: mandatory and permissive.
3.2 Local Government Finance Local authorities need money to be able to perform both mandatory and permissive functions.
176 Each year draft estimate of what it proposes to spend during the financial year is prepared.
Local authorities derive their funds from two main sources ‐ external and internal sources.
Internal Sources These are local revenues (revenues that are within the tax jurisdiction of local government) and are classified as local tax revenues, user charges and administrative revenues.
The dominant and the most promising of this three is tax revenue.
The principles of taxation are efficiency, equity and revenue productivity.
Tax administration must be much easier to manage at the city or urban level than the rural area.
Under taxes we have property tax and user charges.
Self Assessment Exercise 1: List the general/administrative revenues of local government.
External Sources The major external source available to local governments is generally classified as grants.
Here there are two types of grants – general revenue or unconditional grants, specific or conditional grants and loans.
3.3 Central Government Controls of Local Governments 177 There are three main central government organs – the legislative, executive and the judiciary.
3.3.1 Legislative Control Local governments normally operate within the framework of the laws passed by the legislature because local authorities are the creations of the supreme legislative organ of the state.
The parliament can amend the law establishing such authorities at any time.
Besides it can also enact laws forbidding the local authority to take certain actions.
All bye‐laws must be approved by the appropriate authorities before enactment.
3.3.2 Judicial Control Judicial control is exercised by the courts under the doctrine of ultra vires.
The court may declare void any Acts of local authorities which are contrary to the law in excess of the powers granted her by the legislature.
Any citizen or group of citizens who consider themselves to be 129 angered by any action of a local government can institute a legal action against the local authority.
3.3.3 Administrative Control The central government, through the minister for local government, has regulating powers over the appointment conditions of service and dismissal of local government officers.
Central government has the power to suspend or dismiss local authorities and may, in certain circumstances, order a private or public 178 inquiry into a local authority’s affairs.
A management committee may be set up to take over the functions of a council.
Ministers, commissioners or senior civil servants as in Western Nigeria, are appointed by central government to take responsibility for the local administration of major areas of the country.
These representatives of the central government are expected to take a close interest in the affairs of local authorities in their areas and often attend council and supervisory powers prescribed by statute.
3.3.4 Financial Control The bulk of local government revenue comes from grants from the central government.
The central government, after warning the local government, may decide to reduce the grant or to withhold its entirely if the services for which such grants have been allocated are either not being provided or provided unsatisfactorily.
If the grant is withheld, the council can hardly function.
At the end of the financial year, annual accounts are prepared showing active revenue and expenditure and are subject to audit.
If the auditor detects ay improper, unauthorized or charge upon the person on whom the surcharge is imposed must refund to local authority out of his or their own pocket the sum of money surcharged.
3.4 Problems Facing Local Governments in West Africa As important as local government administration is to the development of any nation, nevertheless it is confronted with many problems.
Financial 179 Lack of adequate financial resources is the major handicap of local authorities in Nigeria.
A collection of several factors have compounded these problems, e.g.
some local governments have a weak revenue base; people do not pay taxes as amenities which they are taxed are never provided.
Excessive embezzlement is another factor confronting the local councils.
Furthermore, lack of proper method of revenue collection had in the past resulted in inadequate financial support.
The method of collection was inefficient.
Political Changes in government accompanied by changes in local government structures have not provided the required stability and performance that local government institutions need to fulfil their objectives.
Besides the presence of ineffective and incompetent political functionaries in the membership of the councils coupled with the interference in the operations of the local governments have not only discriminated against certain areas in terms of the provision of social amenities but also by such actions encouraged the people to refuse to support the councils financially.
Another political constraint has been the lack of political or ideological framework with its consequent ill‐denied functions of the agencies of local government.
There have been duplicate operational inefficiencies and waste of material and human resources because the federal government agencies at the local level used to exercise similar functions.
Administrative 180 Although the Federal government controls over local government authorities have been spelt out in details yet there is lack of rigid enforcement of these federal government controls.
Consequently, the local authorities have, in certain areas, neglected the performance of the statutory functions with impunity.
The appointment of incompetent staff to manage the local government machineries is another major constraint.
The qualified personnel often migrate to the urban centres for well‐paid jobs.
The effect of this is moral brain drain which gives opportunity to half‐ baked individuals who are also incompetent in their duties.
Secondly, border dispute amongst the local government authorities is another major problem confronting local councils.
This problem had caused serious problems which had led to killings and arson.
Examples are those of Osun and Bauchi States.
4.0 CONCLUSION This Unit was able to highlight everything about the local government in Nigeria – definitions, concepts and problems confronting it.
5.0 SUMMARY This Unit, in a nutshell, was able to define local government, the reasons for its creation, the principles underlying its creation, financing, control system and problems confronting the system.
6.0 TUTOR‐MARKED ASSIGNMENT 181 1.
State and explain the four characteristics of local government that enjoy dissolution of powers.
2.
Discuss the reasoning being the concept of grass root government.
3.
Highlight and explain the problems confronting local government councils.
Answer to Self Assessment Exercise 1: • Taxes • Rates • Local fees • Earnings from commercial ventures • Local Government property • Interest payment on dividends 7.0 REFERENCES/FURTHER READING Akpan, P.C.
(1984): Modern Local Government Administration in Nigeria.
Barber, M. P. (1975): Local Government.
3rd Ed.
Macdonald and Evans Adigwe, F. (1974): Essentials of Government for West Africa.
University of Ibadan Press 182  UNIT 3‐ THE RELATIONSHIP AMONG THE THREE TIERS OF GOVERNMENT – FEDERAL, STATE AND LOCAL GOVERNMENT.
TABLE OF CONTENTS 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objectives 3.0 Main Content 3.1 The Federal Government 183 3.2 The State Government 3.3 The Local Government 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutor‐Marked Assignment 7.0 References/Further Readings.
1.0 INTRODUCTION All federal states have devised mechanism for coping with the problems generated by shared sovereignty, non – centralization and divided spheres of responsibilities which the federal system connotes.
This unit examines the institutional mechanisms for promoting intergovernmental cooperation in Nigeria.
However, the relationship between units within such a system takes place through process of cooperation, competition and conflict.
Most of the specialized machineries established to promote cooperation, recognise the inevitability of and at times the necessity for conflict and, therefore, always carry out conflict management and resolution activities.
always carry out conflict management and resolution activities.
This unit therefore attempts to identify and assess the performance of three tiers of government and relationship among them.
2.0 OBJECTIVES At the end of this unit, you should be able to understand the intergovernmental relationship at: i.
The Federal Government 184 ii.
The State Government iii.
The Local Government.
3.0 MAIN CONTENT 3.1 The Federal Government An intergovernmental relation assumes that in any modern society, governmental systems are broken down into tiers, politics or constituent unit.
This is why intergovernmental relations is commonly associated with federalism.
Federalism represents a principle for the organization of decision making in an association of groups of people within a nation‐state.
The peculiarity of this association is that such groups are endowed with a special function in central decision making.
Furthermore, the groups possess a relative autonomy that is constitutionally recognized.
Therefore, a federal system of government recognises and respects the co‐existence of concurrent governments with well‐defined autonomy.
Thus, the central government does not play any dominating role in its relationship with the other units of government.
Federalism, therefore, emphasizes the sharing of power in political systems with each level of government exercising its powers within constitutionally app sing its powers within constitutionally approved limits.
(Frankel: 1968:51).
Intergovernmental relations lay emphasis on interactions among human beings “clothed with office” (Anderson: 1960:3) however, while human beings are responsible to carry out the relations between governments, finance is the most critical element of these interactions.
The central government plays vital role in creative institutions for 185 intergovernmental relationship and in articulating intergovernmental cooperation.
The intervention by the central government is either direct or indirect and the effect of central government interference in the organization of intergovernmental interactions is felt by the three tiers of government.
(Ayo and Olowu: 1996: 306).
Intergovernmental relations (IGR) agencies in Nigeria can be classified into three categories.
These include constitutional bodies, statutory bodies, (that operates in executive capacity and ad hoc IGR bodies i.
Constitutional IGR bodies include The National Assembly, The Supreme Court, Council of states and other Federal Executive bodies.
The National Assembly focuses on the management of the national financial resources and makes very significant inputs to the disbursement of federally generated revenues among the levels of government and monitors through committees how disbursed funds are spent to ensure proper accountability.
ii.
The Supreme Court is the court of final arbitration in civil and criminal suits in Nigeria.
Moreover, it is also a Court of original jurisdiction for federal and state governments and among the state government.
iii.
Council of states was created by the federal government through section 140 (i) of the 1979 constitution.
It consists of: ‐ The President, who shall be the chairman; ‐ The Vice‐President, who shall be the deputy chairman; ‐ All former presidents of the federation and all former heads of the Government of the Federations; 186 ‐ All former chief Justices of Nigeria who are citizens of Nigeria; ‐ The President of senate; ‐ The speaker of the House of Representatives; ‐ All the Governors of the states of the federation; ‐ The Attorney – General of the Federation; and ‐ One person from each state, who shall represent that state to be appointed by the council of chiefs of the state from among themselves.
(The Constitutions of Federal Republic of Nigeria, 1999) Self‐Assessment Exercise 1 What is the mechanism for cooperation among the three tiers of governments?
Answer Constitutional provision which divides functions into exclusive, concurrent and residual but seek cooperation among them to avoid conflict.
B. Statutory bodies are set up for promoting intergovernmental cooperation.
Example include: National planning commission which was carved out of the former Federal Ministry of budget and planning and enjoys a ministerial status and headed by a Federal Minister; the 187 National Primary Health Care Development Authority (NPHCDA), among others.
C. Ad Hoc bodies are council meetings of diverse ‐ The President, who shall be the chairman; ‐ The Vice‐President, who shall be the deputy chairman; ‐ All former presidents of the federation and all former heads of the Government of the Federations; ‐ All former chief Justices of Nigeria who are citizens of Nigeria; ‐ The President of senate; ‐ The speaker of the House of Representatives; ‐ All the Governors of the states of the federation; ‐ The Attorney – General of the Federation; and ‐ One person from each state, who shall represent that state to be appointed by the council of chiefs of the state from among themselves.
(The Constitutions of Federal Republic of Nigeria, 1999) C. Ad Hoc bodies are council meetings of diverse meetings of diverse federal and state ministers on key subjects such as personnel, education, finance, etc.
At these meetings, far‐reaching decisions are usually taken by members which often metamorphose into federal policy decisions or even statutes.
It also includes meetings of governors, senators, among other from the same region.
None of these agencies are based on any constitutional or statutory provisions.
(Ayo and Olowu: 1996: 316).
3.2 THE STATE GOVERNMENT 188 At the state level, there are some bodies which possess constitutional statues and some of which perform or are supposed to perform functions which are intergovernmental in nature.
Such bodies include the state civil service commission, Local Government service commission, state council of chiefs; State Electoral Commission and State Judicial Service Commission.
The state Electoral Commission is responsible for conducting election into Local Governments.
Self Assessment Exercise 2 Mention 3 bodies of the Constitutional Intergovernmental Relations.
Answer 1.
The National Assembly; 2.
The Supreme Court; and 3.
The Council of States.
3.3 THE LOCAL GOVERNMENT Local Government is a critical tier whether in a unitary system or federal arrangement.
Irrespective of the power relations under these systems, local governments are always considered as governments are always considered as the government closest to the people.
The basic source of power sharing and power distribution in a federal system is the constitution.
Three constitutions of Nigeria namely: 1979, 1989 and 1999 have recognized local government as a third tier of government and consequently made provisions for the establishment, 189 function, funding, management and control of the institution.
(Odoh: 2003: 411).
Although local government has long been in existence and recognised to be an important level of government in the federal structure, it was not until 1980 that this tier of government was constitutionally given a statutory share of federally the derived.
Revenue rights are essentially the product of the stationary arrangements relating to the assignment of functions and allocation of tax powers.
One of the primary features of a federal system of government is the allocation or assignment of functions between the component units (tiers) of government.
This also forms the basis for the determination of revenue rights, the basis for the determination of revenue rights and the delimitation of tax powers, which constitute the genesis of intergovernmental fiscal relations.
Most constitutional arrangements in federal systems adopt the classification of powers and responsibilities into exclusive, concurrent and residual legislative lists, and that is the case in Nigeria.
The assignment of functions among federating units should be organized in such a way that: 1.
Functions whose benefits cover the entire country or which can be more efficiently performed by the federal Government than the lower level government be assigned to the former, that is be placed in the exclusive legislative list.
These include national defence, external relations (including borrowing and external trade), banking, currency, nuclear energy, among others.
190 2.
Functions whose benefits are more local than national but with possible of spill – over effects be placed in the concurrent list.
Such functions include industrial, commercial or agricultural development, post primary institutions, health care and so on.
3.
Functions which are purely local in character, in the sense that the benefits accrue, in the main, to limited geographic areas within the country are usually assigned to local authorities.
Such functions would include the establishment and maintenance of markets, motor parks and public conveniences, refuse disposal, primary education, and the construction and maintenance of local roads and streets.
(Adewale, 2003:12) However, it could be difficult, if not impossible to put most of these functions into rigid compartments.
The principle of cooperation within the federating units in the performance of a number of functions is therefore necessary.
4.0 CONCLUSION Local Government Councils in Nigeria are charged with a number of responsibilities much of which touch on the welfare and living standards of large segments of the country’s population particularly those living in the rural areas.
Of the three tiers of government‐ federal, state and local‐local government is the one that provides the greatest scope for grassroots development.
191 5.0 SUMMARY Although local government have autonomy, the federal and state governments still exercise control over them.
The reasons for the control include the rate of local authority expenditure to avoid overheating; control over local authority financial health and viability and control over the quality of local services provided such enforcing minimum standards, stimulating improvements or ensuring greater equality in localities.
6.0 TUTOR MARKED ASSIGNMENT Identify the three classifications of legislative powers and responsibilities among the three tiers of government.
7.0 REFERENCES/FURTHER READINGS Adewale, A (2003) ‘Fiscal Relationship between the federal, state and local Government Areas in Nigeria: An Appraisal’ in Yakubu, J.A.
(ed) Socio‐Legal Essays in Local Government Administration in Nigeria.
Ibadan: Demyaxs Law Books.
Ayo, S.B.
and Olowu, D (1996).
“The machinery for Intergovernmental cooperation in Nigeria” in Akindele, R.A. and Elaigwu, J.I (Eds).
Foundations of Nigerian Federalism 1960‐1995.
Abuja National Council on Intergovernmental Relations.
Anderson, W. (1960).
Intergovernmental Relations in Review.
Minneapolis: University of Minnesota Press.
Odoh, A (2003).
“Local Government and the 1999 Constitution”, in Kwanashie, M. (ed).
Politics Politics and Political Power Relations in Nigeria.
Zaria: Institute of Development Research.
192 The Constitution of the federal Republic of Nigeria, 1999.
193  194  195
