 PAD856 : URBAN AND REGIONAL PLANNING NATIONAL OPEN UNIVERSITY OF NIGERIA  TABLE OF CONTENTS MODULE 1: UNIT 1 The Nigerian State UNIT 2 Demography of Nigeria UNIT 3 Perspectives on Administration UNIT 4 Ecology of Public Administration: A Concept and World View UNIT 5 Ecology of Public Administration in Nigeria MODULE 2: UNIT 6 Concept and theories of Urbanization UNIT 7 Evolution of Urban Centres in Nigeria UNIT 8 Rural-Urban Migration: Implication for Economic Development UNIT 9 Community and Urban Development UNIT 10 Problems of Urban Centre Administration MODULE 3: UNIT 11 Concept and theories of leadership UNIT 12 Leadership styles and their Implications UNIT 13 Performance Management UNIT 14 Motivation as a tool in Leadership MODULE 4: UNIT 15 Urbanization and its hazards UNIT 16 Urban Systems UNIT 17 Emergency Management in Nigeria 2  UNIT 18 Security problems of Urban Centres UNIT 1 THE NIGERIAN STATE TABLE OF CONTENT 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objectives 3.0 Conceptual analysis 4.0 Characteristics of a State 4.1 Differences between a Nation and a State 4.2 Evolution of the Nigerian State 4.2.1 The Hausa/Fulani political system 4.2.2 The Igbo political system 4.2.3 The Yoruba political system 5.0 The British adventurism in Nigeria 5.1 Annexion and other activities of the British in Nigeria 6.0 Conclusion 7.0 Summary 8.0 Tutor marked Assignment 9.0 Further Readings.
1.0.
INTRODUCTION: This Unit presents a background to the entire course by explaining the concepts of State and Nation.
It brings to the fore, Nigeria as a Nation State.
The Unit equally traces the evolution of Nigeria as a Nation 3 State.
In the process, it discusses the role played by the British either positively or negatively in attaining the status of a Nation State by Nigeria.
Above all, such other parameters that would aid the understanding of the entire course such as the different nationalities that metamorphosed into a Nation State are identified and explained.
2.0 OBJECTIVES At the end of this Unit, you should be able to: (i) Explain the concepts of State and Nation (ii) Identify the characteristics of a State (iii) Differentiate between a State and a Nation (iv) Trace the Evolution of Nigeria as a Nation State (v) Identify and explain the role played by the British either positively or negatively in Nigeria growth to Nationhood.
3.0 CONCEPTUAL ANALYSIS The State is defined by Anifowose (1999:85-87) as the most inclusive organization which has formal institutions for regulating the most significant external relations of men within its scope.
It is also the basic political unit, a grouping of individuals who are organized in a defined territory for the pursuit of secular common welfare, the maintenance of law and order and the carrying out of external relations with other groups similarly organized.
It has the following features:- (i) It alone has the right to exercise force to compel obedience to its orders.
(ii) It is an all-inclusive association, that is all departments of life are, at least potentially under its control while no other association caters for more than a limited department of life.
4 (iii) It is compulsory for everybody, and not voluntary, like other associations.
(iv) The basis of state is territorial, that is, its jurisdiction includes everybody who was born in a certain stretch of territory and continues to reside there.
(v) It has permanence (vi) It has complete independence and sovereignty 4.0.
CHARACTERISTICS OD A STATE (i) Territory (ii) Population (iii) Government (iv) Sovereignty (v) Independence (vi) A Sense of Nationalism or national identity 4.1 DISTINCTION BETWEEN STATE AND NATION Although both terms share the same characteristics and therefore seem synonymous, the differences can be identified as follows:- (i) A Nation is usually made up of people with a community of identity and consciousness of unity.
It is this feeling of belonging to a homogeneous and unified group by a people that is referred to as Nationalism or sense of Nationality.
(ii) Sovereignty is a characteristic of State and not necessarily of the Nation.
(iii) Contain features associated with the spirit of Nationalism or nationhood.
These are:- (a) A common or related blood i.e.
the people most of the time (b) A common language (c) A common historical tradition (d) A psychological identification with their National territory and 5  symbols.
(e) Common customs and habits.
ACTIVITY 1: Now that you have seen the explanation and analysis of Nation and State, explain the characteristics of a State as well as the differences between State and Nation.
4.0 ANSWER: Characteristics of a State include:- (i) Territory (ii)Population (iii)Government (iv)Sovereignty (v)Independence (vi) A Sense of Nationalism or national identity Difference between State and nation are (i) A Nation is usually made up of people with community of identity and consciousness of unity hence, the term Nationalism.
(ii) Sovereignty is a characteristic of a State and not of a Nation.
(iii) Nation has peculiar features such as common or related blood i.e a race, language, historical tradition, national territory and customs and habits.
4.2 EVOLUTION OF THE NIGERIAN STATE The territory which is today referred to as Nigeria emerged from a conglomeration of pockets of nationalities which existed here and there.
Between the 14th and 18th century, were various empires such as the Oyo Empire, the Benin Empire, the Kanem-Borno Empire, the Songhai Empire which were autonomous entities and successfully administered.
However, the political development of the entity started taking shape in form of alignment and realignments.
Credit for this should essentially be given to Othman Dan Fodio who operated from the Northern part of the territory and through the Jihad fused all the pockets of nationalities in that territory.
6 While he was operating from the northern part of the territory, the Christian Missionaries and Trading Companies were operating from the Southern part of the territory.
Much of whatever beginning and achievements recorded in the country can rightly be attributed to these non-governmental organizations.
The outcome of these exploits and activities provided a shaped or re-shaped etc.
society thereby gradually metamorphosing to what we referred to as the Tripod stand on which the country eventually became firmly seated.
The components of these tripod stands are briefly described hereunder.
4.2.1 Hausa/Fulani Political System The Othman Dan Fodio-led Jihad conquered the Habe or Hausa State thereby ensuring a Fulani occupation of the territory.
This occupation was seen as both religious and political.
The Sokoto Caliphate was thereafter established with outstanding centralized political system of government.
Changes he brought about among others, includes a new system of selecting and appointing rulers who were described as Emirs who ruled the caliphates.
4.2.2 Igbo Political System Generally speaking, the Igbo political system presents a direct opposite of the experiences in the Hausa/Fulani system.
This is because, there is no form of centralized authority and exercise of absolute power is absent.
Here are many institutions that shared political authorities.
They are the Ofo titleholders, the Ozo titleholders, the Age grades etc.
Structurally, the Igbo political system was based on the village as a political unit.
A village is inhabited by a group of related families and each family head held the Ofo title and all of them constituted the council of elders.
It is this council that governed the village.
7 4.2.3.
The Yoruba Political System The Yoruba political system could be traced to the Oyo Empire which was one of the nationalities earlier identified in the territory that conglomerated to what is today known as Nigeria.
Oyo empire was therefore the most popular and outstanding of all empires or kingdoms in the Yoruba political system.
The empire influenced issues in other areas such as Dahomey (Republic of Benin), Ekiti, Ijebu, Ife etc.
Structurally, the political head of the empire was the Alafin who was usually chosen by the Oyo Mesi (seven hereditary kingmakers of the Empire).
In the administering the empire, the Alafin was assisted by the “Bashorun” who was the Prime Minister as well as the leader of the Oyo Mesi.
5.0 British Adventurism in Nigeria The Nigerian state of today is a creation of British imperialism.
This means that it was carved out in the British capitalist drive for raw materials, markets and investment haven.
The justification of British attempt at Nigeria as explained by Afigbi and Uya (2000:35) could be traced to 1849 when the British sought to sanitise the Bights of Benin and Biafra which were notorious ports for slave trade.
From here, one thing led to another for the British, especially deeper involvement in the political and economic life of the city-states of the Bights and a rivalry with the French who also began showing imperial ambitions in the area.
As recounted by Faseke (1998:1), on the 30th of July 1861, Oba Dosumu ceded Lagos to William Mccosky the Acting Consult who was also Commander of Her majesty’s vessel.
McCosky immediately assumed the title of Acting Governor.
The action was supposedly in support of the British resolve to replace slave trade with “Legitimate Commerce”.
A former Governor, 8 Lt. Henry Stanhope Freeman later arrived in November 1861 to take charge of affairs.
5.1 The annexion and other activities of the British in Nigeria could be summarized as follows:- (i) In 1867, the British annexed the Lagos Lagoon area and its immediate environs and converted some into crown colony; (ii) In 1885, the British converted the coastal consulate and its immediate hinterland into the Oil River Protectorate ; (iii) In 1893, the Oil Rivers Protectorate was transform into the Niger Cost protectorate; (iv) In 1888, the British administered political baptism on Goenye Goldies National.
African Company, which had successfully squeezed out rivals, British and non-British from trade in the lower Niger following a trade war of almost unprecedented ferocity.
Goldies Company as a result, became the “Royal Niger Company”, charted and Limited.
It also acquired political and administrative powers over a narrow belt of territory on both sides of the river from the sea to Lokoja, as well as over a vast area which later came to be known as Nothern Nigeria; (v) By 1897, the British influence and power had overflowed the frontiers of Lagos and affected all of Yoruba land which was subsequently attached to Lagos as a protectorate; (vi) In 1898, the British Government appointed a Niger committee under the chairmanship of Lord Selborne to look into and advise on how best to manage the three territories of Lagos colony, Lagos Protectorate and Niger Coast protectorate.
It recommended the establishment of a Maritime province as an amalgam of the three territories and a Sudan Province made up of territories under the Royal Niger Company; 9 (vii) In 1900, major changes took place.
First the charter of Royal Niger Company was withdrawn and the territory under its control renamed the protectorate of Northern Nigeria and brought under the Colonial Secretary.
Secondly, the Niger Coast Protectorate which had hitherto been under Foreign Secretary was renamed the Protectorate of Southern Nigeria and brought under the Colonial Secretary.
Thirdly, the Niger Coast Protectorate, which had hitherto existed as two was remerged into one, thus bringing the Western and Eastern halves of that divide into one.
This finalized the bringing of the three erstwhile separate units under the colonial office for administrative convenience.
(viii) In 1906, following the proposal of the Niger Committee, the Southern Protectorates were amalgamated to form the Colony and Protectorate of Southern Nigeria.
This has severally been interpreted to mean the absorption of the Protectorate of southern Nigeria by the Colony and Protectorate of Lagos.
Within this period (1900 -1906), Sir Frederick Lugard, an erstwhile employee of the Royal Niger company, was appointed the first High commissioner of the Protectorate of Northern Nigeria and charged with responsibility of amalgamating the two protectorates; (ix) In 1914, the State of Nigeria was born following the amalgamation of the Northern Protectorate and Colony and protectorate of Southern Nigeria.
This date marked a turning point in the history of the Nigerian state.
Suffice it to state that some prominent Nigerian politicians in later years described the date and action that took place as a mistake and recognize such action as mere “geographical expression” and not necessarily the birth of a truly nation state.
However, the point must be made that the British Ab initio was pursuing its own interests without apologies to anyone.
The amalgamation was therefore, for its 10 administrative convenience.
It must also be mentioned that Sir Luggard introduced purposeless administrative machinery and could not establish any Secretariat.
All he did was to create a body known as the Nigerian Council, which met once a year, to listen to his address on the state of the colony and protectorate of Nigeria.
Infact, this body had no legislative powers.
Hence, this administration has been described as a one-man rule.
The mechanism introduced by Luggard for the administration of the vast territory of Nigeria, again for administrative convenience is referred to as “Indirect Rule”.
This concept has therefore, ever since, been very popular in the study of Public Administration in Nigeria.
Nigeria could not be described as a nation state since it lacked one of the main characteristics of a nation state.
And that is, it was not a sovereign state but a colony.
What the amalgamation of Nigeria in 1914 did was merely to give Nigeria its present shape and size as well as its complexity of diversity in culture etc.
a phenomenon, which later informed its adoption as a federal structure.
To become a sovereign state, Nigeria underwent a few stages of evolution outlined hereunder: (i) It took the ascension of Sir Hugh Clifford as Governor-general and a successor to Sir Frederick Luggard in 1922 to evolve a more purposely polity in Nigeria.
First, was the adoption of the Clifford Constitution of 1922, which introduced elective principles, and the formation of political organizations.
Secondly was the evolution of political parties.
The second world war accelerated 11 the decolonization process through the devolution of power to Nigerias.
6.0 CONCLUSION Discussions on the Nigerian State have revealed that Nigeria could be regarded as a Nation –State given the characteristic features of both concepts and the level at which Nigeria met those characteristic.
It was not easy really, because, if one considers her chequered history one will appreciate the fact that the nation underwent several stages of metamorphoses.
The role of the British in the whole exercise was catalogued in what we referred to as Annexion and other activities.
Finally, the political systems of the Hausa/Fulani, Igbo and Yoruba created a tripod stand for Nigeria which, to a large extent, fashioned is political evolution that eventually gave her the status of a Nation-State.
7.0 SUMMARY The highpoints of our discussion are that a state entails a political unit, a groupings of individuals who are organized in a defined territory.
It therefore has such characteristics as territory, population, government, sovereignty, independence etc.
These are some characteristics for a nation except that a nation is not necessarily characterized by sovereignty.
Such issues as race or bond of blood, common language etc.
are peculiar to a nation.
Having examined the evolution of Nigeria and the catalytically roles played by British we posit that Nigeria as we have it today is a nation – State.
8.0 TUTOR-MARKED ASSIGNMENT 1.
How would you justify Nigeria as a national-State?
2.
Highlight the role of the British in this endeavour.
12  9.0 REFERENCES (FURTHER READINGS AND OTHERESOURCES).
Anifowose, R and Enemuo, F (1999) Elements of Politics (Lagos: Malthouse Press limited) Maduabum, C.P (2008): The Mechanics of Public Administration in Nigeria (Lagos: Concept Publications).
Omolayo, S. and Arowolaju, b.
(1987) Elements of Government): An Introductory College text on Political Science.
(Lagos: Friends foundation Publishers Limited).
13  UNIT 2 GEOGRAPHICAL EXPRESSION OF NIGERIA TABLE OF CONTENT 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objectives 3.0 Location of Nigeria 3.1 The Geo-Political Zones and States in Nigeria 3.3 Demography of Nigeria 4.0.
Conclusion 5.0.
Summary 6.0.
Tutor marked assignment 7.0.
Further readings 1.0 INTRODUCTION In this Unit, there will be a reflection on the concept of Nigeria, its coinage and location.
The unit will also present the countries bordering Nigeria as well as the various states and local government areas in the country.
The importance of this is underscored by the fact that at least every state capital is an urban center and rural areas are predominant in the local government areas.
The relationship between the two will thus aid understanding of the course on administration of urban centers.
The demography of the country is equally necessary because, to a large extent, the population in a given area is a main factor in revenue collection from the Federation account to that area.
14  2.0.
OBJECTIVES After going through this unit, you should be able to: (i) explain the meaning or concept of Nigeria; (ii) identify the location of Nigeria; (iii) outline the status and local government areas in Nigeria; and (iv) analyze the population of Nigeria by state 3.0.
LOCATION OF NIGERIA The name Nigeria meaning, Niger Area was indeed coined by one Miss Shaw who later became the wife of Lord Fredrick Lugard.
Nigeria is located within the Western Coast of Africa and slightly North of the equator.
She enjoys the cool influence of the Atlantic Ocean in the south and the fairly harsh influences of the arid zone of the Sahara Desert in the North.
It is situated between latitude 4 degrees North and 14 degrees North and between longitudes 3 degrees East and 15 degrees West.
Its geographical area, it must be emphasized, encompasses contrasting landforms, climatic conditions and vegetation belts.
The surface area is approximately 923,800 square kilometers while it enjoys the status of the most populous nation in Africa with a staggering population of about 150 million people.
The country is bordered in the North by the Niger Republic, in the East by Republic of Cameroon, in the West by the Republic of Benin and in the South by the Atlantic Coast line, which of course includes the eastern sector of the Gulf of Guinea.
3.1.
THE GEO-POLITICAL ZONES AND STATES IN NIGERIA With diverse ethnic groups numbering about 373, and their attendant diversifies in language and culture, from an initial three regions of North, West and East, Nigeria of today is made up of six (6) geo-political zones and thirty-six (36) states.
15 Table 2.1 below shows a list of the geo-political zones and the number of states in each geo-political Zone.
Table 2.1.
GEO- POLITICAL ZONES IN NIGERIA AND THE STATES.
S/N GEO-POLITICAL STATE NUMBER ZONE 1.
North West Sokoto, Kebbi, Kano, Jigawa, 7 Katsina, Kaduna, Zamfara 2.
North east Borno, Yobe, Bauchi, Gombe, 6 Taraba, Adamawa 3.
North Central Benue, Plateau, Kogi, Nasarawa, 6 Kwara, Niger 4.
South West Oyo, Lagos, Ondo, Ogun, Osun, 6 Ekiti 5.
South East Enugu, Ebonyi, Anambra, Imo, 5 Abia 6.
South South Rivers, Bayelsa, Crossriver, 6 Akwa-Ibom, Edo ,Delta TOTAL 36 The Thirty-six (36) States in Nigeria are listed below:- 1.
Abia 2.
Adamawa 3.
Akwa-Ibom 4.
Anambra 5.
Bauchi 6.
Bayelsa 7.
Benue 8.
Borno 9.
Cross River 10.
Delta 16 11.
Ebonyi 12.
Edo 13.
Ekiti 14.
Enugu 15.
Gombe 16.
Imo 17.
Jigawa 18.
Kaduna 19.
Kano 20.
Katsina 21.
Kebbi 22.
Kogi 23.
Kwara 24.
Lagos 25.
Nassarawa 26.
Niger 27.
Ogun 28.
Ondo 29.
Osun 30.
Oyo 31.
Plateau 32.
Rivers 33.
Sokoto 34.
Taraba 35.
Yobe 36.
Zamfara And of course the Federal Capital Territory (FCT) of Abuja which enjoys Mayoral rather than state status.
ACTIVITY 1 QUESTION 17 1. Who coined the name Nigeria and from where?
2.
Name the Nigeria’s Neighbours or borders ANSWER 1.
Nigeria was coined by One Miss Shaw who later became the wife of Lord Frederick Lugard.
The name was coined from two terms “Niger” and “Area” to form Nigeria.
2.
(i) Northern border – Niger Republic (ii) Eastern border – Republic of Cameroon (iii) Western border – Republic of Benin (iv) Southern border – The Atlantic Coastline and Gulf of Guinea.
3.3 LOCAL GOVERNMENT AREAS IN NIGERIA Nigeria comprises of 774 Local Government Areas.
The names of the L.G.As are indicated in the first schedule, Section 3, Part 1 of the constitution of the Federal Republic of Nigeria 1999.
Table 2.2 below indicates the number of LGAs per states including the state capitals.
Table 2.2.
Number of LGAs in Nigeria broken down by state S/N STATE NUMBER OF STATE CAPITAL LGAs 1.
Abia 17 Umuahia 2.
Adamawa 21 Yola 3.
Akwa-Ibom 32 Uyo 4.
Anambra 21 Awka 5.
Bauchi 19 Bauchi 6.
Bayelsa 8 Yenogoa 7.
Benue 23 Makurdi 8.
Borno 26 Maiduguri 9.
Cross River 18 Calabar 18 10.
Delta 25 Asaba 11.
Ebonyi 13 Abakaliki 12.
Edo 18 Benin 13.
Ekiti 16 Ado-Ekiti 14.
Enugu 17 Enugu 15.
Gombe 11 Gombe 16.
Imo 27 Owerri 17.
Jigawa 26 Dutse 18.
Kaduna 21 Kaduna 19.
Kano 46 Kano 20.
Katsina 34 Katsina 21.
Kebbi 21 Benin kebbi 22.
Kogi 21 Lokoja 23.
Kwara 16 Ilorin 24.
Lagos 20 Ikeja 25.
Nassarawa 15 Lafia 26.
Niger 25 Minna 27.
Ogun 20 Abeokuta 28.
Ondo 18 Akure 29.
Osun 30 Osogbo 30.
Oyo 33 Ibadan 31.
Plateau 17 Jos 32.
Rivers 23 Portharcourt 33.
Sokoto 23 Sokoto 34.
Taraba 16 Jalingo 35.
Yobe 17 Damaturu 36.
Zamfara 16 Gasau Source: The Federal republic of Nigeria (1999): The Constitution of the Federal Republic of Nigeria, First Schedule, Part I (Abuja: Federal Ministry of Information) pages 125-129.
19  3.3.1 THE FEDERAL CAPITAL TERRITORY (FCT) Although neither a state nor a local government area, the FCT houses the capital of Nigeria, Abuja.
It enjoys a mayoral status instead.
However, Abuja.
Represents a model of an urban centre which is of interest to us in this course.
The FCT has five (5) area councils.
Below are the area councils and their headquarters.
Table 2.3.
FCT AREA COUNCIL AND THEIR HEADQUARTERS AREA COUNCIL HEADQUARTERS Abaj Abaji Abuja Municipal Garki Bwari Bwari Gwagwalada Gwagwalada Kuje Kuje Kwali kwali 3.4.
DEMOGRAPHY OF NIGERIA As a concept, demography refers essentially to the population of a state.
You must recall that population is one of the characteristics of a state.
As a nation state, Nigeria has a population which is put at nearly 150 million.
Population census was carried out periodically mainly within a ten year period.
Another reason we examine the population of Nigeria particularly its distribution per state is because it sometimes contributes to the problems of urban centres particularly the large ones like Lagos, Abuja, Kano , Ibadan, Onitsha etc and the attendant challenges in administering them.
Table 2.4 shows the distribution of Nigeria population per state in year 2006 when the last population census was conducted.
20  Table 2.4: DISTRIBUTION OF THE 2006 POPULATION BY STATES IN NIGERIA.
S/N STATE MALES FEMALE TOTAL NAME 1.
Abia 1,434,193 1,399,806 2,8333,999 2.
Adamawa 1,606,123 1,561,978 3,168,101 3.
Akwa-Ibom 2,044,510 1,875,698 3,920,208 4.
Anambra 2,174,641 2,007,391 4,182,032 5.
Bauchi 2,426,215 2,250,250 4,676,465 6.
Bayelsa 902,648 800,710 1,703,358 7.
Benue 2,164,058 2,055,186 4,219,244 8.
Borno 2,161,157 1,990,036 4,151,193 9.
Cross River 1,492,465 1,396,501 2,888,966 10.
Delta 2,074,306 2,024,085 4,098,391 11.
Ebonyi 1,040,984 1,132,617 2,173,601 12.
Edo 1,640,461 1,577,871 3,218,332 13.
Ekiti 1,212,609 1,171,603 2,384,212 14.
Enugu 1,624,202 1,633,096 3,257,298 15.
FCT-Abuja 740,489 664,712 1,405,201 16.
Gombe 1,230,722 1,123,157 2,353,879 17.
Imo 2,032,286 1,902,613 3,934,899 18.
Jigawa 2,215,907 2,132,742 4,348,649 19.
Kaduna 3,112,028 2,954,534 6,066,562 20.
Kano 4,844,128 4,539,554 9,383,682 21.
Katsina 2,978,682 2,813,896 5,792,578 22.
Kebbi 1,617,498 1,621,130 3,238,628 23.
Kogi 1,691,737 1,586,750 3,278,487 24.
Kwara 1,220,581 1,150,508 2,371,089 25.
Lagos 4,678,020 4,335,514 9,013,534 21 26.
Nassarawa 945,556 917,719 1,863,275 27.
Niger 2,032,725 1,917,524 3,950,249 28.
Ogun 1,847,243 1,880,855 3,728,098 29.
Ondo 1,761,263 1,679,761 3,441,024 30.
Osun 1,740,619 1,682,916 3,423,535 31.
Oyo 2,809,840 2,781,749 5,591,589 32.
Plateau 1,593,033 1,585,679 3,178,712 33.
Rivers 2,710,665 2,474,735 5,185,400 34.
Sokoto 1,872,069 1,824,930 3,696,999 35.
Taraba 1,199,849 1,100,887 2,300,736 36.
Yobe 1,206,003 1,115,588 2,321,591 Zamfara 1,630,344 1,629,502 3,259,846 NIGERIA 71,709,859 68,298,783 140,003,642 Source: The Punch, Vol.
17, No.
19,722, Thursday, January 11, 2007, p.3 Note: (i) There were 36 states in Nigeria as at 2006 when the last census was conducted.
The total population of Nigeria, as recorded by the 1991 census, was 88.99 million.
The population has since been projected to 113.80 million by 1999.
The total population of Nigeria as at 2006 was 140 million.
It must still be restated hat although a multi-ethnic state, Nigeria has three dominant tribes, viz: hausa-Fulani in the north, Yoruba in the West and Igbo in the east.
Hence, some writers had argued that Nigeria rests on a tripod based on these three tribes.
This is being brought to the fore because of the influence exerted by the three major tribes on Nigeria’s political history, the political behaviour of Nigerians and, in particular, also for environmental factors influencing governance in the country in general and the country’s public administration system in particular.
4.0.
CONCLUSION The Unit again draws our mind to the geography of Nigeria during which we identified its territory which of course includes it neighbours.
The vast area of the 22 country exposed the different parts to different climate conditions which inform the culture etc of the people from different parts of the country.
The Unit also presents clearly the six geo-political zones and the 36 states that make up Nigeria and the state capitals which are all urban centers.
Abuja as Federal capital territory although not a state presents a model of an urban center.
The Unit also informed us that there are 774 local government areas in Nigeria.
It equally informed us about the number of LGAs per state.
A list of all the local government areas in Nigeria is contained in pages 125-129 of the constitution of the Federal Republic of Nigeria (1999).
Finally, you are informed of the demography of Nigeria.
Its population and the distribution per state indicates the spread and the attendant challenges in administering the urban centers particularly those of them that have large influx of the population.
All these will aid you in the understanding of the entire course.
5.0.
SUMMARY The major things that were discussed in this unit include the geographical boundary of the territory called Nigeria; its climatic conditions; the six geo- political zones and the number and list of states in Nigeria.
The 774 local government areas and the distribution of the LGAs per state.
Finally, the Unit looked at the population of the country and its distribution per state.
This is particularly informative in that subsequent discussions on rural-urban migration and the use of population as a major determinant for allocation of funds to states and LGAs from the Federation account will be easy to understand.
6.0.
TUTOR MARKED ASIAGNMENTS Explain the relationship between geo-political zones, states and LGAs in Nigeria and how this determines the development of urban centres and the challenges of administering such centres.
23  7.0.
REFERENCE (FURTHER READINGS AND OTHER RESOURCES) Afigbi, A.E; and Uya O.E.
(2000) “The Evolution of Nigeria (1849-1960)” in H.I.A.
Ajaegbu E.T.
(Ed) Nigeria: A People United, A Future Assured, Vol.1: A Compendium (Abuja: Federal Ministry of Information).
Green, A.K.
(1996) “Introduction to Lugard and Amalgamation of Nigeria Record”: A Documentary in E.O.
Erin and J.I.
Ehiagwu (Ed) Foundation of Nigeria Federation: Theoretical Considerations.
Maduabum, C.P.
; (2008): The Mechanics of Public Administration in Nigeria (Lagos: Concept Publications).
24  UNIT 5 MANAGEMENT OF CITIES AND MUNICIPALITIES TABLEOF CONTENT 1.0.
Introduction 2.0.
Objectives 3.0.
Urban and Municipal Management 3.1.
Municipal and Local Services 3.2.
Changes in the Urban Life 3.3.
Evolution of the Role of Management in Municipalities 4.0.
Conclusion 5.0.
Summary 6.0.
Tutor-marked Assignment 7.0.
Further Readings 1.0.
INTRODUCTION: The local and municipal administration aims at the improvement and development of the local community.
Actually, it is in a better position than the central authorities to reach out for the local communities and to understand and seek solutions for the various problems.
Such capacity occurs through the interaction of the local community that induces effective participation of the citizens in the local activities and thus achieve the national participation in the process of development.
Such activities make the process of local administration a successful one.
2.0.
OBJECTIVES At the end of this unit, you should be able to: (i) explain urban and municipal management (ii) identify Municipal and Local Services (iii) identify changes in urban life 25 (iv) outline the evolution of the Role of Management in Municipalities 3.0.
URBAN AND MUNICIPAL MANAGEMENT Urban areas around the globe constitute human aggregation centers, economic activity, social interaction, mobility, scientific, cultural and technological advancements.
The task of administration in cities and municipalities is coordination of the efforts of the human groups and their orientation towards the plans that aim to achieve the defined goals.
The importance of administration lies in the tackling of the burdens of the heavy, diverse, ever increasing and developing tasks in urban areas where the work is complicated by nature due to the technological vast advancement, increase in population, additional needs for municipal and local services and the rapid developments in the urban life style itself.
3.1.
MUNICIPAL AND LOCAL SERVICES Regarding the development, increase and numerous services in cities we may indicate the development plans and burdens, development in the industrial areas and requirements of urban planning, masters of preventive measures for health and environmental and air pollution control, problems of waste collection and the most modern methods of waste disposal, combating rodents and insects, waste water treatment and purification, electronic traffic control, swimming pools control, improvement of fire extinguishers, dental programmes, mother and child care clinics, control on residential complexes, sport areas, airports and helicopter landing areas, road construction and street light.
We can also mention the role of the administrative organization in the daily system for all services and utilities and coordination among them as well as utilization of modern approaches and work systems such as application of computers, microfilm, calculators, information centers.
3.2.
CHANGES IN THE URBAN LIFE: Not only did the functions and tasks of municipalities increase, but they changed in their nature also.
Modern sciences have added a lot to the provision of services in local communities, particularly the urban community.
We recognize now how treated and purified waste water is utilized, how advanced methods of investigation and prevention of crime are applied and how psychological malady which widely spread in the civil communities is better addressed.
We also notice the vast advancements in technology and its applications in contrast to the disability, in general, of municipalities.
The result was more concentrated on the specialization in services and on the important role of applying scientific administrative methods to address 26 the tasks.
This also necessitated prediction for future problems depending on researches and studies and to seek solutions for and seek prevention of future problems.
The qualitative and quantitative and varied change in the nature of municipal functions may be related to several factors, some are: - Increase in population in urban areas and the changeover from rural to urban life which affected the social behaviour and basic environment.
- Migration from rural areas to cities especially the capitals and metropolises which result in many problems and burdens.
- Transferring some local minor units into towns and municipalities and construction of townships and neighborhoods which rely on major cities creating more burdens of providing services, utilities and urban facilities.
- Moving industry from urban to less populated areas.
- Modern sciences and technologies, easy service facilities for the community, local community demands and the problems that face cities in general and capitals and metropolises in particular.
- Development of municipal administration philosophy from supervision and control over performance to assuming responsibility of performing along with organization and development of municipal revenues, improving methods of administration and organization and conducting researches for community services.
ACTIVITY 1 QUESTION: Outline the factors responsible for changing nature of Municipal functions.
ANSWER The factors are: (i) Increase in population in urban areas (ii) Migration from rural to cities (iii) Transferring some local minor units into towns (iv) Moving industry from urban to less populated areas (v) Modern sciences and technology (vi) Development of municipal administration.
3.3.
EVOLUTION OF THE ROLE OF MANAGEMENT IN MUNICIPALITIES: 27 The varied and increasing functions of municipalities have resolved the distinctive role of administrative systems in cities, the tough job of correlating technical and services specializations to facilitate services for the local community, assuming the burdens of the daily (routine) work, addressing the demands of citizens, conducting training programs aiming to upgrade the level of performance and adopting modern methods in implementing the plans for development.
Below are some of the managerial problems and issues to be addressed: 1.
Enhancing the methods for organization and procedures to keep pace with the new changes.
2.
Conducting studies related to the requirements of the civilization shift and the new style of life pertaining to safety, luxury and prosperity.
3.
Improvement of urban planning and housing plans in the city, with special consideration to other elements such as health services, safety and security, local traditions and habits, environmental factors and preservation of the characteristics, heritage and the requirements for development.
4.
Importance of focusing on the manpower element and on the projects of its enhancement and providing the administration with its needs for technical and managerial specializations.
5.
The issue of reorganization and development of managerial elements.
6.
Public opinion on the general policy for the management of the city and on implementation of projects and performance.
7.
Coordinating among municipal authorities and the other authorities that provide facilities and services within the city.
8.
Observing the bases for cooperation and integration among departments of planning and implementation for achieving the main objectives.
4.0.
CONCLUSION We repeat what we said in the very beginning and assure that complexity of the modern government functioning makes the function of public administration more complicated, specifically the local and municipal administration.
No doubt that the increasing trend towards decentralization at the national level and the quantity of responsibilities delegated to the municipalities in the field of services, utilities, environment, local and urban development, all participated in the emergence of several problems and issues which require treatment by the administrative leadership, and many experiences proved successful.
It is our considered opinion that adequate management of Municipal and urban centres would assist government 28 improve the life of the citizens.
This however cannot be realized unless the factors identified in this unit are effectively addressed.
5.0.
SUMMARY Management of cities and Municipalities exposes our discussion on the nifty gritty of measures aimed at addressing such issues as over population of cities and its attendant impact on the citizens; overstretching available resources etc.
This unit therefore explains urban areas as constituting human aggregation centres, economic activity, social interaction etc.
It also looked at services rendered by both the municipalities and local centres.
The unit addressed the changes in urban life and identified six (6) factors responsible for changing nature of municipal functions.
The unit finally addressed the evolution of the role of management of municipalities.
In the process, eight (8) managerial problems and issues to be addressed were outlined.
6.0.
TUTOR-MARKED ASSISGNMENT 1.
Explain the evolution of the role of management in Municipalities 2.
Outline the managerial problems and issues to be addressed.
7.0.
FURTHER READINGS 1.
Al-Nuaim, Abdullah Al Ali (1994) (Management of large Cities- Riyadh city Experience) King Fahad National Library, Riyadh1415H/1994.
2.
Derweesh, Ibrahim (1982) (Administrative Development) Dar el Nahdha Al Arabia-Cairo.
3.
Onokerhoraye, A.G., (1978) “The Urban System and National Integration in Nigeria”, Journal of Black Studies, Vol.
9, No.
2 pg 2-3.
29  UNIT 6 EVOLUTION OF URBAN CENTERS IN NIGERIA TABLE OF CONTENTS 1.0.
Introduction 2.0.
Objectives 3.0.
In the beginning 3.1.
Historical Development 3.2.
The Situation today 4.0.
Conclusion 5.0.
Summary 6.0.
Tutor-marked Assignment 7.0.
Further Readings 1.0.
INTRODUCTION: Urbanization and urban cities although existed before the colonial period, it was at a very low key such as centres of barter trade etc.
However, the advent of colonialism gave prominence to this phenomenon.
This is because colonialism came with it certain infrastructures and facilities made essentially for the comfort of the colonial masters.
Some of the infrastructures are pipe-borne water, electricity, tarred roads etc.
Soon the comfort provided by such modern infrastructural facilities started attracting rural dwellers particularly those that brought their farm products for sale to the Europeans as well as Africans that served them.
The upsurge of population of urban centres are mainly due to such comforts.
30  2.0.
OBJECTIVES At the end of this unit you should be able to: (i) Explain the antecedents that led to existence of urban centres (ii) Trace the historical development of urban centres (iii) Analyze what the situation is today.
3.0.
IN THE BEGINNING Nigerian urbanism, as in other parts of the world, is a function primarily of trade and politics.
In the north, the great urban centers of Kano, Katsina, Zaria, Sokoto, the early Borno capitals (Gazargamo and Kuka),and other cities served as entrepots to the Saharan and trans-Saharan trade, and as central citadels and political capitals for expanding states of the northern savanna.
They attracted large numbers of traders and migrants from their own hinterlands and generally also included “stranger quarters” for migrants of other regions and nations.
In the south, the rise of the Yoruba expansionist city-states and of Benin and others was stimulated by the trade to the coast, and by competition among these growing urban centres for the control of their hinterlands and of the trade from the interior to the Atlantic (including the slave trade).
The activities of European traders also attracted people to such coastal cities as Lagos, Badagry, Brass, and Bonny, and later Calabar and Port Harcourt.
Overlying the original features of the earlier cities were those generated by colonial and postcolonial rule, which created new urban centers while also drastically altering the older ones.
All these cities and peri-urban areas generally tended to have high population densities.
3.1.
HISTORICAL DEVELOPMENT The northern savanna cities grew within city walls, at the center of which were the main market, government buildings, and the central mosque.
Around them clustered the houses of the rich and powerful.
Smaller markets and denser housing were found away from this core along with little markets at the gates and some cleared land within the gates that was needed especially for siege agriculture.
Groups of specialized craft manufacturers (cloth dyers, weavers, potters, and the like) were organized into special quarters, the enterprises often being family-based and inherited.
Roads from the gates ran into the central market and the administrative headquarters.
Cemeteries were outside the city gates.
The concentration of wealth, prestige, political power, and religious learning in the cities attracted large numbers of migrants, both from the neighboring countryside and from distant regions.
This influx occasioned 31 the building of additional sections of the city to accommodate these strangers.
In many of the northern cities, these areas were separated between sections for the distant, often non- Muslim migrants not subject to the religious and other prohibitions of the emir, and for those designated the “ Sabon Gari,” or new town (which in southern cities, such as Ibadan, has often been shortened to “Sabo”), while the latter was often known as the “Tudun Wada,” an area often quite wealthy and elaborately laid out.
To the pre-colonial sections of the town was often added a government area for expatriate administrators.
The result was that many of the northern cities have grown from a single centralized core to being polynucleated cities, with areas whose distinctive character reflected their origins, and the roles and position of their inhabitants.
Surrounding many of the large, older northern cities, including Kano, Sokoto, and Katsina, there developed regions of relatively dense rural settlement where increasingly intense agriculture was practised to supply food and other products to the urban population.
These areas have come to be known as close settled zones, and they were of major importance to the agricultural economies of the north.
By 1990 the inner close settled zone around Kano, and the largest of its kind, extended to a radius of about thirty kilometers, essentially the limit of a trip to the city on foot or by donkey.
Within this inner zone, there has long been a tradition of intensive interaction between the rural and urban populations, involving not just food but also wood for fuel, manure, and a range of trade goods.
There has also been much land investment and speculation in this zone.
The full range of Kano’s outer close settled zone in 1990 was considered to extend sixty- five to ninety-five kilometers from the city, and rural-urban interactions had extended in distance and increased in intensity because of the great improvements in roads and in the availability of motorized transport.
Within this zone, the great majority of usable land was under annual rainy season or continuous irrigated cultivation, making it one of the most intensively cultivated regions in sub-Saharan Africa.
In the south, there were some similarities of origin and design in the forest and southern savanna cities of Yorubaland, but culture, landscape, and history generated a very difficult character for most of those cities.
As in the north, the earlier Yoruba towns often centered around the palace of a ruler, or afin, which was surrounded by a lager open space and a market.
This arrangement was still evident in older cities such as Ife.
However, many of the most important contemporary Youruba cities, including the largest, ibadan were founded during the period of the Yoruba wars in the first half of the nineteenth century.
Reflecting their origins as war camps, they usually contained multiple center of power without a single central palace.
Instead, the main market often assumed the central position in the original town, and there were several separated areas of important compounds established by the major original factions.
Abeokuta, for 32 example, had three main chiefly families from Egba clan who had broken away from and become important rivals of Ibadan.
Besides these divisions were many of the Hausa migrants resided; the sections added during the colonial era, often as government reserve areas (GRAs); and the numerous areas of postcolonial expansion, generally having little or no planning.
In high population densities typically found in Yourba cities… and even in rural villages in Yorubaland—were among the striking features of the region.
This culturally based pattern was probably reinforced during the period of intense intercity warfare, but it persisted in most areas through the colonial and independence periods.
The distinctive Yoruba pattern of densification involved filling in compounds with additional rooms, then adding a second, third, or sometimes even a fourth story.
Eventually, hundreds of people might live in a space that had been occupied by only one extended family two or three generations earlier.
Fueling this process of densification were the close connections between rural and urban dwellers, and the tendency for any Yoruba who could afford it to maintain both urban and rural residences.
The colonial government, in addition to adding sections to existing cities, also crafted important new urban centers in areas where there previously had been none.
Among the most important were Kaduna, the colonial capital of the Protectorate of Northern Nigeria, and Jos in the central highlands, which was the center of the tin mining industry on the plateau and a recreational town for expatriates and the Nigerian elite.
These new cities lacked walls but had centrally located administrative buildings and major road and rail transport routes, along which the main markets developed.
These routes became one of the main forces for the cities’ growth.
The result was usually a basically linear city, rather than the circular pattern largely based on defensive needs, which characterized the earlier indigenous urban centers.
The other ubiquitous colonial addition was the segregated GRA, consisting of European-style housing, a hospital or nursing station, and educational, recreational, and religious facilities for the British colonials and the more prominent European trading community.
The whole formed an expatriate enclave, which was deliberately separated from the indigenous Nigerian areas, ostensibly to control sanitation and limit the spread of diseases such as malaria.
After independence, these areas generally became upper income suburbs, which sometimes spread outward into surrounding farmlands as well as inward to fill in the space that formerly separated the GRA from the rest of the city.
New institutions, such as university campuses, government office complexes, hospitals, and hotels were often located outside or on the fringes of the city in the 1980s.
the space that 33 originally separated them from the denser areas was then filled in as further growth occurred.
ACTIVITY 1 QUESTION: Identify the early features of urban development in both Northern and Southern Nigeria ANSWER The features are: (i) Entrepots to the Sarahan and trans-saharan trades (ii) central citadels and political capitals for the expanding states of the northern savannah.
(iii) Activities of European trade and the coastal cities etc.
3.2.
THE SITUATION TODAY In Nigeria as in most other countries the central districts of major cities now boast of numerous skyscrapers of cement, glass and steel.
But far into the distance spread of Nigeria’s real urban conglomerations: unplanned, chaotic settlements built of wood, corrugated metal sheeting, mud bricks and whatever other materials may be at hand.
They have only dirty roads and open sewer ditches.
They lack pipped water, refuse collections, electricity and most other basic municipal services.
The slums of cities such as in Lagos where we have Ajegunle, Mushin, Agege etc are homes to tens of millions and they are growing rapidly.
Sub- saharan Africa where Nigeria belongs is the only region in the world where urbanization is associated with negative economic growth, according to Nelson Mandela.
This adds to the enormity of the problems of urbanization in a region that is exactly most in need of growth and development to end and reverse its marginalization on the world stage.
Some cities like Abuja gave rise to satellite towns.
For instance, Abuja gave rise to towns like Nyannya, Kubwa, Gwagwalada etc.
And these are rapidly growing into cities though lacking in upgraded infrastructural facilities as could be found in city centres.
Similar situations are found in Kano, kaduna, Ibadan, Onitsha, Aba, Port Harcourt etc.
Again it must be stated that in most urban centres we have the Rich and the Poor living side by side hence the concepts of Urban Rich and Urban 34 Poor.
For instance, before the distruction of maroko in Lagos, almost adjacent to Maroko was Ikoyi and Victoria Island.
Whereas Maroko was an excellent example of slum where many people lived in dehumanized condition, Ikoyi overlooking Maroko house the few rich people where all good things of life exist as a matter of routine.
It is equally in such Urban centres like Lagos that we have people who dwell under the bridges and muddy waters of the Lagoon.
A similar situation was gradually developing in Abuja until the erstwhile Honourable Minister of the Federal Capital city Mallam El Rufai applied force to dislodge the Ashanti settlers.
Beyond this however, Urban cities, present some positive aspects especially with regards to economic activities which to a large extent sustains the local governments in which they are situated.
In such centres however, only those who can afford it enjoy some good things of life.
But we must hasten to add that the ever increasing population of such centres has overstretched the infrastructural facilities in such cities with the result that electricity is a luxury that can only be enjoyed regularly with the purchase of a Generator.
Similarly, most houses are constructed with boreholes as public pipe-borne water is virtually non-existent.
4.0.
CONCLUSION The growth of urban centres in Nigeria signifies what we earlier postulated as attractions that stimulate migration from less developed villages and towns.
For instance, every state capital of the thirty six states of the federation has developed into an urban centre.
And this is often identified as one of the advantages of states creation.
But as is easily observable most migrants often live below poverty level – even a level below what it was in the villages and towns from where they migrated but prefer such a condition than going back to the villages.
A good example is the inhabitants of under-the bridge in Lagos.
These inhabitants have homes in their native towns and villages but prefer to live under a dehumanized condition as long as it is in an urban centre.
5.0.
SUMMARY The Urban centres in Nigeria had overtime undergone stages of evolution prior to the arrival of the colonialists, through their administration period to this day.
This unit therefore examined what the situation was at the onset when some of the cities in the north such as kano,Katsina, Sokoto etc served as entreports to the Saharan and trans-saharan trade.
Similarly the activities of the European traders attracted people to such coastal cities in the South as Lagos, Badagry, Brass and Bonny.
35 The unit equally addressed the historical development that eventually culminated in our having at least one urban centre in each of the thirty-six states in Nigeria.
The situation today although showcases boom in economic activities in the urban centres but presented a gloomy picture of the urban poor who are in the majority but live in abject poverty.
6.0.
TUTOR-MARKED ASSIGNMENT Identify and explain the features of urban centres in Nigeria drawing examples from such cities as Lagos, Abuja, Kano.
8.0.
FURTHER READINDS (1) Al – Nasim, A.A. (2001) “ Management of Cities and Municipalities” Paper presented to International Forum on Povert Rabbat, Morocco, 16-19 October.
(2) Harsch, E. ; (2003) African Cities Under Strain (new York: Africa Recovery, United Nations).
(3) McGee, T.G.
; (1971) The Urbanization Process in the Third World (London: G. Bell and Sons).
36  UNIT 7 URBANIZATION AND RURAL DEVELOPMENT TABLE OF CONTENTS 1.0.
Introduction 2.0.
Objectives 3.0.
Spatial Linkages and Transformation 3.1.
Physical Linkages 3.2.
Economic Linkages 3.3.
Population Movement Linkages 3.4.
Technological Linkages 3.5.
Social Linkages 3.6.
Service Delivery Linkages 3.7.
Political, Administrative and Organizational Linkages 4.0.
Building Development Centres: Location of Urban Services and Facilities.
4.1.
The Village Service Centre 4.2.
The Market Town: Small City 4.3.
Intermediate City: Regional Centre 5.0.
Transformational Development: An Approach to Spatial Integration Strategy.
5.1.
Building on Existing Resources 5.2.
Local Participation 6.0.
Conclusion 7.0.
Summary 8.0.
Tutor-marked Assignment 9.0.
Further Readings 37  1.0.
INTRODUCTION In this unit, we shall discuss the Urban-Rural linkages that would aid development.
The integration of urban and rural development, an essential dimension of equitable growth planning, can only be attained in countries with resource scarcities if they use and build on existing spatial structures, organizational arrangements, behavioural patterns, economic and social institutions, and culturally embedded methods and practices, transforming them into more productive instruments of growth and change.
This unit attempts to delineate one approach to transformational development: It outlines a conceptual framework for integrated spatial development planning, identifies major urban services and facilities needed at various levels of an articulated hierarchy of human settlements, and describes the linkages that result from or promote interaction among communities and that generate transformation towards a cohesive and productive spatial system.
Finally, it describes the policy and programme implications of the transformational approach to development, an approach that seeks to identify and use existing, culturally embedded resources, institutions, and human capabilities, combining them with appropriate modern technologies and organizational arrangements to bring about planned change in pursuit of development goals.
2.0.
OBJECTIVES At the end of this Unit, you should be able to : (i) explain the reason for integrating urban and rural functions into a national spatial system.
(ii) Identify and analyze the various Linkages (iii) Explain the adoption of Political and Administrative Linkages in formal governmental structural relationships (iv) Outline strategies for Building development Centres 38 3.0.
SPATIAL LINKAGES AND TRANSFORMATION Integrating communities and their productive activities into a national economy is a major objective of transformation strategy.
Neither the goals of increased productivity and income expansion nor those of greater equity in income distribution can be attained without increasing interaction among villages, market towns, intermediate cities, and metropolitan areas in developing nations without integrating urban and rural functions into a national spatial system.
Integration promotes transformation at every level of the spatial hierarchy and at every stage of a nation’s development.
Transformation of communities and productive activities –the evolution of subsistence into commercial farming, of simple handicrafts into more specialized processing and manufacturing, of scattered and isolated economic activities into concentrated nodes of production integrated into a national system of exchange – requires a well articulated spatial structure.
Settlement of various sizes, specializing in different economic and social functions, must be linked to each other through a network of physical, economic, technological, social, and administrative interaction.
The linkages- patterns of transaction among groups and organizations located in spatially dispersed communities with sufficient threshold sizes of population to support their own specialized activities – are the primary means of expanding the system of exchange and transforming underdeveloped societies.
Even a cursory examination of developing nations where element of such a spatial system have emerged provides insights into the types of linkages essential for transformation and patterns of change they set in motion.
The fundamental observations seem valid for all developing countries with elements of spatial articulation.
First, increase in the number and diversity of linkages and the growth or transformation of development centers- from villages to market towns, market town to small cities, small cities to 39 intermediate urban areas- are inextricably related.
In some cases, new linkages - extension of road networks, river transport, or all connections – promote growth and diversification in existing settlements or generate new central places, whereas in others the appearance of new productive activities promotes increased linkages between individual settlement and the rest of the spatial system.
That is, some linkages promote accelerated growth of villages, market towns, and intermediate cities, and others result from nodal growth.
To distinguish particular cause and effect relationships, however, is often extremely difficult because nodal and linkage growth may take place simultaneously or because a complex set of changes may occur in rapid succession.
Second, the variety of linkages that integrate urban and rural areas into an articulated spatial system are themselves inextricably linked.
Creation of one new linkage may produce a “cascade effect” making other activities and linkages possible, and promoting the growth of existing or new central places.
Once a new set of linkages is introduced into a rural market system, it can trigger a set of “circular and cumulative changes” towards further growth and changes.
Simply, improving transportation between villages leads to reorganization and expansion of existing periodic markets.
Displacement of weak or unsuccessful markets and redistribution of commerce can create entirely new markets and increase the demands on the transport system.
New urban-rural physical linkages can change the flow of economic resources, the spatial pattern of social and economic interaction and the movement of people.
Closer interaction among villages, market towns, intermediate cities, and major metropolitan areas makes it less expensive and more convenient to integrate technology at each level of the spatial hierarchy and to distribute more widely services that fundamentally transform organization and political relationships.
40 A complex set of linkages transforms and integrates urban and rural areas in developing nations.
Physical, economic, technological, and social linkages and population movement, service delivery, and political, administrative, and organizational patterns play potentially important roles in the transformation of poorly articulated spatial systems (see table 7.1. below ).
Table 7.1.
Major Linkages in Spatial development Physical Linkages Road networks River and water transport networks Railroad networks Ecological interdependences Economic Linkages Market patterns Raw materials and intermediate goods flows Capital flows Production linkages – backward, forward, and lateral Consumption and shopping patterns Income flows Sectoral and interregional commodity flows “Cross linkages” Population movement linkages Migration – temporary and permanent journey to work Technological Linkage Technology interdependences Irrigation systems Telecommunications systems Social interaction linkages Visiting patterns Kinship patterns 41 Rites, rituals, and religious activities Social group interaction Service delivery linkages Energy flows and networks Credit and financial networks Education, training, and extension linkages Health service delivery systems Professional, commercial, and technical service patterns Transport service systems Political, administrative, and Structural relationships organizational linkages Government budgetary flows Organizational interdependences Authority approval-supervision patterns Interjurisdictional transaction patterns Informal political decision chains 3.1.
PHYSICAL LINKAGES The spatial integration of communities results mainly from physical linkages – resource interdependences and man-made transportation networks.
Human ecological relationships in most peasant societies provide basic opportunities for social interaction and economic exchange.
Biophysical links –ecological relationships among land forms, soils, minerals, water, vegetation, and wildlife – limit possible and feasible developmental changes and create opportunities for new productive activities within a region and determine the comparative physical advantages of each community.
Transportation networks- roads, rivers, water channels, and rail systems – are among the most important linkages for integrating spatial systems.
They reduce travel time, lower shipping costs, widen marketing, 42 commuting , migration opportunities, allow greater access to nonagricultural employment, improve communications, and extend areas of service delivery.
Nations investing heavily in road networks have achieved substantial gains in agricultural production and capacity.
3.2.
ECONOMIC LINKAGES A related set of economic linkages is also needed to promote spatial integration.
Most important are market networks, commodity, raw material, and intermediate goods flows among central places, capital and income flows, consumption and shopping patterns, and forward, backward, and lateral production links among commercial and manufacturing activities within urban centers and among them.
Broadening market linkages, is a primary force in commercializing agriculture, diversifying production, and expanding the spatial system of exchange.
The combination of transport and market linkages encourages the growth of nested and integrated markets, expanding patterns of exchange for basic commodities and ensuring broader geographical access to goods and services.
The emergence of an intermediate city relatively well connected to a system of rural market centers and to a large metropolitan area generates a marketing pattern.
The flow of commodities and manufactured goods is strongly influenced by the degree of spatial articulation within developing countries.
Intermediate cities in particular serves as redistribution centers.
In well-articulated spatial systems, moreover, strong linkages develop between inward and outward flows of goods and commodities, through organizations responsible for both export and import functions.
Yet, in most developing nations, the lack of spatial articulation obstructs the evolution of such linkages, which are unlikely to emerge spontaneously without central 43 places large enough to support organizations capable of managing multiple functions.
3.3.
POPULATION MOVEMENT LINKAGES Short-term and permanent migration is an ubiquitous characteristics of development and an important form of urban-rural linkage.
Temporary migration and journey-to-work, more strongly than other forms of spatial integration, depend on transportation and communication linkages between urban-rural areas, and on the location of industrial activities in intermediate cities and smaller towns.
More permanent migration depends on a wider range of economic and social determinants, including the availability of jobs in towns and cities; wage, public service, and educational opportunity differentials between cities and villages; and the distance, cost, and convenience of moving.
Rural people, given potential job opportunity and convenient means of travel, are more likely to migrate to a city where they have friends or kin.
Studies of tropical Africa indicate that where they exist, province towns and intermediate cities attract migrants who either move to them instead of going to the primate city or use them as temporary way stations before moving to the metropolis.
Although much of the migration in Africa is “rural- urban” with frequent return trips to the village, the emergence of small towns or intermediate cities can drastically alter movements if they provide work, education, or increased access to public services and amenities.
In Africa, population movements are less a function of distance than of spatial articulation, with smaller towns having “quite restricted ranges, while the larger urban places exert their influence over much wider areas”.
Although little is yet known about the effects of decentralized urbanization on population movements in developing countries, scattered evidence suggests that the creation of market towns and intermediate cities can 44 have a significant influence on both migration and journey-to-work.
Where villages are widely scattered and central places have not emerged, journey-to-work patterns tend to lack nodality; people move short distances from their homes to fields or from their homes to small shops and processing plants.
Some commute to special facilities and activities such as military reservations, larger plantations, or commercial farms and to nearby cities.
The concentration of economic activities in market towns and small cities, however, generates a greater volume of journey-to-work traffic and significally increases nodality.
Emergence of diversified market towns and small cities can also alter the flow of migration from rural areas to major metropolises and create a pattern of step-wise migration.
3.4.
TECHNOLOGICAL LINKAGES Developing nations need a variety of technologies, appropriate to different social, economic, technical, and administrative capacities of communities of different sizes and stages of development.
Technology, equipment, procedures, and methods of production – must also be integrated spatially and functionally, since no single technological innovation will promote social and economic transformation in developing nations unless it is appropriate to local needs and conditions and linked to both higher and lower levels of technology and related inputs.
The Green Revolution demonstrated that a spatially linked network of technologies is needed to make the introduction of new high-yield seed varieties successful, with technical inputs coming from both urban centers and rural areas.
The components, equipment and skilled manpower needed to test new seeds, construct irrigation systems, and operate new equipment are likely to be drawn, in most countries, from urban areas.
Fertilizer, needed in large amounts to achieve desired results with Green Revolution hybrids, must be manufactured using chemicals and petroleum 45 products imported through large cities; its distribution to farmers depends on the existence of transportation networks between urban and rural areas and within rural regions and on the extension of urban services and facilities to fertilizer production sites.
Many urban workshops are established by progressive village artisans or rural blacksmiths who migrate there to become apprentices, later going into business for themselves.
Large urban manufacturers depend on both the small town urban workshops and the village artisans to service their equipment, make new parts, and repair components, since the firms cannot establish their own repair services in each village and be competitive with local artisans.
Because of the high level of investment required for large firms to produce standardized parts, the major manufacturers of farm equipment must subcontract the work to urban workshops, which make interchangeable components to the specifications of the contracting companies.
3.5.
SOCIAL LINKAGES Market towns and intermediate cities do more than generate physical and economic activities.
They are the focal points for a wide variety of social linkages among development centers and between those centers and their rural hinterlands.
Market centers perform many social roles in rural areas.
Indeed, in many African countries, economic exchange functions grew out of traditional social gatherings and rituals.
The types and frequency of economic activities were closely linked to social events.
Traditional African markets provided an important locus of social interaction.
The marketplace would be used for games and dances, and the market itself was certainly not viewed by the people as simply an economic event”.
In Africa, market remain meeting places for sports and competitions; in Asia and Latin America they contain a variety of social facilities – restaurants, bars, baths, churchs, temples, and cinemas- attracting people from the villages not only 46 to exchange goods and services but also to engage in recreation and to meet friends, acquaintances, and kin.
The growth of market towns in China, as in other Asian countries, had a profound effect on rural social interaction.
Skinner observes that they provided a spatial focus for social interaction within a diffuse trading area.
Because people made regular visits to the market throughout their lifetime, even the poorest farmers came to know almost every other adult in the marketing area; marriage arrangements were most often made from within the trading boundaries; credit and lending decisions were based on people’s reputations formed through frequent market transactions; and the acceptance of common criteria of exchange, such as standard weights and measures, evolved from the need to maintain social harmony among disperse villages and groups within a trading area.
With the market expansion and increasing commercialization of agriculture, periodic markets evolve into permanent places of exchange, daily markets displace smaller, infrequent exchange points, and diffusing social linkages promote increasing social and spatial integration.
Widening market areas extend the spatial range of social interaction, of even such traditional linkages as marriage arrangements, steadily integration smaller clans, communities, and villages, promoting new kinship tics and visiting patterns, and transforming social group and organizational relations.
3.6.
SERVICE DELIVERY LINKAGES Increasing the physical, economic, and technological linkages among central places is critical to expanding service delivery networks in developing nations.
Urban centres and rural areas must be closely linked in order to distribute social and commercial services more widely and to increase the access of rural populations to urban amenities.
Nearly all services require the support of a minimum number of people concentrated 47 in a limited geographical area, a “threshold population” of sufficient size and density to attract enough customers to earn profits for suppliers of commercial and professional services and to allow public services to reach the largest number of people at the lowest cost.
Theshold levels for services vary widely; and because each service has a specific threshold, the types, degree of specialization, and delivery range of services found in any given community depend on the size and density of its population, its occupational profile, income distribution, transportation access, and economic diversification.
All other things being equal, the “hierarchy” of services in a region is closely correlated to the hierarchy of central places.
Larger population size and higher density create economics of scale that allow services to be offered at lower cost.
Services also have different “ranges of influence,” the distance over which they can be extended or that people will travel to purchase or use them.
The larger the area of influence and the more densely concentrated the users within that area, the more efficiently services can be provided, especially those requiring physical facilities or infrastructure for delivery such as water, sanitation, energy, and health.
The World Bank points out that per capital costs of supplying water and sanitation services increases substantially with smaller communities: “sector characteristics change markedly as one progresses from large urban centers, through medium sized cities, small towns and villages, to the dispersed population.
The administrative structure becomes more diffuse, income levels decline, and per capital costs for equivalent levels of service tend to increase.
In areas with widely scattered populations and small central places, there exists less institutional, financial, and technological capacity to deliver services efficiently.
48  3.7.
POLITICAL, ADMINISTRATIVE, AND ORGANIZATIONAL LINKAGES Finally, spatial systems are integrated and transformed through a set of political and administrative linkages reflected in formal government structural relationships, flow of public budget resources, administrative authority, supervision and approval patterns, transactions among government jurisdictions, informal political influence and decision chains, and interdependences among spatially dispersed specialized organizations.
ACTIVITY 1 QUESTION List the linkages that transforms and integrates urban and rural areas in developing Nations such as Nigeria.
ANSWER The linkages are: (i) Physical linkages ii) Economic linkages (iii) Population linkages (iv) Technological linkages (v) Social linkages (vi) Service linkages (vii) Political, Administrative Organizational linkages 4.0.
BUILDING DEVELOPMENT CENTRES: LOCATION OF URBAN SERVICES AND FACILITIES.
The failure of developing countries to achieve growth with equity, it has been argued, can be attributed largely to their poorly articulated spatial 49 systems.
Development is handicapped both by the lack of market towns and intermediate cities and by a spatial distribution of existing centers that is not conducive to creating an integrated system of production and exchange.
Service centers are the smallest places in developing nations at which urban services and facilities can be located for efficient and effective delivery to rural areas.
Villages, hamlets, and farmsteads do not provide large enough markets for most services and facilities.
Market towns and small cities are the most critical settlements in a well articulated spatial system for linking rural and urban functions.
Market towns perform functions essential to the commercialization of agriculture and to the dispersion of urban services and facilities.
Where they have been fully developed, they provide institutions for the collection, exchange, and distribution of agricultural products and contain storage, basic processing, and transportation facilities to ship products to larger urban markets.
They are the locations of basic financial and brokerage functions, of specialized craftsmen who require a threshold population larger than that of a single village, of nonagricultural work opportunities for surplus rural labour, and of basic non-formal and formal education and apprehenticeship training.
They facilitate social, cultural, and administrative interaction among groups and villages within their areas of influence and with larger cities and the metropolis.
The performance of such basic functions and the provision of these services is essential to the promotion of development in economically lagging rural regions.
Without a strong set of market towns, integrated urban-rural development simply will not occur.
Finally, metropolitan areas have indisputable contributions to the development of “Third World nations.
As major investment, social, educational, administrative, and cultural centers, they are the “engines of development” in most countries.
But to distribute more equitably the benefits of urban development, regional equivalents of the primate city – 50 intermediate cities and regional centers – are needed throughout a country, especially in remote rural region.
4.1.
THE VILLAGE SERVICE CENTRE Villages that already have some basic combination of services and facilities often attract larger populations and begin to provide functions for other villages.
New government investments should be located in those communities that already have some capacity to service rural hinterlands.
These points, village service centers, should be easily accessible from surrounding rural areas and located where they can extend critical services and technical, political, and administrative inputs to agricultural programmes.
Village service centers should (1) be small central places providing isolated farms, small hamlets, and villages with basic services and facilities as well as household and agricultural goods, (2) contain facilities that provide services needed to stimulate nonagricultural small-scale industries and increase agricultural productivity, (3) provide basic social services facilities and amenities that raise the quality of life within surrounding rural areas, (4) contain cooperative organizations required to expand popular participation in development programs through a mixture of “bottom up” and “op down” planning, and (5) provide a small node of physical, social, and economic activities that link rural areas and villages to market towns and small cities.
The following types of services and facilities should be located in village service centers: Facilities: small-scale storage; a community center; a cooperative supply outlet; a maternity-health clinic, a primary school/vocational education facility; a police post; farm-market roads; irrigation canals and ditches; potable water pumps, well and storage tanks; rural electrification; a primary processing, grading, weighing and packing 51 facility; agricultural demonstration plots; a village-hamlet government office; a periodic market facility; an all-weather access route; a government supply dumps; and a local transportation stop; and services: an extension services; a welfare and home economy service; a government credit office; a paramedical health service; maintenance of roads and physical facilities; municipal administrative services; a postal and telegraph services; and a local bus and truck transportation service.
Such services and facilities can improve communications between rural areas and the village center, provide a daily market for surplus primary produce, an outlet for commodity required farm inputs, and storage facilities for agricultural products, improve agricultural productivity, and upgrade rural administrative capacity.
4.2.
THE MARKET TOWN: SMALL CITY Market towns are crucial for transforming economically lagging rural regions because rural economies can only be stimulated by the increasing commercialization of agriculture, which in turn requires that every farm has “access to markets where farm produce can be sold for cash without the danger of monopsonistic exploitation and where there are enough sellers of farm supplies to prevent monopoly….. What is essential, therefore, is a unified market town where appropriate facilities are congregated.
“Historically, in most of the developed world, rural investments have clustered around markets.
But if markets are to serve as growth points in developing nations, they must perform a wide range of functions and offer a variety of services and commodities.
They should be permanent and regulated, so that both farmers and traders can escape the abuses of traditional village monopolists.
Markets can be created by stimulating clusters of investment that are related to rural and agricultural needs.
A diversified set of enterprises must be encouraged so that the benefits from association and proximity can provide economies of scale that allow them 52 to thrive and to attract related investments.
As the number of trading, manufacturing, and service industries grow in one center, there is a strong probability both that total demend for all services and products will grow and that the market’s service area will expand.
A critical problem in stimulating market town development is to identify entrepreneurs who can take advantage of the potential for growth and rapidly establish key enterprises.
Several types of entrepreneurs have emerged where such centers have been established.
Intervention at the market town small city level should aim to expand and facilitate marketing and to increase agricultural productivity in the hinterlands.
Physical facilities must be constructed for a permanent market place, supported by storage, grading, and processing facilities, as well as the necessary financial, commercial, and business services.
The market center should be made a district transportation hub to link it with village service centers and intermediate cities and metropolitan areas.
4.3.
INTERMEDIATE CITY: REGIONAL CENTER Although remarkably little is known about intermediate cities in developing nations, middle-size cities perform critical roles in the transformation and development of regional economies and spatial structures.
Intermediate cities are socially and economically heterogeneous, mixing traditional and modern behaviour, institutions, and pratices and accommodating both modern and bazaar economies.
Usually, situated at the hub of regional transportation routes, intermediate cities are often way stations or absorption points for rural-to-urban migrants.
Although, they lack social homogeneity, the middle-size cities have “a degree of ‘opennes’ as well as mechanisms for the assimilation of outsiders into economic structure of the city, and their very heterogeneity serves to integrate a variety of social groups, clans, and tribes as well as village and town services with 53 metropolitan activities and national functions.
Indeed, many intermediate cities manifest both rural and urban physical characteristics.
Taegu, the Korean middle city of more than a million people, with a diversity of industry and a growing economy, can still be described by visitors in terns of its rural atmosphere.
“A city big in population only, it lacks most of the modern facilities that Seoul and Pusan enjoy’ “writes one observer.
“Its small downtown shopping area is clusttered with small stores.
There are no large tourist hotels, no big office buildings, and beyond the core areas of the city, Taegu still looks rural, and this strong rural atmosphere pervades the whole city.
To build middle-size cities and regional centers, facilities and services must capitalize on the openness and heterogeneity of these places, creating a mixed urban-rural economy that can promote higher levels of rural productivity, coordinate national, regional, and local administrative functions, diversify commercial and industrial activities, and absorb any of the functions concentrated in a primate city.
Intermediate cities can be built into raw material and agricultural commodity processing and distribution centers, urban industrial areas that perform wide range of financial, service, commercial, educational, and administrative functions.
This type of change may be facilitated by developing within them industrial estates, specialized trade schools, energy and power stations, communication services, warehousing and storage facilities.
5.0.
TRANSFORMATIONAL DEVELOPMENT: AN APPROACH TO SPATIAL INTEGRATION STRATEGY To make integrated urban-rural development strategy work will require the concerted efforts of both developing nations and international assistance agencies and, within developing nations, a wide variety of public and private organizations, to build the comparative advantages and productive capacity of economically lagging regions.
Integrated urban-rural 54 development, in most countries, requires regional planning, since central governments cannot adequately plan, supervise, and coordinate development.
But unlike development strategies that attempt to substitute modern organizations, technologies, methods of production, attitudes, and social relationships for “traditional” institutions and practices, transformational development seeks to increase incrementally the productivity of indigenous institutions and practices, reinforcing and building on those appropriate to local conditions and needs and adaptive to changing circumstances, gradually displacing those that are not.
The concept of development as transformation involves eight basic principles: (1) building on existing culturally embedded resources, institutions, and pratices; (2) involving local people, who will be affected by transformation and change, in the processes of development planning and implementation; (3) adapting modern technologies, services, and facilities to local conditions; (4) promoting specialization in production and exchange activities based on existing spatial comparative advantages; (5) using appropriate, low-cost, culturally acceptable methods of change to generate “demonstration effects” that lead to widespread adoption of those methods that prove successful; (6) planning for displacement of unproductive and un-adaptable tradional institutions and practices as change occurs; (7) establishing, through planning based on “strategic intervention’, the precondions for transformation and change in social, technical, political, economic, and administrative structures and processes and in elements of the spatial structure; and (8) creating a planning process that is flexible, incremental, and adaptive and that provides for experimentation and adjustment as transformation takes place.. BUILDING ON EXISTING RESOURCES Development planning rarely begins with a clean slate.
In every developing nation, existing problems and circumstances, which often evolved over centuries, establish the environment for change.
Although 55 it is almost a cliché to argue that development planning should be based on a thorough understanding of existing conditions and emerging needs.
This basic principle is often lost in the urgency to activate development plans and policies.
One of the recurrent lessons of development experiences, however, is that the most pervassive changes can be attained by transforming existing resources.
Indigenous social and economic systems survive because they perform useful or necessity functions.
They are usually adaptive mechanisms that are suited to cultural peculiarities and that satisfy the needs of those who maintain them.
Understanding their operations is crucial to designing plans and programs for promoting change.
The use of existing resources and culturally embedded traditions, moreover, can be more effective and less costly than attempting wholesale substitution of “modern” but alien institutions and practices.
The transformation of shifting cultivation as an agricultural system provides an appropriate illustration.
Those schooled in the Western tradition of resources use have been, in the past, almost unanimous in their apriori condemnation of traditional agricultural technologies especially of shifting cultivation in tropical highlands – as primitive, wasteful, destructive, and unproductive.
But, under normal conditions, traditional agricultural systems are not axiomatically ruinous.
But to be made more productive, shifting cultivation must be transformed into a culturally acceptable system that both satisfies family nutritional requirements and generates marketable surplus to meet the growing food needs of urban and rural markets.
5.2.
LOCAL PARTICIPATION Building on existing resources, institutions, and practices requires involving local people, who will be affected by transformation and change in 56 development planning and implementation.
The traditional wisdom, experience, and insights of local people are essential in identifying the scope and dimensions of local needs, the most effective channels of change, and the types of change that they will support.
Only by incorporating local people in the process of planning and implementation can decisions be tailored to specific needs and can latent talents and skills be developed.
6.0.
CONCLUSION The essence of development is expansion of participation in economic activities through the creation of social and economic systems that draw larger numbers of people into processes of production, exchange, and consumption, that involve greater numbers in entrepreneurship and employment, that increase levels of income for the poorest groups and reduce disparities between rich and poor so that a lager majority of people can obtain basic goods, save and invest, and gain acess to services necessary to enrich the quality of their lives.
Development is a process of expanding the productive capacity of public and private organizations, large and small firms, rural and urban regions of a country at a steady pace.
It involves stimulating the use of potentially productive resources, adapting appropriate technologies and institutions to traditional as well as modern communities, transformating subsistence agricultural and rural sectors into employment and income generating elements of the national economy, and providing adequate social services and facilities that allow people not only to satisfy basic human needs but also to develop their productivity capacity and human potential.
The growing realization that expansion of economic participation is essential to sustained development has brought about a dramatic shift in development policy.
National governments and international assistance agencies that once sought rapid growth in GNP through large-scale, 57 capital-intensive, export-oriented, urban-based industrialization, guided and controlled through centrally formulated macroeconomic models, now seek to build more balanced and stable internal economies, with greater social equity.
Achievement of such goals, it was discovered, depends on the expansion of labour-intensive, small scale, and more widely distributed agricultural and manufacturing industries.
It requires investment in social as well as physical infrastructure, promotion of rural development and decentralized planning and administration, and increased access for marginal groups to economic resources and opportunities.
A dimension of the new directions in development policy that has been generally overlooked, however, but that is fundamental to any attempt to expand productive capacity in developing nations, is spatial planning.
The spatial structures of Third World countries have been crucial constraints on the spread of growth, and changes in those structures toward creating more balanced and integrated systems of human settlements can provide enormous opportunities for increasing participation in economic activities.
7.0.
SUMMARY The relationship between Urban Centre and Rural Area particular in Nigeria continues to facilitate development particular in urban centres.
This is because, commodities such as agricultural products are moved from the rural to urban centres although the rural dwellers equally benefit from the influence of urban centres particularly modernization.
This unit thus, explained the concept of Spatial Linkages and transformation.
It identified seven linkages factors that facilitate development in both urban centres and rural areas.
The Unit further analyzed building of development centres.
Three of such centres were identified and analyzed.
58 Finally, the concept of transformational development as an approach to spatial integration strategy was addressed.
By so doing, this unit exposed you to various forms of strategies for ensuring development in both urban centres and rural areas.
8.0 TUTOR-MARKED ASSIGNMENT Explain how spatial linkages could be used to ensure development at both urban centre and rural areas.
9.0.
FURTHER READINGS Adelman, I, and Morvis, T.C.
(1973) Economic Growth and Social Equity in Developing Countries (Stanford: Stanford University Press).
Lele, U.
(1995): The Design of Rural Development: Lessons From Africa (Baltimore: Johns Hopkins University Press) McGee, T.G.
(1971) Urbanization Process in the Third World (London: G. Bell and Sons.
Rondinelli, A.D.; and Ruddle, K., (1978) Urbanization and Rural Development: A Spatial Policy for Equitable Growth (New York: Prayer Publishers) 59  Unit 8 LOCAL GOVERNEMENT AND URBAN DEVELOPMENT TABLE OF CONTENTS 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objective 3.0.
The Concept of Local Government 3.1.
Functions of Local Government 3.2.
Role of Local Government in Urban Development 4.0.
Problems of Government of Local Government in Nigeria 4.1.
Prescriptions for amehorating the situation 5.0.
Conclusion 6.0.
Summary 7.0.
Tutor-marked Assignment 8.0.
Further Readings INTRODUCTION: As a country, Nigeria operates three tiers of government viz: Federal, State and Local Governments.
Where as the federal government is at centre, there are thirty six states plus the Federal capital territory and seven hundred and seventy four (774) local government areas.
Local government is the closest tier of government to the people in Nigeria.
Yet, the resident population appears not to realize full benefits o its existence.
The failure of local government in the area of service delivery has made the citizens to loose thrust I government as an institution.
In some areas, council officials are better known for the harassment of citizens that of rendering useful services.
Sometimes we find that Nigerians have for change in the local government system presently constituted in order to not bring it in conformity with present day realities but to make if live up to the expectations of the people who have been yearning for grassroots development.
60  2.0.
OBJECTIVES At the end o discussions in this client, you should be able to:- (i) explain the concept of local government an its functions (ii) analyze the role of local government in urban development (iii) identify the problems of Governance of local government in Nigeria (iv) prescribe measures for improvement 3.0.
THE CONCEPT OF LOCAL GOVERNMENT The concept of local government as continued to generate excitement among the learned.
These excitements are not unconnected with the increasing importance of local government as one of the paraphenelia o federalism.
Various definitions of local government identified the indispensability of local government to grassroots democracy vis-à-vis its provisions of governmental opportunities for self development.
In general, nearly all the existing works on local government have shown this level of governments increasing propensity for the enhancement of home lie syndrome.
The Oxford Concise Dictionary of Politics (2003:314- 136) defines local government as a governing institution which has authority over a sub-local governments authority sparings from the elected basis and that this behaviour both between and within countries.
Local government as explained b Ogunna (1987:369-386) “is a form of devolution of power of the state” He argues that “it is the government of the grassroots which is designed to serve as instrument of and community (emphasis mine) transformation” He further submits that from ideological perspective local government fosters the principles of democracy as local government is designed gives effect to mass participation of the people in the process of government Thus local government is designed to achieve multi-dimensional goals of economic social and political development He cautions that for local government to achieve its goals, its should be appropriately structured adequately funded and sufficiently staffed with well qualified and continuously trained and motivated competent and dedicated personnel.
He further state that it should also possess appropriate organizational setting effective leadership high level of participation of the local inhabitants and adequate b freedom to operate as a government.
In affect Ogunna is of the view of the view that the institution of local government is through a nation’s government certain criteria as outlined 61 above are of utmost importance to this effectiveness.
Truly it is one thing to have an institution of local government in place and another to be impactful on the community where it is found Bello Imam (1996:2) points out that local government constitutes the most critical level of government at which the momentum to sustain national development can be created The institution of local government he posts is s means through which local human and material resources could be harnessed for national development in a country He however observes that this is known as “development from below”.
According to him “effective local institutions represent a e aspect of the development strategy of development from below”.
Hence he submit for the institution of local government to be effective certain must be attained.
(i) Promotion of economic development from below (ii) Provision of services; (iii) Provision of local freedom/autonomy; and (iv) Enhancement of grassroot democracy.
Whether or not local government councils in Nigeria generally meet these criteria for them to be actually recognized as developmental institutions is debatable Administrative structure of an organization determines the relationship between the various organs and also balances the apparently opposing purpose thereby preserving its inherent character and strength (Bello- Imam 1987) It also has the potential for increasing or decreasing the effectiveness of those who operate it and can make the getting and retaining of able men more or less likely.
As the argument goes it is at the local government level that the people’s aspiration and tropes are discernible in their most relevant and specified from and it is also at this level that their will and creative energy can be most effectively organized and committed to the solution of their own particular community problems and overall national development Therefore the quality of administration at this level is itself one useful measure of what development is being achieved It is one of the main factors which determine the capacity of the system to achieve further democratic development as it is a test of how far-reaching the opportunity is for continuous mass participation in the formulation and in implementation of development policy.
It should be noted, however, that there is no best known administrative structure for local government councils.
Every local government council adopts administrative system which best suits its environment for the effective and efficient distributive justice in its community.
Local 62 government administrative systems therefore vary in different countries and places.
Structure in Europe is generally multi-tier In Federal Republic of German below state level are two tiers of local government: the upper-tier Kriese and the lower-tier municipalities Regionalized states such as Ital Spain Portugal Belgium and France echo such arrangements b having three levels of local government is reflected in the fact that even its lowest-tier authorities ma have bigger populations than some other countries country/province level authorities (Mclean and McMillan 2003314-316) Nigeria is a federation of 36 states plus a federal capital territory (FCT) Abuja and 774 local government It therefore operates, a three tier-system of government with the Federal Government at the ape Some people have argued that the system of local government in a country lie Nigeria is not only superfluous but also redundant and it tends to duplicate responsibilities over-stretch the limited resources These people justify their argument against two much levels of government b saying that it is costlier to administer contiguous societies as different units of local governments that to rule them from far with a central government applying uniform solutions to their similar problems In Nigeria where well trained and experienced local government personnel are hard to come b and where the secondment of crack civil servants to man these local governments had been bedeviled b the problem of allegiance to central (state) government it is difficult to develop the communities Specialist personnel for instance lie local irrigation engineers local planners and architects; quantity surveyors dental surgeons etc can better be employed paid and posted to the local areas b the wealthier central/state governments than b the local government.
Finally the opponents of the local government stem in Nigeria hold that time was not in favour of Nigeria.
To them Nigeria is vast sprawling in-accessible and unmanageable variety of nations each with its peculiar hostile culture and traditions Moreover the argue that a local government system that too account of the multitude of “mini states” was justifiable But time has changed and Nigeria has come a long war towards one nationhood having waded through the travails and triumphs of colonialism civil war oil boom and biting economic recession In addition the argument concludes recent advances in science and technology have so tended to bring Nigerians closer together that there is “cultured diffusion” and what is needed today is global rather than local government (Ozor 1987215) 63 3.1 FUNCTIONS OF THE LOCAL GOVERNMENT The functions of an organ an organ are better articulated to its structure hence a recourse to the structure of Local Government is desirable In Nigeria Local Government Councils are hierarchically structured with the Chairman at the ape of the pyramid assisted his Councilors responsible for policy formulation The Secretary and other principal officers (career civil servants) of the council are charged with the execution of such policies /programmes An organogram of a typical local government in Nigeria is indicated in the figure overleaf Local Government Legislative Arm Executive Arm Internal Leader Chairman Audit Unit Dep.
Leader Information Unit Vice Chairman Councillors Secretar to the L Govt Departments Clerk of Admin Finance Work Agric Health & the Dept D ept Pla nning De pt Dept So cial Research House Welfare & Dept.
Statistics Fig: 8.1.
Organogram of a Local Government in Nigeria As provided in the fourth (4th) Schedule to the 1999 Constitution these functions are- (a) The constitution and the making of recommendations to the State Commission on economic planning or a similar body on (i) the economic development of the stat particularly in so far as the areas of authority of the council and of the State are affected; and 64 (ii) proposals made b the said commission and body; (b) Collection of rates and issuance of Television licenses (c) Establishment and maintenance of cemeteries burial grounds and homes for the Destitute and infirm; (d) Licensing of bicycles trucks (other than mechanically propelled trucks) canoe wheel-barrows and carts; (e) Establishment maintenance and relocation of slaughter houses slaughter slabs market motor pars and public conveniences (f) Construction and maintenance of roads street lighting drains pars gardens open spaces or such public facilities as ma be prescribed from time –to –time b the House of Assembly of a State; (g) Naming of roads and streets and numbering of houses; (h) Provision and maintenance of public conveniences, sewage and refuse disposals; (i) Registration of births deaths and marriages; (j) Assessment of privately-owned houses or tenements for the purpose of levying such rates as may be prescribed by the House of Assembly of a State; (k) Control and Regulation of: (i) Out-door advertisement and boarding; (ii) Movement and keeping of pets of all descriptions; (iii) Shops and kiosk (iv) Restaurants bakeries and other places for sale of food to the public; and (v) Laundries.
The functions of a local government council shall include participation of such councils in the government of the state with respect to the following 65 matters (i) The provision and maintenance of Primary Education; (ii) The Development of Agriculture and Natural Resources other than the exploration of minerals; (iii) The Provision and maintenance of Health Services; and (iv) Such other functions as may be conferred on the local government council by the House of Assembly of the State.
It is important to note that these functions are both executive and Legislative in nature They are executive or administrative in the sense that these are the areas over which the Chairman must concentrate and exercise his administrative control in the day-to-day administration of the Council These functions are also legislative in that council is restricted to these specific areas in its making of be –laws Thus if the Council goes outside these area such a be-law could be declared null and void (Oon and Esema 1999: 26) ACITIVITY QUESTION What are the functions of local government as provided b the constitution of the Federal Republic of Nigeria?
ANSWER (a) The constitution and the making of recommendations to the State Commission on economic planning or an similar body on (i) the economic development of the stat particularly in so far as the areas of authority of the council and of the State are affected and (ii) proposals made b the said commission and body (b) Collection of rates and issuance of Television licenses; (c) Establishment and maintenance of cemeteries burial grounds and homes for the Destitute and infirm; 66 (d) Licensing of bicycles trucks (other than mechanically propelled trucks) canoe wheel-barrows and carts; (e) Establishment maintenance and relocation of slaughter houses slaughter slabs market motor pars and public conveniences; (f) Construction and maintenance of roads street lighting drains pars gardens open spaces or such public facilities as ma be prescribed from time –to –time b the House of Assembly of a State; (g) Naming of roads and streets and numbering of houses; (h) Provision and maintenance of public conveniences sewage and refuse disposals (i) Registration of births deaths and marriages (j) Assessment of privately-owned houses or tenements for the purpose of levying such rates as may be prescribed by the House of Assembly of a State (k) Control and Regulation of (i) Out-door advertisement and boarding (ii) Movement and keeping of pets of all descriptions; (iii) Shops and Loss (iv) Restaurants bakeries and other places for sale of food to the public; and (v) Laundries 3.2.
ROLE OF LOCAL GOVERNMENT IN URBAN DEVELOPMENT.
Following the 1978 Local Government Reforms the Federal Government of Nigeria evolved its own definition of Local Government as: “Government at the level exercised through representative councils established b law to exercise specific powers within defined areas.
These powers should give the council substantial control over local affairs as well as the staff and institutional and financial power to initiate and direct the provision of services and to determine and implement projects so as to complement the activities of the state and Federal Government in their areas and to ensure through active participation of the people and their traditional institutions that Local initiatives and responses to local needs and conditions are maximized.” From the above definitions we can deduce that the Local Government System has the following characteristics 67  (a) It is a sub-division of the nation; (b) It can impose taxes and incure expenses; (c) It exists within a defined territory and populations; (d) It has its autonomous existence and legal identity; (e) It comprises elected members who run it; We could post that the reason for the establishment of local government councils in Nigeria is to provide services to the citizen using locally collected taxes and government grants .An effective local government system delivers basic services to the citizen at affordable costs thereby enhancing the standard of living of the people.
Provision of basic needs such as portable water sanitation basic health-care through functional dispensaries clinics and quality primary education makes local government councils major instruments for fulfilling the obligations of government to cater for the welfare of the citizens.
Being closer to the people local government councils are intended to be more effective in alleviating poverty and caring for members of the society.
Local Government councils are to bridges that link higher levels of Government with ordinary citizens especially where the majority live outside the Federal and State capitals thereby facilitating government penetration of the society.
In the process the also communicate traditional values and demands for consideration and proper response.
A properly functioning Local Government system decongests demands on higher levels of Government thereby leaving them to concentrate on major developmental issues.
As a tier of government its leadership definitely informs the quality of services it will render to the people Ordinarily a leader is said to be that person in authority who is capable of harnessing the available resources using various techniques and sills at various times and levels in achieving results more effectively efficiently and economically.
At the level of governance we are concerned with political leadership.
And the hallmark of this type of leadership are Accountability and Transparency.
Accountability is concerned with stewardship which implies that an individual or group to whom resources are entrusted are expected from time to time to render accounts on how these resources have been managed.
It is a test of the managerial and entrepreneurial sills of the individual or group to whom resources or responsibility has been delegated.
At the political plane we tal of public accountability which is the complete and satisfactory account of the stewardship of a public officer in respect of the acquisition and application of the resources entrusted to him/her in the process of executing public policy and accomplishing planned objectives in 68 accordance with current rules and regulations.
It involves clear specification of outputs and inputs as well as analysis sythesis explanation and satisfactory justification of the utilization of allocated resurces .
Thus public accountability has to do with holding public officers accountable for resurces entrusted to them and ensuring that the officers give accurate and up-to-date account of what they have done with public resources.
One sure way of ensuring this type of accountability is through Transparency.
This concept simply means openness in the conduct of business of the government and hence allow to information and thereby reinforces accountability.
4.0.
PROBLEMS OF GOVERNANCE OF LOCAL GOVERNMENTS IN NIGERIA.
The fundamental question to ask here is leadership of local governments adverse to reforms or do they lack the capacity to comprehend and implement reform measures?
Adequate answers to these questions manifested during the Etsu Nupe Committee’s tour of land consultations with stakeholders across the country.
The findings from the exercise led to a plausible conclusion that Government’s supervisory bodies do not apply and enforce the in-built mechanisms for accountability in the Local Government Councils.
The lack of meaningful supervision and monitoring agency charged with this responsibility further call to question the status of local government leadership in local government development.
Other identifiable problems include stability which failed to tae root in the local government system.
Often state governments resorted to appointment of Sole Administrators or Caretaker Committee rather than holding elections for local councils.
As a result there has been “uncertainty surrounding the legitimacy and organization of local governments which may adversely affect the capacity to serve as an agent of National Development” (King 1988:100).
Instability among local governments is also caused by constant redrawing of the boundaries between them and the additional creation of more local governments which has been regarded as “one of the most provocative issues of Nigerian Politics” (King 1988 ibid).
Local boundary disputes precipitated crisis and violence.
Such changes in the number of local governments and agitation for more changes created tensions and disrupted continuity.
The capacity of local governments is further undermined by their dependence on eternal resources for revenue.
The history of the Federal and State statutory allocation to the local governments has resulted in less effort to source revenue locally (Gboyega 1987: 172).
The dependence on subventions equally reduces the autonomy of the local government.
Ideally the tax and revenue bases of local government in Nigeria have been inadequate for implementing the tasks assigned to the Councils (Orewa and Adewunmi 1983: 269).
Inspite of this low revenue base both the Federal and State Governments assign the Local Government responsibilities for unbudgeted expenses such as 69 that involving Independence National Electoral Commission (INEC) at that level etc.
Management of funds in local governments is widespread.
One often reads in the national dailies confessions of Local Government officials in misappropriating funds meant for development purposes.
The 1976 Reforms provides for the appointment of Local Government Secretaries.
The relationship between the Local Government Secretaries and their Chairmen has been “a source of conflict in the local governments areas” King 1988:99).
There has been the tendency for elected council officials not to build a political career in which they need to be sensitive to their reputation over time.
As a result Councilors do not expect to serve long and this affects continuity and capacity of the Local Government Areas.
4.1.
PRESCRIPTIONS FOR AMELIORATING THE SITUATION The purpose of good governance is to better the lives of the people.
Consequently leadership of Local Governments must face the following challenges squarely: (i) They must have the political will to address the problems identified for the success of the councils; (ii) They must have the ability to carry out their functions conscientiously; (iii) They must be ready and willing to bring erring council members and officials before the independent Corrupt Practices Commission (ICPC) and Economic and Financial Crimes Commission (EFCC) etc; (iv) They must imbibe the fear of God and also be accountable to the people; (v) Accountability and transparency should form the cardinal objectives of administering the people; and (vi) They must try and be proactive in their management style and should remember that they are in the era of globalization.
In more specific terms the following measures have been severally canvassed: (a) Local Government leadership should resuscitate and institutionalize the allocation of matching grants to community self-help projects.
This will create in the people a sense of pride ownership and participation in local governance; 70 (b) In order to monitor implementation of reform programmes which are directives of MDGs State officials should compile comprehensive data on the operations of local Government Councils on annual basis; (c) The key functionaries should be advocate for the abolition of the State Local Government Joint Account.
Funding should be direct.
It is their responsibility to institute adequate check and balance measures to guard against mismanagement of funds.
(d) The Local Government Service Commission and the Office of the Auditor-General for Local Government should enjoy some constitutional being to guarantee their independence and enable them enforce the proper operational procedures.
(e) Regular training to develop the management sills of Local Government staff should be instituted and accorded top priority.
Local Government officials in States and Federal Ministry of Inter-Governmental Affairs should mandate the Administrative Staff College of Nigeria (ASCON) and other designated Universities to carry out this tas.
Such training should emphasize development in personnel and financial management budget and planning.
(f) The Local Government Service Commission’s role in ensuring efficiency in the Local Government Councils by way of close supervision and monitoring of staff performance must not be overload.
(g) Stakeholders must try to create awareness at the Local Government level through effective communication machinery between the Local Government Community leaders non-governmental organization etc in order to assess and monitor performance of Local Government Councils.
(h) Stakeholders should borrow a leaf from Federal Government b encouraging partnership with private sector agencies for the purpose of executing capital projects.
In this regard as major shareholders in the Urban Development Ban Local Government Councils should be advised to tae advantage of the Ban’s services to considerably enhance performance and service delivery.
(i) In view of the epileptic performance of Local Government Councils and the lukewarm attitude of State monitoring organs the Federal Ministry of Inter-Governmental Affairs and Special Duties should provide uniform performance indicators evaluate and publish annually a comprehensive 71 report on all Local Councils.
(j) During the Etsu Nupe/Liman Ciroma Committee’s tour for consultation with stakeholders in Local Government Administration there was a general consensus that the presidential system of government at the Local Government level is too expensive.
Consequently the parliamentary terms would reduce the personnel cost of 774 Local Government Council yearly by about N3 million.
The argument therefore was that such huge amount if saved would go a long way in developing the Local Government Councils.
It is therefore up to the stakeholders to critically examine this position to the advantage of their councils.
(Auwal 2004: 13-14).
At the Council of State’s meeting held on 19th January 2004 it was resolved in line with Etsu Nupe/Liman Ciroma Committee’s that: (i) Only the existing 774 Local Government Councils as contained in the 1999 Constitution will be recognized.
(ii) States should continue to pay Local Government 10% of their total revenue; (iii) Federal and State governments should fund all agencies under them; (iv) Local Government Councils must ensure that not more than 45% of their budget is expended on personnel and overhead cost; (v) States should fully release to Local Government Councils their statutory allocation; and (vi) Local Government Councils will not have to submit their budgets to the House of Assembly for approval.
An inspectorate unit will be establishing to enforce compliance with the approved budget.
5.0.
CONCLUSION: For any meaningful development to take place at the grassroots, the local people must be involved in the decision making process of their affairs and competent hands must be enjoyed by the council in the area of professionalism and technological know how.
Most of these problems, 72 however, can be traced to the operation in Nigeria and how the constitution is implemented and recognized.
Local Government developments in Nigeria have been a major concern to the government practitioners and other various stakeholders at the local level because local participation in development at the grassroots is essential to the country’s national development.
It is the desire o every citizen to see development at the grassroots level because it should encourage active participation in government performance and policies.
6.0.
SUMMARY It is very clear, at least from Nigeria’s experience that Urban centres are located within the local government areas.
So, the administration of local government aids the development o the urban centres.
With this at the back of one mind, we set out in this unit to conceptualize local government which we eventually agreed is governance at the grassroot level which of course includes community.
We thereafter looked at the structure and functions of local government.
Here we identified from the constitution that even such infrastructure at the urban centres such as motor parks, Abartoures etc are within the preview of local government.
Leadership of local government was equally examined.
We then identified problems of governance of local government in Nigeria.
The findings of the Etsu Nupe Committee in this direction was not only informative but educative, measures for amehorating this situation were put forward.
7.0.
TUTOR-MARKED ASSISGNMENT Identify the problems of local government administration in Nigeria and proffer solutions for resolving them 8.0.
FURTHER READINGS 2.
Adamoleku, L. et al (1988) Local Government in West Africa since Independence (Lagos: University of Lagos Press).
3.
Federal Republic of Nigeria (1999) Constitution of the Federal Republic of Nigeria (Abuja: Federal Ministry of Information) 4.
Gboyeja Alex(1987) Political Values and Local Government in Nigeria (Lagos: Maltons Press).
5.
Orewa, G.O.
(1991) Reflection on Local Government Development in Nigeria ( Badagry: ASCON Press) 6.
Orewa, G.O.
and Adewunmi(1983) Local Government in Nigeria: The Changing Scene ( Benin City: Ethiope Publishing Corporation) 73  UNIT 9 RURAL –URBAN MIGRATION TABLE OF CONTENTS 1.0.
Introduction 2.0.
Objectives 3.0.
Concept of Rural-Urban Migration 3.1.
Problems of Rural – Urban Migration 3.2.
Benefits of Rural – Urban Migration 3.3.
Effects of Rural – Urban Migration 3.4.
Advantages of Rural – Urban Migration to the Rural Areas 4.0.
Conclusion 5.0.
Summary 6.0.
Tutor-marked Assignment 7.0.
Further readings 1.0.
INTRODUCTION Migration is the movement of people from one place to another to settle there for some time for one reason or the other.
It is different from the mere movement of people from place to place on a very temporary basis.
Migration has two dimensions – Immigration and emigration.
Immigration refers to inward migration, hat is, movement of people into a place.
Emigration refers to outward migration, that is, the movement of people out of a place.
Migration in Nigeria has some discernible patterns.
74 (i) Rural – Urban Migration: This is the migration of people from rural areas to the urban centre.
In Nigeria, many people desert the villages and go to the towns and cities to live.
This mass movement of people from the rural areas to the towns and cities is referred to as the rural-urban drift population.
(ii) Rural – rural Migration: Some farmers migrate from the congested parts of the country to other areas where there is abundant land for agriculture.
Also, people migrate from rural areas which are not productive to other areas.
Rural – rural migration is on a smaller scale than Urban-urban migration.
2.0.
OBJECTIVES At the end of this Unit you should be able to: (i) Explain the concept of rural-urban migration (ii) Outline the problems of Rural-Urban Migration (iii) Identify the benefits of rural-Urban Migration (iv) State he effects of Rural-Urban Migration (v) Explain the advantages of Rural-Urban Migration to the Rural Areas.
3.0.
CONCEPT OF RURAL-URBAN MIGRATION The quest for employment, that is, white collars jobs which is non-existent and higher levels of income had made people to migrate from rural to urban areas.
The rural drift is caused by search for economic opportunities or the desire to stay in an area with more improved economic and social infrastructural facilities like electricity, hospitals, telephone, pipe-borne water and schools, the desire for a more suitable climate and the desire to have one’s standard of living improved.
The quest for knowledge and skills, problems of natural disasters such as flood, boundary clash, and religious fanatism are some other factors that provide reason for it.
Migration may be blessing to some areas while it may be debilitating to another.
The immigrants enlarge and enrich the labour force for productivity and economics growth and development.
This is evident in the last population census data that Lagos State had more population than most state of the federation.
75 The however made the government then to call for more allocation of federal revenue based on the population figures.
Areas with higher populating figures attract a greater share of government revenue.
Rural-urban migration cause over-population in the urban area and under- population in the rural areas.
The movement of people from rural area that is Sokoto, Ilorin, Enugu, Abia to Badagry partly caused by Crop failures and partly by the general poverty in farming communities.
This movement has resulted in the overcrowding of the towns and cities in the Thirty-sic states of the Federation and because industrial and commercial activities have not expanded to meet this increase in urban population, unemployment in many urban centers is high because these centers contain more people than there are jobs available for them.
With the emigration greater than immigration, under-population or decrease in population result in which most of the 774 Local Government area in Nigeria may partly be due to poor Medical facilities, increase in death rate, decrease in birth rate, war and famine, natural disasters and epidemic, According to C.E Andy (2006) factors that determine movement (inflow or outflow) in population are: (i) Economics Prosperity: It is natural that people would like to move to areas where they would be able to make a living out of life without so much stress.
(ii) Education: sometimes people would go to other places would go to other places to study and acquire skill.
(iii) Political Instability: An area that is characterized by political instability cannot attract inflow of people into such place rather attract inflow of people into such place rather it will witness massive outflow.
(iv) Natural Disaster: An area that is prone to frequent occurrence of natural disasters will witness massive exit of people from that area and stoppage of inflow.
(v) Adventurism: People may be attracted to a particular area due to the availability of some tourist attractions and holiday resorts.
(vi) Religious Purpose: Some clergies have moved from their area to other areas to evangelize.
Studies by Okpan (1993) reveal that migrants from rural to urban areas are always many compared to those from urban to rural areas.
The movement 76 from rural to urban areas makes negative impact on the quality of rural life especially when such migrants carry away their needed consumption into the city.
Migration of young adults from the rural areas also place greater burden on he farmers, for farmers to cover the same area of land as when he had extra assistance, he must work much longer hours thus depriving him of some time for leisure or participation in various social activities.
On the other hand, studies by Ijere (1994) reveal that rural-urban migration has a positive impact on urban growth and social development, which makes generation of employment opportunities and provision of educational facilities and transportation infrastructural for the migrants.
Today, urban-rural migration is one of the most important modes of migration which exist in the society.
Until recently, researchers have not paid much attention to the rural-urban drift.
Studies by Williams (1970) reveal that some factors could send one off a place, which might be able to crisis, old age, transfer, retirement, and invasion of pests and diseases.
Also, some social factors may evolve to make people migrate to rural areas.
Studies by Jibowo (1992) show that factors influencing people to migrate to rural areas might be as a result of city congestion, traffic jams, saniation problems, increasing urban employment, increasing urban unemployment, increase crime and housing problem.
These problems are so great in many developing countries that rural development has been a cardinal programme of political campaigns by many politicians.
Urbanization is also defined by the United Nations as movement of people from rural to urban areas with population growth equating to urban migration.
The United nations projected that half of the world’s population would live in urban areas at the end of 2008.
This study concludes that people migrate based on the prevailing conditions and the reason for it varies from one person to another depending on the situation that brought about the decision.
Migration is a selective process affecting individuals or families with certain economic, social, educational and demographic characteristics.
Migration occurs as a response to economic development as well as social, cultural, environmental and political factors and effects on areas of origin as well as destination.
People tend to move away from a place due to need to escape violence, political instability, drought, congestion in various dimensions and suspected or real persecution.
Also, adverse physical conditions such as flood, landslide (erosion and earthquake), 77 insects and pests, soil infertility contribute largely to the reasons people leave one environment for another.
3.1.
PROBLEM OF RURAL URBAN MIGRATION One of the major forms of migration that tends to crate problems in all developing countries is that of rural-urban migration.
The number of immigrants has increased relative to the number of emigrants.
When people migrate from rural to urban areas, the problems that arise are:- 1.
Congestion on land and pressure on other resources including social services.
2.
There will be a fall in per capital income.
3.
The demand for goods and services will be relatively higher that what is available.
4.
There will be increased imports and greater balance of payment problems.
5.
There will be a high-level of unemployment and underemployment.
6.
Producers may use more labour intensive forms of production.
7.
There may be an excess supply of labour which will lead to a fall in wages and weaken the bargaining power of the trade unions.
8.
There will be a high dependency ratio 9.
There will be a high level of government spending.
10.
Social problem will tend to mount.
ACTIVITY1 QUESTION State ten problems that arise when people migrate from rural to urban areas.
ANSWER 1.
Congestion on land and pressure on other resources including social services.
2.
There will be a fall in per capital income.
3.
The demand for goods and services will be relatively higher that what is available.
4.
There will be increased imports and greater balance of payment problems.
78 5.
There will be a high-level of unemployment and underemployment.
6.
Producers may use more labour intensive forms of production.
7.
There may be an excess supply of labour which will lead to a fall in wages and weaken the bargaining power of the trade unions.
8.
There will be a high dependency ratio 9.
There will be a high level of government spending.
10.
Social problems will tend to mount.
3.2.
BENEFITS OF RURAL-URBAN MIGRATION The rapid rural-urban migration in Nigeria has some benefits in the economy of the nation.
They are: 1.
There will be high supply of labour: The immigrants will provide on large working population which will help in full and effective utilization of resources to increase the level of output.
Other things being equal, an increased level of output would lead to an increased level of consumption.
Consequently, the standard of living will increase.
2.
Large market for goods and services: There will be increased productivity to meet the high demand.
This may lead to economies of scale in production and producers will be encourages to increase productivity further.
3.
Economies in the provision of certain services: Economies services such as defence and administration, when the total costs of providing them are spread over the population, the sot per person will be lower than that with fewer people.
4.
Foreign aid and investment: A country with large population will attract more foreign aids and investments.
5.
There will be increase in skills and talents that will help to raise the level of productivity in the economy.
6.
It boosts market at the receiving region.
7.
It promotes cultural integration e.g.
inter-marriage at the receiving region.
79  3.3.
EFFECTS OF RURAL-URBAN MIGRATION Rural –urban migration has a number of consequences both on the source areas (rural areas) and the destinations (urban centres) these include: 1.
Urban unemployment is aggravated: The migration of many people to urban centres increase the number of people seeking employment in these urban areas.
However, the number of job opportunities is not enough to absorb many of the young people who have drifted to the towns and cities.
Urban employment therefore grows at a fast rate.
The problem of unemployment is further compounded by the fact that most of the unemployed people have no special training or skill.
They therefore constitute a source of social problems in towns.
Crime would be on the increase.
Some might take to armed robbery, petty theft, thuggery, loitering etc.
2.
Explosion of demand for social services: Demand for social facilities such as housing, medical facilities, educational facilities, electricity, pipe-borne water etc.
will be far in excess of their supplies.
This explosion of demand has a number of consequences.
(i) There will be congestion on the available facilities: They will be over-used resulting in their breakdown.
(ii) Shanty towns would develop: As used here, this refers to those parts of the city which are not properly developed.
They lack adequate facilities and usually serve as hide-out for criminals.
(iii) It would necessitate the diversion of funds from productive investment to the provision of social amenities, thereby altering priorities.
3.
Rural-urban migration reduces the supply of labour in rural areas: Since many young people migrate to the towns, farming is left in the hands of an ageing population which is incapable of coping with arduous farming activities.
These old men and women who are left behind in the farms make use of traditional methods of production.
The consequences of inadequate from labour and use of traditional methods is reduced productivity per worker and per hectare.
4.
It reduces the number of taxable adults in rural areas: Since manay taxable young men have migrated to the twons, the amount of revenue which can be derived by the Local Government in the rural areas would be low.
If little revenue is derived, the amount of social facilities provided will be low.
5.
It leads to cultural disintegration at the destination region.
80 6.
It leads to the loss of able-bodied men and youth at the source region.
7.
Environmental pollution: Poor housing, turn-out of waste materials due to high level of human activities generally lead to environmental pollution.
8.
Rural – urban migration also inadequate health services as a result of influx of people to an area.
3.4.
ADVANTAGES OF RURAL –URBAN MIGRATION TO THE RURAL AREAS.
1.
Reduction in government expenditure: Declining populations have fewer people to cater for and as a result there will be a reduction in expenditure by government.
2.
High standard of living: Standard of living has to do with the number of people and the available resources.
With fewer people coupled with increasing resources, this will cause an increase in per capital income, which will result in higher standard of living.
3.
Reduction in congestion: As a result of decrease in the number of people, there will be a corresponding decrease in congestion in terms of human, accommodation and vehicular traffic.
4.
Creation of job: As a result of increase in the number of old people, there will be more employment opportunities for the few labour force.
5.
Increase in saving: With deceasing population, there is an increase in savings on the part on the government.
6.
Increase of investment: As a result of the increase in savings, there will be enough capital for investment in important sectors of economy.
3.5.
DISADVANTAGES OF RURAL-URBAN MIGRATION TO THE RURAL AREA.
1.
Reduction in labour force 2.
Fall in Gross Domestic Product (GDP): The fall in the size of the labour force would result in a fall in the productive capacity of the country.
The small labour force, combined with its inability to make optimum use of available resources, results in low savings and a fall in Gross Domestic Product.
3.
Less Mobility of labour: As a result of the increasing number of people, mobility of labour becomes difficult as old people may either stay at home or refuse to accept new ways of doing things.
4.
Risk of invasion: Due to the increase in the number of old people in the area, the risk of invasion by external forces is very high.
5.
It leads to under-population 6.
High dependency ratio 7.
Reduction in tax.
81 8.
Lower rewards for factor of production 9.
Change in the pattern of demand.
4.0.
CONCLUSION Rural-Urban migration has apparently come to stay particularly In developing nations like Nigeria.
This is because such a movement is instigated by such factors as gainful employment better economic of activities existence of modern infrastructural facilities such as electricity and pipe- borne water; easy access to essential services such as medical, education and other social services.
We submit that such a migration can only be looked when such facilities are adequately made available to the rural area.
5.0.
SUMMARY Rural-urban migration is seen as a sine quo non in developing countries due to availability of modern infrastructural facilities and other social services in the urban centres.
Against this backdrop, this unit get out to conceptualize the rural-urban migration.
Here it stated that the quest for employment particularly the white collar jobs, economic opportunities, better infrastructural facilities such as electricity, pipe-borne water, hospitals, telephone, schools etc.
instigate such a movement.
The unit then identified certain problems that arise as a result of such movements.
Some of these are: Congestion on land and pressure on other resources, fall in per capital income, higher demand of goods and services etc.
The Unit also identified the benefits of such migration as among others, high supply of labour, large market for goods and services economies in provision of certain services etc.
such effects as urban unemployment, explosion of demand for social services, reduction of supply of labour in rural areas, environmental pollution etc.
The unit concluded with outlining the advantages and disadvantages of rural-urban migration.
6.0.
TUTOR-MARKED ASSISGNMENT 1.
Explain the advantages and disadvantages of Rural-urban migration in Nigeria.
7.0.
FURTHER READINGS Fadayomi, (1998) Rural Development and Migration in Nigeria.
Ijere, N.J. (1994) Gender and Rural-Urban Migration (Columbia: 82 University Press.)
Opara, E.e.
(19983) The Impact of Migration on the Quality of Nigerian Rural Life (Ibadan: Nigerian Institute of Social and Economic Research) Williams, A.H. (1970) Migration and Urbanization in Africa (Ilorin: Nigerian Agricultural Research Management and Training Institute) Seminar Series.
83  UNIT 9 RURAL –URBAN MIGRATION TABLE OF CONTENTS 8.0.
Introduction 9.0.
Objectives 10.0.
Concept of Rural-Urban Migration 3.1.
Problems of Rural – Urban Migration 3.2.
Benefits of Rural – Urban Migration 3.3.
Effects of Rural – Urban Migration 3.4.
Advantages of Rural – Urban Migration to the Rural Areas 11.0.
Conclusion 12.0.
Summary 13.0.
Tutor-marked Assignment 14.0.
Further readings 8.0.
INTRODUCTION Migration is the movement of people from one place to another to settle there for some time for one reason or the other.
It is different from the mere movement of people from place to place on a very temporary basis.
Migration has two dimensions – Immigration and emigration.
Immigration refers to inward migration, that is, movement of people into a place.
Emigration refers to outward migration, that is, the movement of people out of a place.
Migration in Nigeria has some discernible patterns.
84 (iii) Rural – Urban Migration: This is the migration of people from rural areas to the urban centres.
In Nigeria, many people desert the villages and go to the towns and cities to live.
This mass movement of people from the rural areas to the towns and cities is referred to as the rural-urban drift population.
(iv) Rural – rural Migration: Some farmers migrate from the congested parts of the country to other areas where there is abundant land for agriculture.
Also, people migrate from rural areas which are not productive to other areas.
Rural – rural migration is on a smaller scale than Urban-urban migration.
9.0.
OBJECTIVES At the end of this Unit you should be able to: (vi) Explain the concept of Rural-Urban migration (vii) Outline the problems of Rural-Urban Migration (viii) Identify the benefits of Rural-Urban Migration (ix) State he effects of Rural-Urban Migration (x) Explain the advantages of Rural-Urban Migration to the Rural Areas.
10.0.
CONCEPT OF RURAL-URBAN MIGRATION The quest for employment, that is, white collar jobs which is non-existent and higher levels of income had made people to migrate from rural to urban areas.
The rural drift is caused by search for economic opportunities or the desire to stay in an area with more improved economic and social infrastructural facilities like electricity, hospitals, telephone, pipe-borne water and schools, the desire for a more suitable climate and the desire to have one’s standard of living improved.
The quest for knowledge and skills, problems of natural disasters such as flood, boundary clash, and religious fanatism are some other factors that provide reason for it.
Migration may be blessing to some areas while it may be debilitating to another.
The immigrants enlarge and enrich the labour force for productivity and economic growth and development.
This is evident in the last population census data which indicated that Lagos State was had more population than other states of federation.
85 This however made the government then to call for more allocation of federal revenue based on the population figures.
Areas with higher populating figures attract a greater share of government revenue.
Rural-urban migration causes over-population in the urban areas and under-population in the rural areas.
The movement of people from rural areas such as in Sokoto, Ilorin, Enugu, Abia to Badagry partly caused by Crop failures and partly by the general poverty in farming communities.
This movement has resulted in the overcrowding of the towns and cities in the Thirty-six states of the Federation and because industrial and commercial activities have not expanded to meet this increase in urban population, unemployment in many urban centers is high because these centers contain more people than there are jobs available for them.
With the emigration greater than immigration, under-population or decrease in population result in which most of the 774 Local Government areas in Nigeria may partly be due to poor Medical facilities, increase in death rate, decrease in birth rate, war and famine, natural disasters and epidemic, According to C.E Andy (2006) factors that determine movement (inflow or outflow) in population are: (i) Economic Prosperity: It is natural that people would like to move to areas where they would be able to make a living out of life without so much stress.
(ii) Education: Sometimes people would go to other places to study and acquire skill.
(iii) Political Instability: An area that is characterized by political instability cannot attract inflow of people into such place rather it will witness massive outflow.
(iv) Natural Disaster: An area that is prone to frequent occurrence of natural disasters will witness massive exit of people from that area and stoppage of inflow.
(v) Adventurism: People may be attracted to a particular area due to the availability of some tourist attractions and holiday resorts.
(vi) Religious Purpose: Some clergies have moved from their area to other areas to evangelize.
Studies by Okpan (1993) reveal that migrants from rural to urban areas are always many compared to those from urban to rural areas.
The movement 86 from rural to urban areas makes negative impact on the quality of rural life especially when such migrants carry away their needed consumption into the city.
Migration of young adults from the rural areas also places greater burden on he farmers, for farmers to cover the same area of land as when they had extra assistance, they must work much longer hours thus depriving them of some time for leisure or participation in various social activities.
On the other hand, studies by Ijere (1994) reveal that rural-urban migration has a positive impact on urban growth and social development, which makes generation of employment opportunities and provision of educational facilities and transportation infrastructural for the migrants possible.
Today, urban-rural migration is one of the most important modes of migration which exist in the society.
Until recently, researchers have not paid much attention to the rural-urban drift.
Studies by Williams (1970) reveal that some factors could send one off a place, which might be due to crisis, old age, transfer, retirement, and invasion of pests and diseases.
Also, some social factors may evolve to make people migrate to rural areas.
Studies by Jibowo (1992) show that factors influencing people to migrate to rural areas might be as a result of city congestion, traffic jams, saniation problems, increasing urban employment, increase in crime and housing problems.
These problems are so great in many developing countries that rural development has been a cardinal programme of political campaigns by many politicians.
Urbanization is also defined by the United Nations as movement of people from rural to urban areas with population growth equating to urban migration.
The United nations projected that half of the world’s population would live in urban areas at the end of 2008.
This study concludes that people migrate based on the prevailing conditions and the reason for it varties from one person to another depending on the situation that brought about the decision.
Migration is a selective process affecting individuals or families with certain economic, social, educational and demographic characteristics.
Migration occurs as a response to economic development as well as social, cultural, environmental and political factors and effects on areas of origin as well as destination.
People tend to move away from a place due to the need to escape violence, political instability, drought, congestion in various dimensions and suspected or real persecution.
Also, adverse 87 physical conditions such as flood, landslide (erosion and earthquake), insects and pests, soil infertility contribute largely to the reasons people leave one environment for another.
3.1.
PROBLEMS OF RURAL- URBAN MIGRATION One of the major forms of migration that tends to crate problems in all developing countries is that of rural-urban migration.
The number of immigrants has increased relative to the number of emigrants.
When people migrate from rural to urban areas, the problems that arise are:- 1.
Congestion on land and pressure on other resources including social services.
2.
There will be a fall in per capital income.
3.
The demand for goods and services will be relatively higher than what is available.
4.
There will be increased imports and greater balance of payment problems.
5.
There will be a high-level of unemployment and underemployment.
6.
Producers may use more labour intensive forms of production.
7.
There may be an excess supply of labour which will lead to a fall in wages and weaken the bargaining power of the trade unions.
8.
There will be a high dependency ratio 9.
There will be a high level of government spending.
(10)Social problems will tend to mount.
ACTIVITY1 QUESTION State ten problems that arise when people migrate from rural to urban areas.
ANSWER 1.
Congestion on land and pressure on other resources including social services.
2.
There will be a fall in per capital income.
3.
The demand for goods and services will be relatively higher than what is available.
88 4.
There will be increased imports and greater balance of payment problems.
5.
There will be a high-level of unemployment and underemployment.
6.
Producers may use more labour intensive forms of production.
7.
There may be an excess supply of labour which will lead to a fall in wages and weaken the bargaining power of the trade unions.
8.
There will be a high dependency ratio 9.
There will be a high level of government spending.
10.Social problem will tend to mount.
3.2.
BENEEFITS OF RURAL-URBAN MIGRATION The rapid rural-urban migration in Nigeria has some benefits in the economy of the nation.
They are: 8.
There will be high supply of labour: The immigrants will provide a large working population which will help in full and effective utilization of resources to increase the level of output.
Other things being equal, an increased level of output would lead to an increased level of consumption.
Consequently, the standard of living will increase.
9.
Large market for goods and services: There will be increased productivity to meet the high demand.
This may lead to economies of scale in production and producers will be encouraged to increase productivity further.
10.
Economies in the provision of certain services: Economic services such as defence and administration, when the total costs of providing them are spread over the population, the cost per person will be lower than that with fewer people.
11.
Foreign aid and investment: A country with large population will attract more foreign aids and investments.
12.
There will be increase in skills and talents that will help to raise the level of productivity in the economy.
13.
It boosts market at the receiving region.
14.
It promotes cultural integration e.g.
inter-marriage at the receiving region.
3.3.
EFFECTS OF RURAL-URBAN MIGRATION 89  Rural –urban migration has a number of consequences both on the source areas (rural areas) and the destinations (urban centres).
These include: 9.
Urban unemployment is aggravated: The migration of many people to urban centres increases the number of people seeking employment in these urban areas.
However, the number of job opportunities is not enough to absorb many of the young people who have drifted to the towns and cities.
Urban unmployment therefore grows at a fast rate.
The problem of unemployment is further compounded by the fact that most of the unemployed people have no special training or skill.
They therefore constitute a source of social problems in towns.
Crime would be on the increase.
Some might take to armed robbery, petty theft, thuggery, loitering etc.
10.
Explosion of demand for social services: Demand for social facilities such as housing, medical facilities, educational facilities, electricity, pipe-borne water etc.
will be far in excess of their supplies.
This explosion of demand has a number of consequences.
(iv) There will be congestion on the available facilities: They will be over-used resulting in their breakdown.
(v) Shanty towns would develop: As used here, this refers to those parts of the city which are not properly developed.
They lack adequate facilities and usually serve as hide-out for criminals.
(vi) It would necessitate the diversion of funds from productive investment to the provision of social amenities, thereby altering priorities.
11.
Rural-urban migration reduces the supply of labour in rural areas: Since many young people migrate to the towns, farming is left in the hands of an ageing population which is incapable of coping with arduous farming activities.
These old men and women who are left behind in the farms make use of traditional methods of production.
The consequence of inadequate labour and use of traditional methods is reduced productivity per worker and per hectare.
12.
It reduces the number of taxable adults in rural areas: Since many taxable young men have migrated to the twons, the amount of revenue which can be derived by the Local Government in the rural areas would be low.
If little revenue is derived, the amount of social facilities provided will be low.
13.
It leads to cultural disintegration at the destination region.
90 14.
It leads to the loss of able-bodied men and youth at the source region.
15.
Environmental pollution: Poor housing, turn-out of waste materials due to high level of human activities generally lead to environmental pollution.
16.
Rural – Urban migration also leads to inadequate health services as a result of influx of people to an area.
3.4.
ADVANTAGES OF RURAL –URBAN MIGRATION TO THE RURAL AREAS.
7.
Reduction in government expenditure: Declining population have fewer people to cater for and as a result there will be a reduction in expenditure by government.
8.
High standard of living: Standard of living has to do with the number of people and the available resources.
With fewer people coupled with increasing resources, this will cause an increase in per capital income, which will result in higher standard of living.
9.
Reduction in congestion: As a result of decrease in the number of people, there will be a corresponding decrease in congestion in terms of human, accommodation and vehicular traffic.
10.
Creation of job: As a result of increase in the number of old people, there will be more employment opportunities for the few labour force.
11.
Increase in savings: With deceasing population, there is an increase in savings on the part on the government.
12.
Increase of investment: As a result of the increase in savings, there will be enough capital for investment in important sectors of the economy.
DISADVANTAGES OF RURAL-URBAN MIGRATION TO THE RURAL AREA.
10.
Reduction in labour force 11.
Fall in Gross Domestic Product (GDP): The fall in the size of the labour force would result in a fall in the productive capacity of the country.
The small labour force, combined with its inability to make optimum use of available resources, results in low savings and a fall in Gross Domestic Product.
12.
Less Mobility of labour: As a result of the increasing number of people, mobility of labour becomes difficult as old people may either stay at home or refuse to accept new ways of doing things.
91 13.
Risk of invasion: Due to the increase in the number of old people in the area, the risk of invasion by external forces is very high.
14.
It leads to under-population 15.
High dependency ratio 16.
Reduction in tax.
17.
Lower rewards for factor of production 18.
Change in the pattern of demand.
11.0.
CONCLUSION Rural-Urban migration has apparently come to stay particularly In developing nations like Nigeria.
This is because such a movement is instigated by such factors as gainful employment, better economic activities, existence of modern infrastructural facilities such as electricity and pipe- borne water; easy access to essential services such as medical, education and other social services.
We submit that such a migration can only be curbed when such facilities are adequately made available to the rural areas.
12.0.
SUMMARY Rural-Urban migration is seen as a sine quo non in developing countries due to availability of modern infrastructural facilities and other social services in the urban centres.
Against this backdrop, this unit set out to conceptualize the rural-urban migration.
Here it stated that the quest for employment particularly the white collar jobs, economic opportunities, better infrastructural facilities such as electricity, pipe-borne water, hospitals, telephone, schools etc.
instigate such a movement.
The unit then identified certain problems that arise as a result of such movements.
Some of these are: Congestion on land and pressure on other resources, fall in per capita income, higher demand for goods and services etc.
The Unit also identified the benefits of such migration as among others, high supply of labour, large market for goods and services, economies in provision of certain services etc.
Such effects as urban unemployment, explosion of demand for social services, reduction of supply of labour in rural areas, environmental pollution etc.
The unit conclude with outlining the advantages and disadvantages of rural-urban migration.
13.0.
TUTOR-MARKED ASSISGNMENT 1.
Explain the advantages and disadvantages of Rural-urban migration in Nigeria.
92  14.0.
FURTHER READINGS Fadayomi, (1998) Rural Development and Migration in Nigeria.
Ijere, N.J. (1994) Gender and Rural-Urban Migration (Columbia: University Press.
Opara, E.e.
(19983) The Impact of Migration on the Quality of Nigerian Rural Life (Ibadan: Nigerian Institute of Social and Economic Research) Williams, A.H. (1970) Migration and Urbanization in Africa (Ilorin: Nigerian Agricultural Research Management and Training Institute) Seminar Series.
93  UNIT 11 CONCEPT AND THEORY OF LEADERSHIP TABLE OF CONTENTS 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objectives 3.0 Definition of Leadership 4.0 Characteristics of Effective Leadership 4.1.
Functions of an Effective Leader 4.2.
Basic Qualities and Skills of Effective leader 5.0.
Theories of Leadership 5.1.
The Trait Theory 5.2.
The Great Man Theory 5.3.
A Contingency Theory 5.4.
Normative Theory 5.5.
The Path- Goal Theory 5.6.
A Situational Theory 6.0.
Conclusion 7.0.
Summary 8.0.
Tutor-marked Assignment 9.0.
Further Readings 94  INTRODUCTION: In every organization, which of course is made up of people, someone or persons usually emerge as either the spokespersons of the group or providing the guide for other group members to adopt or follow.
Hence in any group are categories viz: (i) the leader and the followers.
Each of these must exhibit unique characteristics that must be demonstrated positively in order to ensure smooth running of that organization.
In every establishment both in the private or Government, certain groups of people perform leadership roles.
For instance, who-so-ever occupies a headship position becomes the leader of those he is heading.
And the success or failure of that group is usually attributed to how effective or not the leader is.
In the management parlance, the leader is regarded as an Accounting officer because, he has to be held responsible for what transpires in that organization.
The woes or failures of the Nigerian State, for instance, has always been attributed to the past leaders.
2.0.
OBJECTIVES After going through this unit, you should be able to : (i) Understand the need for Leadership in every group endeavour (ii) define the concept of leadership (iii) outline the functions and basic qualitative of an effective leader (iv) identify some theories of leadership.
3.0.
DEFINITION OF LEADERSHIP Bobbit et al (1978:253-254) define leadership as the ability to influence the behaviour of others.
Similarly, Carslie (1976:554) defines the term as basically an influence process.
Continuing, he states that the leader is the person in the group who has the most influence over the actions of a unit.
If a person has little influence over what the group does, he or she 95 is not considered a leader.
If through interpersonal relations another person is usually able to get others to follow direction, that individual is considered as a strong leader.
Comprehensively therefore, he states that Leadership is a process of providing direction in group activities and influencing others to achieve common goals.
If group progress is inconsistent with the expectations of its members, the leader will loose influence.
Louis A. Allen (1964) defines leadership as “the work a manager performs to cause people to take effective action” .
He identifies five main activities that are associated with management leading:- (i) “Management Decision Making: the work a manager performs to arrive at conclusion and judgments.
(ii) “Management Communicating: the work a manager performs to create understanding.
(iii) “Motivating: the work a manager performs to inspire, encourage, and impel people to take required action.
(iv) “Selecting People: the work a manager performs to choose people for positions in the organization.
(v) “Developing People: the work a manager performs to help people improve their knowledge, attitudes, and skills.” Effective leadership is essential to the achievement of results.
The manager’s leadership strength or weaknesses affect the performance of the entire organization:  He can clarify or confuse objectives, job assignment and expected results, and criteria for measuring performance.
 He can stimulate or inhibit optimum performance.
96  He can encourage or retard the use of his subordinates’ best abilities, skills and interests.
 He can provide or withhold incentives for growth and development.
 He can enhance or undermine job satisfaction and morale.
Research and observation indicate that high productivity, high morale, and optimum growth and development of subordinates result primarily from the leadership given by their immediate superior.
4.0.
CHRACTERISTICS OF EFFECTIVE LEADERSHIP To carry out his leadership responsibilities, each manager requires: - Awareness, sensitivity and an understanding of human relations.
- Skill in the techniques of ascertaining the cause of personnel problems.
- Mastery of the art of changing behavior - Skill in on-the-job coaching These are basic qualities and skills.
The effective manager/leader also exhibits the following important characteristics: 1.
HE ADDS VALUE TO THE He secures the greatest possible return on the RESOURCES OF THE assets of the organization by expertly ORGANZATION planning, organizing, integrating and measuring activities with maximum efficiency and a minimum waste of talent, time, money and effort.
2.
HE IS A PRIME MOVER He determines exactly where the organization is to go, and he is vigorous in his efforts to ensure that it gets there.
He pursues his 97 objectives with single-minded intensity.
He is flexible in the means he chooses to achieve results.
He adapts his strategies to the realities of the specific situation.
He may resort to authority or participation, encouragement or command forcefulness or persuasion, depending on which approach is most likely to achieve his objective.
3.
HE ENERGIZES HIS STAFF He knows his subordinates.
His daily interaction with them increases their motivation and improves their working relationships.
4.
HE BUILDS A COMMITED He emphasizes the importance of team AND COHESIVE WOR GROUP building.
He leads his people so that they are stimulated to co-operate with each other, to offer mutual help spontaneously when needed and to have pride in their workforce – to think of themselves as a good team.
He recognizes that the motives of his 5.
HE PROMOTES THE subordinates for working in the organization SAISFACTION are about as self-centered as his own.
OF SUBORDINATES’ NEEDS He knows that each of his subordinates is concerned with getting as much need satisfaction as he can from the work situation.
He assumes responsibility for changing these 98 self-centered stances to attitudes of mutual interest.
He sets an example – whether good or bad- 6.
HE SETS AN EXAMPLE of management in action.
This is the TO HIS STAFF fundamental basis for the practice of delegation, coaching, counseling and other forms of functional sharing.
He makes it clear that he is willing to help his 7.
HE IS A RESOURCE EXPERT subordinates, but only after they have exhausted their own resources for solving problems.
He offers his assistance only after they have done their homework.
8.
HE INDUCES TENSION He encourages dissatisfaction with work that is no more than adequate, in order to stimulate subordinates to put forward their best efforts.
He recognizes that organizations suffer most, not from occasional setbacks or reversals but rather from complacency resulting from past successes.
He effects profitable, productive change.
He 9.
HE IS A CHANGE AGENT does not expect dramatic breakthroughs or take needless risks with imprudent change, 99 but he commits himself to the hard work of planned, practical programmes of improvement that are geared to measurable results.
He extends the range of his activities beyond 10.
HE IS AN ESENTAIL LINK vertical relationships with his superiors and BETWEEN subordinate to include both lateral and HIS STAFF AND THE REST OF diagonal relationships in the organization.
THE ORGANISATION He shields his people from unfair demands or incursions by personnel in other departments.
He supports the views of top management, and he defends and communicates the views of his staff to the higher echelons.
He provides information to his people on both what they want to know and what they need to know if they are to coordinate their efforts with those of other work groups.
ACTIVITY I QUESTION (i) What do you understand by Leadership?
(ii) List the Characteristics of a leader ANSWER 100 (i) Leadership is a process of providing direction in group activities and influencing others to achieve common goals.
(ii) Characteristics of a leader include:- (a) He adds value to the resources of the organization (b) He is a prime mover (c) He energizes his staff (d) He builds a committed and cohesive work group (e) He promotes the satisfaction of subordinates needs (f) He sets an example to his staff (g) He is a resource expert (h) He induces tension (i) He is a change agent (j) He is an essential link between his staff and the rest of the organization 4.1.
FUNCTIONS OF AN EFFECTIVE LEADER  Decision making  Motivating  Selecting People  Developing People  Performing Basic Management Functions  Control of Subordinates  Model of the Fellowship  Management Communication 101  4.2.
BASIC QUALITIES AND SKILLS OF EFFECTIVE LEADER  A Prime Mover  Plans for the organization  Prudent Utilization of Scarce Resources  Equitable Distribution of Resources and Infrastructures  A Change Agent: Creative and Innovative  Builds A Committed & Cohesive Work Group  Promotes the satisfaction of subordinates’ needs  Essential link Between His Staff and the Rest of the Organization  Provides Information for His People.
5.0.
THEORIES OF LEADERSHIP Theories of leadership refer to various perceptions as contained in the received wisdom in the field.
Here for instance, there is the position that a person’s leadership status may be based on any of the several kinds of power such as reward power, coercion, referent power, expert power or legitimate power.
In some instances, the most influential member is the emergent leader, whose power derives from sources other than that of his formal organizational position.
Whereas in other instances the most influential member may be the appointed leader.
5.1.
The Trait Theory of Leadership Perhaps the oldest theory of leadership effectiveness embodies as its basic concept the idea that leadership effectiveness is determined mainly by personal traits or characteristics of the leader.
Although research is yet to come with a set of peculiar traits that guarantee an affective leader, there are still certain traits that characterize effective leaders.
It has been 102 established, for example, that one who emerges as a leader is likely to be more intelligent than the average of the group that is led.
It is equally established that the personality traits identified in leaders are not necessarily antecedents of leadership.
They may develop in individuals as they take on leadership roles.
5.2.
The Great Man Theory This theory is related to the traits theory.
The proposition here is that some individuals emerge as leaders because they have been born with the necessary leadership traits.
A similar theory is the Zeitgeist theory.
Zeitgeist is a German word meaning “Sprait of the time”.
The implication is that a leader is a product of his times, and those leaders will emerge who have the traits or characteristics needed to meet the demand of their times.
A good example of great men who emerged as leaders because of the circumstances of the time were Adolf Hitler (Germany); Wiston Churchill (Britain); George Washington (United States of America); Charles De Gaul (France); Kwame Nkruma(Ghana); Julius Nyerere (Tanzania); Nelson Mandela(South Africa); Sir, Alhaji Ahamadu Bello (Northern Nigeria); Dr. Nnamdi Azikwe (Esatern Nigeria) and Chief Emeka Odumegwu Ojukwu (defunct Biafra) Chief Obafemi Awolowo (Western Region of Nigeria).
5.3.
A CONTINGENCY THEORY OF LEADERSHIP EFFECTIVESS One of the most widely discussed theories of leadership in recent years has been that proposed by Fred Fiedler, which he calls a contingency theory of leadership effectiveness.
To define leadership behavior, Fieldler developed a questionnaire that could be used to measure a leader’s perceptions of co-workers.
From the result of his research, it became clear that the relationship between leadership style and effectiveness depends upon several factors in the situation.
He identified three:- 103  (i) Task Structure: The most structured task has only one situation, only one path to the solution, and a solution that is clear and verifiable.
The most unstructured task has none of these characteristics.
(ii) Leader-member relations: The effective relationships the leader has with his group.
How much do the members of the group approve of, and support, his leadership?
(iii) Position Power: The power inherent in the leader’s organizational position; the degree to which the leader has at his disposal various rewards and sanctions, his authority over the group’s members, and the degree to which this authority is supported by the organization.
5.4.
A NORMATIVE THEORY OF LEADERSHIP Whereas Fiedler’s contingency theory is firmly rooted in empirical observations of leadership effectiveness in many situations, Vroom and Yettom have provided an elaborate and precise normative model of leadership styles.
It is based deductively on certain assumptions about the outcomes that result from various leader behaviors.
The assumptions appear to be consistent with most of the descriptive data reported in the research literature and Yetton model is still in the testing stage.
What is significant about this theory is that it provides operational, prescriptive statements that managers or leaders may use in determining which leadership methods they should employ in each of various situations that they encounter in carrying out their leadership roles.
Vroom and Yettom consider such terms as task orientation and process orientation, or concern for production and concern for people, to be too imprecise to be operational.
104 They conclude that a normative leadership theory must specify leadership behavior precisely enough that a person may determine with certainty whether or not he is acting in accordance with the prescription offered by the theory.
They further assume that the leadership method used in response to one situation should not constrain the method or style used in other situations.
In other words, they believe that a leader should use different methods depending on the particular situation.
To arrive at prescriptions as to the appropriate decision method for various situations, a description of the kind of outcomes desired is needed.
Vroom and Yettom distinguish three classes of outcomes that influence the ultimate effectiveness of decisions: (1) the quality or rationality of the decision, (2) the acceptance of the decision by subordinates and their commitment to execute it effectively (3) the amount of time required to make the decision.
With these classes of outcomes in mind, Vroom and Yettom conclude that the leader’s choice of decision method should be based on the problem attributes.
5.5.
PATH –GOAL THEORY OF LEADERSHIP The normative theory of leadership discussed in the preceding section focuses on the decision-making function of the leader.
But decision making is only one of a number of leadership functions.
The path-goal theory emphasizes how the leader influences the subordinate’s perceptions of his work, personal goals, and the paths of goal attainment.
The main concern is the degree to which the leader’s behaviour is motivating or satisfying to his subordinates.
The central hypothesis of the theory is that a leader’s behavior is motivating or satisfying to the degree that the behavior increases subordinate goal attainment and clarifies the paths to the goals.
This theory of leadership is closely related to the expectancy theories 105 of motivation.
The kinds of leadership behavior conceptualized in the theory are similar but not identical to those we have discussed in previous sections.
They are as follows:- (1) Directive leadership – the behavior involved in letting subordinates know what is expected of them, providing specific guideline, standards, and schedules of work to be done as well as rules and regulations.
(2) Supportive Leadership – the leadership behavior that shows concern for the status, well-being, and needs of subordinates, attempting to make work more pleasant, and exhibiting friendliness.
(3) Participative leadership – the leadership behavior that involves consultation with subordinates, soliciting suggestions and giving them consideration in decision making.
(4) Achievement –oriented leadership – the activity of setting challenging goals of emphasizing improvement in performance, expressing confidence in and high expectations of subordinates’ ability to meet higher standards of excellence.
5.6.
A SITUATIONAL LEADERSHIP THEORY A useful situational leadership theory is helpful to managers and leaders in diagnosing the demands of their situation has been developed as a result of behavior science research.
This theory is based on a relationship between the amount of direction (task behaviour) and the amount of socio-emotional support (relationship behavoiur) a leader must provide, and the level of “maturity” of his followers or group.
Followers in any situation are vital, not only because individually they accept or reject the leader, but as a group, they actually determine whatever personal power he may have.
106  6.0.
CONCLUSION The quality of leadership an institution or, organization or even a country is endowed with determines, to a large extent, how successful or otherwise that organization will be.
We have leadership everywhere for instance; he who occupies a headship position in an endeavour is a leader.
In government establishments, we find leaders in every Cadre, Ministry, Department, Branch, Division, Section, Unit etc.
All these inform our devoting a considerable time to this unit.
The knowledge acquired in this unit will not only assist you in being at home with your responsibilities as a subordinate but will also your responsibilities as a leader (either now or in the future).
The study of leadership is a significant parameter for understanding administration of urban centres.
This is because, at the top of this administrative structure is a leader.
All these we shall appreciate shortly.
7.0.
SUMMARY Discussions on leadership will assist us to appreciate leadership roles in administration generally and administration of urban centres in particular.
Against that backdrop, this unit defined the concept of leadership which talked about influencing others.
From here discussions shifted to the characteristics of effective leader where we identified ten (10) of such characteristics.
The unit also outlined the functions of an effective leader as well as the basic qualities and skills of an effective leader.
Finally, the unit discussed various leadership theories.
These are: the trait theory; the Greatman theory; the Contingency theory; the Path-goal theory; and a Situational leadership 107 theory.
It is our hope that this unit has sufficiently exposed you to the fundamental knowledge of leadership.
The next unit (i.e Unit 10) will provide a more detailed discussion on leadership, that is leadership styles.
8.0.
TUTOR-MARKED ASSISGNMENT 1.
What do you understand by Leadership?
2.
Outline the various characteristics of an effective leader 3.
Discuss any three (3) theories of leadership 9.0 FURTHER READINGS Allen A.L.
(1964): The Management Profession (New York: McGraw-Hill) Bobbit, R.H. Jr. et al (1978) Orgnaisational |Behavior: Understand and Prediction (2nd Edition) (Englewood Cliffs: Prentice-Hall) Fiedler E.F. (1967) A Theory of leadership Effectiveness (New York: McGraw-Hill).
108  UNIT 10 LEADERSHIP STYLES AND THEIR IMPLICATIONS TABLE OF CONTENTS 1.
Introduction 2.
Objectives 3.
Two Dimensions of Leadership 4.
Factors that affect Choice of Leadership Style 4.1.
Leadership Styles and their Characteristics 4.2.
Managerial Grid depicting Relationship between Leadership Style and Motivation 5.
Conclusion 6.
Summary 7.
Tutor-marked Assignment 8.
Further Reading 1.
INTRODUCTION In the preceding unit, we explored the concept of leadership, the functions, qualities and characteristics of a leader.
In the process, adequate foundation was laid for discussions on this unit.
With such a background information, we look, in this unit, at various leadership styles at the disposal of a manager.
Each has its own characteristics as well as positive or negative influence on the staff on the one hand, and achievement of organizational goals on the other.
We took a position in this unit that the choice of leadership style made by a manager is a function of his personality, those of his staff and envisaged results achievement.
109  2.
OBJECTIVES At the end of this unit, you should be able to: i.
Explain the two dimensions of leadership ii.
Identify the factors that affect the choice of appropriate leadership style.
iii.
Outline the characteristics and effects of various leadership styles.
iv.
Establish a relationship between leadership styles and motivation.
3.
THE TWO DIMENTIONS OF LEADERSHIP Two dimensions of leadership are of major concern to managers.
First, there is their leadership style:  Some managers choose their leadership style either by intuition or by following the example of other managers.
 Studies of group operations and power relationships have shed much light on the differing impacts of various leadership styles.
 Researchers in the field of management have long been engaged in a search for the “best “style of leadership.
But evidence to date clearly indicates that there is no single style that is appropriate to and effective in all types of situations.
 Results-oriented managers are those who can adapt their leadership style to meet the demands of each specific situation and the needs of their subordinates.
In addition to their leadership style, managers are concerned with the substance o their directing and controlling activities.
These two factors interact, and neither can be ignored:  What the manager does to direct and control his subordinates will determine what they will do.
 How the manager carries out those responsibilities will determine where the emphasis will be placed and influence the level of the subordinate’s response.
Awareness of the importance of leadership has led many managers to ask themselves questions such as the following:- - How democratic should I be?
110 - How much group participation will provide results and how much is just a waste of valuable time?
- How can I best use my authority without arousing resentment?
- How can I prevent my orders from being distorted by staff two levels down in the organization?
- Why is it that this group seems to respond differently to my leadership than the staff in the last organization in which I worked?
4.0.
FACTORS THAT AFFECT CHOICE OF LEADERSHIP STYLES Various factors affect the choices of an appropriate leadership style: 1.
The personality o the manager.
Since he is the product of his past experiences, the manager will find it easy to engage in certain types of behaviour, difficult to carry off others adroitly and impossible to feel comfortable with still others.
2.
The manager’s life philosophy.
The manager’s values are the rudder that guides his behaviour.
Obviously, the ethically callous can act in ways that the ethically sensitive would not even contemplate.
3.
The characteristics of the work group.
The work group is no more a blank page than is the manager.
Its members have their own traits as individuals; and the work group as a whole also has unique distinguishing characteristics.
4.
The manager-work group relationship.
The chemistry between the leader and the followers is crucial.
Each combination of individuals requires a slightly different approach.
5.
The manager’s influence with his superiors and others who have power in the organization.
Without relatively consistent backing from his superiors and co-operative support from other key personnel in the organization, the manager’s efforts to lead may well miscarry.
6.
The manager’s interaction with other departments.
In complex organizations, extensive negotiation, accommodation and adaptation are required.
7.
The mandate of the work and the work environment.
Opportunities for and obstacles to effective leadership necessarily vary from one situation to another.
111  8.
The requirements of the organization.
The organization’s philosophy, climate and tempo and the pressures on it dictate the types of managerial leadership that will be rewarded.
Manager need to become familiar with their leadership behaviour because: - This behaviour has been developed over a period of time, and it is what others have learned to recognize in them as their style.
- Subordinates expect and may even be able to predict certain kinds of leadership behavoiur in their superior.
Much management training takes the form of developing a leadership model: - To assist each manager in determining his own natural style.
- To help each manager to clarify the assumptions he has made about his staff.
- To provide managers with feedback on the appropriateness of their style to both the demands of the situation and the needs of their subordinates.
ACTIVITY I QUESTION: List the factors that affect the choice of leadership style.
ANSWER: The factors are:- (i) The personality of the manager (ii) The manager’s life philosophy (iii) The characteristics of the work group (iv) The manager-work group relationship (v) The manager’s influence with his superiors (vi) The manager’s interaction with other departments (vii) The mandate of the work and the work environment (viii) The requirements of the organization.
112  4.1.
LEADERSHIP STYLES AND THEIR CHARACTERISTICS CHARA CTER ISTIC S AND EFFEC TS OF VARI OUS L EADE RSHIP STYLES LEADERSHIP STYLE FACTOR AUTOCRATIC VARIABLE DEMOCRATIC Underlying Authority and Will to achieve Self-interest and concepts control free will Predominant Dominant self Objective –creative Tolerant, trusting personality traits of reliant the leader Relationships with Controlling, forcing Developmental, Permissive, non others helping directive Customary Task oriented Consultative Catalytic behaviour Leader’s role Energizer and Team builder Integrator compeller Subordinate’s role Perform as expected Contribute to group Share the leadership goals Decision-making Adjudication by Consensual decision Acceptance of process leader making competent judgement Communication Downward and Free flowing and Authentic and process directive relevant multi-directional Motivation process Challenges and Participation Self-motivation reward Moral indicator Efficiency Attainment of group Improvement and goals innovation Methods Directive standards, Flexible analysis, Consultation, tight control, reward action, commitment, objectivity, loose and punishment challenge control, recognition Results: Good to excellent Excellent Unimpressive Short term Long term Unimpressive Excellent Poor > Leadership is an influence process dependent upon: - Personal characteristics of the leader - Nature of the situation - Personal characteristics of the follower 113  The manager operating in the variable style range will consider factors from both the situation and his subordinates before adopting a particular style.
 The key is to be able to vary your leadership style depending on the interaction of these factors.
We can summarize as follows: - Managers with an autocratic style tend to rely on authority to lead, are dominant and operate through a system of rewards and punishments.
The autocratic style produces good to excellent short-term results, but long-term result are unimpressive.
- The democratic style is typical of tolerant, trusting, permissive managers; they maintain loose control and emphasize rewards and recognition rather than punishments.
Their results range from unimpressive to poor.
- Results-oriented managers operate in the variable style category.
They are aware of the variety of styles available to them and change their style according to the situation and the needs of their subordinates.
Their results tend to be excellent in both the short and the long term.
4.2.
RELATIONSHIP BETWEEN LEADERSHIP STYLE AND MOTIVATION This we explain in terms of focus of the leader with regards to carrying out tasks vis-a vis his relationship with those who carry out the tasks.
Hence we referred to it as task behaviour and relationship behaviour.
4.2.1.
TASK BEHAVIUR AND RELATIONSHIP BEHAVIOUR The recognition of the task and relationship as two important dimensions of leader behaviour has been an important part of the works of management theorists over the last several decades.
These two dimensions have been variously labeled, using terminology ranging from “autocratic” and “democratic,” to “employee-oriented and “production-oriented.” For sometime, it was believed that task and relationship were either/or styles of leader behaviour and, therefore, could be depicted on a single dimension, a continuum, moving from very authoritarian (task) leader behaviour at one end to very democratic (relationship) leader behaviour at the other.
114  In more recent years, the feeling that task and relationship were either/ or relationship styles has been dispelled.
In particular, the relationship studies initiated by the Bureau of Business Research at Ohio State University questioned this assumption.
In observing the actual behavior of leaders in a wide variety of situation, the Ohio state staff found that they could classify most of the activities of leaders into two behavioral categories or dimensions: “Initiating Structure” (task behavior) and “ Consideration” ( relationship behavior).
Definitions of these two dimensions follow: Task Behavior – The extent to which a leader is likely to organize and define the roles of the members of his group (followers); to explain what activities each is to do as well as when, where, and how tasks are to be accomplished.
It is further characterized by endeavouring to establish well- defined patterns of organization, channels of communication, and ways of getting jobs accomplished.
Relationship Behavior – The extent to which a leader is likely to maintain personal relationships between himself and the members of his group (followers) by opening up channels of communication, delegating responsibility and giving subordinates an opportunity to use their potential.
It is characterized by socio-emotional support, friendship and mutual trust.
In the leadership studies that followed, the Ohio State research staff found that relationship styles tended to vary considerably from leader to leader.
The behavior of some was characterized mainly by structuring activities of followers in terms of task accomplishments, while others concentrated on providing socio-emotional support in terms of personal relationships between themselves and their followers.
Other leaders had styles characterized by both task and relationship behavior.
There were even some individuals in leadership positions whose behaviour tended to provide little structure or consideration.
No dominant style appeared.
Instead, various combinations were evident.
Thus, it was determined that task and relationship are not either/or leadership styles as an authoritarian – democratic continuum suggests.
Instead, these patterns of leader behavior can be plotted on two separate and distinct axes as shown in 115  figure 10.1 High High Task (High) Relationships And And High Relationships Low Task Relationships behaviour Low Task High Task And And Low Low Relationship Relationships (Low) (Low)________Task Behavior (High) Fig 10.1: The basic leader behaviour style Maturity of the followers or group – Maturity is defined in this situational leadership theory by the achievement – motivation, the willingness and ability to take responsibility, and task relevant education and experience of an individual or a group.
While age may affect these, it is not directly related to maturity as used in this theory.
The concern is for psychological age, not chronological age.
According to current leadership theory, as the level of maturity of one’s followers continues to increase, appropriate leader behavior not only requires less and less task behavior (structure) while increasing relationship behavior, but should eventually call for decreases in socio- emotional support (relationship behavior).
Thus this theory discusses appropriate or effective leadership styles to the level of maturity of one’s follower or group.
5.0.
CONCLUSION: This unit brings us to the end of discussions on leadership and leadership styles.
From the conclusions reached in the unit, there is no best way of leading due to the numerous factors at play in choosing an appropriate style.
The fact still remains that the leader is an accounting officer who is held accountable for successes or failures of the work group or department or organization.
So, with the target of achievement of goals and objectives in mind, he chooses the leadership style which he feels will best achieve his purpose.
This unit thus is an attempt to assist the leaders either present or future to acquire that knowledge and exposure that will enhance their performances as leaders.
116  6.0.
SUMMARY This unit started by looking at two dimensions of leadership which are of major concern to managers.
The belief is that it is a logical continuation of discussions in the preceding unit.
It stated that in addition to their leadership styles, managers are concerned with the substance of their directing and controlling activities.
The unit submits that these two factors interact and neither can be ignored.
We equally explained that factors that affect the choice of leadership style.
Here we identified and explained eight of such factors.
We thereafter identified three essential leadership styles which are Autocratic, Variable and Democratic leadership styles.
The characteristics of each of these were articulated.
Thereafter, we discussed leadership style and motivation which come in form of leaders reaction to carrying out assigned tasks and his relationship with his subordinates who perform these tasks.
A managerial Grid was sketched to reveal a picture of this relationship in four compartments.
From these compartments you can identify the particular leadership style at play in each compartment.
This, of course, will enable you identify the best leadership style.
7.0.
TUTOR –MARKED ASSISGNMENT (i) Identify the different leadership styles and outline the characteristics of each.
(ii) With the aid of schema explain the relationship between a leadership style and motivation.
8.0.
FURTHER RESDINGS Bobbitt, R.H. (jr.) et al; (1978) Organizational Behaviour: Understanding and Prediction (Englewood Cliffs: Prentice-Hall Inc.) Allen, A.L, (1964): The Management Profession (New York: McGraw-Hill) Carlisle H.M (1982): Management: Concepts, Methods and Applications (2nd Edition) (Utah: Science Research Associates Inc.) Hayes,J.L; (1983): Memos For Management: Leadership(New York: American Management Associations).
117  UNIT 12 PERFORMANCE MANAGEMENT TABLE OF CONTENTS 1.0.
Introduction 2.0.
Objectives 3.0.
What is Performance and Performance Gap?
3.1.
Common Reasons for Poor Performance 4.0.
Performance Analysis 4.1.
Performance Evaluation 4.1.1 Aims and Objectives of Performance Evaluation 4.1.2.
Reporting System in the Nigerian Public Service 4.2.
Strategies for Systems Improvement 5.0.
Conclusion 6.0.
Summary 7.0.
Tutor-marked Assignment 8.0.
Further Readings 1.0.
INTRODUCTION: The drive to achieve organizational goals we refer to as performance.
In other words, the extent to which an individual carries out assigned duties and tasks is what we call performer.
So, performance is dependent on availability of duties, tasks, responsibilities etc.
Where these are successfully carried out we say that the individual has performed.
The individual is adjuged as a non-performer when reverse is the case.
At a more micro level, an organization is equally adjuged to be performing as long as it is achieving its mandate.
Reverse is equally the case where it is said to be non –performing.
This situation is vital in that in Nigeria, some companies fold up due to non-performance.
The recent situation with the banking industry is a case in point.
Sometimes the government’s central 118 agency, Civil service falls within the bracket of non performing institution where services rendered to the citizens are either not there or inadequate i.e.
falling short of expectation In this unit therefore we shall examine this concept of performance, its analysis, evaluation and benefits derivable there from.
2.0.
OBJECTIVES At the end of this unit, you should be able to (i) explain the term, performance, and performance gap (ii) identify common reasons for poor performance (iii) discuss the concept of performance Analysis (iv) analyse performance Evaluation and ratings in the Nigerian Public Service.
3.0.
OUR UNDERSTANDING OF PERFORMANCE AND PERFORMANCE GAP.
A quick look at Job Analysis reveals that what an employee actually does is his duty, how he does it constitutes the different tasks that make up the duty.
Job analysis also shows that a statement of the duties an employee is expected to carryout is referred to as Job description while the qualities required for the satisfactory performance of the duties could be referred to as Job Specification.
The actual accomplishment or discharge of the duties is referred to as his performance.
A discrepancy occurs when there is a difference or gap between what employees usually do and what they are expected to do.
This, constitutes a performance problem.
In discussing Performance Management therefore, emphasis should be placed on the gap or discrepancy which exists in the performance of an employee’s duties.
The word discrepancy is used here in place of deficiency which is sometimes erroneously used, because deficiency gives a pre-judgemental impression while the onus is the analysis or examination of all the probable contingencies that brought about the ‘gap’.
Hence one can only refer to the cause of the gap as the employee’s deficiency in any of the contingencies, only after their appraisal and an identification of a particular cause like knowledge or skill is made.
119  3.1.
COMMON REASONS FOR POOR PERFORMANCE The greatest challenge of performance management in organizations is performance problems of employees.
The altimate aim of performance management therefore is resolution of these performance problems in order to ensure improved performance.
This thus informed identification of courses of these problems.
When an employee is not performing well, there is often an identifiable reason.
Listed below are some common causes of gaps in performance.
1.
The employee is apathetic about his work, his co-workers or the department.
He is not interested.
2.
He is dissatisfied with working conditions, his pay, the personality of his supervisor or his treatment by the supervisor or others in the organization.
3.
The manager’s approach is obtrusive or inappropriate.
It is: - Too directive, autocratic or demanding - Laissez-faire or negligent - Inconsistent or unpredictable 4.
The employee does not know what is expected of him, does not know the objectives of his job, does not know by what standards his efforts will be judged.
5.
He does not accept the manager’s expectations, because they are unrealistic, inappropriate or, in the employee’s view, unimportant.
He feels no commitment to the job objective and no responsibility for achieving it.
6.
He believes, erroneously, that he is meeting expectations; he is unaware that his performance is inadequate.
7.
He does not know how to do his job; he lacks the necessary knowledge, skill or competence to perform satisfactorily.
8.
He feels that there are good reasons why he cannot do what is expected; he is aware of a problem, barrier or restraint that the manager does not seem to recognize.
9.
The job is not worth doing; it fulfills no personal need or doing the job may be risky, costly, painful or threatening.
10.
Not doing the job is rewarding in some way.
11 The job is too easy; the employee can do it with only a minimum of effort.
12 The employee feels that his past performance has not been recognized; he never gets credit for a job well done.
120  ACTIVITY 1 Question: Identify and list ten (10) common causes of performance problems.
ANSWER: 1.
The employee is apathetic about his work, his co-workers or the department.
He is not interested.
2.
He is dissatisfied with working conditions, his pay the personality of his supervisor or his treatment by the supervisor or others in the organization.
3.
The manager’s approach is obtrusive or inappropriate.
It is: - Too directive, autocratic or demanding - Laissez-faire or negligent - Inconsistent or unpredictable 4.
The employee does not know what is expected of him, does not know the objectives of his job, does not know by what standards his efforts will be judged.
5.
He does not accept the manager’s expectations, because they are unrealistic, inappropriate or, in the employee’s view, unimportant.
He feels no commitment to the job objective and no responsibility for achieving it.
6.
He believes, erroneously, that he is meeting expectations; he is unaware that his performance is inadequate.
7.
He does not know how to do his job; he lacks the necessary knowledge, skill or competence to perform satisfactorily.
8.
He feels that there are good reasons why he cannot do what is expected; he is aware of a problem, barrier or restraint that the manager does not seem to recognize.
9.
The job is not worth doing; it fulfills no personal need or doing the job may be risky, costly, painful or threatening.
10.
Not doing the job is rewarding in some way.
11 The job is too easy; the employee can do it with only a minimum of effort.
12.
The employee feels that his past performance has not been recognized; he never gets credit for a job well done.
121  4.0.
PERFORMANCE ANALYSIS Performance Analysis is a detailed examination of how a job holder executes the roles assigned to him in his job in converting inputs into outputs.
It looks at how the employed adds value to inputs in yielding outputs with a given resource, within a time span.
Discussion on performance analysis would be based on two levels; the organizational level, Kurt Lewin’s “force-field analysis” could be used to explain the causes of performance problems among the different groups that make up the organization.
Here we look at those things that enhance the group’s performance as well as those things that tend to restrain or impede the group’s performance.
Restraining forces constitute the performance problems of the group.
Solution to the problem, therefore, rests with reducing or eliminating the retraining forces and at the same time increasing the enablers or driving forces so that the group’s performances could be brought to a desired state.
Below are some enabling and re- estimating factors identified in a Paras- tatal organization in Nigeria during a recent study carried out by a group in ASCON.
ENABLING FACTORS RESTRAINING FACTORS - Pushful Leadership - Inadequate financial allocation by the Federal Government.
- Opportunity for job - inadequate motivation resulting in Negative attitudes satisfaction to work -Improved inter-personal - In ability to delegate effective Civil Service relationship bureaucracy and mentality - Ability to keep to the - Poor Communication main set objectives of the - Non- co-operation due to petty jealousy organization - Bad and insincere management problem definition and solution.
From the foregoing, the importance of organizational environment on performance is too glaring to be overlooked.
Infact environmental influence goes a long way to determine individual’s performance.
Such environmental variables as Job design, supervision, fellow workers, compensation, working conditions, training and evaluation compliment the individual’s ability where motivation is provided to raise his performance to the desired or expected level as is shown in the diagram below 122  Environment Individual Job design; supervision; fellow workers; Ability compensation; working conditions; Performanc training; evaluation Motivation Fig.
11.1. : Organization and its environment At the individual level, a few questions are pertinent.
- what is the difference between what is being done and what is supposed to be done?
- - What are those things that made one feel things aren’t right?
- Why is there a state of dissatisfaction?
In finding satisfactory answers to these questions, one can then conveniently say whether a performance discrepancy exists or not, where it exists, then the next major step is, if it is important , if it is really worth the energy and time which will obviously be utilized in trying to resolve the discrepancy or bridge the gap.
They include; - why is the discrepancy important?
- what would happen if the discrepancy is left alone?
- Could doing something to resolve it have any worth while result?
In providing answers to these questions, it will obviously be established if the discrepancy is important.
If it is not important, it is then, ignored.
But where it is important we proceed to the next step which is “skill deficiency”.
Here an attempt should be made to find out whether the problem is 123 authentically that of skill deficiency.
In doing this, answers to the following questions could be sought.
- could he do it if he really had to?
- Suppose his life depended on it, could he do it?
- Are his present skills adequate for the desired performance?
Here are two paths, the ‘yes’ and ‘No’ paths.
If the performance discrepancy is as a result of genuine skill deficiency, the ‘yes’ path is followed if not, the ‘No’ path is followed.
For the purpose of this discussion, the ‘yes’ path could be examined and later the ‘No’ path.
Now it has been established that the discrepancy is as a result of skill deficiency, the next thing is to establish whether he has done it before.
If he hasn’t done it before and could not do it now, then go to the next step which is “whether his skill has been in constant use”.
IF NO, then arrange for PRACTICE SESSIONS, but if yes, then arrange for regular FEED- BACK on his performance as that could correct possible deviations or mistake which he has been making over the years.
IF HE ONCE KNEW HOW TO DO ITBUT ISDOING IT INCORRECTLY AND DOES IT REGULARLY AND DOES NOT DO IT REGULARLY LOOK FOR LOOK FOR LACK OF FEEDACK LACK OF PRACTICE AS THE PROBABLE CAUSE Figure 11.2.
A diagram on cause of individual performance problems Even when a genuine skill deficiency exists, any solution to the problem should be weighed against the possibility of changing the job, particularly through providing some kind of job-aid, checklists, instruction sheets, signs, label, e.t.c.
If training seems to be the only remedy, then on-the-job training which involves.
-Analyzing the task to be learned - Setting a stimulating interactive learning climate - Telling the learner how to do the task - Showing him how 124 - Letting him do the task himself - Reviewing his work in ways that reinforce his achievement and setting goals for improvement.
It may be easier and cheaper and just as good as the formal variety.
As Thomas Gilbert, puts it, ‘show-how ’is cheaper than ‘know-how’.
These constitute the simpler way of providing solution to skill deficiency problem.
Finally, it is useful to determine whether someone has the capacity to do the job required, and whether he would ”fit” the job mentally and motivationally even if his performance were brought up to standard.
If the answer to both questions is ‘yes’, then we go ahead with the alternative solutions enumerated earlier but if ‘No’, we change the man this time around, either by transferring him to a less demanding job or terminating his appointment.
However, where the cause of the performance discrepancy is not skill deficiency, one could get clues that the problem is mainly that of performance management rather than performance teaching from statements such as, “He just isn’t motivated” “He just doesn’t want to do it” “He simply doesn’t care” “He’s too lazy to do it” “He doesn’t have the right attitude” “ I’m too busy to do it” “ I’m not allowed to do it” “ That isn’t my job” “ They’ll fire me if I do it” The aforementioned statements indicate a situation where the skill is there but the will to perform is just not there.
In order to influence the employee to perform therefore, one has to change the environment around the performance.
There are four general causes of such non-performance.
- It is punishing to perform as desired - It is rewarding to perform other than as desired - It simply doesn’t matter whether performance is as desired.
- There are obstacles to performing as desired Again, we discuss them as alternative sources of solution to non performance problem.
125  1.
Is Desired performance punishing?
When it appears like someone knows how to perform as desired but doesn’t , one should find out whether the desired performance leads to unpleasant results(unpleasant from this point of view).
If so, the remedy is to find ways to reduce or eliminate the negative effects and create, or increase the strength of positive or desirable consequences.
2.
Is Non-performance rewarding?
Here we find that many bureaucrats hide under the clock of “Rules and Regulations” and obstruct attempts made by others to get things done.
They tend to constitute themselves into thin ‘gods’ by exerting such obstructive behaviour towards others.
That recognition gives them great satisfaction.
3.
Does performing Really matter Sometimes a performance discrepancy continues to exist neither because the performer doesn’t know how to perform nor because he isn’t motivated, but because it simply doesn’t matter whether or not he performs.
Nothing happens if he takes the trouble to perform as someone wants; nothing happens if he doesn’t.
In dealing with such a situation therefore, one has to arrange a consequence which should be considered favourable by the person expected to perform differently, when you want someone to perform in a particular manner, one rule is: “Make it matter”.
4.
Are there obstacles to Performing?
Most people often say “I could do this job perfectly well if only this telephone would stop ringing and people stop trooping in and out of my office so that I could concentrate for five minutes at a time”.
This is an example of a situation in which job would get more efficiently if the conditions were changed, if the obstacles were removed.
5.
Which solution is best?
Having discussed different available solutions to a performance discrepancy the next important step is to choose the best of them all that would produce the desired result.
In doing this, one should think whether the remedy is worth the probable results.
To do so will help select which of several remedies may be the most practical, economical, easiest to use- the one most likely to give the most result for the least effort.
Then we finally implement such solution.
So far, we have attempted to analyze performance problems in organization.
We shall subsequently look at performance evaluation.
126  4.1.
PERFORMANCE EVALUATION Evaluation in this context refers to systematic assessment of a worker’s job performance and potential or development.
Evaluation therefore is the process of estimation or judging the value, excellence, qualities or status of persons.
The evaluation of individuals in an employment setting has been described over the years by personnel authors and practitioners in a number of different ways.
Some of the common descriptions include: performance appraisal, merit rating, behavioural assessment, employee evaluation, personnel review, progress report, service rating and fitness report.
Some personnel specialists use the concepts interchangeably while others attach special interpretations to some of those appraisal phrases.
In this unit therefore, Performance Evaluation and Performance Appraisal would be taken interchangeably.
One important concept that forms part of our discourse is “Service Delivery”.
Simply put, this is the main goal of organizations that are classified as public sector or governmental organizations.
The bulk of organizations here constitute the single instrument which the government of the day uses in rendering services to the citizens of the country.
This, much is provided in section 318, fifth schedule of the Nigerian Constitution, 1999.
Hence, we have the Health Sector, Education Sector, Agricultural Sector, Power Sector, Works and Housing etc.
4.1.1.
OBJECTIVES AND AIMS OF PERFORMANCE EVALUATION: It is important at this point to state that performance evaluation exercise is not necessarily done for promotion purposes alone.
There are many reasons why organizations carry out performance evaluation exercise.
However, the main purpose is to analyze what a person has done and is doing in his job in order to help him to do better by developing his strengths or by overcoming his weaknesses.
Other purposes of performance evaluation exercise include the following.
(a) It is used for checking on the success of recruitment, selection and placement.
Organizations are known to recruit when the need arises.
It is only when employee’s jobs are properly assessed that the need will be determined for the type of recruitment needed.
Such new staff are placed on specific schedules after orientation and except their performance are evaluated for the period they were placed on the schedule, such an organization would know whether or not it has recruited the right calibre of staff in the right place.
127 (b) Performance appraisal is also used to assess the current targets/objectives of the individual and the level of his achievements.
It enables organizations to know how well an officer has carried out the responsibilities assigned to him and thus provides the officer a feedback on his performance and enables him know, whether or not his past performance on the job needs improvement.
(c) Performance evaluation is used to identify training needs or in checking the success of previous training of employees.
When officers are placed on a job, their productivity after a while will determine their training needs,.
It guides management to know whether or not the amount spent on staff training was well spent.
(d) An organization should be able to set its goals in line with those of its workers so as to eliminate the possibility of role conflicts.
When this is done, it becomes possible for the organization to assess individual employee’s performance, to know if such an employees has worked towards the organizational goal or not.
Performance evaluation is therefore used to see that employees are motivated towards organizational goals.
(e) Performance evaluation deals with the problem of predicting the level and type of work that the employee will be capable of doing in the future.
It helps to review the distribution of such rewards as pay, power and status.
It is seen as providing data for judgment of future job assignment, compensation and selection for promotion.
A good performance appraisal exercise should be able to guide both the manager and the subordinate in their continuous relationship and thereby ensuring mutual attainment of corporate goals and objectives.
ACTIVITY 2 QUESTION: What are the aims and objectives of performance evaluation?
ANSWER: (i) To check the success of recruitment selection and placement (ii) To assess the current targets/objectives of the individual and the level of his achievement.
(iii) To identify training needs in checking the success of previous training of employees.
(iv) To set organizational goals in line with those of the workers 128 (v) To assist in reviewing the distribution of such as rewards as pay, power, status etc based on the performance of individual employees.
4.1.2.
REPORTING SYSTEM IN THE NIGERIAN PUBLIC SERVICE A major dilemma which personnel managers in the public service faced in the past was the method of filling vacant posts.
The question was whether such vacant posts should be filled by generosity or by merit.
Before the acceptance of the philosophy of a results-oriented Civil Service following the Udoji report, the scale had always tilted in favour of seniority.
Officers with the longest period of service within a particular grade where always considered first for promotion even if their performance reports were not very outstanding.
Merit was, therefore, largely relegated.
Following the Udoji report, the emphasis shifted from the seniority to merit as a factor of promotion.
Officers within a particular grade could then compete for vacant posts in the higher grade and their promotability or otherwise depended on their performance and not how long they had been on their grade.
The reporting system also became open.
This enabled both the reporting officer and subordinate officer to discuss and determine the latter’s performance in the preceding year.
This was an improvement on the old confidential reporting system which was criticized as: (i) not being objective; (ii) an instrument of suppression and even oppression; (iii) not guaranteeing fair treatment (iv) a travesty of the rule of law which guarantees fair hearing The 1988 Civil Service Reforms re-emphasized the philosophy of work performance and results-oriented management.
Accordingly, a new Annual Performance Evaluation Reporting (APPER) system was introduced.
A new A.P.E.R form where the ratings are in favour of performance and merit, was introduced.
GUIDELINES ON PERFORMANCE RATINGS: RATING A OUTSTANDING PERFORMANCE: 1.
Performance in relation to the duties, objective, responsibility and targets of the job that in most, if not all, instances substantially exceeded expectations and demonstrated an outstanding capacity to perform his job:- - completes assignments in a manner beyond expectations and often before agreed target dates; 129 - consistently makes recommendations of changes or adjusts methods or procedures that significantly contribute to the product of his own work or that of any of his associates or subordinates; - demonstrates an obvious capacity for leadership by means of personal initiative, relations with superiors, associates and subordinates and contributing materially to the completion of individual or group assignments that often exceed management expectations; - shows his superior knowledge, abilities and understanding of his and related jobs as well as a willingness and capacity to assume duties and responsibilities beyond those normally expected.
Recommendation Exceptionally well qualified, the officer already seems likely to stand out in the next higher post.
RATING B – SSUPERIOR PERFORMANCE 2.
Performance in relation to the duties, objectives, responsibilities and targets of the job that in some instances exceed expectations, which in every other respect demonstrates a superior capacity to perform his job; Indicators: - completes all assignments satisfactorily within agreed target dates; - demonstrates a thorough knowledge of the academic, technical or operational requirements of his job through his ability to complete assignments with a minimum of direction; - shows his satisfactory attitudes, general aptitudes and understanding of his job relationship through his ability to work effectively with fsuperiors and subordinates and to carry out his assignments and work under limited supervision.
Recommendation- Ready for promotion or transfer to a more demanding assignment that will enhance his career advancement.
RATING C – GOOD PERORMANCE Performance in relation to the duties, objectives responsibilities and targets of the job that meets its demands in a satisfactory manner: 130  Indicators - completes all assignments satisfactorily within agreed targets dates; - demonstrate a thorough knowledge of the academic, technical or operational requirements of his job through his ability to complete assignments with a minimum of direction; - shows his satisfactory attitudes, general aptitudes and understanding of his job relationship through his ability to work effectively with superiors and subordinates and to carry out his assignment and work under limited supervision.
Recommendation: - has promotion potentials, has completed the required number of years.
RATING D – SATISFACTORY PERFORMANCE: Performance in relation to the duties, objectives, responsibilities and targets of the job that does not entirely meet its demands, but is generally acceptable.
Indicators: - occasionally fails to meet assigned objectives or task within target dates or timings and to acceptable standards; - demonstrates a less than complete knowledge of the academic, technical or operational demands of the jobs though sometimes not being able to complete his assignment without the assistance of his superiors or requiring more than ordinary supervision.
Shows through his shortcomings and general performance that he is in need of further training and experience but has the capacity to improve to satisfactory performance given the opportunity.
Recommendation: - Not yet ripe for promotion (For non-fulfilment of conditions prescribed for promotion in line with the Guidelines and Civil Service Reforms).
131  Rating E – Fair Performance 5.
Performance in relation to the duties, objectives, responsibilities and targets of the job that measurably fails to meet the demands of the job in an acceptance manner; (E) Indicators: - consistently or often fails to carry out assignments within acceptable time limits and standards; - demonstrates an inadequate knowledge of the academic, technical or operational requirements of his job and unacceptable work attitudes by frequently requiring detailed and repetitive instruction and constant supervision.
- Shows by his neglect of his duties and his attitude towards superiors and associates or any subordinates that he is unlikely to become a useful and satisfactory member of a unit or group.
Recommendation: - No evidence of promotion potential at present.
Rating F- Poor Performance 6.
Performance in relation to the duties, objectives, responsibilities and targets of the job that does not meet the demands of the job in any manner.
(F) Indicators - always fails to carry out tasks within acceptable time limits and standards; - demonstrates a complete inadequate knowledge of the academic, technical or operational requirements of his job and unacceptable work attitudes even after being given detailed and repetitive instruction and constant supervision; - shows by his uncaring attitude towards his duties, superiors, associates or any subordinate that he is unlikely to become a useful and satisfactory member of a unit or group.
132  Recommendation - Unlikely to qualify as he/she seems to have reached the limit of his/her capacity.
WEIGHING PROCEDURE In accordance with paragraph 59 of the Guidelines, of the Civil Service Reforms.
“Annual Performance Evaluation Report” has been allocated 50% as part of the criteria to be used for promotion.
In order therefore to be able to quantify each performance, the following weight ratings should be copious.
Outstanding A - 6 Very Good B - 5 Good C - 4 Satisfactory D - 3 Fair E - 2 Poor F - 1 There are four broad headings under the new Guidelines under which officers are to be judged and reported upon.
These are: (i) Job Assessment/general Ability - 14 points (ii) Character Traits -5 points (iii) Work habits - 4 points (iv) Leadership Performance at work - 4 points 27points X 6 = 162 points In arriving at the above total work i.e.
162 points, each of the factors was multiplied by 6 which is the maximum score allocated for an “Outstanding performance”.
In the light of the above, each of the above factors will be as follows: Job Assessment: (i) 14 x 6 = 84 points 133 Character Traits (ii) 5 x 6 = 30 points Work Habit (iii) 4 x 6 = 24 points Leadership Performance (iv)4x6=24points Total = 162 points (i) If an officer scores 4As and 10Bs in Job Assessment/General Ability, his weighing will be (4 x 6 =24) + (10 x 5 = 50) 74 point 84 (ii) If he scores 5Bs on Character Trait his weighting will be( 5 x 5)25 points 30 (iii) If he scores 2As and 2Bs in Work Habits his rating will be (2 x 6) + 2 x5) + 12 + 10 = 22 24 (iv) If he scores 2As and 2Bs in Leadership Performance = 2 x 6 + 2 x 5 = 10 = 22 24 His total score will be:- (i) Job Assessment/General Ability - 74 (ii) Character Traits - 25 (iii) Work Habit - 22 (iv) Leadership Performance - 22 His total score for all factors will be = 143 points In order therefore to compute his total score in percentage in relation to the maximum possible points the weighting will be:- 143 x 100 = 43.8 162 2 50 4.1.3.
ERRORS IN PERFORMANCE EVALUATION 134 Certain errors are easily identifiable in performance evaluation.
These errors constitute the bulk of the problems witnessed in evaluating staff today.
These include: (i) Halo Effect: This is a situation where a superior officer uses one good aspect of a subordinate to conclude that the subordinate is good.
(ii) Pitch-Fork Error: This is a situation where a superior officer uses one bad aspect of a subordinate to conclude that the subordinate is bad.
(iii) Error of Central Tendency: This is a situation where a superior officer deliberately avoids high or low ratings apparently due to his inability to defend in writing such ratings as required by the policy.
(iv) Common Errors: Here, we have evaluators who are either too harsh or too lenient.
For this categoric group, those so rated will normally not have a fair deal.
(v) Aside from the foregoing, is the subjectivity element which sometimes reduces the entire exercise to a laughing stock.
4.3.
STRATEGIES FOR SYSTEMS IMPROVEMENT; A few of them will suffice (i) Management By Objective (MBO): This is otherwise referred to as people’s management.
It is an instrument that focuses essentially on setting targets.
But here, the targets are jointly set for the subordinate by the superior and his subordinate.
By so doing, the subordinate will see the job as “ours’ and not “theirs”.
His commitment and dedication to accomplishing the tasks, all other things being equal, are better imagined.
(ii) Total Quality Management: This is an instrument that encourages partnership among clients and customers.
Here, customers of whatever goods or services which are produced are seen as customers that must be satisfied for continued 135 patronage.
Hence all efforts are geared towards this customer satisfaction.
To ensure this, we must assume that the customer must be treated as a “king” exciters could sometimes be introduced.
So, Performance could be measured against the backdrop of staff/customer relationship.
(iii) Management by Wandering Around (MBWA): Here monitoring is used as an effective tool of ensuring employees performance in accordance with expectations and provided guidelines.
It is only through such wandering around that deviations can be detected and corrected for systems improvement.
5.0.
CONCLUSION: Attempt has been made so far to re-awaken our minds and enthusiasm to performance management and the all important evaluation of employee performance as one sure way of ensuring his positive contributions towards the survival and growth of the organization.
We therefore aver that where and when the strategies proposed in this unit are accepted and implemented, the individual and organization performances will improve there by ensuring the growth of the organization.
6.0.
SUMMARY Performance of individual employees in particular and the organization in general expose a vital aspect of administration which of course will assist in our quest for administration of urban centres.
In this unit, we explained the concepts of performance and performance gap.
We then identified twelve (12) common causes of poor performance.
These, we equally identified in our next section on performance analysis.
We identified and carried our analysis at two levels viz: organizational level where Kurt Lewins’s Force.
Field Analysis (FFA) was of assistance.
Finally, the unit addressed the issue of performance evaluation particularly in the public service.
In the process, we assessed the confidential reporting system practice prior to the Udoji Commission’s Report, then the Open Reporting System recommended by the Udoji Commission and The Target Setting recommended by the “Dotun Philips Report”.
Errors in performance evaluation were identified and explained.
This has led to proffering strategies for systems improvement.
136  7.0.
TUTOR-MARKED ASSISGNMENT (a) what do you understand by performance?
(b) what are the problems of performance evaluation in the Nigerian Public Service?
(c ) what strategies can you suggest for improving the system?
8.0.
FURTHER READINGS Humble, J., (1978) Management By Objectives in Action (New York: Mc Graw-Hill) Ikotun, A., (1992) “use of process Consulting as a Strategy of Improving Organization Performance: A Case or Nigerian Local Government” ASCON Journal of Management Vol.
1 & II Nos.
I & II, April/October.
Mcgregar D (1993) An Unesy Look at Performance Appraisal (New York: Mc Graw-Hill).
Maduabum, C.P., (2006) Reforming Government Bureaucracies in Nigeria: The Journey so far (Badagry: ASCON Press) Staley, J.G, and Dellof, I.A.
(1963) Improving Individual Productivity (New York: AMA, USA).
Whitemose, D.A., (1971) Measurement and Control of indirect Work (London: Heinemmann) 137  UNIT 16 EMERGENCY MANAGEMENT AND PUBLIC POLICY TABLE OF CONTENTS 1.0.
Introduction 2.0.
Objective 3.0.
Fundamental Issues in Disaster Management 4.0.
Definition and Nature of Public Policy 4.1.
Typology of Public Policies 4.2.
The Policy Cycle 5.0.
Role of Public Policies in Disaster Management 5.1.
Role of Policy: Key Success Factors 6.0.
Conclusion 7.0.
Summary 8.0.
Tutor-Marked Assignment 9.0.
Further Readings 1.0.
INTRODUCTION Appropriate public policies that address disaster risks and related issues will go a long way to enhance disaster management.
However, in examining the role of public policy in disaster management, we need to provide answers to some salient questions; - What are the fundamental issues involved in disaster management?
- How will public policy enhance disaster management?
- What should we do to ensure that public policy enhances disaster management?
138 - What are the roles of Public Officers in ensuring appropriate public policies for disaster management?
2.0.
OBJECTIVES At the end of this unit, you will be able to; (i) identify and explain the fundamental issues involved in disaster management.
(ii) Explain how public policy enhances disaster management (iii) Outline the roles of public officers in ensuring appropriate public policies for disaster management.
3.0.
FUNDAMENTAL ISSUES IN DISASTER MANAGFMENT The new disaster management paradigm- disaster risk reduction- aims at pre-empting a disaster and also putting in place, following a disaster, a rehabilitation process that rebuilds resilience to future disasters.
It focuses on three fundamental issues: (1) Disaster risks (2) Vulnerability (3) Resilience Disaster risk is the probability of harmful consequences or expected loss (of lives, properties, etc.)
resulting from an interaction between a hazard and vulnerable conditions.
Vulnerability is the existence of conditions of defenselessness and insecurity resulting from physical, social, economic and environmental factors which expose a group or community to the impact of hazards.it is defined in terms of exposure (where and how people live) and susceptibility (the condition of being easily affected by hazard).
Resilience is the ability to absorb and recover from disaster impacts, i.e.
the capacity to anticipate, cope with, resist and recover from disaster.
It depends on the availability and use of social, economic, political, physical and environmental assets to meet basic needs in times of adversity.
The variables that cause disasters are rooted in the social, economic, political and environmental conditions of people.
for example, high incidence of poverty and diseases, inaccessibility to education, clean water and sanitation, food and livelihood, insecurity, poor housing conditions, lack of property rights, political instability, financial insecurity, environmental stress, etc.
will increase vulnerability and 139 undermine a community’s resilience making it prone to disasters.
Consequently, effective disaster management will need to focus on policies and practices that promote social development, equity, economic growth, environmental quality, etc.
Such policies will minimize the impact of hazards, reduce vulnerability and enhance coping and adaptive capacity.
Thus appropriate public policies are critical in disaster management.
4.0.
DEFINITION AND NATURE OF PUBLIC POLICY Policy is a purposive course of action for dealing with a problem or matter of concern.
It is a guide to action aimed at actualization of predetermined goals and objectives.
In that connection, public policy is simply a purposive direction or course of action undertaken by government institutions and officials to address specific social/societal problems.
Problems are used here in a very broad sense to refer to any situation that is unsatisfactory.
In that regard, any situation that needs improvement, even though not completely bad, is a problem.
Public policy comprises of a number of elements –policy demands, policy decisions, policy statements, policy outputs and policy outcomes.
 Policy demands: These are claims of the people, representing their needs, desires, wishes, aspirations, intentions, difficulties and questions.
The people directly or indirectly present these demands to the political system (public officials).
 Policy decisions: Policy decisions are the authoritative steps taken by the government giving direction and contents to policy actions.
These provide bases for the determination of objectives and selection of suitable means for their accomplishment.
 Policy statements refer to the formal expression or articulation of public policy indicating the intention of government and what will be done to realize them.
Examples are legislative statutes, executive orders administrative rules and regulations etc.
 Policy outputs are the tangible manifestations of public policies.
They are the actual activities carried out by the government in pursuance of policy decisions and statements.
 Policy outcomes are the consequences for society that flow from action or inaction by government.
They could be manifest (intended) or latent (unintended) .
Studies have shown that most government policies have latent consequences that may cripple the original intentions of such policies.
140  4.1.
TYPOLOGY OF PUBLIC POLICIES Public policies can be classified according to various criteria.
On the basis of the overall goals that government wants to achieve, public policies can be classified into three broad categories: (1) Distributive policies – involve programmes and project used to provide social goods and services to a segment of the population or the entire society.
e.g.
free education scheme; flood, erosion and desert control; rural electrification and water schemes; primary health care and immunization programme, e.t.c.
(2) Re-distribution policies – involve transfer of resources or benefits from some people or communities to others.
e.g.
progressive tax systems, land use policy, etc.
(3) Regulatory policies – involve the setting of standards and rules to restrict or control the activities of some individuals or groups in the society in order to prevent undesired consequences of their action.
4.2.
THE POLICY CYCLE (1) Policy Agenda Building – involves bringing an issue to the attention of a large number of people who are already conscious of shared interest or who discover a shared interest.
(2) Policy Formulation – involves identification and assessment of alternative (often competing and conflicting) proposals, choices of action for dealing with given problems and formalizing the choice.
(3) Policy Adoption – involves action/decision by appropriate persons to approve, modify, or reject a preferred/recommended policy alternative.
Also, involves bargaining, horse trading, consensus building.
(4) Policy Implementation –putting the goals and objectives set forth in policy decisions into practice.
Three elements of implementation include organizational structure, rules and guidelines and resource allocation (5) Policy Evaluation – concerned with the estimation, assessment, or appraisal of policy including its content, implementation and effect/impact Policies that go through the rigours of the ‘Policy Cycle’ are more likely to be effective in addressing the problems they set out to solve.
The diagram representing the cycle is indicated hereunder 141  POLICY AGENDA SETTING POLICY POLICY EVALUATION FORMULATION POLICY POLICY ADOPTION IMPLEMENTATION N FIG 16.1: THE POLICY CYCLE 5.0.
ROLE OF PUBLIC POLICIES IN DISASTER MANAGEMNT  Disaster management involves cross-cutting issues: - Issues that promote social and economic development and well- being so as to ensure that risks from hazards are either eliminated or reduced to the minimum in all development processes- poverty alleviation, equality, access to social amenities and services, critical infrastructure, e.t.c.
- Issues that promote the protection and enhancement of the ecology and total human wealth in order to improve the environment’s carrying capacity and reduce vulnerability.
- Issues that make people responsible for their actions in order to control abuse and misuse of common critical assets which can undermine resilience.
Disaster management therefore involves actions from multiple parties (governments, private sector organizations, communities, etc) across all sectors (environment, transport, industry, finance, construction, agriculture, education and health, etc.)
Policies provide the platform for the integration and coordination of the multiplicity of actions by the multiple parties involved.
142  Policies provide overall direction and a vision of a better society that is less prone to disasters.
Policies direct attention and action to compelling priorities for better resource allocation.
Policies provide incentives and/or disincentives for appropriate and/or inappropriate behaviour.
Policies provide the basis for, and define the nature of partnerships among and between partners.
5.1.
ROLE OF POLICY: KEY SUCCESS FACTORS  Absolute Leadership commitment/support  Extensive Stakeholders involvement/consultation  Unconditional Political WILL  Continuous Capacity building  Faithful implementation  Networking 6.0.
CONCLUSION Disasters threaten livelihoods and human existence; they should be eliminated or reduced to the maximum.
Appropriate disaster management strategies are needed; those that minimize risks from hazards, reduce vulnerability and enhance resilience of communities.
Appropriate public policies that address relevant issues and integrate all actions will promote effective disaster management strategies and eliminate or reduce disaster threats to human existence.
7.0.
SUMMARY Disaster management can only be effectively undertaken by both government and individuals or, groups if a policy is enunciated for that purpose.
This is because policy provides the guide for a systematic approach to tackling problems.
With this in mind, this unit set out to identify those fundamental issues in disaster management and linked it up with the concept of policy.
The unit went further to outline the roles of public policies in disaster management and finally identified key success factors in disaster reduction and disaster management.
8.0.
TUTOR-MARKED ASSISGNMENT Identify the roles of Public policies in disaster management 143  9.0.
FUTHER READINGS Aisveni, C.I.
(2009) “Developing Human Capital for Disaster Management”, A paper presented at the NEMA/ASCON Sensitization Workshop on Disaster Risk Management.
Ivbijaro, F.A., (2009) “Disaster Risk Reduction Survey in Lagos and Bayelsa States”, A paper presented at the Sensitization Workshop on Mainstreaming Disaster Management into National Development.
Maduabum, Chuks (Ed) (2003) Contemporary Issues on Public Policy Analysis in Nigeria (Badagry: ASCON Press).
144  UNIT 14 URNANIZATION AND ITS PROBLEMS IN AFFRICA TABLE OF CONTENTS 1.0.
Introduction 2.0.
Objectives 3.0.
United Nations Perception of the Problems 3.1.
Urbanization and Poverty 3.2.
Two Sides of the Coin 3.3.
Slum Upgrading 3.4.
Community Participation 3.5.
Financial Dilemmas 3.6.
Local Governance 4.0.
Conclusion 5.0.
Summary 6.0.
Tutor-Marked Assignment 8.0.
Further Readings 1.0.
INTRODUCTION The central districts of many of Africa’s major cities boast numerous skyscrapers of cement, glass and steel.
But far into the distance spread Africa’s real urban conglomerations: unplanned, chaotic settlements built of wood, corrugated metal sheeting, mud bricks and whatever other materials may be at hand.
They have only dirt roads and open sewer ditches.
They lack piped water, refuse collection, electricity and most other basic municipal services.
145  These shantytowns are home to ten of millions- and they are growing rapidly.
“Sub-Saharan Africa is the only region in the world where urbanization is associated with negative economic growth, “says former South African President, Nelson Mandela.
“This adds to the enormity of the problems of urbanization in a region that is exactly most in need of growth and development to end and reverse its marginalization on the world stage” Many of the recent arrivals in the African’s slums migrate from the countryside.
Although the conditions are miserable and most urban Africans see little escape from poverty, more newcomers are constantly coming.
Africa’s cities are being “overwhelmed by the sheer rate of change, according to “Ms.
Anna kajumulo Tibaijuka, executive director of the Nairobi-based UN centre for Human Settlements (UNCHS, or Habitat).
She cities as an example Dar es Salaam, in her own country, Tanzania, which is expanding at a remarkable rate of 10 per cent a year.
At that pace, the city’s total population will double in seven years.
“ You can imagine what that will do for water services, electricity, telephones, traffic, schools.” Homelessness does not mean that there are no homes.
It exists because people don’t have employment to have access to homes.
2.0.
OBJECTIVES At the end of this Unit, you should be able to: (i) explain the United Nation’s perception of urbanization and its patterns (ii) explain the poverty part of the problem (iii) identify the existence of slums and efforts to curb them (iv) explain the financing dilemmas 3.0.
UNITED NATIONS PERCEPTION OF THE PROBLEMS The continent’s urban problems do not revolve only around insufficient resources and services.
They also include severe social dislocations, high levels of crime and insecurity, corrupt and inefficient local government institutions, striking inequalities in wealth and especially the pervasive poverty that blights most urban settlements.
A half decade ago, some of the unique urban problems of Africa were recognized at the Second UN Conference on Human Settlements (Habitat- 146 II), held in June 1996 in Istanbul, Turkey.
It adopted a global Habitat Agenda,” affirming that adequate shelter is a human right and acknowledging “the critical situation and needs of Africa and the least developed countries.
“ Participants cited Africa’s high rate of rural-to-urban migration, wars that have spurred massive population displacements and the severe decay of urban infrastructure.
In June 2001, the UN general Assembly held a special session in New York called “Istanbul +5.” It looked again at the particular challenges facing urban centres in Africa and other parts of the world and reviewed the various programmes that have been initiated so far.
There has been progress in implementing the Habitat Agenda in Africa, noted African ministers responsible for housing and urban settlements at a November 2000 meeting in Addis Ababa, Ethiopia.
But at the same time, the ministers recognized that ineffective management, poor infrastructure and rising crime and violence have had “negative impact ….
on the quality of life and working environment in many African cities and towns.” ACTIVITY 1 QUESTION State the genesis of Habitat Agenda ANSWER “Habitat Agenda” was adopted by the United Nations as a global policy which affirms that adequate shelter is a human right.
It was at the 2nd UN Conference on Human Settlements held in June 1996 in Istabul, Turkey.
3.1.
URBANIZATION AND POVERTY The African ministers also forecast that the continent will experience unprecedented urbanization over the next quarter century.
Since most African cities simply are unprepared to accommodate the additional population, this will lead to a further “mushrooming of squatter settlements of high densities and inadequate or no services.” Already, African’s urban population is growing at an average annual rate of 4 per cent, the highest of any world region.
For some individual cities, it is significantly higher.
Currently, Africa is still the most rural continent, with only about 38 per cent of its population living in cities and towns.
But within the next three decades, more than half of all Africans will be in urban centres.
147 Some of this urban growth is a result of natural population increase, but most come from rural poverty and wars continue to push many young villagers toward the cities in search of jobs and other economic and social opportunities.
But with the economic crises of the past two decades, few regular jobs are to be had.
According to some analysts, Africa’s urban problems have been worsened by the economic policies adopted by many governments during the 1980s and 1990s, largely at the urging of the World Bank and International Monetary Fund.
The initial privatization progarmmes often led to reduced formal sector employment, as did trade liberalization, which contributed to which the failure of many local businesses unable to compete with cheap imports.
Without steady jobs, many residents have been unable to afford adequate shelter.
“Homelessness does not mean that there are no homes,” notes Ms. Tibaijuka.
It exists because people “don’t have employment to have access to homes.” On top of this, the budgetary stringency that came with structural adjustment programmes further eroded the capacities of municipal authorities to maintain and finance essential services, such as roads, waste collection, electricity and water systems.
3.2.
TWO SIDES OF A COIN Agricultural policies also have had an impact, notes Proff.
Abdou Salam Fall, an urban sociologist at Chiekh Anta Diop University I Dakar, Senegal.
Since market liberalization and the reduction of government support services in the 1980s, there has been an “accelerated process of pauperization” among Senegalese farmers, especially in the groundnut sector.
This has pushed even more rural youths to seek income opportunities in the main cities or in Europe and the U.S. For such reasons, Mr. Mandela emphasized, “We have to overcome the mildset which counterposes rural and urban development.
Poverty knows no boundaries.
Rural and urban development are two sides of the same coin.” In Africa overall, poverty is still largely rural.
But with increased concentrations of people in the cities, poverty has been growing more markedly in the urban centres, even as rural conditions have improved slightly in some African countries.
The November 2000 meeting of African housing and urban ministers observed that there has been a trend toward both an “urbanization and feminization of poverty” in many African countries.
(Estimates of the number of households headed by women in African capital cities range between 10 and 25 per cent.)
148 Conditions in some of the largest cities have deteriorated to such an extent that the patterns of migration from the countryside are starting to shift.
Historically, most migrants have flocked to one or two main cities in a given country: Abidjan, Nairobi, Dar es Salaam, Dakar, Brazzaville, Luanda.
In 1999, according to estimates by the UN’s Population Division, more than half the total urban population lived in the single largest city in 16 African countries.
Over the past decade, however, as conditions in these big cities have worsened, the urbanization process has become less lopsided.
In Tanzania, for example, medium-sized towns of about 20-30,000 people have proliferated.
According to research by Prof. Fall, Dakar’s rate of growth has slowed noticeably, while four or five secondary towns now absorb a greater share of rural migrants, marking the beginning of a “diversification” of Senegal’s urban centres.
3.3.
SLUM UPGRADING Even before the 1996 Habitat conference, programme and projects were launched in a number of African countries to help residents of urban slums build better housing and to improve essential services.
In Ghana, for example, a series of urban upgrading projects have been under way since 1985, in one of the most extensive efforts anywhere in Africa.
By 2000, these had improved infrastructure and services for nearly half a million people in five cities, out of a total of 2 million urban residents classified as poor.
According to Mr. Chris Banes, a World Bank municipal engineer who has worked with the Ghana project, one key to its progress has been “political commitment” at the national level.
Other factors were decentralization of responsibility and authority to local governments, active involvement by community groups, and an emphasis on basic, achievable services, such as main access routes, drainage networks, water supply, sanitation and refuse collection.
The Istanbul conference led to a greater emphasis, across Africa and in other parts of the world, on building stronger partnerships among all those actively concerned with urban improvement: national governments, municipalities, external donor agencies, non-governmental organizations (NGOs), and local communities themselves, including private sector contractors and businesses.
To strengthen coordination among aid agencies, Habitat and the World Bank launched the Cities Alliance in 1999, which has been spearheading the Cities Without Slums initiative, for which Mr. Mandela is the “patron.” It 149 works with other UN agencies, regional development banks, bilateral donors, local associations of municipal authorities, NGOs and private companies to identify and prepare citywide and countrywide slum upgrading progarmmes.
Many of the initial ones have been in Asia, but programmes also are being prepared in some African countries, such as Mauritania and South Africa.
The grant facility’s total target for the first three-year period(1999-2001) is $40 mn.
3.4.
COMMUNITY PARTICIPATION While external financing can play an essential role, many urban development experts, drawing on experiences like those in Ghana, argue that active involvement by the local communities is equally, if not more, important.
Because urban poverty in Africa is extremely complex, sustainable solutions to the problems of the most destitute will require an “integrated approach, based on community participation”, argue.
Mohamed Soumare and Jerome Gerard, both of Environment and Development Action –Third World (ENDA), a regional NGO headquartered in Dakar.
In Malawi, Habitat of Humanity, another NGO, works with local and district governments, the national authorities, community groups and traditional chiefs to build low-cost houses and latrines.
Locally elected committees choose low-income applicants who are willing to provide voluntary labour and ready to repay input costs (payments which go into a revolving fund for further construction).
The project has involved more than 460 communities and has built nearly 4,000 houses and latrines.
In Luanda Sul, a poor shantytown area of the Angolan capital, an urban programme launched in 1995 has benefited some 2,700 families displaced by that country civil war.
It has built 2,210 houses and laid in drainage, piped water and electricity lines, with financing from taxes and tariffs, the sale of land concessions and investments by private businesses.
Community representatives participated in the design and planning of the programme, and local residents have first option to buy land.
One notable feature of the Luanda Sul programme was the creation of 4,000 local jobs through its construction projects, which was particularly welcome in an area of high unemployment.
Similarly, in nearly a dozen West African countries, most of them francophone, job creation through public works projects in poor urban neighbourhoods has been an explicit goal of the Agence de travaux d’interet public pour l’emploi (AGETIP) programme, supported by the World Bank.
Many of the construction projects undertaken through AGETIP were proposed by municipal authorities , but in Chad, Guinea-Bissau and Senegal a number also were proposed by community leaders or NGOs.
150  Implementation to women’s tenure rights (% of countries reporting) Owning land Inheriting land Taking and housing mortgages in their own name Africa 41 70 31 Arab States 29 29 21 Asia-Pacific 24 24 24 Industrialized 11 0 0 countries Latin America & 24 11 34 Caribbean World 24 26 24 Source: UNCHS (Habitat), The State of the World’s Cities, 2001.
Community involvement has not always ensured that the benefits of such projects reach everyone.
In Voi, Kenya, the government agreed that local residents could acquire access to land through traditional communal tenure arrangements, and NGOs provided technical and legal support for securing titles.
However, according to one of the NGOs, Kituo Cha Sheria (Legal Aid Centre), women were marginalized in the process, since customary practices kept men as the main decision makers.
One of the lessons that Habitat has drawn from such cases is that urban improvement projects should have a special focus on women.
FINANACING DILEMMAS One of the greatest dilemmas facing many African cities is how to finance the development and maintenance of essential services, such as waste removal and the provision of clean water.
Despite some financial support from national governments or donor agencies- usually only for the initial construction of facilities, not their on-going operations – municipal authorities must rely overwhelmingly on local taxes, fees and tariffs.
A Habitat study of municipal taxation in Kenya, Tanzanian and Uganda found that many big cities draw most of their revenue from property taxes.
These account for 60 per cent of total revenue in Nairobi and 56 per cent in Dar es Salaam.
In Uganda’s capital, Kampala,it is only 6 per cent, but reaches 43 per cent in Jinja, another Uganda city.
Through such taxes, the better-off sectors of society – those able to own taxable 151 property – help pay for services that benefit a broader layer of the population, including some of the poor.
But actually collecting all the taxes that could be paid, let alone expanding the tax base, is not easy .Property valuations often are incomplete and out of date, while it is very difficult to value property in unplanned residential areas, since legal ownership is poorly documented.
Many taxpayers also are reluctant to pay what they owe, especially where corruption is widespread and they do not see their taxes being put to good use.
Moreover, in Nairobi, Mombasa and Dar es Salam and Dar es Salaam, central government institutions are among the largest property owners, but do not pay anything into the municipal coffers.
Given such financing constraints, there is a growing trend among city authorities to privatize or contract out the provision of services.
In East Africa, the privatization of waste removal has been most prevalent.
Nairobi privatized garbage collection in the central business district in 1997, while some 100 small firms operate in other neighbourhoods, many of which never had much public refuse collection.
In Dar es Salaam, five private companies have been awarded contracts to collect solid waste in specific parts of the city.
Although efficiency generally has improved, there are shortcomings.
Private contractors usually operate mainly in middle – and higher- income areas, where residents can afford to pay, leaving manay of the poor without such services.
In a number of countries, including Cameroon, Cote’dIvoire, Guinea, the Republic of Congo and Senegal, public municipal bus companies are disappearing with the privatization of transport sectors.
Private taxis and bus companies often are more expensive, and only service the more lucrative routes, obliging many urban residents to bicycle or walk longer distances.
Ms. Tibaijuka sees a role for privatization of water services, but also raises concerns about equity and access.
“It is a myth that the poor at the moment are accessing water free”, she argues.
Because of a “total failure of public provision, the water is not reaching these people.” As a result, they must buy water from informal sector vendors, and often end up paying more than the rich do.
“The notion of privatization of water services is, in itself, not a bad thing.
“ But then, she adds,”How will people access the privatized water?” Policies are needed to ensure that the poor are not excluded simply because they cannot afford to pay.
“It is not a matter of either/or It is a 152 question of finding clear answers, without losing sight of the end objective, which is to improve people’s access to water.” In Uganda, for example, the government’s long-term goal is to ensure full “cost recovery” for municipal services.
But it also recognizes that public subsidies may be necessary to ensure that low-income groups have access to clean water services.
LOCAL GOVERNANCE Solution to many of the problems of African cities depend critically on the capacities, competence and legitimacy of municipal governments and institutions.
As Habitat points out, efforts to achieve secure tenure for poor residents and to include as many urban actors as possible in upgrading programmes require local government institutions that are efficient, open and transparent.
To focus more attention on such issues, it has launched a Global Campaign for Good Urban Governance.
Negotiations currently are under way on a proposed World charter of Local Self –Government, which would emphasize the need for national governments to decentralize more responsibilities and authority to the local level.
In most African countries, “ political and administrative power is highly centralized, “ observed Mr. K.Y.
Amoako, executive secretary of the UN Economic Commission for Africa, at the November meeting in Addis Ababa.
“Cities neither have the political nor financial clout, let alone the administrative and technical capacity, to make decisions critical to the way people live.” He added that while more African countries have moved toward decentralization over the past decade, this has “often not been accompanied by the necessary fiscal power to enable local governments and communities to raise revenues to finance investments and the operationals costs essential for the sound management of cities.” Similarly, with the dramatic shift in the 1990s toward multiparty democracy in much of Africa, more municipal governments now have elected city councils and mayors.
Democratization is important, emphasizes Prof. Catherine Coquery –Vidrovitch, a prominent French historian of Africa, otherwise urban governance would have little real meaning, except to manage the cities “more efficiently on behalf of the elites and transnational corporations.” Even where formal democratization has been introduced, corruption and other shortcomings in municipal administration have not 153 necessarily dissipated.
In Burkina Faso, for example, municipal councils have been elected since 1995, but there have been numerous cases of embezzlement, bribe-taking and other malpractices by elected councilors and appoint administrators alike.
Since late 1999, residents of Ouagadougou, Bobo-Dioulasso, Tenkodogo, Hounde, Koudougouher towns have been protesting that titles to urban land have been distributed unfairly to officials’ wives, relatives and friends or to wealthy individuals willing to pay hefty bribes.
Perhaps the greatest factor in pushing for improved urban governance is the increased assertiveness of civil society organizations.
In two neighbourhoods of Nairobi, for instance, residents went to court and won an order suspending payments of rates and service charges to the city council until roads, water and sanitation services improve.
Since the 1980sand 1990s, some of the biggest challenges to structural adjustment and other problems of the cities have come from urban youth, notes Mr. Kadimiel Wekwete, who has worked on urban proammes in Zimbabwe and is now a senior technical advisor at the UN Capital Development Fund.
As more and more Africans are concentrated in urban areas and view the cities as their primary home, the more likely they are to press vocally for improvements.
Increasingly, he says, “local governments are having to grapple with an urban population that is demanding things.” 4.0.
CONCLUSION Urbanization ordinarily is supposed to be developmental in nature and forms.
And in most cases it has been so.
For instance in Nigeria, creation of 36 states from 3 regions ab initio triggered off urbanization such that these automatically became 36 cities.
In most African cities could be noticed such modernization as skyscrapers, electricity, pipe-borne water etc.
Despite these, urbanization left many African cities in a very poor shape.
For instance, such urbanization unwittingly encouraged slums and more people living in abject poverty.
There are many cases of over population like in Lagos and a corresponding consequences of stretching to the limits the available resources meant for a fewer population etc.
154  5.0.
SUMMARY Urbanization, though development in nature and focus has its bad ideas and disadvantages.
Over population and its attendant pressure on limited resources as well as effect on the rural areas from where the migration emanated.
Against the foregoing backdrop, this unit dwelt on a survey of what the situation is in some cities across the African continent.
The United Nations perspective and concern led to the declaration of the Habitat Agenda at a Conference in Istanbul, Turkey in June, 1966.
The unit equally examined the degree of poverty to which inhabitants of these cities and indeed other rural areas due to urbanization of the cities.
A need for upgrading the slums was canvassed.
In addition, the unit looked at other issues such as Community participation, financing dilemmas, and local governance.
6.0.
TUTOR MARKED ASSIGNMENT Identify and explain at least five problems of urbanization in Africa.
7.0.
FUTHER READINGS Tibaijuka, A.K.
(2001) African Cities under Strain (Nairobi: Africa Recovery) Williams, A.H. (1970) Migration and Urbanization in Africa (Ilorin: Nigeria Agricultural Research Management in) and Training Institute) Seminar Series 155  UNIT 16 EMERGENCY MANAGEMENT AND PUBLIC POLICY TABLE OF CONTENTS 1.0.
Introduction 2.0.
Objective 3.0.
Fundamental Issues in Disaster Management 4.0.
Definition and Nature of Public Policy 4.1.
Typology of Public Policies 4.2.
The Policy Cycle 5.0.
Role of Public Policies in Disaster Management 5.1.
Role of Policy: Key Success Factors 6.0.
Conclusion 7.0.
Summary 8.0.
Tutor-Marked Assignment 9.0.
Further Readings 1.0.
INTRODUCTION Appropriate public policies that address disaster risks and related issues will go a long way to enhance disaster management.
However, in examining the role of public policy in disaster management, we need to provide answers to some salient questions; - What are the fundamental issues involved in disaster management?
- How will public policy enhance disaster management?
156 - What should we do to ensure that public policy enhances disaster management?
- What are the roles of Public Officers in ensuring appropriate public policies for disaster management?
2.0.
OBJECTIVES At the end of this unit, you will be able to; (iv) identify and explain the fundamental issues involved in disaster management.
(v) Explain how public policy enhances disaster management (vi) Outline the roles of public officers in ensuring appropriate public policies for disaster management.
3.0.
FUNDAMENTAL ISSUES IN DISASTER MANAGFMENT The new disaster management paradigm- disaster risk reduction- aims at pre-empting a disaster and also putting in place, following a disaster, a rehabilitation process that rebuilds resilience to future disasters.
It focuses on three fundamental issues: (4) Disaster risks (5) Vulnerability (6) Resilience Disaster risk is the probability of harmful consequences or expected loss (of lives, properties, etc.)
resulting from an interaction between a hazard and vulnerable conditions.
Vulnerability is the existence of conditions of defenselessness and insecurity resulting from physical, social, economic and environmental factors which expose a group or community to the impact of hazards.it is defined in terms of exposure (where and how people live) and susceptibility (the condition of being easily affected by hazard).
Resilience is the ability to absorb and recover from disaster impacts, i.e.
the capacity to anticipate, cope with, resist and recover from disaster.
It depends on the availability and use of social, economic, political, physical and environmental assets to meet basic needs in times of adversity.
The variables that cause disasters are rooted in the social, economic, political and environmental conditions of people.
for example, high incidence of poverty and diseases, inaccessibility to education, clean water and sanitation, food and livelihood, insecurity, poor housing 157 conditions, lack of property rights, political instability, financial insecurity, environmental stress, etc.
will increase vulnerability and undermine a community’s resilience making it prone to disasters.
Consequently, effective disaster management will need to focus on policies and practices that promote social development, equity, economic growth, environmental quality, etc.
Such policies will minimize the impact of hazards, reduce vulnerability and enhance coping and adaptive capacity.
Thus appropriate public policies are critical in disaster management.
4.0.
DEFINITION AND NATURE OF PUBLIC POLICY Policy is a purposive course of action for dealing with a problem or matter of concern.
It is a guide to action aimed at actualization of predetermined goals and objectives.
In that connection, public policy is simply a purposive direction or course of action undertaken by government institutions and officials to address specific social/societal problems.
Problems are used here in a very broad sense to refer to any situation that is unsatisfactory.
In that regard, any situation that needs improvement, even though not completely bad, is a problem.
Public policy comprises of a number of elements –policy demands, policy decisions, policy statements, policy outputs and policy outcomes.
 Policy demands: These are claims of the people, representing their needs, desires, wishes, aspirations, intentions, difficulties and questions.
The people directly or indirectly present these demands to the political system (public officials).
 Policy decisions: Policy decisions are the authoritative steps taken by the government giving direction and contents to policy actions.
These provide bases for the determination of objectives and selection of suitable means for their accomplishment.
 Policy statements refer to the formal expression or articulation of public policy indicating the intention of government and what will be done to realize them.
Examples are legislative statutes, executive orders administrative rules and regulations etc.
 Policy outputs are the tangible manifestations of public policies.
They are the actual activities carried out by the government in pursuance of policy decisions and statements.
 Policy outcomes are the consequences for society that flow from action or inaction by government.
They could be manifest (intended) or latent (unintended) .
Studies have shown that most government 158 policies have latent consequences that may cripple the original intentions of such policies.
4.1.
TYPOLOGY OF PUBLIC POLICIES Public policies can be classified according to various criteria.
On the basis of the overall goals that government wants to achieve, public policies can be classified into three broad categories: (1) Distributive policies – involve programmes and project used to provide social goods and services to a segment of the population or the entire society.
e.g.
free education scheme; flood, erosion and desert control; rural electrification and water schemes; primary health care and immunization programme, e.t.c.
(2) Re-distribution policies – involve transfer of resources or benefits from some people or communities to others.
e.g.
progressive tax systems, land use policy, etc.
(3) Regulatory policies – involve the setting of standards and rules to restrict or control the activities of some individuals or groups in the society in order to prevent undesired consequences of their action.
4.2.
THE POLICY CYCLE (6) Policy Agenda Building – involves bringing an issue to the attention of a large number of people who are already conscious of shared interest or who discover a shared interest.
(7) Policy Formulation – involves identification and assessment of alternative (often competing and conflicting) proposals, choices of action for dealing with given problems and formalizing the choice.
(8) Policy Adoption – involves action/decision by appropriate persons to approve, modify, or reject a preferred/recommended policy alternative.
Also, involves bargaining, horse trading, consensus building.
(9) Policy Implementation –putting the goals and objectives set forth in policy decisions into practice.
Three elements of implementation include organizational structure, rules and guidelines and resource allocation (10) Policy Evaluation – concerned with the estimation, assessment, or appraisal of policy including its content, implementation and effect/impact Policies that go through the rigours of the ‘Policy Cycle’ are more likely to be effective in addressing the problems they set out to solve.
159 The diagram representing the cycle is indicated hereunder POLICY AGENDA SETTING POLICY POLICY EVALUATION FORMULATION POLICY POLICY ADOPTION IMPLEMENTATION N FIG 16.1: THE POLICY CYCLE 5.0.
ROLE OF PUBLIC POLICIES IN DISASTER MANAGEMNT  Disaster management involves cross-cutting issues: - Issues that promote social and economic development and well- being so as to ensure that risks from hazards are either eliminated or reduced to the minimum in all development processes- poverty alleviation, equality, access to social amenities and services, critical infrastructure, e.t.c.
- Issues that promote the protection and enhancement of the ecology and total human wealth in order to improve the environment’s carrying capacity and reduce vulnerability.
- Issues that make people responsible for their actions in order to control abuse and misuse of common critical assets which can undermine resilience.
Disaster management therefore involves actions from multiple parties (governments, private sector organizations, communities, etc) across all sectors (environment, transport, industry, finance, construction, agriculture, education and health, etc.)
160 Policies provide the platform for the integration and coordination of the multiplicity of actions by the multiple parties involved.
Policies provide overall direction and a vision of a better society that is less prone to disasters.
Policies direct attention and action to compelling priorities for better resource allocation.
Policies provide incentives and/or disincentives for appropriate and/or inappropriate behaviour.
Policies provide the basis for, and define the nature of partnerships among and between partners.
5.1.
ROLE OF POLICY: KEY SUCCESS FACTORS  Absolute Leadership commitment/support  Extensive Stakeholders involvement/consultation  Unconditional Political WILL  Continuous Capacity building  Faithful implementation  Networking 6.0.
CONCLUSION Disasters threaten livelihoods and human existence; they should be eliminated or reduced to the maximum.
Appropriate disaster management strategies are needed; those that minimize risks from hazards, reduce vulnerability and enhance resilience of communities.
Appropriate public policies that address relevant issues and integrate all actions will promote effective disaster management strategies and eliminate or reduce disaster threats to human existence.
7.0.
SUMMARY Disaster management can only be effectively undertaken by both government and individuals or, groups if a policy is enunciated for that purpose.
This is because policy provides the guide for a systematic approach to tackling problems.
With this in mind, this unit set out to identify those fundamental issues in disaster management and linked it up with the concept of policy.
The unit went further to outline the roles of public policies in disaster management and finally identified key success factors in disaster reduction and disaster management.
10.0.
TUTOR-MARKED ASSISGNMENT Identify the roles of Public policies in disaster management 161 11.0.
FUTHER READINGS Aisveni, C.I.
(2009) “Developing Human Capital for Disaster Management”, A paper presented at the NEMA/ASCON Sensitization Workshop on Disaster Risk Management.
Ivbijaro, F.A., (2009) “Disaster Risk Reduction Survey in Lagos and Bayelsa States”, A paper presented at the Sensitization Workshop on Mainstreaming Disaster Management into National Development.
Maduabum, Chuks (Ed) (2003) Contemporary Issues on Public Policy Analysis in Nigeria (Badagry: ASCON Press).
162  UNIT 17 THE ROLE OFF PUBLIC AND OTHER STAKEHOLDERS IN DISASTER REDUCTION TABLE OF CONTENTS 1.0.
Introduction 2.0.
Objectives 3.0.
Public Awareness 3.1.
Poverty 3.2.
Illiteracy 3.3.
Low Salience 4.0.
Communication 4.1.
The Media 4.1.1.
The Print Media 4.1.2.
Electronic Media: The Television 4.1.3.
Electronic Media: The Radio 4.1.4.
House Journals and Instructions Materials 5.0.
Other Avenues 5.1.
Road Shows 5.2.
School Clubs 5.3.
Non- Governmental Organizations (NGOs) 5.4.
Social Clubs 5.5.
LEMC/SEMA 163 6.0.
The Way Forward 7.0.
Conclusion 8.0.
Summary 9.0.
Tutor-Marked Assignment 10.0.
Further Readings 1.0.
INTRODUCTION: Emergency Management, the discipline of dealing with and avoiding risks essentially involves mitigation, preparedness, response and recovery.
Disaster Risk Reduction, the mantra of the new approach in disaster management focuses on mitigation and preparedness aspects of disaster management.
Disaster Risk Reduction is the conceptual framework of elements considered with the possibilities to minimize vulnerabilities and disaster risks throughout a society, to avoid (prevention) or to limit (mitation and preparedness) the adverse impacts of hazards, within the broad context of sustainable development.
Migration efforts attempt to prevent hazards from developing into disasters altogether, or to reduce the effects of disasters when they occur.
They focus on long term measures for reducing or eliminating risks.
Preparedness is the phase in which emergency managers develop plans of action for when disaster strikes.
These are activities and measures taken in advance to ensure effective response to the impact of hazards, including the issuance of timely and effective early warnings and temporary evacuation of people and property from threatened locations.
The success of disaster risk reduction strategies is largely dependent on effective public awareness creation about risk and measures to minimize vulnerability to known hazards.
The law setting up the National Emergency Management Agency (NEMA) rightly provides at Section 6 (I)(e) that the Agency shall educate and inform the public on disaster prevention and control measures.
2.0.
OBJECTIVES At the end of this Unit, you should be able to: 164 (i) Explain the concepts of Emergency Management and Disaster Risk Reduction (ii) Identify the various stake-holders in emergency management (iii) Explain the Roles of each stakeholder in emergency management/disaster reduction (iv) Suggest the way forward 3.0.
PUBLIC AWARENESS Public awareness is the process of informing the general population, increasing levels of consciousness about risks and how people can act to reduce their exposure to hazards.
Potential victims of disasters are the most important target to communicate disaster reduction measures.
In order to know who these potential victims or at –risk people are, some sort of physical risk assessment or vulnerability capacity analysis is imperative.
Vulnerability Capacity Analysis helps to: - Identify key vulnerable groups - Identify factors that make them vulnerable - Assess their needs and capacities - Collate and integrate these data into a database.
- Ensure that projects, policies and programs address these needs, through target interventions or prevention and mitigation of potential adverse impacts.
For many reasons, awareness creation for the purpose of disaster management in Nigeria is not exactly as straight forward as in the developed societies.
Here the problem of poverty, illiteracy, under- development, low salience among public officials as well as among the general public itself, make awareness creation an uphill task.
3.1.
POVERTY About 70 per cent of Nigerians are among one million people on this planet who live on less than one dollar a day.
Poverty kills 30,000 children every day and most of them are in Africa.
Every 30 seconds, an African child dies of malaria – a poverty related problem.
Unfortunately, the poor constitute the most vulnerable group.
When talking about vulnerability to disaster, we should bear in mind that epidemics are also part of disaster.
The poor are not like those of you here who have some assurances as to how we can feed ourselves and other –members of our family.
Emergency management issues mean very little to those who do not know where and how they and other members of their families will get the next meal.
What does right to life 165 or the security of it mean to a man when indeed he feels he will be happier if that very life is taken away from him to end his sorrows?
It does not matter to him whether he lives or not.
Such fatalism begets low salience among the poor majority.
Experts who took part in a consultative meeting of stakeholders on pipeline vandalism, organized by NEMA in October 2008 to find a lasting solution to this deadly problem, identified poverty and discontentment as one of the reasons Nigerians take such awesome risk.
So, while Russia could run its pipelines, through many countries to deliver gas and other petroleum products all over Europe without constituting any major risk factor, Nigerian petroleum product pipelines remain potential disaster spots anywhere they exist within the country.
The poor have no access to any medi-care.
The illiterate attendant selling fake and substandard drugs in a medicine kiosk near his slum may be the only “medical expert” he knows.
He is the most vulnerable to epidemics.
His habits of answering the call of nature is the open, poor refuse disposal and general environmental degradation, lack of portable water are among the many factors that increase his vulnerability to diseases.
3.2.
ILLITERACY: The much talked about fall in that standard and quality of education is becoming increasingly evident in the society, especially among the youths.
With the exception of a small minority, mostly the children of the elites who attend special schools, secondary school and polytechnic graduates can hardly read and understand the contents of a newspaper, neither could they understand television and radio programmes in English.
Offices and streets are buzzing with the new “Lingua franca” broken or pidgin English.
This makes it more difficult to communicate messages to them because pidgin English is not a scripted language, it is fluid and ambiguous and has no etymology.
3.3.
LOW SALIENCE Emergency managers find it very difficult to convince public officials to give priority to disaster issues.
They find it difficult to justify the expenditure of scarce resources to prepare for events that may not happen.
Disaster preparedness efforts generally have low salience among public officials as well as among the general public itself and that is a major impediment to effective policy making and awareness creation alike.
All too often there is an assumption of safety and the comfort of the false logic that because it has not happened so far, it will not happen.
166  But disasters will happen.
It is therefore better to look at the period of relative safety as incubation period during which a number of events accumulate overtime and if not noticed and understood in the context of disaster risk reduction measure may escalate into major incidents.
A typical example of how low salience among public officials hamper disaster risk reduction played out recently with the outbreak of cerebrospinal meningitis and lassa fever in some parts of the country.
The country was not prepared to handle the emergency despite early warnings by the World Health Organization and NEMA.
Over 2000 people died and we appeared unperturbed by the huge loss of lives.
Perhaps this is a reflection of the value this society places on life.
Now compare this to the outbreak of the HI NI (swine) flu pandemic.
Once 5 students took ill with the virus in New York City, a state of public health emergency was declared.
The prompt response and elaborate preventive measures were typical of the developed society.
I think only one death was reported in the US, but it was such a huge issue.
But over 2000 died of meningitis and we took it as normal!
Un-masking the forces against disaster risk awareness creation will help the information expert to understand the challenges before him so that his strategies will address the realities on ground.
It is like conducting risk assessment as precursor to disaster risk reduction procedures.
ACTIVITY 1 QUESTION List the factors that militate against awareness creation for disaster management among public, officials.
ANSWER: The factors are: (i) Poverty; (ii) Illiteracy; (iii) Underdevelopment; (iv) Low Salience.
4.0.
COMMUNICATION The next step will be to explore and identify the media that can effectively disseminate disaster risk reduction information to create and sustain public awareness, despite the odds.
167 The National Emergency Management Agency has, no doubt, featured prominently in the news of late and one expects that disaster management information was spreading too.
The activities of journalist’s Against Disaster (JAD) are commendable.
But in spite of the huge efforts, Nigerians are still ignorant about the structure of emergency management .People affected by small incidents in remote areas still expect NEMA to be the first responders.
This is contrary to the provision of the NEMA Act.
Response to such incidents should come from Local Emergency Management Committee of the Local Government.
It is only when this crisis is beyond the capacity of the local authority that the State Emergency Management Agency is called upon.
It is the responsibility of the State Emergency Management Agency to call upon NEMA for assistance when overwhelmed by a disaster.
NEMA Act Section 9 (a) and (b) .
“The state commitment shall (a) notify the Agency of any natural or other disasters occurring in the state; (b) respond to any disaster within the state and may seek assistance from the Agency if it deems fit in each circumstance.
If the people at the local level do not know about this structure and how emergency management operates, they will not put pressure on their local government and state government to do what is necessary to set up their local machineries for disaster management.
Disaster reduction programmes cannot be effectively implemented without local participation.
The Director-General of NEMA, AVM MM Audu-Bida (rtd) raised a critical issue bordering on disaster mitigation on an NTA programme when he expressed dissatisfaction with what obtains at accident scenes on motoraways.
Most of the other accident scene are not helpful to the victims.
They in fact, compounded their problems, because they are ignorant of basic first aid and rescue procedures.
A Daily Trust editorial opinion touched on a similar issue recently when it commented on flood sensitization by NEMA.
The paper insisted that the programmes should target the vulnerable groups in the local communities.
I totally agree.
Emergency management, especially disaster risk reduction is an educational activity which means that involved persons must first be aware that procedures exist and then understand them.
4.1.
THE MEDIA Traditionally, the media is the best equipped to disseminate emergency management information.
But given the reality of the Nigeria situation can we rely solely on the media?
168  4.1.1.
THE PRINT MEDIA The reading culture of the Nigerian public is abysmally poor.
Less than one percent read regularly and that engenders low production and poor circulation of newspapers and magazines.It is not unusual for a newspaper to send less than 500 copies of its edition to a local government area with a population of over 200,000.
Many local government areas in remote parts don’t even get supplies; yet these remote areas are the real theatres of disasters.
Demographically, the one percent who have access to the newspapers and magazines are the elites and not the very vulnerable poor.
The print media, therefore may not be the ultimate channel for disaster risk reduction sensitization.
Its strength may be in the areas of sensitizing bureaucrats to their responsibilities.
But it has some inherent strength that is unique to it.
Printed information materials are instruments of permanent record.
Once in print, the information is there for posterity and likely to be read and digested by thousands of people as long as it has not been destroyed.
4.1.2.
THE TELEVISION This too has its problem.
The poor rural dweller cannot afford a television set.
He has no electricity – it is not his priority any way.
Even in the cities, where most households could afford television sets, lack of electricity reduces their chances of viewing the programs.
Those with alternative sources of energy have other distractions from viewing the relatively poor programmes on the local channels: the foreign cable television stations.
The chances of the target audience viewing a disaster risk reduction programme on the television at any given time due to the combined effects of all the factors mentioned earlier will be very low.
Television programmes are transient, if you don’t catch it while it is on, it is gone forever.
It is unlike the print media that is a permanent record and could be read anytime at the convenience of the reader.
However, I must add that bureaucrats need to watch to hear what “ the Oga” is saying or what the people are saying about them may be useful for Disaster Risk Reduction sensitization, specially targeted at public servants to facilitate the mainstreaming of DRR issues into government programmes.
169  4.1.3.
THE RADIO Radio sets are available and affordable to almost all strata of the society; from simple plastic types to the gold plated ones.
The FM stations have added new dimensions to radio broadcasting.
Both the rich and the poor tune in with ease on their transistor radio sets, car radio sets, on their Gsm sets, etc.
Most are powered by simple batteries, making them suitable for use in the rural communities as well as in the cities.
The radio is a reliable source of instant information and it gets to its target audience with or without electricity.
Hour after hour and day after day, radio stations churn out music, news, sports information etc.
With the radio no information is too trivial; birthday requests and wishes nor is any too big, like a disaster.
Local radio offers the community a platform to talk to itself.
Being a primary source of information to many, the local radio is especially suitable for disaster risk reduction information.
Even the illiterate can be communicated effectively using local language or pidgin.
4.1.4.
HOUSE JOURNALS AND INSTRUCTIONS MATERIALS The print media may not repeat a story.
It is considered stale once it has been published.
The radio and television too, may not continue to air the same story, once it has been broadcast, it becomes an old chestnut.
Only some new developments will bring back the story from the archive.
The media is not really interested in routine disaster management information like disaster risk reduction advisory let alone talk about repeating them to increase the possibility that the target audience will read, or view or listen to them.
The media is only naturally attracted to the disaster itself.
Disaster is the very essence of hard news.
It sells newspapers, attracts large audience for the radio and television.
But the routine disaster risk reduction information do not hold such attraction it has to be “sold” to the news media.
To fill this gap, there is need for volumes of house journals.
The popular “Handbook” of Emergency Management – Programs and Policies dealing with Major Hazards and Disasters” edited by Williams L. Waugh and Ronald John HY relied heavily on Federal Emergency Management Agency’s FEMA NEWSLETTER, “NATURAL Hazards Observer”, CQ Weekly Reports”, etc, all in-house publications of the US 170 Emergency Management Agency and other stakeholders in disaster management.
The national Emergency Management Agency too has in-house magazines – NEMA NEWSLETTERS and NEMA NEWSMAGAZINE.
There are also many information booklets, pamphlets and manuals.
Some of them are “ SOME FACTS ABOUT HIV AND AIDS’, “SOLID WASTE MANAGEMENT: A DISASTER RISK REDUCTION TRAINING MANUAL” COMMUNITY EMERGENCY PREPAREDNESS PLAN”, FROM EMERGENCY RESPONSE TO DISASTER RISK REDUCTION”, etc.
The in-house journals should compliment the mass media.
There is no limit to what you can achieve with an in-house journal if it is properly packaged and edited professionally and above all, effectively circulated to the target groups.
The practice of heaping journals and publications in the store to gather dust is not going to help in the dissemination of disaster risk reduction information.
Unlike the commercial media, the in-house journals do not discriminate against routine emergency management stories.
In fact the journals are all about disaster risk reduction measures and activities of disaster managers towards achieving the goal of emergency management.
5.0.
OTHER AVENUES It will be advisable that strategies for creating awareness on disaster risk reduction in Nigeria be different from those employed in the developed society.
The strategies must be appropriate to the realities of the society.
Factors of hunger, illiteracy, ignorance, diseases, corruption, the hallmarks of underdevelopment must be taken into consideration.
Messages posted on the internet will attract millions of browsers a day in the developed society.
Here, access to the internet is dismally low for obvious reasons of cost, poor infrastructure, poor literacy level and poverty amongst others.
Strategies that will be effective for a people who, willingly will assist and guide a lost or wounded whale back to its habitat in the deep sea wont work for a people who would rush the carcass of a dead whale that is washed ashore, not minding the health risk, because of hunger and poverty.
171  5.1.
ROAD SHOWS The Lagos State Emergency Management Agency (LASEMA) in collaboration with NEMA and the Civil Defence held a road show between Alausa and Ketu areas of Lagos recently to spread information about meningitis and lassa fever preventive measures.
The organizers made it very colourful with music and dancing in between the sensitization lectures.
The officials were surprised about the level of ignorance of these diseases that have already claimed over 2000 lives.
The road show gave them the opportunity to come in contact with the at-risk population.
They handed out leaflets to those who could read.
The exercise made sense.
5.2.
SCHOOL CLUBS In rural communities, schools are important for the spreading of knowledge through the young ones to their parents.
Simple to understand literatures could be used to teach them basic disaster reduction procedures which they will take home to their parents.
The active participation of the state and local government makes for speedy response to disasters, and since the local governments work directly with the local people they are in a better position to lead in disaster reduction measures.
They are better positioned to identify the risks the people face and take steps to reduce the risks.
Whatever disaster risk reduction programmes that are initiated by the National Emergency Management Agencies at the center can only succeed if that states and local governments take ownership of such programs in their areas of jurisdiction.
Perhaps the law requiring states to set up Emergency Management Agencies should be made strict and enforceable to compel the state chief executives to act.
Left to their discretion, we may have to wait a long time more.
Erroneously, people call on NEMA first when there is a minor incident in their domain.
They are ignorant about the shared responsibility in emergency management.
I think disaster risk reduction strategy should include educating the people at the community level about the responsibilities of all tiers of government – perhaps they will begin to mount pressure on their local authorities and states to set up emergency management structures.
172 5.3.
NGOs Non Governmental Organizations play prominent roles in disaster management.
In disaster response, The Red Cross Society is ever visible.
Doctors Without Borders too and there are many new NGOs.
The Red Cross Society relies on volunteers who are mobilized at short notice to assist in disaster management.
NEMA needs to take a cue from the Citizens Corps, an organization of volunteer service programs administered locally and coordinated nationally by the Department of homeland Security in the US.
The citizen Corps seek to mitigate disaster and prepare the population for emergency response through public education, training and outreach.
It organizes community emergency response teams focused on disaster response skills.
Like the Red Cross Society, they rely on donations with limited government funding only as reimbursement to prevent misappropriation.
5.4.
SOCIAL GROUPS A lot of social groups exist.
These are groups of people with common interests.
They meet periodically to discuss issues that affect them.
These groups are mostly found in the communities where the population is usually homogenous.
They could serve as conduits for disaster reduction information to their people.
In a similar manner, churches, mosques, market unions and traditional institutions could be targeted for information dissemination about issues that affect their safety and well being.
5.5.
LEMC/SEMA Disaster management cannot succeed without the participation of all tiers of government; Federal/State/Local governments.
In the United Kingdom, the Civil Contingencies Act 2004 legislated the responsibilities of all category one responders regarding an emergency response.
There are civil contingencies secretariat at regional and local authority level.
Most of disaster management training is conducted at the local level by the organization involved in any response.
In the United States, emergency management responsibility is fragmented vertically between federal, state and local government.
The NEMA Act provided for full participation by all tiers of government, too, but many states and local governments are yet to come onboard.
Everywhere local governments are first responders to disasters.
Only when such disaster is beyond their capacity that the state is called upon.
And it is only if the damage is very great and beyond the capacity of both local and state is there an expectation of federal assistance.
173  6.0.
THE WAY FORWARD The target groups for disaster risk reduction are the rural communities where vulnerability is highest.
This should be the frontline for emergency management.
NEMA should establish more zonal offices so that all communities are not more than three hours drive from the zonal headquarters.
The zonal operations will be more effective.
Greater emphasis should be placed on getting the local government councils to set up local emergency management committees.
Grassroots emergency volunteers working with the local emergency management committees could guarantee that disaster risk awareness is created and sustained in the local communities.
Given the level of under-development, emphasis should be placed on advocacy through social groups, associations and faith-based organizations.
The NEMA/NYSC emergency management vanguards should be fully developed so that members who at all times are present in all communities play greater roles in disaster risk reduction efforts of the Agency.
Simple training manuals incorporating easy-to-understand instructions on how to avoid known risks be made available to grassroots volunteers, emergency management vanguards and others involved in emergency management programmes.
Schools should be used to spread the knowledge of disaster management.
Leaflets on specific hazards prevalent in communities be written in simple language and circulated among students for their benefits and those of their parents.
Knowing the level of ignorance among the population, practical crowd- pulling events like road shows be staged regularly to communicate information on disaster risks.
Stronger advocacy is recommended to get the state governments to set up state emergency management agencies.
Some legal framework be explored to compel states and local governments to set up their structures for disaster management as provided by the NEMA Act.
In simple terms officials should be legally liable if they are not prepared to response to emergencies.
174  Volunteerism in emergency management should be encouraged and expanded to cover more areas.
Something like the Citizens Corps will provide more trained hands needed to penetrate the local communities.
The full potentials of local radio stations should be tapped, through jingles, dramas and discussion programmes in local languages.
If need be, emergency management issues could be effectively communicated to local communities.
And local radio programmes are affordable.
State television stations should also be involved in creating awareness, especially among the civil servants and public office holders to mainstream disaster management into government programmes.
As much as possible, emphasis should be placed on core disaster risk reduction communication.
The huge media attention presently enjoyed by the Agency should reflect this priority.
7.0.
CONCLUSION Disaster management in general and Disaster reduction in particular is the responsibility of all and sundry.
Although, the government has the overall responsibility, the public and other stakeholders should assist the government in this huge responsibility.
After all, it is the public and not necessarily the government that bears the greatest brunt of such disasters.
In discharging its statutory responsibility in the area of disaster management government established among others, the National Emergency Management Agency (NEMA).
As this often drives the implementation of policies in this direction so must the public and other stakeholders cooperate with it in realizing the goal of disaster reduction in Nigeria.
8.0.
SUMMARY The importance of emergency management in general and disaster risk reduction in particular, informed the discussions of this unit in our quest towards urban administration.
The involvement of the public and other stakeholders will definitely enhance achievement of goal in this direction.
The unit as a result, discussed public awareness and in the process identified factors that militate against it as poverty, illiteracy, under- development, low salience etc.
for disseminating information to the public, the unit equally identified and explained the roles of print and electronic media.
The unit, in addition, identified and explained other avenues such as road shows, school clubs, NGOs, Social groups and LEMC/SEMA.
It finally proposed the way forward.
175  9.0.
TUTOR –MARKED ASSIAGNMENT Identify the strategies through which the public and other stakeholders could be carried along in the quest for disaster reduction in Nigeria.
10.0.
FURTHER READINGS Aisweni, C.I.
(2009) “Developing Human capital for Disaster Management” A paper presented at the NEMA (ASCON Sensitization Workshop on Disaster Risk reduction.
Ivbijaro, F.A.
(2009) “Disaster Risk Reduction Survey in Lagos and Bayelsa States”, A Paper presented at the sensitization Workshop on Mainstreaming Disaster Management into National Development.
Osadebamwen, O., (2009) “Prevention and Mitigation of Road Disaster”, Paper presented at the Sensitization Workshop on Disaster Management for Public Officers.
176  UNIT 15 EMERGENCY MANAGEMENT INSTITUTION IN NIGERIA: NATIONAL EMERGENCY MANAGGFEMENT AGENCY (NEMA).
TABLE OF CONTENTS 1.0.
Introduction 2.0.
Objectives 3.0.
Historical Overview 3.1.
The Effect of Disasters 3.2.
Organizational Structure 3.3.
Functions of the Departments 4.0.
NEMA and Strategies against Fire Disaster Risks 5.0.
NEMA’s Performance: An Assessment 6.0.
Conclusion 7.0.
Summary 15.0.
Tutor-marked Assignment 9.0.
Further Readings 1.0.
INTRODUCTION: National Emergency Management Agency (NEMA) is one of the key agencies that Government has established in its determination to protect life and property irrespective of whether the threat to such life or property is man-made or natural.
We seem to live in a world where hardly a month passes without us receiving reports of disasters in the form of hurricanes or earthquakes; landslides or flashfloods; accidents and other unfortunate losses that affect our common humanity.
As a country, we have no option but to put in place the enabling infrastructure that will help our people respond swiftly and effectively to disaster whenever and wherever it may occur.
177  Disasters threaten national development, poverty reduction initiative and the attainment of the Millennium Development Goals of government.
While Nigeria has been spared the occurrence of major disasters, with devastating socio-economic consequences, as witnessed in other parts of the globe, we can not afford to be complacent.
We should continue to build on our capacity for effective and prompt response so as to reduce our vulnerability.
This capacity is crucial today more than ever before in the face of daunting challenges.
2.0.
OBJEFCTIVES At the end of this unit, you should be able to: (a) Trace the historical antecedents that led to the establishment of NEMA.
(b) Explain the organizational structure and functions of NEMA (c) Identify NEMA’s achievements and challenges so far.
3.0.
HISTORICAL OVERVIEW Disaster management in Nigeria started as far back as 1906, when the Fire Brigade (now Federal Fire Service) was established, with the mandate to, amongst others, “save lives and property and provide humanitarian services during emergencies.” The devastating drought of 1972/73, during which the country suffered huge losses in life and property however became the catalyst for the eventual establishment of the National Emergency Relief Agency (NERA) in 1990.
NERA was charged with the responsibility of collecting and distributing relief materials to disaster victims.
This precursor of the National emergency Management Agency had a narrow mandate and its function were equally limited in scope.
That was the landscape of disaster management until the Federal Government was spurred into further action later in the 1990s by the United Nations International Decade for Natural Disaster reduction (IDNDR), among other factors.
Subsequently, the Government set up an inter-ministerial body to address natural disaster reduction in Nigeria.
With the growing awareness of disaster management issues, the Federal Government, in 1993, expanded the scope of disaster management, via Decree 119, which raised the status of NERA to an independent body under the Presidency, with the responsibility for “formulating general policies and guidelines relating to management of disasters in Nigeria and in friendly countries.” 178  The pioneers of disaster management soon discovered the inadequacy of the functions and capacity of NERA to meet the difficult challenges posed by disasters.
The Ejigbo C 130 military plane crash, in which the nation lost almost a whole generation of young military officers and other crises, were a rude awakening to the fact that emergency service delivery was still in the deficit, NERA was essentially a relief dolling outfit; not equipped to manage risks and hazards in vulnerable communities to prevent catastrophic events and other disaster risk reduction activities.
National Emergency Management Agency, as it is today, is largely the product of a consensus among stakeholders.
Upon the review of the failures of emergency management, and the understanding that what was desperately needed was a body to coordinate disaster management in the country, NERA was assigned this role by the stakeholders.
This role, amongst others, was formally enacted into law when National Emergency Management Agency (NEMA) was established in March 1999 via Act 12 as amended by Act 50.
The Act conferred NEMA with the following functions and powers: (a) Formulate policy on all activities relating to disaster management in Nigeria and coordinate the plans and programmes for efficient and effective response to disasters at national level; (b) Co-oordinate and promote research activities relating to disaster management at the national level; (c) Monitor the state of preparedness of all organizations or agencies which may contribute to disaster management in Nigeria; (d) Collate data from relevant agencies so as to enhance forecasting, planning and field operation of disaster management.
(e) Educate and inform the public on disaster prevention and control measures; (f) Coordinate and facilitate the provision of necessary resources for search and rescue and other types of disaster curtailment activities in response to distress call; (g) co-ordinate the activities of all voluntary organizations engaged in emergency relief operations in any part of the Federation.
(h) Receive financial and technical aid from international orgnanizations and non government agencies for the purpose of disaster management in Nigeria; 179 (i) Collect emergency relief supply from local, foreign sources and from international and non governmental agencies; (j) Distribute emergency relief materials to victims of natural or other disasters and assist in the rehabilitation of the victims where necessary; (k) Liaise with State Emergency Management Committees established under section 8 of this Act to assess and monitor where necessary, the distribution of relief materials to disaster victims; (l) Process relief assistance to such countries as may be determined from time to time; (m) Liaise with the United Nations Disaster Reduction Organization or such other international bodies for reduction of natural and other disasters; (n) Prepare the annual budget for disaster management in Nigeria; and (o) Perform such other functions which in the opinion of the Agency are required for the purpose of achieving its objectives under this Act.
The Act also defined “natural or other disasters” to include any disaster arising from any crisis, epidemic, drought, flood, earthquake, storm, train, roads, aircraft, oil spillage or other accidents and mass deportation of Nigerians from any other country.” The definition is broad and comprehensive and apparently intended to cover all natural or human- induced disasters.
Such is the huge task before NEMA.
The present management of NEMA assumed duty in 2006 and immediately adopted proactive disaster management as its mantra.
Proactive disaster management is in sync with the Hyogo Framework for Action 2005-2015 adopted by the united nations World Conference on Disaster Reduction, with the theme “Building Resilience of Nations and Communities to Disasters.” The shift in emphasis from mere emergency relief and response to proactive disaster risk reduction (DRR) threw up many daunting challenges before NEMA; not least the complete absence of emergency management structures at the state and local government levels (with the exception of a few) as anticipated by the NEMA Act.
The 1999 Act, at section 8 (1) “… established for each state of the Federation, a State Emergency Management Committee (in this Act referred to as State Committee)” The functions of the State Committee are: 180 (a) Notify the Agency of any natural or other disasters occurring in the State.
(b) Respond to any disaster within the state and may seek assistance from the agency if it deems fit in each circumstance.
(c) Carry out disaster management activities in the state as may, from time to time, be recommended by the Agency; and (d) Be accountable to the Agency for all funds accruing to it for purposes of discharging its functions under this Act.
If this provision had been compiled with by the States, the task of providing efficient emergency management would have been much easier, but only 20 of the 36 states and Abuja have any disaster management structures in place, albeit mostly sketchy.
This frustrates the fragmentation of government responsibility for emergency management programs intended by the Act vertically between Federal and state governments with some autonomy at the state level.
The non participation by most states leaves a big void.
To fill this gap, therefore, NEMA has had to go beyond its mandate in many instances.
It was impossible to strictly concentrate on managing disasters at the national level as provided for in the Act.
The establishment by NEMA of six Zonal offices namely North East with office in Maiduguri, South West, with office in Lagos, North central with office in Jos, South South with office in Port Harcourt, North West with office in Kaduna and South East with office in Enugu, was meant to decentralize disaster management.
The zonal offices are expected to provide mechanism for sustainable interdependence and interrelation between the three tiers of government and among all stakeholders so as to build a culture of preparedness, prevention, response and community resilience to disasters in the country.
The full potentials of this strategic approach will not be realized without emergency management structures at the state level to serve as conduit to the local communities.
To overcome, or better still, lessen the impact of this problem, NEMA came up with community-based programmes like Grassroots Emergency Volunteers in partnership with local government councils and Emergency management vanguards in partnership with the National Youth Service Corps Directorate.
Brieffly, the Grassroots Emergency Volunteer Programmes enables NEMA in partnership with local government councils to train at least 200 volunteers resident in the communities in basic skills of disaster management, while the Emergency Management Vanguards programme aims at training selected youth corps members in disaster management 181 skills before they are posted to their host communities for the one year service.
Both programmes are strategic to building a pool of first responders to disasters, thus creating resilience at the community level.
NEMA’s emphasis on community based and people-centric programmes is borne out of the fact that communities that suffer the least damage and recover the fastest from disasters are those that can rely on their mutual support systems and their own resources.
One of such initiatives achieved a major breakthrough in the area of search and rescue and epidemic evacuation, with the signing of the instrument by stakeholders, at a ceremony presided over by the Vice President of the Federal Republic of Nigeria, Dr. Goodluck Jonathan (GCON), who was also the Chairman of the Governing Council of NEMA.
The Search and Rescue and Epidemic Evacuation Plan was conceived in 2006, a period that witnessed unprecedented scale of air disasters, thereby exposing the inadequacy of search and rescue operations in the country.
Search and rescue operations were bedeviled by inter-agency conflict and distrust, wasteful duplication of efforts and unwarranted competition.
NEMA took the initiative to work out strategies towards achieving a sound and efficient response plan which all stakeholders in disaster management will identify with.
It is imperative that as stakeholders in disaster management, we should have a system in place whereby we could all draw on our collective strengths to build a formidable group of highly mobile, motivated, dedicated and competently trained workforce of disaster managers.
In conjunction with stakeholders, NEMA came up with the Search and Rescue and Epidemic Evacuation Plan for Nigeria, a plan that spells out the specific functions and responsibilities of different agencies and organizations during search and rescue operations in nine different disaster scenarios; Aviation disasters within and outside the airports, maritime based disasters, road accidents, flood, fire, collapsed building, rail accident, oil pipeline explosion and epidemic evacuation plan.
The attainment of Full Operational Capability (FOC) by the Nigerian Mission Control Centre (NIMCC) is another remarkable achievement ffor search and rescue operations.
The achievement enables NEMA to communicate directly with the international community with the Cospas- Sarsat equipment, for cooperation in search and rescue procedures.
NIMCC is ready to integrate ECOWAS countries to NEMA’s MCC and plans are in top gear to install Rescue Coordination Centres (RCCs) equipment in all the countries in the sub region and link them via 182 Aeronautical Fixed Telecommunication Network (AFTN) to NEMA’s MCC.
After successful RCCs installation and test run, delegates will be invited from these countries for a workshop in NIMCC on the use of the equipment.
Eleven West African countries have been configured on NEMA’s Mission Control Center and communication link tests successfully carried out from the MCC to the AFTN Centers located at the various airports in those countries.
Search and Rescue operation is capital intensive.
In this regard, the willingness of the Federal Government to fund the procurement of some critically important plants and equipment and other facilities for search and rescue is therefore a welcome development.
NEMA has a deliberate policy of manpower development for Disaster Risk Reduction.
This is designed to identify the imperatives of DRR for sustainable development and good governance.
The policy is also to identify effective strategies for mainstreaming DRR into public programmes and safety measures during disasters in work places by equipping participants with basic skills to respond to disaster events and reduce vulnerability.
NEMA in its bid to build the capacity of its staff, stakeholders and communities has undertaken some major programmes.
These include collaborating with some six federal universities, Administrative Staff College of Nigeria, National Education Research Development Council, National Institute for Policy and Strategies Studies and AFCSC Jaji.
3.1.
THE EFFECT OF DISASTERS Disasters are serious disruptions of the functioning of a community or a society causing widespread human, material, economic or environmental losses which exceed the ability of the affected community, or society to cope using its own resources.
Over the last decade, disasters, natural or human induced, have claimed more than 600,000 lives and affected more than 2.4.billion people, worldwide, the majority of them in developing countries.
In Nigeria, as in most developing countries, disasters are threats to national development, poverty reduction initiatives and the attainment of the Millennium Development Goals.
The range of disasters include: frequent oilspills in the Niger Delta, pipeline vandalism in many parts of the country, rise in number and severity of 183 floods due to climate change, increasing threat of desertification, rampant cases of fire disasters across the country, ethno-religious conflicts, gully erosions with humanitarian consequences in many parts of the country, shrinking coast lines, outbreak of avian influenza H5N1 (bird flu), plane crashes, collapsed buildings, drought and increasing levels of industrial pollution and waste.
ACTIVITY 1 QUESTION Identify the consequence of disasters over the last decade in the world.
ANSWER Disaster, natural or human induced have, claimed more than 600,000 lives and affected more than 2.4. billion people worldwide, the majority of them in developing countries.
3.2.
THE STRUCTURE AND FUNCTIONS OF NEMA The National Emergency Management Agency (NEMA) is the Agency of the Federal Government “charged with responsibility for disaster management in Nigeria; and to make provision for other matters connected therewith” – National Emergency Agency (Establishment, ETC.)
Act 1999).
The Departments report to the Director-General who is the Chief Executive and Accounting Officer of the Agency.
NEMA is structured into departments, divisions, units and the zonal offices, as follows: (1) Department of Planning, Research and Forecasting: After the office of the Director-General, this is the nerve center of activities of the Agency.
Its responsibilities include, but not limited to developing policies on activities relating to disaster management; coordinating plans and programmes for efficient and effective response to disaster at national level and monitoring the state of preparedness of all organizations or agencies which may contribute to disaster management in Nigeria.
The department also coordinates the operations of the zonal offices established by NEMA to decentralize its operations for greater efficiency in disaster management.
Programmes on early warning, vulnerability capacity analysis, inter agency collaboration and coordination are within the purview of the department.
The Geographic information System (GIS) Lab and the Agency Library are units in the department.
184  (2) The Department of Relief and Rehabilitation occupies.
This department is essentially concerned with post-disaster management activities.
It is, therefore, the most visible department of the Agency from the perspective of disaster victims and those NGOs, CBOs and international organizations involved in post disaster relief and rehabilitation activities.
While the current trend in disaster management is in favour of proactive disaster risk reduction as prescribed by UN/ISDR, humanitarian relief support and rehabilitation are indispensable in major incidents, to restore normalcy.
The department is presently executing rehabilitation programmes for vulnerable communities in Agwagune, Cross River State and Wase in Plateau State respectively.
Relief and Rehabilitation Department is also handling the Disaster Risk Reduction Programme of the Agency towards implementing the Hyogo Framework For Action 2005 (HFA).
Disaster Risk Programme for Nigeria serves to inform and guide disaster risk reduction implementation in Nigeria.
3.
The Department of Search and Rescue: This department is the operational arm of the Agency.
When disaster strikes, it has the responsibility of “coordinating and facilitating search and rescue activities”.
It coordinates the Disaster Reaction Units (DRUs) of the Nigeria Armed Forces, the Agency’s Emergency Response Teams (ERTs) and those of other stakeholders, for efficient and effective response to disasters.
Search and Rescue deparment has the Nigeria Cospas-Sarsat Mission Control Center (NIMCC) which is an international programme that supports search and rescue, using satellite aided technology and ground segment facilities to detect and locate distress alert signals from aircraft, ships and land users.
The year in review saw the inauguration of the Search and Rescue and Epidermic Evacuation Plan for Nigeria (SAREEP).
It is expected that SAREEP would remove all obstacles to smooth search and rescue operations henceforth.
(4)The Department of Administration and Supplies: This is the hub around which all functions of the Agency turn.
The Stores/Suppliers/Warehouse Management Units are run by the department, amongst others.
The department also participates in search and rescue exercises as it is on standby at the warehouses to provide urgently required relief materials.
185  (5) Department of Training: This department is responsible for developing training programmes for staff, stakeholders, state emergency management agencies and the general public is crucially important to create manpower base for effective disaster management.
(6)Finance and Accounts Department: This department is responsible for the coordination of day-to-day finance and accounts activities of the Agency.
(7)In addition, Six zonal offices were established by the Agency in 2006, to improve interaction between NEMA and the other tiers of government, response organizations, NGOs, CBOs, FBOs, etc.
The zonal offices facilitate rapid response, quick intervention and smooth communication between NEMA and stakeholders in disaster management.
186  The Organogram of the Agency is indicated in figure 15.1 below.
Governing Council Director-General Special Assistant to the Director General Legal Audit Press Unit Unit Departmen t of Department of Finance Department of Department of Department Departm Administration & & Planning, Research Relief of Search ent of Training & Commu Train Admin Finance Planning & Relief nication ing & Moni Research torin g Search & Supplies Accounts Forecasting Rescue Evaluati Rehabilitation Operations on & Curricul um Develop GIS me-nt Pensions NIMCC North North North South South South Central East West South East West Zonal Zonal Zonal Zonal Zonal Zonal Office Office Office Office Office Office Fig.
154.1.0. :.
Or ganogram of NEMA 187  5.0.
NEMA AND STRATEGIES AGAINST FIRE DISASTER RISKS: National Emergency Management Agency (NEMA) advises the general public to take extra precautions when handling fire and combustible materials at our homes, markets, workplaces, et ecetera.
Fire kills and destroys properties; take the following steps to prevent it!
 Ensure candles are not placed on tables, carpets or any combustible materials.
 Ensure that candles or lanterns are put out before going to bed.
 Never smoke in bed; dispose cigarette stubs appropriately.
 Comply with no smoking rules/signs.
 Make an escape plan and practice regularly.
 Conduct evacuation/fire drills for large offices and factories.
 Call the local fire service in case of fire out breaks.
 Be conversant with the telephone numbers of the fire service/emergency services closest to you.
 During fire incident, move out and remain outside until the fire service arrives.
 Assist the fire fighters with necessary information.
 Purchase fire extinguishers and learn how to use them and service them regularly.
 Ensure that only professionals carry out your electrical installations.
 Do not cut corners by using undersized cables.
 Never pass extension cables under the carpet.
 Avoid the use of generators/stoves in market place; if you have to, they must be far away from combustible materials.
 Avoid bush burning.
 A little investment could save your life and properties.
 Insure your assets.
 Raise an alarm by breaking the glass of the nearest fire alarm point or shout Fire!
Fire!!
Fire!!!
Keep shouting until everybody is out.
 Switch off all electrical appliances after office hours or when not in use at home.
Do not hesitate to contact the fire service in your area, if you require further information.
If you identity or detect any sign of risk/hazard, contact National Emergency Management Agency (NEMA).
Head office; 8, Adetokunbo Ademola Crescent, Maitama, Abuja, Phone: 09 2905777, 09 4134341, 08032003555.
188  For similar purpose below are NEMA Zonal Offices.
(i) North West Zonal Office; No.
15, Wurmo Road, Unguwan Sarki, Kaduna, GSM: 08035925885 (ii) South East Zonal Office; NCFC Building, No.
5 Onisha Road, Enugu, GSM 08037020447; 07026106217 (iii) North Central Zonal Office; Direct Labour Compound, Vom Road, Jos.
GSM 08069107987.
(iv) South South Zonal Office; No.
51, Ikwere Road, Diobu, Port Harcourt, GSM 08068652639, 07026106215 (v) South West Zonal Office; 4th Floor Old National Asembly Building, Obalende, Lagos.
GSM 08039795231.
(vi) North East Zonal Office, Medical Store Premises, Off TBS, Baga Road, Maiduguri GSM 08030998210, 07028175614.
NEMA “Coordinates resources towards efficient and effective disaster prevention, preparedness, mitigation and response in Nigeria”.
6.0.
NEMA’S PERFORMANCE: AN ASSESSMENT The National Emergency Agency (NEMA) made modest achievements in 2009, in concrete terms, as programmes and policies aimed at reducing or eliminating risks and vulnerabilities in the society began to materialize.
However, it is often difficult to categorically say that the programmes are effective, in the absence of real disasters.
It is also appreciated that in severe disasters no amount of preparation is adequate.
Nevertheless, mitigation measures that either attempt to prevent hazards from developing into disasters or reduce the impacts of disasters when they occur are preferred options in modern disaster management to post disaster relief and rehabilitation which was the focus in the country until recently.
While the agency made some progress, it is still contending with the daunting problem of inertia by critical stakeholders whose participation in emergency management is anticipated by law and indispensable, practically.
State governments and Local government councils have vital roles to play.
The law requires the State governments to establish their autonomous state emergency management agencies (SEMAs) to take charge of disaster management in the states while NEMA operates at the national level and may only be called upon to participate in disaster management operations that are beyond the capacity of the SEMAs.
It is the norm all over the world that local emergency management structures play pivotal roles in disaster risk reduction by embracing structural and 189 non- structural mitigation measures while they are also expected, due to sheer logistics, to be first responders in disaster situations in their communities.
Response to emergencies, to be efficient, should begin within the first five minutes of the outbreak.
For most incidents 30 minutes is already too late to save lives and properties.
Emergency management also suffers low issue salience and resistance to regulatory and planning efforts among stakeholder agencies, departments and ministries having clearly defined roles in disaster management.
What NEMA has been able to achieve, therefore, is mostly through hard work and ingenuity of the management and staff of the Agency.
It is pertinent to say that as a coordinating Agency, NEMA should be able to depend heavily on collaboration and cooperation from stakeholder agencies, departments, ministries, non-governmental organizations, etc, to succeed in its assignment.
The outgrowths of the inertia by stakeholders are:- 1.
Failure of most state governments to establish their state emergency management agencies.
2.
With the exception of Lagos State which has a fully functional, well funded and equipped Lagos State Emergency Management Agency (LASEMA) the so called SEMAs are not worth the paper their laws are written on.
Let me note also, for the purpose of encouragement, that Kaduna, Anambra, Niger and Kano SEMAs are coming up and wish that they emulate Lagos State.
3.
Lackadaisical attitude of core stakeholder agencies to emergency management matters leading to low attendance, lateness, low level representation at seminars, workshops and a general lukewarm attitude to the Agency’s functions.
It is hard to understand this attitude to disaster management in an area that is constantly witnessing the ravages of natural and human-induced catastrophes.
With us, any disaster in any part of the globe is a wake up call to be prepared.
Nigeria is not immune to disaster; we have had some and are at risk all the time.
It is, calm as incubation period during which many hazards and risks accumulate and if not noticed and acted upon may escalate into major disasters.
It is the actions taken before the disaster (preparedness) that matter; once it has struck, it is too late.
How you cope with that disaster to curtail losses of lives and properties, mitigation pains and miseries of the victims are determined by what has been put in place in “ peace” time.
190 Some of the programs executed by the Agency, which have the potential of really transforming disaster management in Nigeria are; grassroots emergency volunteers, emergency management vanguards, executive emergency volunteers, courses disaster management in six universities across the six geopolitical zones, sensitization workshops for senior civil servants to mainstream disaster management into public policies, specialized training in high skill search and rescue and recovery, simulation exercises, etc.
Grassroots Emergency Volunteers: As stated earlier, response to disasters must be spontaneous.
Yet disasters can happen anywhere, any time and often without warning.
Therefore, NEMA conceived the grassroots emergency volunteer program through which at least 200 men and women from different communities and backgrounds are trained in basic disaster management techniques.
Once trained, these volunteers are expected to serve as first responders should disaster erupt in their communities.
With 774 local government areas the country could have as much as 154,800 volunteers when the programme is fully developed.
So far, 6480 have been trained.
It could have been faster if NEMA had its way.
Here too the States and the LGAs have shown very little interest, inspite of the potential gains of this programme.
Emergency Management Vanguards: This programme is targeted at members of the National Youth Service Corps.
They are selected upon volunteering at their orientation camps and trained in disaster management skills, including advocacy in disaster risk reduction, which knowledge is expected to impact positively on their host communities during their one year national service.
Their presence in all nooks and crannies of the society and their level of education and discipline stand them in good stead to be advocates of disaster management.
This programme has started in six states of the federation, but NEMA is gradually expanding its scope to cover the whole nation.
Executive Emergency Volunteers: These are volunteers drawn from the top echelon of the society.
Made up of top professionals, senior military officers, senior civil servants, senior police officers, etc, the executive emergency volunteers will provide leadership and direction in disaster situations, among others.
The scheme is being established all over the country.
Courses in disaster/emergency management: NEMA is collaborating with six universities in the six geopolitical zones to offer courses in disaster/emergency management up to graduate and post graduate levels.
The universities are University of Nigeria, Nsuka, Federal University of Technology, Minna, University of Ibadan, University of Maiduguri, Ahmadu Bello University, Zaria and University of Port Harcourt.
This programme 191 will, among others, ensure the availability of core professionals in disaster management who will eventually help to overcome the problem of ignorance and or lukewarm attitude to emergency management in the establishments they are eventually employed.
Funds have been released to the universities for the takeoff of the courses.
Specialized training in high skill search and rescue operation: The Agency engaged experts from Israel to train 65 Nigerians in high skill in search and rescue operation.
The participants were drawn from different stakeholder agencies with vital roles in search and rescue operation.
They were given drawn first class training in modern search and rescue techniques, placing them at par with the best in the world.
Sensitization workshops for senior civil servants: Seminars and workshops were conducted for senior civil servants on grade levels 12 and above in all the six geopolitical zones of the country.
Administrative staff College of Nigeria (ASCON) was engaged by the Agency for this program which served, among others, as a platform for advocacy, education and information dissemination on disaster management.
NEMA expects that the seminars would help break through the problem of inertia for emergency management issues in the public service and help mainstream disaster management perspectives into national development plans.
Simulation exercises: Preparedness for disasters is enriched when disaster scenarios are simulated to enable emergency rescue workers practice their drills.
Such exercises afford emergency rescuers the opportunity to correct lapses in their approach, deficiencies in equipments and other shortcomings.
The scenarios are disaster specific.
Two major ones were conducted in 2009; plane crash in and around the airport and epidemic evacuation.
Mindful of the importance of these rehearsals, the Agency has established a division solely responsible for designing and conducting simulation exercises.
It is worthy of note that the achievements as recorded in the 2009 Annual report were possible because of the tremendous support and encouragement from the President, Dr. Goodluck Ebele Jonathan (GCFR) who was the Chairman of the Governing Council of NEMA.
Indeed, all other council members, especially sub-committee chairmen have shown keen interest in the success of disaster management in Nigeria.
But the benefits of our success at the Federal level will not trickle down to the communities where the majority live without SEMAs and local emergency management committees participating and taking ownership of programmes and other emergency management initiatives in their domain.
192  6.0.
CONCLUSION The havoc reaked by disaster on individuals and groups both in Nigeria and elsewhere cannot be overemphasized.
The fact remains however that numerous lives are continuously lost in such tragic events.
Notable accident occurrences across the globe include the Tsunamic, earthquakes, floods, air and road accidents etc.
In response, the world body – United Nations demonstrated some concerns which stimulated among others in Nigeria, the establishment of the National Emergency Management Agency (NEMA).
The Nigeria’s government support for this Agency and its activities so far indicate a serious approach at tackling this monster in order not only to save lives but protect lives and property.
7.0.
SUMMARY The challenge posed by Disasters in Nigeria informed putting in place measures to forestall the ugly incidence.
One of those measures is the eventual establishment of the National Emergency Management Agency (NEMA) with an overall mandate of stemming the tide.
Against this backdrop, this unit set out to examine this agency which is believed to enhance through its activities the management of urban and rural areas.
In its introduction the unit identified NEMA as the centrality of government’s efforts in disaster management.
The Unit also traced the historical antecedents right from 1906 to 2006 that led to the establishment of NEMA.
The organogram and functions of NEMA were examined.
Similarly, the functions of each of the six departments of NEMA and those of the six zonal offices in Nigeria were outlined.
NEMA’s strategies for Managing Disasters were equally identified.
Finally, NEMA’s performance so far was assessed during which some challenges facing the agency were identified.
8.0.
TUTOR-MARKED ASSISGNMENT (a) Outline the achievements of NEMA (b) Outline the challenges of NEMA 9.0.
FURTHER READINGS NEMA: 2008 Annual Report (Abuja NEM: The Presidency) NEMA: 2009 Annual Report (Abuja: NEMA: The Presidency) NEMA (2008) Newsletter, Vol.1, No.
10, December NEMA (2009) Newsletter, Vol.1, No.
17, October.
193  UNIT 18 FIRE DISASTER: PREVENTION OF MITIGATION TABLE OF CONTENTS 1.0.
Introduction 2.0.
Objectives 3.0.
Fire Prevention 3.1.
Definition 3.2.
Fire fighting 3.2.1.
Method of Fire fighting 3.2.2.
Classes of Fire 3.2.3.
Method of Extinction 3.3.
Other Fire Preventive Measures 4.0.
Fire Safety in Public and Private Properties 4.1.
How to Respond to Emergencies 5.0.
Conclusion 6.0.
Summary 7.0.
Tutor-Marked Assignment 8.0.
Further Readings 1.0.
INRODUCTION Fire has been a very old friend of ours since ages past.
Even Biblical stories present it been used in different purposes, as some instances it was used for burning of sacrifices, in another, as a source of light t lead the people, while in some other instances as indication for the presence of God, and at some other instances for destruction.
We hear of how the primitive man used fire to prepare his food.
In our days we have increased the use and forms of fire to endless limits.
Bur how far have we been able to control fire after having used it for so long?
The Scientist who have 194 invented fire in many forms, have also invented ways of controlling them, but have we kept those instructions?
If we keep the instructions then fire is our friend, else it is readily our enemy living with us.
2.0.
OBJECTIVES At the end of this unit, you should be able to (i) Define fire (ii) Explain fire prevention and methods of fighting fire (iii) Outlined fire safety procedures in Public and Private Properties (iv) Explain how to respond to emergencies 3.0.
FIRE PREVENTION: Fire Prevention is the precautions taken to reduce or check any occurrence of unwanted fire in a particular place or environment.
It could be in buildings, vehicles, and bush or in any other thing that is of value to the owner(s).
All fire outbreak sustain a loss in one way or the other, so fire prevention is viewed as being more important and loss-free than then fire fighting.
On October 9th, 1871 the great Chicago fire killed very many people and rendered many other people homeless.
In the United States of America, during the reign of Calvin Coolidge, 15,000 lives were lost to fire and estimated 16400 homes were destroyed by fire.
Again in 2003 in the USA, also about 17600 lives and 25,600 buildings were lost to fire and 1520 person were injured.
In Akwa Ibom State property worth about =N=14,000,000.00 (fourteen million naira) was recorded lost to fire.
Loss caused to both states and the Federal Government of Nigeria through market fires within the last few years have been very alarming and calls for serious concern from all angles of life endeavours.
If America, with all her technological advancements can be confronted by fire despite their sophisticated machines, it means that fie fears nobody or government.
WHAT SHALL WE DO?
Let’s take to Fire Prevention, lest it takes us by surprise.
Let it be taught in schools, in communities, and in everywhere.
Let’s open offensive attack on fire and block all possible entrances against unwanted fires through intensified Fire Prevention Operations.
195 The most awesome fire used to be petrol fire because of its rate of spread, but now we owe Malaysia thanks for overcoming petrol fire with XPLO- PROJECT.
3.1.
DEFINITION OF FIRE: Fire is rapid chemical combination of two or more combustible substances resulting in the production of Heat and Light.
Before any fire can occur three elements must be present viz: HEAT, FUEL AND OXYGEN.
These three elements are normally linked by some chemical combinations, known as chain reaction before we can have fire.
This is known as Fire Tetrahedron.
Please see the following diagram HEAT FUEL HEAT FUEL HRL TRADE FIRE MARK OXYGEN OXYGEN Fig 18.1. : TRAINGLE OF COMBUSTION FIRE TETRAHYDRON 3.2.
FIRE FIGHTING: In fire fighting, we cut off the supply of one of the three elements to extinguish the fire.
But sometimes, depending on the class of fire and the type of extinguisher used, we do two things at the same time, that is, cut off the supply of one element and chemically interfere with the chain reactions.
3.2.1.
METHODS OF FIRE FIGHTING There are three methods that can be adopted in fighting fire.
They are: (1) STARVATION: the withdrawal of fuel.
(2) SMOTHERING – The withdrawal of the supply of oxygen from the fire.
196 (3) COOLING – The reducing of Heat from the temperature of the burning materials.
3.2.2.
CLASSES OF FIRE: There are four classes of fire.
These are classes A, B, C and D. CLASS A: These are fire involving free-burning materials such as wood, textiles, paper, etc.
ACTIVITY 1 QUESTION List the three methods that can be adopted in fighting fire ANSWER The methods are: (i) Starvation (ii) Smothering (iii) Cooling Method of extinguishing them is by cooling with water in various forms.
CLASS B: These are Fires involving flammable liquids e.g.
petrol, kerosene, diesel, paints, fats, etc.
3.2.3 METHOD OF EXTINCTION: By cutting off the supply of oxygen (Smothering) using C02, Dry Chemical Powder or Foam Extinguishers.
Dry Sand can be used on the spillage.
CLASS C: Fire involving Gases such as methane, butane, Acetylene etc.
METHOD OF EXTINCTION: Is by using Dry Chemical Powder, sand.
Turn off the valve.
CLASS D: These are Fires involving metals such as potassium, magnesium, sodium, etc.
METHOD OF EXTINCTION: By smothering with special Dry Powder, Dry Sand, powdered Graphite, Talc, Soda Ash, Limestone.
197  ELECTRICAL FIRES: In time past, people used to count electrical fir as being a separate class of fire by itself but now it is made known that electrical fire does not exist on its own, that fires starting from electricity burn on either materials of classes A, B, or D. The normal procedure in fighting electrical Fire is to switch off or disconnect the electricity and use an extinguishing method appropriate to what is burning.
For fires where there is suspicion of electrical equipment operating or remaining energized, special extinguishing agents may be required which are non conductors of electricity and those include halons, dry powders and carbon dioxide.
It should be remembered however, that dry power may cause corrosion if not removed completely from electrical components and carbon dioxide gas may affect sensitive electronic equipment due to rapid cooling and condensation.
WHAT TO DO IF YOU DISCOVER A FIRE: (1) Raise the alarm, warn everyone (2) Call the fire Service (3) Evacuate the building (4) Attack the fire with available extinguishers if it is save to do so.
3.3.
OTHER FIRE PREVENTION MEASURES ARE: (a) At the start of business everyday, ensure that: (i) Doors to escape routes are kept open and remain unobstructed (ii) Firm Doors are shut (iii) Fire Detectors and Alarm are tested (iv) Actuated fire extinguishers are replaced.
(b) At the close of business each day, ensure that: (i) All outside doors, windows and means of escape are in good state and are secured against intruders who may cause fire in order to defraud the company.
(ii) Heating apparatus and mains switches are, where appropriate, turned off and plugs removed from wall sockets.
(iii) Inspect the whole premises before leaving it.
198  4.0.
FIRE SAFETY IN PUBLIC AND PRIVATE PROPERTIES The general attitude that people have about public properties in terms of protecting them from fire accident is such that would make the word accident irrelevant, since the properties were not even enjoying any protection before the fire out-break.
Take for instance, public building built at the cost of many millions or billions of naira may lack the provision of even one fire extinguisher in cases where some extinguishers are provided, nobody is shown how to use the fire extinguisher to save the building in event of fire outbreak.
Public buildings with many costly machines and equipment may not enjoy enough sockets to plug the equipment unto, rather the officer who is detailed to handle the machine/equipment may buy extension real and or many adapters to overload the available electrical point which may cause short circuit and a consequent fire outbreak.
Public vehicles bought with many millions of naira lack portable fire extinguishers which may cost about two or three thousand naira, so that a single fire out-break in the vehicle may consume the whole vehicle entirely.
WHAT NEED BE DONE All public buildings should be protected from fire rage by taking the following action: (a) Install the proper types of fire extinguishers.
(b) Train people occupying such buildings on how to use the available fire extinguishers to fight fire if it occurs.
(c) Keep files and other free burning materials away from electrical socket.
(d) Switch of all electrical appliances and remove them from the socket before leaving the office.
(e) Public vehicle should be equipped with fire extinguishers and the drivers should be given some induction course on what to do in event of fire out-break in the car.
After all not all cases of car fires need the use of the extinguishers if discovered in time.
4.1.
HOW TO RESPOND TO AN EMERGENCY There are three development stages prior to an emergency: 199 1.
Warning Phase: This phase is the best of stages if detected either by smelling the early stage of combustion or recognized the feeling of furious heat.
2.
Impact Phase: This is when the smoke or other fumes have charged up the atmosphere or room environment to trigger the alarm bells.
3.
Evaluation Phase: The situation having gotten out of control, leads to the affected area being evaluated or abandoned.
This point could be avoided if there were no barriers to the points listed below: (i) Limitation of senses (ii) Not my business (iii) Not an emergency situation (iv) May be someone else have already raised the alarm If these points are carefully observed and avoided, the emergency situations would be responded to immediately.
Rather, be (i) Familiar with your work area (ii) Know exit routes and muster stations (iii) Follow safety orders (iv) Do not panic use the fire acronyms to find, inform, restrict and extinguish the fire.
F-] Find (using all senses) I –] Inform (notify, call, raise alarm bell) R -] Restrict (remove any part of the fire triangle) E - ] Extinguish evacuate or escape the place.
MEANS OF FIRE PREVENTION Understanding fire helps to prevent and control them.
Majority of fires can be prevented by knowing that preventing the outbreak of fire is a collative responsibility and starts from YOU.
Prevention as they say is better than cure, and so the knowledge of prevention should be build around the fire triangle.
Several steps will lead to fire prevention program: Work site analysis, maintenance, good house keeping, fire prevention and control seminars, safe work practices, being fire conscious, regular fire hazard inspection etc.
USING FIRES EXTINGUISHERS Fire extinguishers are identified by a pictorial attached to the extinguisher body showing the type of fire for which they should be 200 used.
We have different portable fire extinguishers: Water type, dry chemical powder type, carbon dioxide type, foam extinguisher etc.
To use the portable extinguisher, follow the steps called PASS.
P – Pull the pin A – Aim at the base of the fire S – Squeeze the trigger S- Sweep from side to side.
It is good to note here that it is always good to aim at the base of the fire.
This is important for two reasons.
First, a small fire extinguisher has limited material.
It will be wasted aiming above the flame.
Secondly, the fire extinguisher materials will form a barrier above the fire.
The flames can roll up under the barrier towards you.
FIRE PREPAREDNESS Being prepared to control a fire is different from prevention of a fire hazard.
These are a number of steps taken to be prepared for a fire emergency.
Consider starting these practices in your home or place of employment.
 All family members/employees should be trained in fire prevention and control measures  Fire service emergency lines should be accessible to all persons  Written directions to the house exit route should be known and used at ease.
 Smoke alarms and carbon monoxide detectors should be installed in houses and companies.
 Test the batteries and replace them as needed.
 Schedule regular fire training and fire drills with families and employees.
Being prepared for a fire is a good insurance that all persons involved will react in focused and safe manner.
5.0.
CONCLUSION: Prevention and mitigation of fire disaster is every body’s task.
This will really be achieved when we do not panic at fire situations but rather build up our confidence in our primary understanding of fire related situations.
201 It is however imperative to be prepared ahead of time because you won’t have time to shop or search for the supplies you will need when a disaster strikes.
Some disasters are caused by human actions, but regardless of the type of disaster, there are things you can do to prepare.
Contact your Fire Service Station, Local Red Cross Chapter, visit FEMA website to make sure you are aware of the potential for national disasters in your community.
But aware from these:  Install smoke detectors  Test your detector at least every month  Keep detector from dust  Fire extinguishers should be mounted in the kitchens, garages and workshops.
 Learn how to use fire extinguishers  Don’t store newspapers near fireplaces  Install thunder arrester in your houses.
 When lighting the gas, strike the match first before you turn the gas on.
 Install and maintain heating equipment correctly.
 Don’t leave space heaters operating when you are not in the room;  Keep space heater at least three feet away from combustible materials.
 Never leave home with the cloths dryer running.
 Never put in synthetic fabrics, rubber or foam in cloth dryer.
 It is better to use extension cord especially running it under rugs or twist around nail or hook.
 Disconnect electrical appliances from sockets after use.
This way, fire will always be prevented from our environment and our lives and properties will be saved and secured.
6.0.
SUMMARY The havoc recked by fire both to individuals and groups within the society informed our choice of the topic for discussion.
And of course we do know that the bulk of fire ravages takes place in the urban centres.
Its knowledge is therefore appropriate as part of administration of urban centres.
The unit explained the concept of fire and how it could be prevented.
The unit equally explained measures to be adopted when and where fire occurs and above all, measures to be adopted in responding to emergency situations.
202  7.0.
TUTOR-MARKED ASSIGNMENT Identify and explain measures to be adopted in managing fire and its attendant consequences.
8.0.
FURTHER READINGS Bassey, N.I.
(2009) “Prevention and Mitigation of Fire Disasters” Paper Presented at a Workshop organized by NEMA in collaboration with ASCON, 10-13 August, 2009.
Ojo, E.O.
(2009) “Disaster Risk Reduction in National Development: An Update,” Paper delivered at a Sensitization Collaborative Workshop On Mainstreaming Disaster Risk Reduction into Public Development Policies, Kaduna State, 10-13 August, 2009.
203
