 NATIONAL OPEN UNIVERSITY OF NIGERIA SCHOOL OF MANAGEMENT SCIENCE COURSE TITLE: INTRODUCTION TO ADMINISTRATIVE PRACTICES AND PROCEDURES COURSE CODE: PAD 408 i  PAD 408 INTRODUCTION TO ADMINISTRATIVE PRACTICES AND PROCEDURES COURSE GUIDE PAD 408 INTRODUCTION TO ADMINISTRATIVE PRACTICES AND PROCEDURES Course Developer/Writer: IBEME, NWAMAKA P. School of Management Sciences National Open University of Nigeria Victoria Island, Lagos Course Co-ordinator : OSABIYA BABATUNDE School of Management Sciences National Open University of Nigeria Victoria Island, Lagos Programme Leader: Dr. Idrusi School of Management Sciences National Open University of Nigeria Victoria Island, Lagos ii  NATIONAL OPEN UNIVERSITY OF NIGERIA National Open University of Nigeria Headquarters 14/16 Ahmadu Bello Way Victoria Island Lagos Abuja Office No.
5 Dar es Salaam Street Off Aminu Kano Crescent Wuse II, Abuja Nigeria e-mail: centralinfo@nou.edu.ng URL: www.nou.edu.ng Published By: National Open University of Nigeria First Printed 2014 ISBN: All Rights Reserved iii  CONTENTS 1.0 Introduction 2.0 What you will learn in this Course 3.0 Course Aims 4.0 Course Objectives 5.0 Working through this Course 6.0 Course Materials 7.0 Study units 8.0 Book and Reference Materials 9.0 Assignment File 10.0 Course Assessment 11.0 Tutor-Marked Assignment (TMA) 12.0 Facilitation/Tutors and Tutorials 13.0 Summary iv PAD 412 INTRODUCTION TO ADMINISTRATIVE PRACTICES AND PROCESSES 1.0 INTRODUCTION PAD 412: Introduction to Administrative Practices and Processes is one- semester course for students offering B.Sc Degree in Public Administration.
It is a 3 credit course and also a core course for B.Sc in Public Administration.
The course consists of 8 modules and 25 units.
The modules are: MODULE ONE COMMUNICATION SKILLS MODULE TWO DRAFTING, MINUTING, MEMO WRITING AND OFFICIAL LETTER WRITING MODULE THREE REPORT WRITING MODULE FOUR SPEECH WRITING MODULE FIVE CONDUCT OF MEETINGS MODULE SIX PREPARATION FOR AND ORGANISATION OF CONFERENCES AND SEMINARS MODULE SEVEN CONDUCT OF GOVERNMENT BUSINESS MODULE EIGHT RECORD MANAGEMENT 1 PAD 412 INTRODUCTION TO ADMINISTRATIVE PRACTICES AND PROCESSES Introduction to Administrative Practices and Processes combines theory and practice, although, it slants more towards practice.
It exposes students to how government conducts its business particularly in Nigeria.
It also addresses how the operators within and outside government should carry out administrative procedures in the discharge of their duties.
In the course therefore, you will discover the adoption of both theory and practice.
This course Guide tells you briefly what the course is about, what course materials you will be using and how you can work your way through these materials.
It also highlighted issues of timing for going through these units, and explains the Activities and Tutor-Marked Assignments.
2.0 WHAT YOU WILL LEARN IN THIS COURSE The overall aim of this course on the Introduction to Administrative Practices and Processes is to expose the students to the nitty gritty perspective on Administrative procedures and stimulate your interest in government operations.
It is also to make you appreciate all that culminate in administrative practices and inputs towards the delivery of goods and services to the citizens.
You will therefore learn the ideas behind the act or minuting, drafting of speeches, writing reports and speeches, recording minutes of council meetings, developing minutes.
You will also be exposed to the communication skills, how to prepare for organizational conferences and seminars.
In addition to these, you will also learn how to conduct government businesses as well as professional ways of record management.
3.0 COURSE AIMS.
The aim of this course as pointed out earlier is to expose the students of Public Administration to the administrative practices and processes of government operations.
It is to make you appreciate the way government operates its business and what they are capable of doing.
2 PAD 412 INTRODUCTION TO ADMINISTRATIVE PRACTICES AND PROCESSES This will be achieved by aiming to: ‐ Introduce you to the basic principles of minutes taking in government business ‐ Introduce you to the act of drafting speeches, writing reports, recoding minutes of council meetings and developing same, ‐ Give an insight into the nitty gritty of communication skills.
‐ Assess the patterns of behavior of operators of government ‐ Introduce you to the conduct of government businesses and record management, ‐ Appraise the changes that had taken place over time in the operative mechanism of government.
4.0 COURSE OBJECTIVES To achieve the aims set out above, the course sets overall objectives.
In addition, each units also has specific objectives.
The unit objectives are always included at the beginning of a unit.
You are advised to refer to them as you study each unit both at the beginning and at the end to ensure that you check your progress and that you have done what is required of you by the unit.
Below are wider objectives of the course as a whole.
By meeting these objectives, you should achieve the aims of the course as a whole.
On successful completion of the course, you should be able to: 1.
Identify and explain the basic principles of minutes taking, speech drafting, report writing, recoding and developing minutes of council meetings associated with the conduct of government business.
2.
Situate the administration of government business within its contextual limits.
3.
Appreciate the philosophy of day to day administration in government businesses and how it is conducted.
3 PAD 412 INTRODUCTION TO ADMINISTRATIVE PRACTICES AND PROCESSES 4.
Identify and discuss written communication in various forms, as a veritable tool with which policies are formulated, decisions are made and approvals are given by government operators.
5.0 WORKING THROUGH THIS COURSE To complete this course, you are required to read the study units and recommended text books and explore more current materials on the internet.
You may also need to visit the organs of governments around you to observe practically some of the things conveyed in this course, for example, communication, minuting, reports and speech writing in government organisations.
You could also have a chat with government staff on a wide array of issues including the problems they face.
Note also that government is a living subject and there are developments daily about its organs especially in your country.
So, you are advised to keep abreast of these in the newspapers and magazines and even the radio and the television sets.
In this course, each unit consists of exercises or activities to test your understanding from time to time.
At a point in your course, you are required to submit assignments for assessment purposes.
At the end of the course is a final examination.
Below, you will find listed all the components of the course, what you have to do and how you should allocate time to each unit in order to complete the course successfully on time.
6.0 COURSE MATERIALS Major components of the course are: 1.
Course Guide 2.
Study Units 3.
Further Readings 4.
Activities and Tutor Marked assignment Everything is contained in each unit except the test books which you may have to acquire.
You are advised to source current materials on the net and 4 PAD 412 INTRODUCTION TO ADMINISTRATIVE PRACTICES AND PROCESSES avail yourself of newspapers, magazines and other publications on government.
You may contact your tutor where you run into problems about recommended text books.
7.0 STUDY UNITS The units in this study are classified into modules as follows: MODULE ONE COMMUINICATION SKILLS Unit 1 Definition and meaning of Communication Unit 2 Communication in Organisation Unit 3 Common Mistakes in spoken English Unit 4 Effective Communication MODULE TWO DRAFTING, MINUTING, MEMO WRITING AND OFFICIAL LETTER WRITING Unit 1 Drafting Unit 2 Minuting Unit 3 Official Letter Writing Unit 4 Memo writing MODULE THREE REPORT WRITING Unit 1 Preparation for Meetings Unit 2 Minutes of Meetings Unit 3 Report Writing MODULE FOUR SPEECH WRITING Unit 1 How to Prepare a Speech Unit 2 Procedure for Writing a Speech 5 PAD 412 INTRODUCTION TO ADMINISTRATIVE PRACTICES AND PROCESSES MODULE FIVE CONDUCT OF MEETINGS Unit 1 Definition/Types of Meetings Unit 2 Pre-Meeting Activities Unit 3 Meeting Activities Unit 4 Post-Meeting Activities Unit 5 Recording and developing Minutes of meetings MODULE SIX PREPARATION FOR AND ORGANISATION OF CONFERENCES AND SEMINARS Unit 1 Organisation of Conferences Unit 2 Organisation of Seminars MODULE SEVEN CONDUCT OF GOVERNMENT BUSINESS Unit 1 Policy making and Policy Implementation Unit 2 Values and Ethics in Government Business Unit 3 The Nigerian Civil Service MODULE EIGHT RECORD MANAGEMENT Unit 1 Records Management In Organizations Unit 2 Handling of Files Each module is representing a homogenous body of issues on the Administrative Practices and Processes.
You must read each unit carefully.
The basic knowledge on the topic is conveyed here.
Supplementary reading is advised.
As you work through each unit, the core of the unit is at the (3.0) level which is classified as the main content.
The conclusion (4.0) helps to round up what has been said so far while “summary” (5.0) gives a brief summary of the major issues discussed.
This is meant to assist you to remember the key issues and simplify the discussions at the end.
6 PAD 412 INTRODUCTION TO ADMINISTRATIVE PRACTICES AND PROCESSES Sometime, at the end of some issues discussed at the 3.0 level in the unit, you will come across “Activity”.
These are meant to provide simple questions to enable you comprehend or remind yourself of the things discussed before the Activity.
Answers are directly provided in most cases.
Do not consult the answers until you have attempted the questions.
You may sometimes observe that the answers provided give you more insight than may have been originally conveyed, (especially with the tutor-marked question.
This is part of the characteristics of an essay question).
8.0 BOOKS You are not restricted to read only Introduction to Administration Practices and Procedures for this course.
There is no compulsory textbook for this course either.
However, as you go through the course, you will observe that some textbooks are recommended often.
This shows that such books are crucial to a number of units.
Please try and consult these.
Moreover, each unit has its own assigned texts and documents.
You should also lay hands on these for added knowledge.
9.0 ASSIGNMENT FILE The major assignment required of you is a Tutor-Marked Assignment (TMA) which you are expected to complete at the end of each unit and mail to your tutor.
10.0 COURSE ASSESSMENT Your assessment for this course is made up of two components: ‐ Tutor-Marked Assignment - 30% ‐ Final Examination - 70% 11.0 TUTOR-MARKED ASSIGNMENT (TMA) Each unit in this course has a TMA attached to it.
You can only do this assignment after covering the materials in each unit.
Normally, the TMAs are kept in a separate file.
Your tutor will mark and comment on it.
Pay 7 PAD 412 INTRODUCTION TO ADMINISTRATIVE PRACTICES AND PROCESSES attention to such feedback from your tutor and use it to improve your other assignments.
You can write the assignment by using materials from your study units, textbooks or other sources.
It is however preferable that, as a graduate student, you should demonstrate evidence of wide reading especially from texts and other sources.
This will show that you have researched more widely.
But do remember that copying from any source without acknowledgement is plagiarism and is not acceptable.
You make references properly when you refer to other people’s work.
The assignments are, in most cases, essay questions.
Examples from your own experience or environment are useful when you answer such questions.
This gives you the opportunity to theorize on real life situations.
12.0 TUTOR AND TUTORIALS There are 20 hours of tutorials in this course.
The dates, times and location of the tutorials will be provided.
As soon as you are allocated a tutorial group, the names and phone numbers of your tutor will be provided.
It is your tutor’s responsibility to supervise you closely in order to ensure your steady progress and resolve whatever difficulties you encounter.
He will give the assignment mark then and provide you with feedback on them for corrective actions.
13.0 SUMMARY PAD 412 Introduction to Administrative Practices and Procedures is a course that will expose the students to the administrative practices and processes of governmental operations either in the main stream civil service or other government agencies.
As a core course, mastery of this course is a sure way of building confidence as a graduate of Public Administration.
It is hoped that you will enjoy this course and at the same time wish you every success in this endeavour.
8 PAD 412 INTRODUCTION TO ADMINISTRATIVE PRACTICES AND PROCESSES MAIN COURSE MATERIAL COURSE CODE: PAD 408 COURSE TITLE: INTRODUCTION TO ADMINISTRATIVE PRACTICES AND PROCEDURES COURSE WRITER/DEVELOPER: IBEME, NWAMAKA P. School of Management Sciences National Open University of Nigeria Victoria Island, Lagos Course Co-ordinator : OSABIYA BABATUNDE School of Management Sciences National Open University of Nigeria Victoria Island, Lagos Programme Leader: Dr. Idrusi School of Management Sciences National Open University of Nigeria Victoria Island, Lagos 9 PAD 412 INTRODUCTION TO ADMINISTRATIVE PRACTICES AND PROCESSES TABLE OF CONTENTS PAGE MODULE ONE COMMUNICATION SKILLS 12 Unit 1 Definition and meaning of Communication Unit 2 Communication in Organisation Unit 3 Common Mistakes in spoken English Unit 4 Effective Communication MODULE TWO DRAFTING, MINUTING, MEMO WRITING AND OFFICIAL LETTER WRITING 60 Unit 1 Drafting Unit 2 Minuting Unit 3 Memo writing Unit 4 Official Letter Writing MODULE THREE REPORT WRITING 84 Unit 1 What Report Writing is all About Unit 2 Strategies and Structures of Report Writing Unit 3 Writing a Report MODULE FOUR SPEECH WRITING 101 Unit 1 How to Prepare a Speech Unit 2 Procedure for Speech Writing 10 PAD 412 INTRODUCTION TO ADMINISTRATIVE PRACTICES AND PROCESSES MODULE FIVE CONDUCT OF MEETINGS 113 Unit 1 Preparation for Meetings, Recording and Developing Minutes of Meetings MODULE SIX PREPARATION FOR AND ORGANISATION OF CONFERENCES AND SEMINARS 124 Unit 1 Organisation of Conferences Unit 2 Organisation of Seminars MODULE SEVEN CONDUCT OF GOVERNMENT BUSINESS 141 Unit 1 Policy making and Policy Implementation Unit 2 Values and Ethics in Government Business Unit 3 The Nigerian Civil Service MODULE EIGHT RECORD MANAGEMENT 182 Unit 1 Record Management Unit 2 Handling of Files 11 PAD 412 INTRODUCTION TO ADMINISTRATIVE PRACTICES AND PROCESSES MODULE ONE COMMUNICATION SKILLS Unit 1 Definition and meaning of Communication Unit 2 Communication in Organisation Unit 3 Standard Expression in Spoken English Unit 4 Effective Communication Unit 1 DEFINITION AND MEANING OF COMMUNICATION CONTENTS 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objectives 3.0 Main Content 3.1 Definition of Communication 3.2 Functions or roles of Communication 3.3 Communication Process 3.4 Content of Communication 3.5 Tools of Communication 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutor-Marked Assignment 7.0 References/Further Readings 1.0 INTRODUCTION 12 PAD 412 INTRODUCTION TO ADMINISTRATIVE PRACTICES AND PROCESSES This unit exposes us to communication and its roles in organisations.
We will also examine the content and process of communication and the tools of disseminating information in an organisation.
An organisation may consist of management, vast acres of land, state-of- the- art equipment, materials, highly qualified employees, etc., but without communication to effectively link all these parts together and co-ordinate their activities, it will not come to life.
Management’s decisions must be disseminated to the employees, there must be measures put in place to ensure that these decisions are acted upon.
The decisions in itself are based on a flow of information that got to the management from all parts of the organisation.
There are many sizes of organisation.
There are small, medium, large and complex organisations.
Communication in these sizes of organisations varies.
Communication in large, complex organisation with many departments and various locations are more difficult than those in a small single organisation.
The form which communication takes place in an organisation can affect the attitude of the employees either positively or negatively.
Also many industrial disputes emanate in a failure of communication.
Communication is very essential in an organisation.
Indeed the success of any manager is, to a large extent, dependent on his or her ability to communicate effectively with other members of the organisation.
From the leadership angle, communication plays a vital role in motivating individuals and groups to act in a certain way or to follow certain behavioural pattern.
Communication is required for the effective co- ordination of group activities and is crucial in the performance of all management functions.
It is very crucial in every social transaction.
2.0 OBJECTIVES At the end of this unit, you should be able to:  Understand and discuss communication and it’s processes;  know the importance of communication  know the means of communication  know the functions of communication; 13 PAD 412 INTRODUCTION TO ADMINISTRATIVE PRACTICES AND PROCESSES 3.0 MAIN CONTENT 3.1 DEFINITION OF COMMUNICATION Communication has been variously defined by various authors and management practitioners.
Abimbade (2006) sees communication as a process of exchanging information between two or more individuals in an attempt by an individual to persuade or change the behaviour of the other individual.
Some believe that communication is the transfer of information from the sender to the receiver with the information being understood by the receiver.
Reilly, (1979), posit that it is “the exchange of information between a sender and a receiver and the inference of meaning between organisational participants”.
Randall (1984:156) defines it as the meaningful transfer of information from one person (or group) to another.
Communication consists of all the processes by which information is transmitted and received.
Communication is not only spoken or written words.
It may come as facts, attitudes, gestures, intentions, feelings etc.
Silence is also perceived as an effective way of communication.
The overriding concept in communication is to make the receiver of a communication decode what is in the mind of the sender.
In other words, communication does not occur unless one person transmits a piece of information to another person, who receives the piece of information and the received information has meaning to the receiver.
Cushway and Lodge (1999:189), opines that communication is effective only when the ideas and intentions of one person are successfully conveyed to another.
Communication involves emotional, psychological and mental characteristics of the sender and the receiver of the information as well as the technical characteristics of the medium used to communicate.
Communication can be used to motivate or demotivate an individual or group of individuals.
It can be used for effective co-ordination of group activities.
It is essentially vital in the performance of all management functions.
For communication to be effective, the process of sending the information will be in such a way that the information received is close in meaning to the intended message.
Three conditions are vital for effective communication.
They include: 14 PAD 412 INTRODUCTION TO ADMINISTRATIVE PRACTICES AND PROCESSES i There must be at least two people involved, ii There must be information to be communicated, and iii There must be intent or attempt to transmit the information.
For this to be accomplished, three vital components must be present.
These are; the source, the channel and the receiver.
3.2 FUNCTIONS OF COMMUNICATION Communication is indispensable for an effective running of an organisation.
To this end, we posit that its roles or functions are enormous.
Communication in its broadest sense, not only acts as the exchange of news and messages, but also as an individual and collective activity embracing all transmissions in sharing of ideas, facts and data.
Communication in any organisation, be it private or public, plays many roles.
These include: 1.
Information: The collection, storage, processing and dissemination of news, data, facts, opinions, etc which is essential in order to understand and execute organisational practices and processes are all embedded in communication.
It will be difficult to make or execute decisions or policies in organisations without communication.
2.
Socialization: Communication provides a common forum for people to interact and operate as effective members of the society in which they live.
Such interaction will enable them learn and acquire the societal norms and values which is imperative in communal life.
It will also help them find enjoyment and recreation which will subsequently aid healthy society.
The social cohesion and awareness so acquired will enables them to participate actively in public life.
3.
Motivation: Communication gives directions to the employees in that it will make them know what is expected of them at any point in time.
It also clarifies the mode of execution of tasks.
Praises for job 15 PAD 412 INTRODUCTION TO ADMINISTRATIVE PRACTICES AND PROCESSES well done are also channelled through communication.
All these and more will motivate and encourage the employees to put in their best for the organisation.
4.
Education: Communication ensures dissemination of information within the community.
It enhances the transmission of knowledge develops intellectual capability of individuals within the society.
In so doing, it aids the formation of character and acquisition of skills and capacities of individuals at all stages of life.
5.
Debate and discussion: Communication provides the needed facts required to facilitate the exchange of agreements or to clarify differing viewpoints on public issues.
It also supplies relevant evidence needed to foster public interest and involvement in all local, national and international issues.
6.
Control: Communication serves as a veritable tool for control measures in an organisation.
Every organisation has chain of command as well as rules and regulations that guide it.
This will be disseminated to all through communication.
Grievances reporting as well as making various official requests are done through communication.
7.
Cultural Promotion: Dissemination of cultural and artistic products in a bid to preserve the heritage of the past is facilitated through communication.
8.
Integration: Communication is the key to dealing with people as it facilitates the exchange of ideas and information.
It provides all persons, groups and nations access to the variety of messages needed in order to know and understand themselves and to appreciate each other’s viewpoints and aspirations.
For this reason, it is classified as the foundation of purposive management.
16 PAD 412 INTRODUCTION TO ADMINISTRATIVE PRACTICES AND PROCESSES 9.
Planning: The pivot of planning, which is one of the functions of management, is information.
Communication, therefore, aids planning, since no planning is possible without information.
10.
Decision Making: Communication aids in decision making.
It provides information that individuals and groups need to make decisions through the provision of data to identify and evaluate alternative choices.
11.
Managerial roles: Communication helps managers take action.
The plans must be explained, policies must be interpreted, procedures must be outlined and budget limits should be stated.
All these require adequate communication since decisions not communicated cannot be implemented.
12.
Organising: The organizing function of management is not complete until there is interconnection of the vertical and horizontal structures.
Communication acts to control the behaviors of the formal and informal groups within the organisation in various ways.
13.
Recruitment: Communication is very essential in the recruitment, orientation, placement or deployment of employees.
New employees get acquainted with the dos and don’ts in the organisation through communication.
The existing employees are also supervised and disciplined according to the rules and regulations of the organisation.
These are made possible through communication.
14.
Staff Appraisal: Appraisal of performance as well as promotion or demotion is made possible through communication.
Training of employees is made possible through communication.
Remuneration is also organized through communication.
17 PAD 412 INTRODUCTION TO ADMINISTRATIVE PRACTICES AND PROCESSES 15.
Display of Emotions: Emotive use of Communication allows for the expression of feelings and the satisfaction of social needs.
Employees within their work groups communicate among themselves to show their frustration or feelings of satisfaction which ultimately provides a release for their emotional expressions of feelings.
3.3 COMMUNICATION PROCESS Communication process begins when one person (sender) initiates a communication exchange.
The initiator of a communication perceives and or decides that a fact, idea, opinion etc.
needs to be transmitted to someone else.
This process through which information is transmitted from one party to another is what we termed communication.
The exchange of information between a sender and a receiver is crucial for communication to occur.
There is need to make a distinction between the information sent out and the interpretation of the information by the recipient.
This is because, the information the sender wishes to exchange may not be interpreted by the recipient in the manner intended.
For communication to occur, the information, fact, idea or opinion must have meaning to the sender.
Thus meaning is the first step in communication process.
Communication can be one-way or two-ways.
a.
One-way communication The one-way communication i.e from one person to another involves seven steps, such as; i.
Meaning, ii.
Encoding, iii.
Transmission, iv.
Decoding, v. Receiver, vi.
Feedback and vii.
Noise.
b.
Two-way communication 18 PAD 412 INTRODUCTION TO ADMINISTRATIVE PRACTICES AND PROCESSES In the two-way communication, i.e interaction between people, the three steps of encoding, transmitting and decoding are repeated as the receiver responds to the sender.
Communication Process can occur in a variety of ways such as, face- to- face, written, gesture, phone etc.
The sender’s meaning is encoded into a message that must be decoded by the receiver before the meaning of the message is inferred.
The encoded message is passed through a medium or channel.
This channel serves as the physical medium for the transmission of the message.
The receiver then decodes the message from the sender to give it a meaning.
Once the message is decoded, it is accepted as received.
The result is the transference of meaning from one person to another (Robbins 1999:268).
This is schematically shown below.
SENDER RECEIVER MESSAGE Meaning Encode Decode Meaning NOISE FEEDBACK Sources: 1.
J.C. Okoye “Communication Effectiveness in Public and Private Organisations”.
2.
C.P.
Maduabum in “Conduct of Government Business”.
Communication process may have some setbacks or problems.
This can be in form of wrong encoding which manifests in the message conveying wrong meaning.
Secondly, even when the message is a true reflection of the sender’s intention, the receiver may not interpret it properly and thus receive 19 PAD 412 INTRODUCTION TO ADMINISTRATIVE PRACTICES AND PROCESSES different meaning.
Third, the message may not be accurately received as a result of NOISE that exists at the time the message was communicated.
Another process is the feedback medium.
Feedback is the means to check on the accuracy to which messages are received.
This can come in the form of the receiver’s behaviour or comments to the sender.
Feedback is also a means of confirming that the message or information is received.
3.4 CONTENT OF COMMUNICATION Communication can be classified according to its content or the nature of the message.
The content can further be classified as technical, interpersonal (behavioural), and strategic.
The technical communication is basically the instructions, policies, decisions, and procedures related to the performance of jobs in the organisations.
Technical communication can be verbal, written or simply behavioural.
The verbal aspect can be in the form of instructing employees in how to perform a task.
The written comes in form of written job description or procedures.
The behavioural, on the other hand, is being a role model or modelling the correct way for employees to perform a task or interact with the customers.
Interpersonal communications may or may not be job related.
It may be formal or informal.
Just like the technical communication, interpersonal communication can also be verbal, written and or behaviour.
It may equally be motivational, inspirational or simply an inquiries about the health of members of the employees.
For instance, the verbal can take the form of praise for a job well done.
Such commendation may be communicated to the staff in writing for the personnel file.
Still it can be behaviour where the concerned employee is invited to join a group of management staff for lunch or dinner.
Strategic communications on the other hand, has to do with the future direction and goals of the organisation.
It also deals with the information relating to the external environment.
Strategic communication asks such questions as “where are we headed to?” “who are our toughest competitors?” “what leverage do they have over us?” “where will we be in the next five 20 PAD 412 INTRODUCTION TO ADMINISTRATIVE PRACTICES AND PROCESSES years?”.
Just like the two types discussed above, strategic communication can be verbal, written, or behavioural.
The verbal comes in form of addressing management staff to inform them on corporate goals and major changes in the organisation.
Such can equally be put in writing by providing a statement of goals and core values in the organisations newsletter, annual report or website.
While behavioural communication takes such measures as allocating time frame among competing activities and demands.
3.5 TOOLS OF COMMUNICATION Communication tools are all those mediums which organisations use to pass the information required for the operation of the organisations’ business.
They include: 1.
Memoranda and Letters: It is the norm in formal organisations such as ministries, parastatals, banks, academic institutions, etc to use this tool of communication.
Such written communication is required to follow line of authority or what we call chain of command.
2.
Manuals: this tool is used to communicate the organisational permanent policies and practices.
Example is Civil Service Manual and Academic Regulations of NUC.
3.
Records and Reports: This is a very essential tool in organisation.
Records and reports are the heart of the organisation.
Records and Reports give direction to the organisations’ activities as well as to the employees who work in these organisations.
Records and Reports can be done daily, weekly, bi-weekly, monthly or annually.
4.
Paper flow: This is mostly utilized by those organisations that handle financial transactions such as banks, insurance institutions, accounting firms.
21 PAD 412 INTRODUCTION TO ADMINISTRATIVE PRACTICES AND PROCESSES 5.
Oral instruction, Spoken words or face-to-face communications: This tool, though not institutionalized, is commonly used in organisations.
It can be in form of instructions, messages, orders or commands.
It operates mostly between superiors and subordinates.
4.0 CONCLUSION As earlier stated, communication is very crucial in all aspects of human endeavour.
Its importance goes beyond the transmission and reception of information.
Communication or lack of it can affect the attitudes of the employees and the degree to which they understand or support management policies.
Many industrial disputes, misinterpretation of company’s policy etc, originates in lack of communication or inadequate communication.
Communication is also required if result of a given goal or objective is to be evaluated.
It is also very essential in motivating individuals or groups to follow a certain behavioural patterns.
The importance of communication in organisation cannot be quantified.
5.0 SUMMARY In this unit, we discussed the meaning and also attempted a few definitions of communication.
The functions or roles of communication were brought to the fore.
We equally looked at the communication processes, content of communication and the tools of communication.
It is believed that you have learnt the contents of the unit very well and that you are quite prepared to answer the questions below.
In the next unit we will be discussing communication in organisation.
6.0 TUTOR-MARKED ASSIGNMENT 1.
Write brief notes on the following: 22 PAD 412 INTRODUCTION TO ADMINISTRATIVE PRACTICES AND PROCESSES i. Communication process ii.
Content of communication iii.
tools of communication 2.
Discuss seven (7) roles of communication in an organisation.
7.0 References/Further Readings Abimbade, A.
(2006).
Principles and Practice of Educational Technology.
Accra: Woeli Publishing Services.
Maduabum, C. P. (2013).
Conduct of Government Business.
Lagos: National Open University of Nigeria.
Obiaku, D. (1999).
Communication Skills.
Lagos: Advertising Practitioners Council of Nigeria, APCON.
Oreh, O.O.
(1982).
“Modes of Communication” in Readings in African Humanities- African Cultural Development, Ogbu Kalu (ed).
Enugu: Fourth Dimension Publishers.
Okoye, J.C. (2004).
Communication Effectiveness in Public and Private Organisations.
Enugu: HRV Publishers.
Reilly, W. (1979).
Training Administration for Development.
London: Heinemann Limited.
23 PAD 412 INTRODUCTION TO ADMINISTRATIVE PRACTICES AND PROCESSES UNIT 2 COMMUNICATION IN ORGANISATION 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objectives 3.0 Main Content 3.1 Communication Patterns in Organisations 3.2 Types of Communication in organisations 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutor-Marked Assignment 7.0 Further Readings 1.0 Introduction The design of an organisation should provide for meaningful communication in four district directions: downward, upward, horizontal, and diagonal.
These four directions establish the framework within which communication flows in an established organisation, be it public or private.
In this unit, we are going to examine the various patterns and types of communications in an organisation.
3.1 COMMUNICATION PATTERNS IN ORGANISATIONS Communication patterns encompass the directions that communication takes in groups and in organization as well as the channels by which communications flow.
Communication can flow vertically and laterally.
The vertical dimension can be further divided into downward and upward direction.
a. Vertical Communication 24 PAD 412 INTRODUCTION TO ADMINISTRATIVE PRACTICES AND PROCESSES This type of communication may involve two or more people, or it may flow among several different levels in an organisation.
It may also flow both up and down the organisation.
b.
Downward Downwars Communication flows from the top level of a group of an organization to a lower level.
It involves the dissemination of information from highest hierarchy downwards.
This could be from the top management down to other levels.
It involves job instructions, official memos, explanation of policy direction and procedures, point out problems that need attention and offer feedback about performance, etc.
The most common form of downward organisational communication are indoctrination of company’s goals, organisational policy, procedures and practices, job rationale, job instruction, and employees performance feedback.
c. Upward This is the type of communication that flows from a subordinate to a higher or superior officer in a group or organization.
It is used to provide feedback to top management, inform them about progress toward goals.
This method also keeps managers aware of how employees feel about their jobs.
Examples of upward Communication include performance reports prepared by middle management for top management, suggestion boxes, and grievance procedures.
Upward communication is more subject to distortion than downward communication.
Okoye, (2004:16) is of the view that subordinates are more prone to withhold information or distort information.
Studies have also shown that the greater the degree of difference in status between the superior and subordinate coupled with the greater degree of distrust, the more likely the subordinate will supress or distort information.
Upward communication provides employees the opportunities to express their feelings in an organisation.
On the other hand, the top management equally depend on their subordinates for vital information.
Grapevine information is very vital and the subordinates are the greater patronages of the grapevine.
25 PAD 412 INTRODUCTION TO ADMINISTRATIVE PRACTICES AND PROCESSES d. Lateral Communication is referred to as lateral when it takes place amongst colleagues and peers.
When members of the same work group, or managers of the same level or among any horizontal equivalent personnel communicates amongst themselves, we term it lateral communication or horizontal communication.
This type of communication facilitates co- ordination among independent units.
It can also be very effective for joint problem solving as when two managers of large organisation work together to fashion out ways to improve productivity or efficiency in their organisation.
A Committee with representatives drawn from various sections of the organisation or faculty is another good example of lateral communication.
3.2 Types Of Communication In Organisation Communication can either be formal or informal.
a.
Formal Communication Communication is said to be formal, if the dissemination of information, messages and ideas are done according to prescribed or fixed rules and customs.
Such Communication is usually very rigid and follows definite pattern and it is official in nature.
It may be oral or written, vertical or horizontal.
They are usually bureaucratic in nature and the directives or instructions are to be carried out.
The various means of carrying out formal communications in an organisation are as follows: a.
Telephone b.
Computers c. Postal system d. Written instructions in i. memos, 26 PAD 412 INTRODUCTION TO ADMINISTRATIVE PRACTICES AND PROCESSES ii.
letters, iii.
minutes, iv.
notice boards, v. company’s magazines, journals, newsletters, pay slips etc.
e. Broadcast messages over public address systems.
f. Briefs in meetings addressed by senior officers to subordinates.
g. Inter-departmental committees.
h. Interviews to give instruction or information or to review a subordinate’s performance.
i.
Joint committees of management and employees.
j.
Suggestion boxes.
k. Questionnaires.
Many organisations have communication problems not because they do not know the importance of communication in an organisation but because they fail to make necessary and formal arrangements for communication to flow at the desired directions and levels, either laterally or upward thus preventing management from having access to the employees’ ideas and opinions and also making departmental co-ordination very difficult.
b.
Informal Communication This is described as any interaction or relationship which exists in any organization which is unofficial or unplanned.
It may also be viewed as messages conveyed through gestures, facial expressions, body movements, the intonations or emphasis we give to words, and the physical distance between the sender and receiver (Okoye:2004).
Means of informal communication are as follows: a.
Conversations between employees at all levels.
b.
A private telephone conversation to facilitate the speedy accomplishment of a task in an organisation.
This is usually based on personal or friendly relationship between the officers in the organisation.
c. Cartoons in the notice boards.
27 PAD 412 INTRODUCTION TO ADMINISTRATIVE PRACTICES AND PROCESSES d. Secret signs and gestures warning other officers of the approach of an officer that is not supposed to be privy to the information or of the approach of a senior manager.
e. Grapevines or rumours.
This is a great channel of informal communication.
It is important to note that when the formal system of communication in an organisation are comparatively inefficient, the informal communication become very active.
So effort should be made to ensure that the formal system of communication in an organisation is functional and effective.
4.0 CONCLUSION Communication in an organisation is indispensable to the survival and efficient management of the organisation.
It is the livewire of any organisation.
It can be likened to the blood that flows in the veins of the human beings without which the individual dies.
Communication is required if result are to be evaluated in terms of what was sought through a given plan.
To communicate something to someone involves the emotional, psychological and mental characteristics of both the communicator and the recipient of the information as well as the medium used in such communication.
5.0 SUMMARY We have discussed extensively on communications in organisation.
We examined the patterns of communication as well as the types of communications in an organisation.
We observed the features of formal and informal communication in an organisation.
It is hoped that you have gained meaningful information and knowledge in this unit that will help you perform at your optimal in any organisation you may find yourself.
6.0 TUTOR-MARKED ASSIGNMENT 1.
Write short notes on the following: a.
Formal communication b.
Informal communication 28 PAD 412 INTRODUCTION TO ADMINISTRATIVE PRACTICES AND PROCESSES c. Lateral or horizontal communication d. Vertical communication e. Downward communication f. Upward communication 7.0 References/Further Reading Maduabum, C. P. (2013).
Conduct of Government Business.
Lagos: National Open University of Nigeria.
Obiaku, D. (1999).
Communication Skills.
Lagos: Advertising Practitioners Council of Nigeria, APCON.
Oreh, O.O.
(1982).
“Modes of Communication” in Readings in African Humanities- African Cultural Development, Ogbu Kalu (ed).
Enugu: Fourth Dimension Publishers.
Okoye, J.C. (2004).
Communication Effectiveness in Public and Private Organisations.
Enugu: HRV Publishers.
29 PAD 412 INTRODUCTION TO ADMINISTRATIVE PRACTICES AND PROCESSES Unit 3 COMMON MISTAKES IN SPOKEN ENGLISH CONTENTS 1.0 INTRODUCTION 2.0 OBJECTIVES 3.0 MAIN CONTENT 3.1 Nouns and Errors in the Use of Nouns 3.2 Omission/Wrong use of Articles 3.3 Pronouns and Errors in their use 3.4 Errors in the use of Verbs 3.5 Punctuation marks 3.6 Common Errors in Nigerian English/Standard Expression 4.0 CONCLUSION 5.0 SUMMARY 6.0 TUTOR-MARKED ASSIGNMENT 7.0 FURTHER READING 1.0 INTRODUCTION English language is the second language as well as the official language spoken and written in Nigeria.
It is used to communicate both at the national and international levels.
For such a language that is so frequently and commonly used on a daily basis and for every conceivable transaction, one would have expected perfection in its masterly and usage.
But this is far from the case.
The language is constantly used incorrectly and carelessly almost at all levels.
Its application both verbally and in writing is also 30 PAD 412 INTRODUCTION TO ADMINISTRATIVE PRACTICES AND PROCESSES bastardized.
In view of this we deem it pertinent to correct some of the anomalies in spoken English.
C.P.
Maduabum, (2012), writing on this topic made very useful corrections in ‘The use of Nigeria’s LINGUA FRANCA in Government’.
This is done with a view to assist the user in the spoken and written English communication in organisations and indeed in every sphere of life endeavour.
2.0 OBJECTIVES At the end of this unit, you should be able to: (i) identify common errors in the use of English Language (ii).
identify appropriate corrections to such errors; and (iii).
apply adequate English Grammar in written communications in government business.
3.0 MAIN CONTENT Coherence in speech and writing makes effective understanding a reality.
Hindrances to effective communication can manifest in form of wrong spelling, defective punctuation, poor pronunciation and erroneous sentences or misuse of words.
Let us examine some example of parts of speech and their usages in spoken English.
3.1 Nouns and Errors in the use of Nouns.
It is usual to define nouns as names of people, place or things.
Nouns cover names like those of institutions, months and days and abstract ideas e.g Sule, Uchenna , Nigeria , School , Ox, Chair, University, Family , January, August, Friday, Sunday, and Wisdom, Beauty etc Noun can be divided into two large groups namely: Proper nouns and Common nouns..
Proper Nouns: These are names of particular people (e.g Shola Balogun); places (e.g Nigeria, Ghana); months and days of the week (e.g May, Tuesday); Magazines and Newspapers (e.g News watch, The Guardian)etc.
31 PAD 412 INTRODUCTION TO ADMINISTRATIVE PRACTICES AND PROCESSES Proper nouns are unique and their first letters are written in capital no matter where the noun occurs in the sentences e.g - She visited Lagos last year.
Paul reads the Guardian every day.
Common Nouns These are names given to a class of persons and to places, things, ideas etc eg.
boy, box, church, wisdom etc.
Common Nouns are either countable or uncountable.
Collective Noun: These are names of group of people or things.
They are treated as singular or plural nouns depending on whether the group is conceived as a singular entity or as being made up of several members.
The following are some examples of collective nouns:-class, committee, crowd, family, gang, jury, flock, congregation, group, community etc.
Number: Plural of Nouns:- There are two numbers in English language: Singular and Plural.
Countable nouns have both singular and plural forms, while uncountable nouns have only the singular form e.g Box-boxes, girl-girls, Ox-oxen, mouse-mice, index- indices, crisis-crises, boyfriend-boyfriends, deer-deer, aircraft-aircraft, series-series, etc.
Some nouns must end in ‘s’ even when they are singular e.g troops, headquarters, particulars, premises, savings, thanks.
Some nouns don’t take ‘s’ and are treated as plural e.g cattle, gentry, people, police, the poor, the rich etc.
Some nouns are countable and should be used as such, any attempt to use one as the other, causes an error in a sentence.
Unfortunately, using an uncountable noun as a countable is a common error in Nigeria.
Some uncountable nouns which are often misused in this manner are:- staff, news, information, slang, advice, behavior, equipment, personnel, stationary, luggage, clothing, bedding, treatment, etc.
1.
‘The Staffs of the University are on strike’ 32 PAD 412 INTRODUCTION TO ADMINISTRATIVE PRACTICES AND PROCESSES The word ‘staff’ should not be pluralized.
This is because, it has a plural connotation, though structurally singular.
The correct sentence reads: The Staff of the University are on strike’.
2.
‘ I have a good news for you’ This sentence is erroneous because the word ‘news’, an uncountable noun had been used as a countable one by allowing the indefinite article ‘a’ to precede it.
The correct sentence is this: I have good news for you; OR I have a piece of good news for you.
OR I have three pieces of good news, 3.3 Omission/Wrong Use of Articles Articles are words used before nouns.
There are two types of articles, the definite articles, “the” an indefinite article ‘an’ ‘a’.
The definite article ‘the’ as the name implies is used to make a specific or particular reference while ‘an’ ‘a’ are used for non-specific reference.
The indefinite article ‘a’ is used with countable nouns which begin with consonant sound(e.g p,b,t,k,m) .
I saw a girl, while ‘an’ is used with singular countable nouns whose pronunciation begins with vowel ‘sound’ (a e i o u) e.g .She ate an apple.
The major error in the use of articles is mainly with their omission where they are obligatorily needed.
The omission is, no doubt, a result of interference of our mother tongues since most Nigerian languages do not possess any separate morpheme for the articles.
Sometimes the articles are used redundantly and at other times one is used where another is appropriate.
We shall now examine some of these errors.
(i) I find it difficult to express myself in English language’ This sentence is erroneous because of the omission of ‘the definite article which colligates with English Language for the sentence to be correct, the article ‘the’ must be inserted accordingly.
I find it difficult to express myself in the English Language.
In same manner, you must not omit the definite article in expression such as; the German Language, the French language, the Hausa language, the Igbo 33 PAD 412 INTRODUCTION TO ADMINISTRATIVE PRACTICES AND PROCESSES language, the Abakaliki dialect, the Afipko dialect, and the Onitsha dialect.
(ii) Majority of our students have ardent keenness in politics.
The word majority is compulsorily used with either of the articles, ‘the’ or ‘a’ preceding it.
In this sentence, “it” has been omitted thereby rendering it erroneous.
When corrected, the sentence should read: The majority of our students have ardent keenness in.
politics.
3.4 Pronoun and Errors in the Use of Pronoun A pronoun is the word used in place of a noun.
The main essence of using pronoun is to avoid repetition of nouns which makes a write-up clumsy.
For the appropriate pronoun to be used instead of a noun the following should be considered.
(1) Gender: There are three genders in English Language: (a) Feminine gender: Used for females e.g she, her, hers (b) Masculine gender: Used for males e.g He, him, his (c ) Neuter gender: Used for animals and inanimate objects e.g it, its (2) Number: If the noun to be changed is in singular form then the pronoun to be used will be in singular form too.
E.g John is kind becomes he is kind.
‘he’ is used because it is a masculine singular pronoun.
(3) Function: The function of the noun to be changed must be considered to be able to show a pronoun functioning in the same slot with the noun of “John is kind” becomes ‘he’ is kind”.
John is the subject of that sentence so’he’ is the most appropriate pronoun to use because John is a masculine gender in singular form and performs the function of the subject in the sentence.
34 PAD 412 INTRODUCTION TO ADMINISTRATIVE PRACTICES AND PROCESSES Personal pronouns are classified into three persons showing their numbers and functions as illustrated in the diagram table overleaf.
SINGULAR PLURAL Subject Objective Subject Objective First Person 1 Me Me Us Pronoun Second Person You You You You Pronoun Third Person He she, Him, her, it They Them Pronoun it We shall analyse some of the errors inherent in the use f English pronouns 1.
‘The boy completed the assignment by himself ‘ The preposition ‘by’ in this sentence is Otiose One should simply say: The boy completed the assignment himself, Note that himself, herself, themselves, itself, myself, and yourself are each one word 2.
I hope the students know themselves.
This sentence, as it is, means that every student knows himself/herself.
This meaning is implied by the wrong use of the pronoun themselves, where each other, or one another is more appropriate.
The sentence should be recast as follows: I hope the students know one another, Similarly, the expression, I hope you know yourselves, possesses the same interpretation as given in the use of themselves above.
The use of each or one another should be adopted here, to replace yourselves’ 3.
Bernard and myself sat together in the exam hall Myself was wrongly use here.
It should be replaced with I thus: 35 PAD 412 INTRODUCTION TO ADMINISTRATIVE PRACTICES AND PROCESSES Bernard and I sat together in the exam hall.
4.
Today’s date is what?
This is an incorrect expression in English.
We should reconstruct it as follows: What is today’s date?
Similarly we should say: what page is that/and not page what……?
3.6 Errors in the use of Verbs A verb is a word or group of words that is used to tell what someone or something is, does or experiences.
It is an obligatory element of a sentence expressing an action done by the subject or a state experienced by the subject or what is becoming of the subject.
It is therefore regarded as the most important part of a speech since no sentence can be acceptable without it.
Some examples are, talk, come, look, close, write, have, do, may, shall, ought to, used to e.t.c.
Out of all the parts of speech, verbs are the most problematic.
The following constitute the major areas of difficulty: confused verbs, stative verbs, concord, tautology, redundant prepositions, wrong tense of the verb e.t.c Concord: This is the agreement of the verb, in number, with the subject of a sentence.
As a general rule, if the subject is singular, it will take a singular verb; if the subject is plural, it will take a plural verb.
Some nouns always take plural verbs.
They are: police, people, remains, minutes, thanks, etc.
The non-count nouns concur with the singular form of verbs.
Using them with the plural verbs constitute some of the errors in sentences.
Here are other rules to guide and some exceptions to note 36 PAD 412 INTRODUCTION TO ADMINISTRATIVE PRACTICES AND PROCESSES 1.
Subject joined by ‘and’ generally takes plural verb e.g.
Peter and John are first year students.
(a).
But, when the two singular subjects joined by ‘and’ give the impression of a unit the verb is singular e.g.
Bread and butter are my favorite meal.
His wife and boss forbid it.
(b) When each of the singular subjects is considered individually especially after ‘each’ or ‘every' the verb is singular e.g.
Every man and woman is expected to be a good citizen.
(c )`When ‘and’ is replaced by such words or phrases as with, together with, in addition to, including, as well as, no less than or a similar construction, the verb becomes singular.
Such a phrase is not part of the subject e.g The coach with his team was praised The secretary as well as the president is kind 2.
Singular subjects joined by ‘or’, ‘nor’, ‘but’, ‘either’ … nor, take singular verbs e.g.
Either Kosi or Damy was elected Not only his wife but even his mother thinks he is selfish.
3.
When one of the subjects connected by the correlatives {‘either….or’ or ‘neither….. nor’ is singular and the other plural, or when they differ in person, the verbs agree with the nearer one.
e.g Either Ade or you are to go.
This should be: Either you or Ade is to go.
4.
A singular subject with a plural modifier still requires a singular verb e.g .
The attitude of these men is hostile A list of the successful candidates is on the notice board.
5.
A collective noun modified by Plural noun takes a singular verb e.g A team of athletes comes here daily 37 PAD 412 INTRODUCTION TO ADMINISTRATIVE PRACTICES AND PROCESSES A flock of sheep is owned by Peter 6.
A collective noun like family, team, jury, group, takes a singular verb when it functions as a unit and plural verb when the members function as individual’s e.g The committee has decided to attend (singular) The committee has their different opinions (plural) 7.
Nouns which are plural in form but singular in meaning take a singular verb e.g Economics, news, electronics, ethics, mumps, measles e.t.c Measles is a serious disease.
No news is new 8.
Periods of time, amounts of money, measurements and weights are generally regarded as a single unit, therefore they take a singular verb e.g Eight hours is the normal working hours Ten kilograms of rice is not too heavy.
Other Errors in the use of Verbs are: (1) I am now understanding the lecture.
Here is another misuse of a stative verb.
A stative verb cannotbe used in the progressive aspect.
But understand, a stative verb, has here been so used.
This renders the sentence ungrammatical in English.
In good English we should have: I now understand the lecture Some other stative verbs are: resemble, have, lack, fit, contain, measure and suit.
All these behave like verbs hear and understand.
They are not often used in the progressive form.
(2) I prefer living in Enugu than living in Onitsha.
Prefer does not go with than but with to.
The correct version is: I prefer living in Enugu to living in Onitsha 38 PAD 412 INTRODUCTION TO ADMINISTRATIVE PRACTICES AND PROCESSES (3) Tony has gone to barb his hair: May we reiterate here.
That the word barb does not mean to cut one’s hair.
It means the point of an arrow, a fish hook, or a remark that is intended to hurt somebody’s feelings.
Barbs in this sentence is therefore misnomer.
What we say in good English is, Tony has gone to have his hair cut.
6.
We must have to travel at 8’0 clock tomorrow.
Must and have to are synonymous.
Therefore allowing both of them to co-occur causes a problem of redundancy.
The correct construction is: We must travel at 8’o clock tomorrow.
OR We have to travel at 8’0 clock tomorrow (5) All that glitters are not gold When the construction all that is used a singular verb becomes necessary, But when all is followed by an object, it takes a plural verb as in: All the students are here.
In the above sentence, therefore, we do not require a plural verb.
The correct version is: All that glitters is not gold (6) Her remains was buried in the church yard.
Although the noun remains means, here, the dead body of one person, it always goes with a plural verb.
A good construction reads: Her remains were buried in the church yard.
(7) The minutes of the last meeting was read by the secretary.
Minutes is a plural noun and so should take a plural verb thus: The minutes of the last meeting were read by the secretary.
(8) He can be able to do it 39 PAD 412 INTRODUCTION TO ADMINISTRATIVE PRACTICES AND PROCESSES Similarly, can and be able are synonymous.
We do not allow them to co-occur in a sentence: It is therefore wrong to say: He can be able to do it.
The correct version is: He will be able to do it.
3.7 Punctuation Marks Punctuation is a complicated subject and only the main principles can be discussed here.
The discussions are based on practice in British English.
The main headings are as follows:Full stop, Capitalization, Comma, Colon, Semicolon, Question mark, Exclamation mark, Apostrophe, Quotation marks, Parenthesis (Brackets), Dash, Hyphen.
The purpose of punctuation is to mark out strings of words into manageable groups and help clarify their meaning.
The marks most commonly used to divide a piece of writing are full stop, the semicolon, and the comma, with the strength of the dividing diminishing from the full stop to the comma.
The full stop therefore marks the main division into sentences, the semicolon joins sentences and the comma (which is the most flexible in use and causes most problem) separates smaller elements with the least loss of continuity.
Bracket and dashes also serve as separators often more strikingly than commas Full Stop This is used to mark the end of a sentence when it is a statement.
In prose, sentences marked by full stops normally represent a discrete or distinct statement.
Full stops areused to mark any abbreviations (Weds.
Gen.
P.M.) A sequence of three full stops is to make an ellipsis or omission in sequence of words, especially when forming an incomplete quotation.
When the omission occurs at the end of a sentence, a fourth points is added as the full stop of the whole sentence.
He left the room, banged the door… and went out.
A full stop is used as a decimal point (910.5) and to divide units e.g 6.15pm, 6.3kg, etc.
40 PAD 412 INTRODUCTION TO ADMINISTRATIVE PRACTICES AND PROCESSES Comma The use of comma is more difficult to describe than other punctuation marks.
, and there is much variation in practice.
Essentially, its role is to give detail to the structure of sentences, especially longer ones, and make their meaning clear.
The comma is widely used to separate the main clauses of a compound sentence when they are not sufficiently close in meaning or content to form a continuous unpunctual sentence, and are not distinct enough to warrant a semicolon.
A conjunction such as and, but, yet, is normally use Commas are usually inserted between adjectives coming before a noun: An enterprising, ambitious person A cold, damp, badly heated room.
An important role of the commas is to prevent ambiguity or misunderstanding, especially after a verb used intransitively where it might otherwise be taken to be transitive.
With the police pursuing, the people shouted loudly.
Commas are used in pairs to separate elements in a sentence that are not part of the main statement: I should like you all, ladies and gentlemen, to raise your glasses.
There is no sense, as far as I can see, in this suggestion.
Comma is also used to separate a relative clause from its antecedent when the clause is not serving an identifying function.
The book, which was on the table, was a gift.
Commas are used to separate items in a list of sequence.
Usage varies as to the inclusion of comma before and in the last item: the following will report at 9:30 am .Jones, smith, peter, Agnes and Paul.
Question mark?
This is used in place of the full stop to show that the preceding sentence is a question.
Do you want another piece of cake?
41 PAD 412 INTRODUCTION TO ADMINISTRATIVE PRACTICES AND PROCESSES It is not used when the question is implied by indirect speech: I asked you whether you wanted another piece of cake.
Julius Caeser, born (?)
100 BC They were then seen boarding a bus (to London?)
Exclamation Mark !
This is used after an exclamatory word, phrase, or sentence expressing any of The following: Absurdity: What an idea!
Command or Warming: Go to your room!
Be careful!
Emotion or pains I hate you!
That really hurts!
Ouch!
Enthusiasm I’d love to come!
Wish or regret Let me come!
If only I could swim!
Wonder, Admiration, or Surprise!
Aren’t they beautiful!
Apostrophe The main use is to indicate the possessive case as in John’s book, the girls’ mother, etc 42 PAD 412 INTRODUCTION TO ADMINISTRATIVE PRACTICES AND PROCESSES It comes before the ‘s’ in singular and plural nouns not ending in ’s’ as in the boy’s games and the women’s games.
It comes after the’s’s in plural nouns ending in ‘S’ as in the boys’ games.
In singular nouns ending in ‘s’ practice differs between Charles’ and Charles’s ,in some cases the shorter form is preferable for reason of sound.
It is also used to indicate a place or business e.g the butcher’s.
In this use it is often omitted in some names e.g Smiths bane.
It is used to indicate a contraction, e.g he’s, wouldn’t Quotation marks “ ” The main use is to indicate direct speeches and questions.
A single turned comma (‘) is normally used at the beginning and a single apostrophe (:) at the end of the quoted matter She said,” I have something to ask you.
The closing quotation mark should come after any punctuation mark which is part of the quoted matter, but before any mark which is not: they shouted, ‘watch out!
Punctuation dividing a sentence of quoted speech is put inside the question marks: ‘Go away’ he said, ‘and don’t ever come back’.
Quotation marks are also used for cited words and phrases: What does ‘integrated circuit mean?
A quotation within a quotation is put in double quotation marks: ‘Have you any idea’, he said, ‘what ‘integrated circuit ‘means?’ Indirect/Reported Speech As the names suggests, the indirect or reported speech reports what a speaker or writer has said without using his exact words.
This is very prominent in minute taking for example.
43 PAD 412 INTRODUCTION TO ADMINISTRATIVE PRACTICES AND PROCESSES Direct speech: Sule said, ‘I will return next month, by the grace of God’ Reported Speech: Sule said that he would return the following month by the grace of God Certain things to Note about the Reported Speech 1.
Usually the reported verb found in the direct speech is used but sometimes it could be changed, if the reporter feels like doing so.
e.g Direct: The man said to us: ‘We have enough accommodation for all of you’.
Reported: The man informed us that they had enough accommodation for all of us.
2.
If the reporting verb is in the past, the verb in the reported speech would change to the past tense.
3.
If the reporting verb is in the present or future, the verb in the reported speech does not change e.g Direct: He says: ‘We have lectures every Friday?
Reported: He says that they have lectures every Friday.
4..
If what is expressed in the direct speech is a universal truth no change take place in the reported speech no matter the nature of the reporting verb.
e.g.
Direct: Our teacher said: ‘The earth is not round but spherical?
Reported: Our teacher said that the earth is not round but spherical.
Please note that what has been said so far on the reported speech are guides, which are not always rigid.
The circumstance of the speech situation determines exactly what the reporter says.
3.8 Common Errors in Nigerian Spoken English/Standard Expression 1.
My wife put to bed last week.
- My wife gave birth to a child last week.
2.
My wife delivered a child last week.
- My wife was delivered of a child last week.
44 PAD 412 INTRODUCTION TO ADMINISTRATIVE PRACTICES AND PROCESSES 3.
During the course of his lecture.
- During his lecture or in the course of his lecture 4 The man ate our money.
- The man embezzled our money 5.
You have a stranger.
- You have a visitor 6.
The University has a lot of brilliant academicians.
- The University has a lot of brilliant academics.
7 I slept at 10 last night.
- I went to bed at 10 o’clock last night.
8 May I follow you home?
- May I come home with you 9 A trouble shooter - A trouble maker 10 The lady has bottom power.- The lady wields undue influence with sex.
11.
The rain beat me.
- The rain fell on me.
12.
The couple love themselves.
- The couple loves each other 13.
I horned.
- I sounded the car horn 14.
Don’t make noise.- Don’t make a noise 15.
We reached here safely.- We got here safely 16.
I’ll branch at your place.
- I’ll call at yours 17.
Customer (referring to a Customer (refers to the buyer only) Seller from whom one buys regularly) 18.
From the beginning to the end.- From beginning to end.
19.
He is too nice.
- He is very nice 20 They are my invitees.
-They are my guests 21.
Any place for me in the bus.- Any room for me in the bus 22.
Starting from the scratch.
- Starting from scratch 23.
Don’t put your mouth in this matter.- Don’t interfere in this matter 24.
Like I said earlier.
- As I said earlier 25.
I am coming.
- I will be back soon in a moment 26.
I’ll barb my hair.- I will have a haircut.
27 Bring my cup.- Fetch my drinking glass.
28 Deprived from going abroad.
– Deprived of going abroad 29 My house is twenty kilometres to my village.- My house is twenty kilometres from the village 30 Your book is with me -.
I have your book 45 PAD 412 INTRODUCTION TO ADMINISTRATIVE PRACTICES AND PROCESSES 31.
All what he does.- All that he does 32.
Globe .
- Bulb 33.
Matured student.
-Mature student 34.
Coloured television.- Colour television 35.
My business is moving fine .- My business is thriving.
36 By what time did you come?- At what time did you come?
37 It does not worth it.
- It isn’t worth it.
38 I am saving against the rainy day.
- I am saving for the rainy day 39 Well done (greeting for someone performing a task) .- Not a greeting, rather it means cooked 40 Sorry (when somebody trips without anybody being responsible for it) - Watch out 4.0 CONCLUSION The wrong use of English language in written communication adversely affects the quality of our output in the organisation.
The Factors that are responsible for poor English grammar include: poor reception of English Language at the background, non-challant attitude of the users to make use of good English construction and a dearth of reading culture of the populace.
It is important to note that the use of Dictionary will assists immensely particularly in correcting spelling errors in written English communication.
5.0 SUMMARY In this unit, we identified and discussed some of the common mistakes in spoken and written English language which are unique to Nigerian such as Nouns, Pronouns, Verbs, Preposition, Punctuation marks.
Masterly of the proper use of these will give you a good command of the language.
In the next unit, we will be discussing effective communication.
46 PAD 412 INTRODUCTION TO ADMINISTRATIVE PRACTICES AND PROCESSES 6.0 TUTOR-MARKED ASSIGNMENT 1.
List the different types of Nouns and give an example of each 2.
List any 20 errors in English spoken or written by Nigerians and their corresponding corrections.
7.0 REFERENCES/FURTHER READINGS Eyisi, J.
(2004).
Common Errors in the Use of English Maduabum, C. P. (2012).
Conduct of Government Business, Lagos: NOUN Printers Ogunsanwo, O. el al (1990).
Count Down to English Language Lagos: Evans Brothers Nigeria Publishers Ltd. Osoba, Gabriel A.
(2001).
English for Effective Communication.
Ibadan: Olu- akin Publishers) Oxford Advance Learners Dictionary,, 7th ed London : Oxford University Press.
47 PAD 412 INTRODUCTION TO ADMINISTRATIVE PRACTICES AND PROCESSES UNIT 4 EFFECTIVE COMMUNICATIONS 1.0 INTRODUCTION 2.0 OBJECTIVES 3.0 MAIN CONTENT 3.1 Effective Communication 3.2 Barriers to Communication flow 3.3 Principles of Effective Communication 3.4 Guidelines to Effective Communication 4.0 CONCLUSION 5.0 SUMMARY 6.0 TUTOR-MARKED ASSIGNMENT 7.0 FURTHER READINGS 1.0 Introduction Effective Communication can be appropriately viewed as the ability to convey the intended message accurately to the receiver.
One may ask why the ability to communicate effectively so important to managers.
Effective communication, no doubt, is very important in organisation but equally important is what gets communicated and the quality of interaction.
Even the most capable and innovative manager is unlikely to perform well without being able to communicate ideas effectively.
It is not sufficient for managers to have the knowledge of how tasks are to be performed or what changes are needed to improve effectiveness or efficiency in organisations; managers also must be able to communicate such knowledge and ideas to those people who take part in the routine daily activities of the organisation.
Some barriers to effective communication have been identified and discussed.
In view of the barriers to communication identified and examined, what can individuals do to minimize the problems and attempt to overcome these barriers?
The 48 PAD 412 INTRODUCTION TO ADMINISTRATIVE PRACTICES AND PROCESSES discussions and suggestions made in this unit may be helpful in answering this question and in making communication more effective in organisations.
2.0 Learning Objective To give the students the knowledge and necessary skills required for effective communication in the organisation whether public or private organisation.
3.0 MAIN CONTENT 3.1 EFFECTIVE COMMUNICATIONS Effective communication is the process of sending a message in such a way that the message received is close in meaning to the message intended.
It incorporates the ideas of meaning and consistency of meaning.
Meaning in this sense, is that which the initiator of the communication wishes to convey.
The meaning should be conveyed in such a way that the receiver understands it.
From the psychological perspective, effective communication has an importance which goes beyond the transmission and reception of information.
It is vital for the effective co-ordination of group activities in all spheres of life.
For communication to be effective, the following guidelines should be taken into consideration; 1.
What is communicated must be clear and understood.
The sender should be clear about the message to be conveyed and the reasons for the message.
2.
Identify faults in previous methods of communication used and select an appropriate method of communication.
3.
There should be clear lines of communication.
The content of the message, the timescale and the recipients’ i.e target audience should be checked.
49 PAD 412 INTRODUCTION TO ADMINISTRATIVE PRACTICES AND PROCESSES 4.
The message should be prepared in the appropriate format and language having particular regard to the nature and background of the recipients of the communication.
5.
Where possible, use more than one means of communication to reinforce the message and be prepared to repeat it if necessary.
6.
The sender of the message should be someone with credibility in the organization 7.
Highlight the benefits of any particular message or suggestion.
8.
Illustrations should be given where appropriate to support the message.
9.
Factual information and careful explanation should be given where required.
10.
Logically and sequential structuring of argument is vital.
11.
Strong points should be used to reinforce your statements.
12.
Make your message interesting to your audience.
13.
Use pilot test in your proposed message and take account of any constructive feedback 14.
The purpose of the communication should be very clear.
15.
A communication style that will appeal to your audience should be adopted.
16.
Communication overload and under load should be avoided.
17.
The receiver’s attention should be captured and retained.
18.
The language of the communicator must be at the experience level of the recipient.
19.
Listening is a very important tool in communication.
Listen empathetically.
20.
Your Communication should be regularly updated and refined.
21.
Informal communication is a powerful tool, make use of it whenever necessary.
22.
Introduce journals, training courses and conferences in communications for staff.
23.
Make use of joint consultations.
50 PAD 412 INTRODUCTION TO ADMINISTRATIVE PRACTICES AND PROCESSES 3.2 BARRIERS TO EFFECTIVE COMMUNICATION FLOW Cushway and Lodge (1999:189) posit that barriers to Communication can come from a number of sources such as the sender, the receiver, the mode of transmission or the feedback mode.
The barrier may be with the sender of the message who may be unable or unwilling to communicate the necessary message very clearly, or with the receiver who may not understand the message sent, or there may be environmental factors affecting the condition under which the message is conveyed, such as noise.
Other factors which can pose as barrier to effective communication include but not limited to the following; 1.
Bad morale 2.
Lack of confidence/fear 3.
Frustration of staff 4.
Unwillingness to communicate 5.
Bad organisational setup 6.
Failure to assess the effectiveness of previous methods used 7.
Lack of integrity.
8.
Poor Communication skills of the Sender 9.
Vagueness and murkiness of the message i.e badly expressed messages.
10.
Poorly chosen words and phrases, omissions, lack of coherence, poor syntax and failure to clarify intentions.
11.
Information being too scanty for the receiver to give adequate feedback or take a decision.
12.
Information overload.
Where too many relatively trivial issues are out as information, the important messages may get lost unless special attention is drawn to them in some way.
13.
When there is disaffection between the sender and the receiver of the information, their emotional state will affect the way that message is perceived.
51 PAD 412 INTRODUCTION TO ADMINISTRATIVE PRACTICES AND PROCESSES 14.
Failure to come to the receiver’s language and experience level.
When we adjust our knowledge and skills to the level of the receiver, communication will be effective.
15.
Physical Noise can easily distort Communication.
16.
Selection of a poor channel/Transmission may also cause distortion in communication.
17.
Failure to understand the message by the receiver is a serious barrier to communication.
18.
Barrier to communication can occur where the receiver is threatened by the message.
19.
There will be a barrier in communication where the receiver displays impatience for any reasons when receiving the message 20.
When the receiver of the message is pre-occupied with other matters, the content of the message being receive may not be fully appreciated.
21.
Where there is a negative attitude towards the receiver of the message or towards the sender, the communication may not likely be effective.
22.
Physical conditions or environmental factors may also prevent the receiver from understanding the message.
1.
Communication will become ineffective where the receiver does not understand certain terms used in the message.
24.
Communication may also become ineffective where feedback is not provided at all or where feedback is delayed.
25.
Inattention can pose a very serious barrier to communication.
26.
Unclarified assumptions.
27.
Premature evaluation.
28.
Insufficient adjustment period.
29.
Loss by transmission and poor retention.
30.
Faulty translation.
31.
Failure to communicate is a grave barrier to communication.
52 PAD 412 INTRODUCTION TO ADMINISTRATIVE PRACTICES AND PROCESSES 3.3 PRINCIPLES OF EFFECTIVE COMMUNICATION Communication can be effective if the following principles are adhered to.
1.
Principle of Clarity The sender of the message should communicate in a clear and commonly understood language.
2.
Principle of Attention Full attention should be given when giving or receiving information as no communication is complete unless the message is understood.
Attention is required for this to be accomplished.
3.
Principle of Integrity This is the essence of communication.
Communication is one of the tools for securing and maintaining cooperation in attaining the organisation’s goals.
The integrity of the organisation depends on how well its core values and mission are actualized and this will be done through its managers.
The integrity principle anchors on the premise that the integrity of the organisation depends, in part, on supporting the position of the subordinate managers.
This is due to the fact that they occupy centres of communication and so should be encouraged to use their positions for this purpose.
4.
Principle of Strategic use of Informal organisation Informal organisation thrives on information.
In fact their core value lies in the transmission of information.
Formal organisation should make constructive use of informal organisation as a means of communication.
5.
Principle of Implementation A decision or policy not implemented is as good as not taken at all.
For the decisions or policies to be implemented, requires adequate communication and dissemination of information to all the concerned 53 PAD 412 INTRODUCTION TO ADMINISTRATIVE PRACTICES AND PROCESSES parties.
The cost of poor or ineffective communication cannot be quantified.
There is no doubt that there will be cost improvement and efficiency in organisation from effective communication.
3.4 GUIDELINES TO EFFECTIVE COMMUNICATION 1.
Keep the information to be transmitted short.
Don’t overload.
2.
The information should be broken down into essential and non- essential units, 3.
The chain of information transmission should be kept short.
4.
Ensure that the information is received and understood.
5.
Two-way communication is important and should be used whenever possible.
6.
Important delays should be noted.
7.
Remember that information has to be shared in order to be used.
8.
Know also that different people have different perception of information.
9.
Listening is also very effective in oral communication.
10.
Assumptions should not be mistaken for facts.
11.
In our daily activities, we are constantly communicating our dealings and attitude non verbally.
4.0 CONCLUSION Communication is the glue that holds an organisation together.
It cuts across every activity of human endeavour.
Effective communication is very desirable and essential for co-ordination of organisational and or group activities.
The interconnection that we seek with others is successfully accomplished through effective communication on many different levels.
Misunderstanding that occurs due to ineffective communication could lead to great losses to the organization.
Good masterly of effective communication processes and the avoidance of the barriers to effective communication can lead to improved managerial performance in organisations be it private or public organisation.
54 PAD 412 INTRODUCTION TO ADMINISTRATIVE PRACTICES AND PROCESSES 5.0 SUMMARY In this unit we observed that communication is inevitable for the smooth operations of organizations, be it private or public organisation.
In this unit we explained effective communication, the various barriers to effective communication, and concluded by giving guidelines to effective communication.
We hope you have learnt a lot about communication and how to communicate effectively.
This is very essential and is the principal means of achieving various organisational activities.
6.0 TUTOR MARKED ASSIGNMENT 1.
List and explain 15 barriers to effective communication.
2.
Suggest 8 guidelines to effective communication?
3.
Mention 4 principles of effective communication and briefly explain each of them.
7.0 References/Further Readings 1.
Armstrong, M(2008): How to be a Better Manager.
7th Edition.
London: Kogan Page).
2.
Obiaku, D, (1999) Communication Skills.
Lagos: Advertising Practitioners Council of Nigeria APCON 3.
Okoye, J. C. (2004).
Communication Effectiveness in Public and Private Organisations.
Enugu: HRV Publishers.
4.
Schermertorn, Hunt and Osborn (1985): Managing Organisational Behavior.
New York: John Wiley and Sons.
55 PAD 412 INTRODUCTION TO ADMINISTRATIVE PRACTICES AND PROCESSES MODULE TWO Unit 1 Drafting Unit 2 Minuting Unit 3 Memo writing Unit 4 Official Letter Writing UNIT 1 DRAFTING 1.0 INTRODUCTION 2.0 OBJECTIVES 3.0 MAIN CONTENT 3.1 Drafting 3.2 Uses of Draft 3.3 Features of a good draft 3.4 Guidelines for good Drafting 4.0 CONCLUSION 5.0 SUMMARY 6.0 TUTOR-MARKED ASSIGNMENT 7.0 FURTHER READINGS 1.0 INTRODUCTION Draft is another form of communication in an organisation.
Sometimes a superior officer may be so busy to handle most of the official duties that needs his/her immediate attention.
Coupled with this, is so many deadlines to meet with so little time, at his/her disposal, to meet such deadlines.
The concerned officer may call for draft on certain documents from his/her subordinate.
Added to this is the fact that superior officers may use the act of draft and drafting as a means of training their subordinates in the act of performing their official duties more efficiently.
To this end, one may ask, what is draft?
In the context being used here, draft can be referred to as a preliminary version of a piece of writing, a document or plan that will require 56 PAD 412 INTRODUCTION TO ADMINISTRATIVE PRACTICES AND PROCESSES more work in order to be finished.
It can be a sketch, design or drawing that is made before a final version is produced.
We are going to discuss features of draft, when to draft and when not to draft in this unit.
2.0 Learning Objectives To help the students acquire the necessary skills in the act of drafting that will help them perform excellently well in their chosen profession.
3.0 Main Content 3.1 Drafting A draft is a proposal of something such as letter, circular, minute, report or other document, prepared in writing and sent by a lower officer to his superior for consideration.
The process of preparing a Draft is called Drafting.
The draft can be made and corrected several times before a final version is produced.
But if the proposed letter or suggested circular serves the prescribed purpose, it is considered good and approved without amendment.
A draft may be amended by filling in the gaps in the efforts of the officer or by the incorporation of additional facts by the senior officer.
A bad draft (e.g one which does not show an appreciation of the point at issue or one hastily put up may be rejected and scrapped.
3.2 Uses of Draft A draft can be called by the superior officer if an item or correspondence is of a routine nature and calls for a routine reply.
A letter that is ready for signature should be put up to the senior officer for his signature.
Sometimes the writer of a minute has to submit a draft embodying a recommendation in his minute.
Draft replies suggested for consideration may reduce substantially the length of a minute.
When a draft has been approved, it is sent to a typist to be produced in the correct form for issue.
The act of typing the letter in this form is known as ‘fairing’ and the finished document is known as a ‘faired draft’.
57 PAD 412 INTRODUCTION TO ADMINISTRATIVE PRACTICES AND PROCESSES 3.3 Features of a good Draft: (a) Clarity of expression: Use simple and direct language.
Avoid repetition.
(b) Accuracy: Verify your facts and figures in advance before writing.
(c) Grammar Weak grammar mars the quality of a draft.
Use correct punctuation marks, Avoid slangs.
Use your Dictionary when in doubt.
(d) Courtesy: All communications must be worded politely.
Even the reply to a discourteous writer should be couched in courteous terms.
(e) Headings: Drafts of minutes, briefs, letters, etc should as a rule, have headings which give an idea of the matter in the drafts.
(f) Line Spacing: Reasonable spacing is used in typed drafts so that there is ample space for amendments.
Drafts should be typed only on one side of the typing sheet or already used or discarded sheets.
(g) Discretion: Discarded papers containing classified information should never be used for drafting.
(h) Instruction for faired copy/copies: When drafts of any document are given to typists for fairing, the number of copies required should always be clearly recorded at the top of page 1 of every draft.
Such instructions can, for example take the form of either ‘6 copies’ meaning 6 in all or ‘1+ 5 copies’ meaning an original and five copies.
It is desirable for Schedule Officers and their typists to agree on the wording to be used in describing the number of copies that should be made in addition to the original so as to save time and avoid waste of stationary.
(i) Designation: After drafting a minute or letter for the superior officer, the drafting officer should remember to write the superior officer’s name and not his/her own name as the author.
It is an offence in the civil service to claim credit for a draft you made for your superior officer.
(j) Filing: The subordinate should put the draft in a file before sending the reply back to the superior officer.
In the absence of the main file use a Temporary File marked (“T File).
58 PAD 412 INTRODUCTION TO ADMINISTRATIVE PRACTICES AND PROCESSES (k) Finally, a good draft from a subordinate to a superior officer should be such that the superior officer has little or no addition to make.
3.4 Guidelines for good Drafting (i) Avoid ambiguity: If one’s thinking is obscure, one’s drafts and minute is likely to be ambiguous.
Be as clear in your thinking and writing as possible.
(ii) Bad Hand-Writing: Let your writing be legible.
It is not necessary to type short drafts or minutes but minutes or drafts covering more than half of foolscap sheet should be typewritten.
(iii) Haste: Do not defer action on problems requiring considerable effort in drafting and minuting.
Poorly produced minutes or speeches or draft of any kind is attributable to accumulation of work or files.
Procrastination encourages the production of hasty drafts or minutes based on haphazard research.
(iv) Irrelevance: Have a grasp of the subject matter.
Be consistent and include relevant issues.
Do not deviate from the question being considered.
(v) Inaccurate Information: Make sure that you are well informed in the provisions of Government circulars and regulations.
Take note of alternations in the laws, Public Service Rules and other approved authorities.
Try to be current in the happenings in the service because a conclusion based on an obsolete precedence is likely to be misleading.
(vi) Indecision: A draft must be written in a decisive manner if it is proposed to solve or advance the solution to a problem.
It should not be hanging on the fence or show elements of indecision.
The summing up or conclusion should, indicate your stand.
59 PAD 412 INTRODUCTION TO ADMINISTRATIVE PRACTICES AND PROCESSES (vii) Stylistic Defects: Avoid repetitions or unnecessary airs and graces.
4.0 CONCLUSION We viewed draft as a preliminary version of a piece of writing, a document or plan that will require more work in order to be finished.
We also observed that it can be a sketch, a design or a drawing that is made before a final version is produced.
Drafting is one of the tools of communication.
Communication skills can be learnt through drafting of minutes, speeches and what have you.
It is important to note that a good draft should contain as few corrections as possible.
This is not easy to accomplish especially with new timers.
Constant practice will, however, help subordinates accomplish this.
5.0 SUMMARY In this unit, an attempt has been made to cover almost everything concerning draft and drafting.
Among the issues discussed were features of draft, when to draft and when not to draft as well as guideline on how to produce a good draft.
We hope that you have acquired the necessary knowledge and skill on drafting that will help you do well in your profession.
6.0 TUTOR-MARKED ASSIGNMENT 1.
Outline the features of a good draft.
2.
What are the things to look out for in a good draft?
3.
Draft a speech to be delivered by the Vice Chancellor on the occasion of the matriculation ceremony of your university.
7.0 FURTHER READING Fadeyi, B.
(1995).
“Minuting , Drafting, Report/Letter Writing,” Paper Presentation at an Induction Programme for Newly Employed Officers of the Nigeria Public Service, Lagos.
60 PAD 412 INTRODUCTION TO ADMINISTRATIVE PRACTICES AND PROCESSES Federal Republic of Nigeria, (1997).
Civil Service Handbook.
Abuja: Office of Establishment and Management services, the Presidency).
Little, P. (1975).
Communications in Business.
2nd Edition, London: Longman Group Ltd. Maduabum, C.P.
(2009).
“Drafting, Minuting, Memo Writing, Official Letter Writing, in Chuks P. Maduabun (Ed) Writing Techniques for the Management of Public and Private Affairs.
Badagry : ASCON Press.
Obiaku, D. (1999).
Communication Skill.
Lagos: Advertising Practitioners Council of Nigeria (APCON) 61 PAD 412 INTRODUCTION TO ADMINISTRATIVE PRACTICES AND PROCESSES UNIT 2 MINUTING 5.0 INTRODUCTION 2.0 OBJECTIVE 3.0 MAIN CONTENT 3.1 Definition of Minute 3.2 When Not To Minute 3.3 Form and Content of a Minute 3.4 What to Avoid in Minute 3.5 Tips on Minuting 3.6 Abbreviations in Minuting 4.0 CONCLUSION 5.0 SUMMARY 6.0 TUTOR-MARKED ASSIGNMENT 7.0 REFERENCES/FURTHER READINGS 1.0 INTRODUCTION Minuting, like drafting, is a very important form of written communication in an organisation.
It is one of the most widely used and its use cuts across all levels of the organisational hierarchy.
In view of the importance attached to this form of formal communication, we deem it pertinent to give the students the required knowledge and skill on how to write minutes while performing their professional duties.
This is because many employees especially the newly employed do not know what minuting is all about.
Majority of them do not know when to minute or when not to.
Equally surprising is the fact that those of them who know when to minute still struggle as to the content or form such minutes will take.
There are still older employees who do not know the forms and content of a Minute.
Neither do they know what to avoid in Minuting.
We intend to discuss all these and also give essential hints on Minuting as well as the format and strategies for minuting.
62 PAD 412 INTRODUCTION TO ADMINISTRATIVE PRACTICES AND PROCESSES 2.0 OBJECTIVES At the end of this unit, the student should be able to acquire knowledge and proficient skill on the art of minuting while performing their professional duties.
3.0 MAIN CONTENT 3.1 DEFINITION Minute could be defined as a communication in writing between two or more officials in an organisation.
Minutes are normally used to consider and settle matters or to direct what action may be taken in a circumstance.
Minuting is the act of writing a minute.
3.2 When Not to Minute It may not be necessary to minute on a matter when: (a) The matter can be solved by oral communication either at a meeting (usually informal) or by telephone.
(b) The action necessary is a routine one.
(c) The matter is straight forwarded and no further information or guidance is required.
3.3 Form and Content of a Minute At the top left-hand side of a minute is the designation of the person to whom the minute is addressed to.
This is followed by the text of the minute.
This is then concluded by the signature or initials of the writer.
Immediately under his signature or initials is the typewritten or stamped name of the officer that wrote the minute.
Under his name, the post held is shown and the date of his minute, indicated.
63 PAD 412 INTRODUCTION TO ADMINISTRATIVE PRACTICES AND PROCESSES Guidelines for a good minute: (a) State briefly the ‘matter at issue’.
(b) State the present position and the facts affecting it.
This should be supported by making reference to previous papers.
(c) It is important to verify whether or not the report, proposal or request accords with any laws, Public Service Rules, Financial Regulations, Circulars, or Memoranda which have been circulated.
Quote the necessary section of the Public Service Rules, etc, or attach a copy of the relevant document concerning the point at issue.
(d) It is quite necessary to indicate any previous decisions which may be relevant to the point at issue.
(e) Indicate any facts or argument which may influence the action to be taken.
You will do well to cite relevant authorities.
(f) Finally, suggest what action you think should be taken.
The substance of a memoranda or letter in reply may be suggested in your minute which should be so drafted that the wording may be incorporated direct into the reply to issue.
3.3 What To Avoid In Minuting.
(j) Avoid mediocrity: Do not minute in an amateur or obscure manner.
Try to be as clear and as logical as possible.
(ii) Legibility Writing: Let your writing be legibly enough.
Do not type short minutes.
However, minutes covering more than half of foolscap sheet should be type written.
64 PAD 412 INTRODUCTION TO ADMINISTRATIVE PRACTICES AND PROCESSES (iii) Avoid procrastination: Do not defer action on problems requiring considerable effort in minuting.
Delay to act on files promptly tends to encourage the production of hasty minutes based on haphazard research.
(iv) Be original and relevant: Try to have a grasp of the subject at issue and do not drift away from the matter being considered.
(viii) Avoid Inaccurate Information: It is profitable to know intimately the provisions of Government circulars and regulations.
Take note of alternations in the laws, Public Service Rules and other approved authorities.
It is pertinent to be as current as possible.
This is because a conclusion based on an obsolete rules and regulations is likely to be misleading.
(ix) Indecision: For a minute to solve or advance the solution to a problem, it should not show indecision.
In view of this, the summary or conclusion of the minute should indicate its stand.
(x) Stylistic Defects: Avoid repetitions as well as unnecessary airs and graces.
3.5 Tips on Minuting To write a good minute, the following guidelines should be adhered to: (i) Go through the subject matter files and other relevant documents to ensure you have facts to enable you produce a good minute.
(ii) make sure you clearly understand the subject matter which should be briefly stated.
(iii) State the previous positions or decisions, if any, which may lead to the present.
65 PAD 412 INTRODUCTION TO ADMINISTRATIVE PRACTICES AND PROCESSES (iv) Write in good English with correct spellings and avoid journalistic writing or slang.
(v) Arranged all facts in both logical and chronological order.
(vi) Indicate whether there are laws or past decisions that may affect the present case.
(vii) Identify relevant facts and argue persuasively either for or against the matter at issue, quoting appropriate authorities or laws or precedence wherever necessary.
(viii) Identify the options and make sure your argument is balanced by stressing points for and against the options.
(ix) Highlight reasons for your preference.
(x) Avoid disjointed presentation by ensuring that your presentation flows logically.
(xi) Avoid bad grammar.
Use correct punctuation marks.
(xii) Be precise in your expressions.
Avoid flowery language or journalistic writing.
(xiii) Make sure that the information you give is correct.
(xiv) It is good to put headings when minuting as this serve as a quick reference point.
66 PAD 412 INTRODUCTION TO ADMINISTRATIVE PRACTICES AND PROCESSES (xv) Long minute should be type-written.
However, if a minute is to be submitted in long hand, it should be done neatly, legibly and should not exceed half of one foolscap sheet page.
(xvi) Minutes are supposed to be short and not lengthy, therefore, use abbreviations where necessary.
3.6 Abbreviations in Minuting: The under listed abbreviations are examples of some of the abbreviations to use while minuting: i. a b c means: at back cover of file; ii.
fyi – means for your information; iii.
fna – for necessary action; iv.
b.u – Bring up.
4.0 CONCLUSION Muniting is one of the many forms of written communication in an organisation.
A powerful communication skill can be learnt by acquiring a good command of the art of minuting.
This is not easy to accomplish but constant practice will, however, help subordinates accomplish it.
5.0 SUMMARY Attempt has been made to cover almost everything concerning minuting in this unit.
We discussed all the relevant issues concerning minuting.
We also proffered guidelines on how to write a good minute.
We hope that you have acquired the necessary knowledge and skill on how to write a good minute.
6.0 TUTOR-MARKED ASSIGNMENT 1.
What are the things to avoid when minuting.
2.
Give guidelines on minuting to the newly employed staff in your department.
67 PAD 412 INTRODUCTION TO ADMINISTRATIVE PRACTICES AND PROCESSES 7.0 REFERENCES/FURTHER READING Fadeyi, B.
(1995).
“Minuting , Drafting, Report/Letter Writing,” Paper Presentation at an Induction Programme for Newly Employed Officers of the Nigeria Public Service, Lagos.
Federal Republic of Nigeria, (1997).
Civil Service Handbook.
Abuja: Office of Establishment and Management services, the Presidency).
Little, P. (1975).
Communications in Business.
2nd Edition, London: Longman Group Ltd. Maduabum, C.P.
(2009).
“Drafting, Minuting, Memo Writing, Official Letter Writing, in Chuks P. Maduabun (Ed) Writing Techniques for the Management of Public and Private Affairs.
Badagry : ASCON Press.
Obiaku, D. (1999).
Communication Skill.
Lagos: Advertising Practitioners Council of Nigeria (APCON).
68 PAD 412 INTRODUCTION TO ADMINISTRATIVE PRACTICES AND PROCESSES Unit 3 MEMO WRITING 1.0 INTRODUCTION 2.0 OBJECTIVES 3.0 MAIN CONTENT 3.1 Memo Writing 3.2 Essence of Memorandum 3.3 Format of a Memo 4.0 CONCLUSION 5.0 SUMMARY 6.0 TUTOR-MARKED ASSIGNMENT 7.0 FURTHER READINGS 1.0 INTRODUCTION Memorandum is another form of written communication used in both public and private organizations.
Memorandum is a highly classified document.
It connotes notes, minutes, as well as forms of letters.
It is a written documents used informally to convey information, facts or ideas from one person or group to another in an organisation.
But for the purpose of the administrative practices and purposes we view memorandum as a specialized and classified government or public agency document used for the presentation of analysed data, facts and ideas to aid government or a particular public organization’s decisions either for a more vigorous approach to execute established policies, or exploit revision of existing policies.
In this unit, we are going to examine forms of memo, its importance in an organisation as well as the various formats and strategies for writing a memo.
69 PAD 412 INTRODUCTION TO ADMINISTRATIVE PRACTICES AND PROCESSES 2.0 OBJECTIVES: It is believed that after studying this unit, students should have acquired added knowledge and skill on the art of memo writing, its importance as a medium of communication in an organisation as well as the various formats and strategies for writing a good memo.
3.0 MAIN CONTENT 3.1 MEMO WRITING The word “Memorandum” or Memo is derived from the Latin word” “Memorare” which means ‘to remember’ or ‘to’ bring to mind’.
According to the Chambers Twentieth Century “Memorandum” means “something to be remembered; a note to assist the memory; a summary of the state of a question”.
Memorandum is used in both public and private organizations to mean notes, minutes, as well as forms of letters and written documents used informally to convey information, facts or ideas from one person or group to another.
For the purpose of Administrative practices and processes, a memorandum is viewed as a specialized and classified government or public agency document used for the presentation of analysed data, facts and ideas to aid government or a particular public organization’s decisions either for a more vigorous approach to execute established policies, or exploit revision of existing policies.
3.
2 ESSENCE OF MEMORANDUM Writing a memorandum involves some activities such as: research into a subject problem or situation; data collection and analysis; and policy initiation and analysis, relevant inputs for decision-making at government level.
In the public service, government policies and programmes and other crucial issues are examined and analysed in its entirety and thereafter presented in a concise, analytical form as a memorandum.
This is done to facilitate decision-making.
Memorandum is a highly classified document.
70 PAD 412 INTRODUCTION TO ADMINISTRATIVE PRACTICES AND PROCESSES Normally, it is ‘SECRET’ and regarded as the property of the council or cabinet.
The memorandum may be submitted to the appropriate authority in the form of concrete proposals or recommendations for the purpose of obtaining approval or consent, decision or directive on fresh policy or amendment or modification of an existing policy.
Similarly, an internal memo serves the same purpose but is restricted to a particular organization.
3.3 FORMAT OF A MEMO As is the case in a minute, a memo starts by addressing the designation of whom the memo is meant.
This is followed by the subject matter of discussion written and underscored so that it will attract attention immediately.
In public organisation, the subject matter in a memo is referred to as “Matter at issue”.
The first paragraph of the memo deals with the introductory aspect of the matter at issue.
Then major components or interrelated areas in the subject matter are, each, discussed in the subsequent paragraphs.
The last paragraph is called the PRAYER paragraph.
This is a request paragraph in which the approval is sought.
In this paragraph, each of the issues discussed in the previous paragraphs should be itemized.
For example: “In view of the foregoing, the Vice Chancellor is requested to kindly consider and approve that: (i) A course on Forensic Analysis be organized for the staff of the Audit Unit; (ii) The ICAN be chosen to run the course (iii) The course should take place at Intercontinental Hotels, Ikeja, Lagos State; (iv) Six (6) Audit officers between CONTISS 10 and 13 be released to attend the programme; (v) A total sum of Two MILLION Naira (2, 000, 000.00) as analysed in paragraph -- be released for the course.
71 PAD 412 INTRODUCTION TO ADMINISTRATIVE PRACTICES AND PROCESSES Then the final sentence could then be: Submitted please OR submitted for the V.Cs kind consideration and approval please.
This is immediately followed by the forwarding officer’s signature, designation and date.
It is important to note the following: (i) Designations are used in place of names because, in the Service, Officers are known by their designations e.g Dean, SMS meaning Dean, School of Management Sciences OR D.V.C.
(Acad.)
meaning Deputy Vice Chancellor (Academics), etc.
(ii) Aside from paragraph one, other paragraphs are numbered for cross- referencing purposes.
(iii) The word PRAYER could be written in the last paragraph but the important thing is to understand that it means request.
For instance, an officer who feels unfairly treated in a disciplinary action or loss or promotion opportunity could appeal for a re-consideration of his case.
In this instance, he could use the word Prayer in that paragraph.
However, people should not be seen to be praying in this paragraph for the “Almighty God or Allah” to make the approving Authority to grant their request.
4.0 CONCLUSION Memo is one of the many forms of written communication in an organisation A good knowledge of the art of writing memo will enhance the communication skill of the concerned officer.
As is the case with other forms of communication discussed above, this is not an easy task to accomplish but constant practice will, however, help subordinates accomplish it.
5.0 SUMMARY In this unit, all the relevant issues concerning memo and memo writing were discussed.
We also discussed its importance as well as powerful guidelines on how to write memo in an organisation.
We hope that you have 72 PAD 412 INTRODUCTION TO ADMINISTRATIVE PRACTICES AND PROCESSES acquired the necessary knowledge and skill on this very important medium of communication.
6.0 TUTOR-MARKED ASSIGNMENT 1.
Your organisation has just procured sophisticated equipment that will help dictate fraudulent practises in your establishment as well as make it difficult for staff to engage in same.
However, there are no competent officers to handle this very costly equipment.
Employing new staff to perform this assignment will be very costly for the organisation.
You are therefore required, as the head of your unit, to present a memo to the Managing Director of your organisation requesting that five (5) employees of the Audit unit within the salary scale of COUNTIS 12 to 15 be allowed to attend an IT course on Forensic detection and prevention.
The content of this course revealed that the attendants will be trained in the use of the sophisticated equipment which your organisation has procured.
Present your memoranda on this request.
7.0 FURTHER READINGS Fadeyi, B.
(1995); “Minuting, Drafting, Report/Letter Writing,” Paper Presentation at an Induction Programme for Newly Employed Officers of the Nigeria Public Service, Lagos.
Federal Republic of Nigeria (1997).
Civil Service Handbook (Abuja: Office of Establishment and Management services, the Presidency).
Little, P. (1975).
Communications in Business, 2nd Edition, London: Longman Group Ltd. Maduabum, C.P (2009): “Drafting, Minuting, Memo Writing, Official Letter Writing, in Chuks P. Maduabun (Ed) Writing Techniques for the Management of Public and Private Affairs.
ASCON Press, Badagry Obiaku, D., (1999).
Communication Skills.
Lagos: Advertising Practitioners Council of Nigeria (APCON) 73 PAD 412 INTRODUCTION TO ADMINISTRATIVE PRACTICES AND PROCESSES Unit 4 OFFICIAL LETTER WRITING 1.0 INTRODUCTION 2.0 OBJECTIVES 3.0 MAIN CONTENT 3.1 Official Letter Writing 3.2 File Copy 3.3 Salutations 3.4 Attachments 3.5 Re-directed Letters 3.6 Endorsements 4.0 CONCLUSION 5.0 SUMMARY 6.0 TUTOR-MARKED ASSIGNMENT 7.0 FURTHER READINGS 1.0 INTRODUCTION Letters, like minutes, memo etc.
are forms of communication from one individual or group to another.
Letters are used to convey decisions, to give directives on the required course of action or to let people know of certain new developments.
Our selection to treat official letter writing in this course drives from the belief that availability of information necessary for the solution of the problems in an organisation or attainment of the organisational goal is prime to the success and or continual existence of the 0rganisation.
Letters differ from minutes or memo in that it possesses certain formalities that are not present in minutes and memos.
In this unit, we will treat some of the important aspect of official letter writing such as; format of official Letters, the relevance of keeping file Copy, the relevance of Salutations and its position in an official letters, when and where to put Attachments in an official letters, the uses or importance of re-directed 74 PAD 412 INTRODUCTION TO ADMINISTRATIVE PRACTICES AND PROCESSES Letters and when to use it, the relevance of endorsements in an official letters.
2.0 OBJECTIVES This unit is expected to give the students proper knowledge and understanding of the following:  official Letter Writing  relevance of file Copy  relevance of Salutations  when to put Attachments  re-directed Letters  endorsements 3.0 MAIN CONTENT 3.1 OFFICIAL LETTER WRITING Letters, like minutes, memo etc are forms of communication from one individual or group to another.
Letters are used to convey decisions, give directives on the required course of action or to let people know of certain new developments.
Letters differ from minutes or memo in that they, unlike minutes or memo invariably insist on certain formalities such as the inclusion of the addresses of both the author and the addressee, indication of the date of the letter at the right hand side, insertion of headings and so on.
The use of abbreviations is not encouraged in official letters.
It is advisable to write words in full.
Most letters are written on prepared letter-headed papers which have already printed address of the sender, columns for Reference Number, and Date.
The format of any letter will, to a large extent, depend on the addressee.
If the letter is from one ministry to anther the format is similar.
But if it is from a Ministry or Parastatal to an individual or organization outside government, the format is different.
If a letter is going from one 75 PAD 412 INTRODUCTION TO ADMINISTRATIVE PRACTICES AND PROCESSES ministry to another the person who signs it will equally depend on the seriousness of the subject matter and who is supposed to treat it at the receiving end.
It is advisable for a senior or a high-ranking officer to sign any letter that is considered very important or has serious under tone.
An officer may be directed in a minute to issue a letter but his signature should not be appended in the said letter without prior clarification from the officer that issued such directives.
The signatory to a letter is considered very serious in certain public offices such as the Armed Forces.
A lower ranking officer should never sign a letter that is meant for the attention of a very senior officer.
When in doubt as to whose signatory the letter should bear, seek clarifications from your superiors.
Paragraphs should be numbered in letters except the first paragraph.
The concluding paragraph bears “Thank you”, which, in this instance, appears to be shortest paragraph.
3.2 File Copy A copy of any letter sent out by an officer should be made and put in the file and appropriately paged as a file copy.
The importance of file copy is enormous.
For instance, it provides an easy reference point for the subject matter dealt in it.
It is also an invaluable guide for officers who may be posted newly to any ministry or establishment of government long after the originator of the letter had left the organization.
In the file copy, it is also indicated the date when the file should be brought up (b.u) for a reappraisal of the content of the letter.
Officers should also keep their own ‘flimsy copies’ for future reference.
3.3 Salutations In letters from one ministry of government establishment to another, letters are addressed to the Chief Executive, e.g .
Honourable Minister, in the case of Ministries or to the General Manager, Managing Director or Director- General for parastatals , as the case may be.
76 PAD 412 INTRODUCTION TO ADMINISTRATIVE PRACTICES AND PROCESSES For ministries, it is not usual to start with Dear sir, or Dear xyz.
Sometimes, however, some Permanent Secretaries or Chief Executives are known to put some familiar and personal touches by starting with Dear Colleague or Dear xyz.
What is meant here is that in government to government correspondence, Dear Mr. XYZ may be tolerated at higher levels and where the author and the addressee are fairly familiar; otherwise it is usual not to include these.
The closing is also less formal in that yours faithfully etc., are not included.
This style is not very common outside government establishments.
This style differs from that of letter going outside government establishments as the later take a more formal format.
They are started with dear XYZ and close with “Yours faithfully”.
3.4 Attachments Attachments that are necessary for the circumstance of the given letter should be added to the letter irrespective of the recipient of the letter.
But this is most serious when it is government or official document.
The importance of adding attachments to a letter are very enamours.
The attachments make for faster consideration of the subject or ‘matter at issue’, in addition to assisting better appreciation of the matter at hand.
Attachments should be clearly indicated.
The sign for attachments is shown at the left-hand margins.
Alternatively, all the enclosures are spelt out at the bottom end of the letter.
3.5 Re-directed Letters There are instances when a letter meant for a particular ministry is mistakenly directed to a different ministry.
When such things happens, rather than send back the letter to the author and ask that he direct his letter to the appropriate ministry, the ministry that receives the misdirected letter should re-direct it to the appropriate destination with a short letter.
The original letter should be attached while photocopy is made and retained 77 PAD 412 INTRODUCTION TO ADMINISTRATIVE PRACTICES AND PROCESSES in a file.
The appropriate ministry should then be requested to deal directly with the originator of the letter.
Thereafter, the originator of the letter should be informed of the action taken with the advice that he or they should also deal directly with the correct ministry in matters connected with the subject matter of in the letter.
This action is viewed as being more mature than sending back the letter to the originator and asking him to address it to the appropriate ministry.
3.6 Endorsements Endorsement is written at the bottom of an earlier letter to person or persons to whom the original one was not addressed.
The purpose is to pass information to the new addressee.
He or she is requested or directed as to what is required sequel to the body of the main letter.
A definite action is often required in endorsements and so is preferable to draw the attention of the person to whom it is endorsed to the paragraph or paragraphs requiring his action.
For instance, the above is for your necessary action with particular reference to the issues raised at paragraphs 3 or 4 of my letter or of the ministry xyz letter or circular of the matter at issue.
At times, the endorsement may be for information only.
When this is the case, it is usually stated.
4.0 CONCLUSION Official letter is a relevant tool and a vehicle to official communication in an organisation.
This unit has provided us some fundamental facts which before now have been complex in official letter writing.
However, the unit has also analyzed the import of official letters and its usefulness.
An in-depth knowledge and understanding of this unit enable anyone reading Administrative Practices and Processes either as a student, practitioner or scholar, to become very proficient and confident in the art of official letter writing and or any form of written communication.
78 PAD 412 INTRODUCTION TO ADMINISTRATIVE PRACTICES AND PROCESSES 5.0 SUMMARY In this unit, a detailed explanation of all that is involved in official letter writing was undertaken.
The various stages involved, in addition to the structure / format of official letter writing were equally clarified.
We hope you have learnt enough as to enable you produce a very powerful official letters henceforth.
6.0 TUTOR-MARKED ASSIGNMENT 1.
Outline the format of an official letter.
2.
Identify the differences between an official letter and a Minute and or a Memo.
7.0 FURTHER READING Fadeyi, B.
(1995); “Minuting, Drafting, Report/Letter Writing,” Paper Presentation at an Induction Programme for Newly Employed Officers of the Nigeria Public Service, Lagos.
Federal Republic of Nigeria (1997).
Civil Service Handbook (Abuja: Office of Establishment and Management services, the Presidency).
Little, P. (1975).
Communications in Business, 2nd Edition, (London: Longman Group Ltd).
Maduabum, C.P (2009): “Drafting, Minuting, Memo Writing, Official Letter Writing, in Chuks P. Maduabun (Ed).
Writing Techniques for the Management of Public and Private Affairs.
ASCON Press, Badagry Obiaku, D., (1999): Communication Skills (Lagos: Advertising Practitioners Council of Nigeria (APCON) 79 PAD 412 INTRODUCTION TO ADMINISTRATIVE PRACTICES AND PROCESSES MODULE THREE REPORT WRITING Unit 1 - What Report Writing is all About Unit 2 - Strategies and Structures of Report Writing Unit 3 - Writing a Report Unit 1 WHAT REPORT WRITING IS ALL ABOUT CONTENT 1.0 INTRODUCTION 2.0 OBJECTIVES 3.0 MAIN CONTENT 3.1 Definition 3.2 Types of Report 3.3 Strategies of Report writing 3.4 Purpose of Report 4.0 CONCLUSION 5.0 SUMMARY 6.0 TUTOR-MARKED ASSIGNMENT 7.0 FURTHER READINGS 1.0 INTRODUCTION Report is a medium or a vehicle of communication.
It is a means of generating and presenting information to meet organizational needs.
The ability to produce a good report is a mark of serious minded and erudite staff.
Modern and Corporate organizations invest heavily in the capacity building of their employees partly because of the high dividend of such investment.
The knowledge and skills to write qualitative reports is 80 PAD 412 INTRODUCTION TO ADMINISTRATIVE PRACTICES AND PROCESSES recommended for all the staff in the organisation especially at the middle and management levels.
2.0 OBJECTIVES At the end of this unit, you should be able to: (i) Know what report writing is all about (ii) Identify the different types of Report (iii) Explain the stages involved in Report writing (iv) Write and present good reports 3.0 MAIN CONTENT 3.1 DEFINITION Reports are means of generating facts and presenting information to meet organizational needs.
According to Bentley (1978) “reports are means of setting down the facts, opinion and conclusion which the author or (individual/group) wishes to communicate”.
Oxford Dictionary describes report “as a written document in a given subject to convey information and ideas and at times to make recommendation”.
According to Oxford advanced Learners Dictionary, Report is “A spoken or written account of something heard, seen, studied, etc.
All the above definitions are pointers to what report is all about.
It is indeed a means of conveying information or an account of an issue to the parties concerned and, sometimes, to non- concerned parties as well.
Report may be written or orally given but written report has a more permanent nature.
3.2 TYPES OF REPORTS The types of report are largely based on the Ministries/Departments/Agencies (MDAs) in the Public and Private sectors and their need.
In the context of both public and private sectors, the following format is common: (i) Performance 81 PAD 412 INTRODUCTION TO ADMINISTRATIVE PRACTICES AND PROCESSES (ii) Functional related job (iii) Scientific and Technical (iv) Professional Advisers (v) Government Green and white paper; and (vi) Committee of inquiries (i) Performance Report on performance is of four types.
These include: - Quarterly report - Half yearly report - Annual report - Report on conferences / seminars (a) Quarterly Report – is clear and that in every quarter reports on the activities of an organization or its units are written and are forwarded to the Chief Executive Officer (CEO).
(b) Half yearly – can be useful in different Organizations, Departments, Divisions to enable the organizational objectives to be properly put in place for the Chief Executive Officer (CEO).
(c) Annual Report – is a report that organizations render to their corporate body or stakeholders annually.
Progress of the organization can be obtained from this report.
(d) Report on Conference/Seminar – this is a report obtained from personnel who attended seminar/conference and submitted to his organization at the end of the conference/seminar.
Recommendations contained in it, become useful for the organizations; and other vital organ for implementation.
Other forms of report are; 82 PAD 412 INTRODUCTION TO ADMINISTRATIVE PRACTICES AND PROCESSES Internal Audit Accident Sales Production Appraisals Internal Audit – This provides a kind of checks and balances on both administration and financial activities.
It deals with individuals and papers respectively.
Accident - This is an unexpected event which comes and goes but the organization takes report of such event.
The reports are made available after investigation e.g fire, burglary, road accident etc.
Sale – This relates to cash transaction outfits, e.g the NOUN Canteen where sales report is made formerly to the Head of ventures on daily basis.
Appraisal - This involves assessment of an individuals against his productivity.
Report on his performance gives the organization the opportunity to know how productive the individual/group is.
(i) Scientific and Technical Report: Report on technical contents, emanate from Ministries of Health, Science, Education etc.
Diagnosis is incomplete without formal technical report.
(ii) Professional/Advisers: This is a report that takes the style of scientific/Technical.
It emanates from professionals such as accountants , medical and management consultants to the Chief Executive Officer (CEO) for decision making.
(iii) Committee of Inquiry: This is usual with public sector organizations.
It is set up to conduct studies on different issues/problems, according to Mort (1920, to provide recommendations.
83 PAD 412 INTRODUCTION TO ADMINISTRATIVE PRACTICES AND PROCESSES (iv) Government’s Green and White Papers: it is a gorgeous type of report.
It is green when the contents are still being proposed (policy), while the white paper indicates that a definite decision has been made.
It is then called white paper 3.3 PLANNING OF REPORT WRITING Planning is an essential ingredient in report writing.
Before putting your pen to paper, the planning stage must be well articulated, i.e.
through collection and arrangement of data.
In report writing, which presupposes that thorough collections and analysis have been and must as well be managed as a matter of fact.
It should be noted that information or data analysed must meet the facts required.
Indeed, the terms of focus or/and essential for a rational conclusion.
Planning in report, takes cognizance of structure and layout features such as: the title, table of contents and digital system i.e.
the main heading, sub headings e.g.
1.
Main headings 1.1 Sub headings; and 1.1.1 Sub, sub headings Furthermore, the sources of data collection are worthy of mentioning in planning.
It is important to consider interview or talking to people who are involved, apart from the data collected.
These facts must be devoid of (hear say) when planning.
It is also necessary to appreciate the state of Art in communication today, hence the need for information technology.
Technologies have played roles that are dominant; computer print out brochures, pamphlets can be relied upon when planning to write reports.
84 PAD 412 INTRODUCTION TO ADMINISTRATIVE PRACTICES AND PROCESSES The sources of information which include primary and secondary are very germane in writing a good report.
The sources are as follows: Primary: This includes field interview, observation, experimentations etc.
Secondary: This involves collection of information from books, Encyclopaedia, computer etc.
A good planning / preparation provides, in the final analysis, a good report.
At this stage, the write up is said to have fulfilled the reader’s needs.
3.4 PURPOSE OF REPORT The purpose of a Report provides the focus and determines the structure and content of a report.
The overall purpose of the report is to communicate or to inform.
Under the purpose, the element of structure is a feature which provides the arrangement of the contents for the readers to comprehend the proper intent of the report.
The essence of written report is to communicate therefore, organizations must have written report basically to inform its audience and for actualization of the organisation’s goals and objectives.
Every written report is to provide explanation on specific events as well e.g.
“report on last semester exam”.
Report enhances discussions or consensus reached by individuals or groups.
The importance attached to Report is quite high so much so that an agreement cannot be reached without a written document.
4.0 CONCLUSION Report is a very strategic means of conveying information or an account of an something to people.
It may be written or given orally.
However, written report is more desirable since it has a more permanent nature.
Organisations are more concerned with written reports.
In view of this, it is 85 PAD 412 INTRODUCTION TO ADMINISTRATIVE PRACTICES AND PROCESSES highly recommended that employees should be adequately trained and equipped with the right skills and knowledge in the art of report writing.
5.0 SUMMARY In this unit, we have discussed report writing, types of reports, the strategies of report writing and the purpose of report writing in an organisation.
We also examined the format of report writing which is very crucial for good report writing.
It is believed that good knowledge and skill in report writing will help eliminate or reduce to the barest minimum, the errors in report writing in an organisation.
6.0 TUTOR-MARKED ASSIGNMENT 1.
Outline and discuss in detail the format of report writing.
2.
What is the importance of report writing?
3.
What is performance report?
7.0 FURTHER READINGS ASCON (1992) “Report Writing” “Workshop on GMC ’92 Manual.
Bentley, T.J. (1978) Report Writing in Business (London: Kogan page) Bowden, J.
(1991), Report Writing Format Step by Step (Oxford: To Books Ltd.) Creswell, G. (2005) Writing For Academic Success.
(United Kingdom: Oxford Pushing Ltd).
Olivet (1973) Report Writing For Supervisor (London: G. Bell and Son Ltd).
86 PAD 412 INTRODUCTION TO ADMINISTRATIVE PRACTICES AND PROCESSES Unit 2 STATEGIES/STRUCTURE OF REPORT WRITING 1.0 INTRODUCTION 2.0 OBJECTIVES 3.0 MAIN CONTENT 3.1 Strategies/Structure of Report Writing 4.0 CONCLUSION 5.0 SUMMARY 6.0 TUTOR-MARKED ASSIGNMENT 7.0 FURTHER READINGS 1.0 INTRODUCTION In the previous unit, we discussed about report writing, the types of reports, planning of report writing and the importance of report writing in an organisation.
In this unit, we are going to examine the strategies and structures of a report.
We will discuss investigative type of report as well as the note taking type of report.
2.0 OBJECTIVE The Learning objective of this unit is to enable the students understand the various approach or strategies and structures of report writing in their various fields of endeavour.
3.0 MAIN CONTENT 3.1 STATEGIES/STRUCTURE OF REPORT WRITING Two main stages are to be considered.
These are:- Investigation and note taking: (i) Investigation: This is carried out to obtain facts, uncover problems and gainful understanding of the subject.
Information 87 PAD 412 INTRODUCTION TO ADMINISTRATIVE PRACTICES AND PROCESSES can be obtained from published materials, files or individuals, which must be critically examined to avoid bias.
(ii) Note taking: This is an essential aspect of report writing.
Notes which can be used in writing the report must be taken as the investigation progresses.
It should be stated that under planning there is a need for proper sort out of data during this period of note taking as well.
Structure: All organizations should prepare and issue guidelines about the way reports should be structured and ensure strict adherence to them.
The structure will vary with the type of report.
The following are the three basic elements in structuring a report: (i) Structure (ii) Language and; (iii) Presentation Sections, Paragraphs, Sub paragraphs etc, should be given headings to aid the flow of the report and clearer understanding.
(a) Preliminaries aspect of report writing includes the following: i Title page, ii Dedication, iii Acknowledgement, iv Preface, v Foreword, vi Content page etc.
and are numbered in Roman figure.
(b) Main body of the report includes: i introduction, ii findings, 88 PAD 412 INTRODUCTION TO ADMINISTRATIVE PRACTICES AND PROCESSES iii Analysis, iv recommendations etc.
(c) End Matter will include the following: i Appendix, ii Bibliography, iii References etc.
Language: - The rules are as follows (i) The writer should write it in lucid prose (ii) The writer should express and not impress.
(iii) He should employ clearly legible and short sentences (iv) He must observe the rule of the 4C’s i.e.
clear, concise, correct and complete.
Presentation: The report must be presented in such a way that will arouse the reader at a glance.
The writer must be very generous with the use of space, and the layout of report must be well set with appropriate margin.
Format, according to Derbyshire (1970) depends upon the types and purpose of the report, its reader, and the prescribed convention, and also laid out by theorganization.
In general terms, there are two broad types of format which are differentiated by whether the summary and / or recommendation is placed after the main body of the report, or is placed before the main body.
The eventual choice might be a combination or a condensed version of these two formats.
A typical format of a written report is as follows:- (a) Title page (b) Abstract (c) Table of Contents (d) Body of the report 89 PAD 412 INTRODUCTION TO ADMINISTRATIVE PRACTICES AND PROCESSES (e) Conclusion (and recommendations where applicable) (f) References / Bibliography (g) Glossary (if needed) (h) Appendices.
(i) Title page – State the title, the author e.g.
“Report on end of workshop is prepared by -----.
State the names of the Chairman, members and Secretary.
(ii) Executive Summary – It is a report in miniature covering all the sections of the main report with a proportional length.
(Must not be in all reports) but where it is used, it comes immediately after the title page.
(iii) Letter of Transmittal – This is a covering letter forwarding the report which highlights the genesis of the report, the objectives, items of reference and the issues/recommendations.
(iv) Acknowledgement – This acknowledges the help obtained and expresses the gratitude to those who assisted in preparing the report.
This usually comes after the title page.
(v) Table of Contents – This contains the list of headings and pages which will enable the reader to easily grasp and understand the content of the various sections.
(vi) Introduction – The author in this section tries to put the reader fully in the picture.
It highlights the events that led to the writing of the report, how and why he addressed the problem; the way he sees and how successful he was in reaching solutions.
Materials from the main body may not be part of this section.
90 PAD 412 INTRODUCTION TO ADMINISTRATIVE PRACTICES AND PROCESSES (vii) Methodology – This section, which usually features in big reports, explain how the problems/issues were tackled and why particular methods and techniques were used.
(viii) Body of the Report – This is regarded as the heart of the report where all materials gathered during the investigation stage are clearly and logically presented.
The facts / information presented in this section should be objectively stated and the temptation to develop parts, because the writer finds them interesting, must be down- played.
(ix) Conclusion – The placing of conclusion in a report is a matter of convenience.
In some instances, both conclusion and recommendations can be included in the main body.
This section also gives the writer the first opportunity to express opinion as against facts.
The aim should be to present opinions in such a way that the reader is able to follow the reasoning, even though his interpretation may differ.
(x) Recommendations - This section is the ultimate goal of the report.
It proffers solutions to the problems/issues that gave rise to the report.
(xi) Appendices – Appendix is mostly recommended and is desirable in a complex report.
This, however, is not the case with a brief report.
Appendix makes the body of the report more readable.
Cross references in the text should be made to the relevant parts of the appendices.
4.0 CONCLUSION Report writing is a very important form of communication in organisations.
Unfortunately, not everybody knows how to present a good report.
There is no uniformity in writing reports.
However, all organizations should prepare and issue guidelines about the way reports should be structured and ensure strict adherence to them.
The structure will also vary with the type of report.
A good report must be presented in such a way that will arouse the reader at 91 PAD 412 INTRODUCTION TO ADMINISTRATIVE PRACTICES AND PROCESSES a glance.
It should also contain necessary information that will aid the reader to grasp the full meaning of the report.
5.0 SUMMARY We discussed all the structures and strategies for writing a good report this unit.
All the nitty gritty in report writing is taken care of starting from the topic down to the body and finally to the conclusion of a report.
A good understanding and masterly of what was discussed in this unit will enhance your analytical and reporting skill in your profession.
6.0 TUTOR-MARKED ASSIGNMENT 1.
Which part of the report gives the picture of the report and why?
2.
Critically analyse why the body of a report is called the heart of the report.
3.
Outline and discuss the language of a Report.
4.
Identify the strengths and weaknesses inherent in report writing.
7.0 FURTHER READINGS ASCON (1992) “Report Writing” “Workshop on GMC ’92 Manual.
Bentley, T.J. (1978) Report Writing in Business London: Kogan page Bowden, J.
(1991), Report Writing Format Step by Step Oxford: T. Books Ltd. Creswell, G. (2005) Writing For Academic Success.
United Kingdom: Oxford Pushing Ltd. Olivet (1973) Report Writing For Supervisor London: G. Bell and Son Ltd. 92 PAD 412 INTRODUCTION TO ADMINISTRATIVE PRACTICES AND PROCESSES Unit 3 WRITING THE REPORT 1.0 INTRODUCTION 2.0 OBJECTIVES 3.0 MAIN CONTENT 3.1 Writing a Report 3.2 Revision 3.3 Characteristics of Bad Report 3.4 Characteristics of Good Report 4.0 CONCLUSION 5.0 SUMMARY 5.0 TUTOR-MARKED ASSIGNMENT 7.0 FURTHER READINGS 1.0 INTRODUCTION Report is a vital tool in communication.
Unfortunately, not everybody knows how to use this vital tool.
Writing a report can be a complex and rigorous exercise.
In report writing, the structure, the language and its presentation must be clearly dealt with.
It should have a meaningful beginning, which explains the reason for the report and introduces the reader to the subject.
It must equally end by summarizing how the report has achieved its objectives.
This strategy will aid a good understanding of the report of whatever nature.
In this unit we are going to examine the import of report and its usefulness in decision making, the importance of proof reading of the written report as well as the characteristics of a good and bad report will also be discussed.
93 PAD 412 INTRODUCTION TO ADMINISTRATIVE PRACTICES AND PROCESSES 2.0 OBJECTIVES To give the students skills necessary to produce qualitative report writing and communication knowledge that will help them excel in their examination and in their profession generally.
3.0 MAIN CONTENT 3.1 WRITING THE REPORT Writing the report can be said to be a complex and rigorous exercise; as the structure, the language and its presentation must be clearly dealt with.
Organizing the information requires stating clearly at the beginning what the report is about.
This stage should be organized clearly to communicate the main idea, first, and to provide the supporting details.
The information should be presented in a logical order.
In describing a mechanism; this could move from the general (function and formation of the machine) to the particular (the details of the construction).
The report should state its conclusion clearly and, where appropriate, give the reader information to help him/her make decisions.
Establish the style, based on the information presented as objectively as possible.
Do not allow bias or preconceptions to becloud your judgment.
If you are stating an opinion, make this clear e.g.
“in my opinion” A report is a reflection of you as a professional.
Good report reflects favourably on the author.
Strive for quality, precision and accuracy.
Before proceeding further into a proper report, there are some fundamentals that should be highlighted for the purpose of writing a good report.
It should have the structure, Language and presentation as contained in the previous section.
3.2 PROOF READING 94 PAD 412 INTRODUCTION TO ADMINISTRATIVE PRACTICES AND PROCESSES Before submitting a report, it is important to check through it, section by section, to ensure its sense, accuracy, logical sequencing and soundness of expression.
The writer should in particular, check spellings (use dictionary), quotations, punctuations, references, the coverage of certain terms and grammar (particularly consistency of tenses).
Failure to eliminate such mistakes can reduce the quality of a report.
It is very important to edit and proofread the report before submission.
The following questions can assist:- i.
Is The ‘shape’ apparent?
ii.
Is the ‘Body’ consistent?
iii.
Are the introduction, conclusion and recommendations integrated?
iv.
Are there sufficient headings and subheadings?
v. Has the right language and proper punctuates been used throughout?
vi.
Does this report have readability and impact?
It should be noted that there is the need for a gap between the Writing and Revision.
Not less than 24 hours is necessary, the report should be revised and read through the eyes of the intended reader.
It can also be useful if a colleague assists in reading the report.
3.3 CHARACTERISTICS OF BAD REPORTS:- (a) Bad report:- suffers from a failure to recognize that the prime purpose is to communicate.
The language is often verbose and full of jargons.
Important facts are missing and unorganized arrangements etc.
3.4 CHARACTERISTICS OF GOOD REPORTS:- (b) Good report must contain the following:- - Clear - Concise - Complete - Correct 95 PAD 412 INTRODUCTION TO ADMINISTRATIVE PRACTICES AND PROCESSES - Simple - Focused It should have a meaningful beginning, which explains the reason for the report and introduces the reader to the subject.
It must equally end by summarizing how the report has achieved its objectives.
4.0 CONCLUSION Report is a vital tool or the fifth function in management; and a vehicle to communication.
This unit in the first instance, has provided us some fundamental facts which before now have been complex in report writing.
However, the unit has also analyzed to its maximum the import of report and its usefulness in decision making.
In this context, organizations shall find it handy in their strategic decision making especially, the public service.
5.0 SUMMARY In this unit, a detailed explanation of all that is involved in report writing was undertaken.
The importance of proof reading of a report before submission was equally clarified.
The unit concluded with itemizing the characteristics of good report as well as that of a bad report.
6.0 TUTOR-MARKED ASSIGNMENT 1.
Explain the importance of proof reading a report.
2.
List and explain the characteristics of a bad and good report.
7.0 FURTHER READINGS Bentley, T.J. (1978) Report Writing in Business (London: Kogan page) Bowden, J.
(1991), Report Writing Format Step by Step (Oxford: To Books Ltd.) 96 PAD 412 INTRODUCTION TO ADMINISTRATIVE PRACTICES AND PROCESSES Creswell, G. (2005) Writing For Academic Success.
(United Kingdom: Oxford Pushing Ltd).
Olivet (1973) Report Writing For Supervisor (London: G. Bell and Son Ltd).
97 PAD 412 INTRODUCTION TO ADMINISTRATIVE PRACTICES AND PROCESSES MODULE FOUR SPEECH WRITING Unit 1 How to Prepare a Speech Unit 2 Procedure for Writing a Speech UNIT 1 HOW TO PREPARE A SPEECH CONTENT 1.0 INTRODUCTION 2.0 OBJECTIVES 3.0 MAIN CONTENT 3.1 Definition 3.2 How to Prepare a Speech 3.3 Structure of a Speech 4.0 CONCLUSION 5.0 SUMMARY 6.0 TUTOR-MARKED ASSIGNMENT 7.0 FURTHER READINGS 1.0 INTRODUCTION: Speech writing is an activity that is regularly undertaken by officers both in public and private organisations.
It is common place in organisations for officers to be required to write speeches for some important events in or outside their organisations.
The vital role that speeches play in an organization and in fact, all spheres of life makes it imperative that speech writing be given serious attention.
This is particularly so in view of the fact that many people saddled with the responsibility of writing speeches, especially in the public service, lack the necessary skill required to produce a good speech.
In this unit, we are going to examine what speech writing is 98 PAD 412 INTRODUCTION TO ADMINISTRATIVE PRACTICES AND PROCESSES all about, explain how to prepare a speech, outline the structure of a good speech, and discuss the procedure for writing a good speech.
2.0 OBJECTIVES At the end of this unit you should able to: (i) Define a speech; (ii) Explain how to prepare a speech; (iii) Outline the structure of a speech; and (iv) Identify the procedure for writing a good speech.
3.0 MAIN CONTENT 3.1 DEFINITION According to Valde, a speech is “a powerful communication tool which can persuade and convey information with an immediacy that a press release or white paper doesn’t have”.
A speech is viewed as a talk, prepared or impromptu, delivered to an audience by a writer.
A speech writer, on the other hand, is a professional writer who composes speeches for others to deliver.
It is the duty of the speech writer to ensure that a fit and proper speech is prepared as and when due.
A good speech can galvanise and mobilize employees around common goals, values and missions.
It can motivate customers.
In a crisis, a well-timed speech can blunt criticism and set the record straight.
The purpose of almost any speech is to move someone or some group to do something.
A speaker might be a great orator and relay facts in splendid fashion.
But if the audience walk away, unmotivated to take action, the speaker has failed.
3.2 HOW TO PREPARE A SPEECH Every good act requires preparation and so it is with speech.
Preparation in speech writing should be done as careful as possible.
There must be a theme for every speech.
Writing speeches is much more than finding inspirational quotes and some funny stories with which to catch the interest of the 99 PAD 412 INTRODUCTION TO ADMINISTRATIVE PRACTICES AND PROCESSES audience.
The key to good speech writing lies in the use of a theme.
The audience will respond positively and remember the wordings of the speech if you refer to the theme.
The theme will be based on the message the speech is trying to convey.
The message to be conveyed is also determined by the occasion and the audience.
What you say must be in line with the dignity of the occasion itself.
The occasion will dictate not only the content of the speech, but also the duration, the tone and the expectations of the audience.
Good knowledge of your audience and the ability to address their concerns is a veritable tool in speech writing.
The speech must always be targeted at your audience.
The knowledge of your audiences will enhance your ability to effectively affect them with the message you want to convey.
3.3 STRUCTURE OF A SPEECH Most good writings must have structure and so it is with good speech.
A speech should have the opening or beginning, the body or middle of the speech and the closing or end of the speech.
A good speech must have a heading or title stating what the speech is all about, who is delivering it, at what occasion, where it was delivered and the date.
Closely following the title or heading is the salutation or what some refer to as the list of protocol.
It recognizes the dignitaries present at the occasion in descending order of hierarchy.
The Beginning or Opening The first and last sentences of a speech are crucial.
The import of this is to catch the interest of the audience from the beginning and leave them satisfied at the end.
A good speech should start with a general introductory paragraph which sums what is to come, catches the attention of the audience and indicates what the speaker is thinking about and would cover in the speech.
The general introductory paragraph should cover aspects of thanks personal remarks, and introductory.
A good opening speech should be kept short and simple without losing all the essential information to be conveyed to the audience.
100 PAD 412 INTRODUCTION TO ADMINISTRATIVE PRACTICES AND PROCESSES The Middle The body of the speech is usually the largest part.
The series of points that would be raised in the speech are highlighted and arranged sequentially.
Doing this will give the speech a more logical progression and make the job of the listener a lot easier.
The speech will flow better if the argument is structured and supported with main points, or reasons and evidence.
Try to have fewer points that are properly driven home to the audience.
This will make more and lasting impact than too many points that are scantily handled.
This is supported by Grevile Janner (1981):12) who opined that ‘brevity is the soul of success in speech writing’.
Do not allow your speech to be stiff.
Allow humour and wit intermittently but, more especially, when appropriate in the speech.
Grammatical errors in whatever form must be avoided at all cost in speech writing.
If you are in doubt about the precise meaning of a word, either avoid it completely or look it up in the dictionary.
Avoid using offensive words in your speech so as not to hurt anybody’s feelings.
Try to be as diplomatic as possible in your choice of words.
Ending or Concluding a Speech A good ending of a speech is very desirable.
Similarly, nothing can be more ruinous than a poorly ended speech.
Like the opening, the closing of your speech must contain some of your strongest material since this an opportunity to sell your points or showcase whatever information you want to pass across to the audience.
This is your selling point.
The conclusion is an opportunity to:  Summarize the main points of your speech;  Provide some further food for thoughts for the audience  Leave the audience with positive memories of your speech; and  Choose the final powerful thought or emotion.
A really good ending in most cases include the following: (i) A summary, in a sentence or two, of the main purport of the speech; 101 PAD 412 INTRODUCTION TO ADMINISTRATIVE PRACTICES AND PROCESSES (ii) Any proposal or resolution arising out of the body of the speech; and (iii) A call for support or warm words of thanks as the case may be.
4.0 CONCLUSION A good speech is said to have considerable merits for strong progressive management in any aspect of human endeavour.
It can galvanise and mobilize employees around common goals, values and missions.
It can motivate customers or clients.
We also observed that in a crisis, a well- timed speech can blunt criticism and set the record straight.
A good knowledge and skill in speech writing is very desirable for all the students as well as the employees in any public or private organisation.
5.0 SUMMARY We discussed how to prepare a speech as well as the structure of speech writing.
We noted the contents of the opening, the middle or the body of the speech as well as the end or the conclusion of the speech.
It is hoped that you have acquired a good knowledge and skill in the act of speech writing.
In the next unit, we are going to examine the procedure for speech writing.
6.0 TUTOR-MARKED ASSIGNMENT 1.
Your organisation wishes to sign a MoU with another organisation for a collaborative project in e-learning.
Write a speech which the head of your organisation will deliver on this occasion.
7.0 FURTHER READINGS 1.
Greville, A., (1982) Janner’s complete speech maker.
London: Business Books 2.
Samuel, G.
(Ed.)
(1975) The Book of Ready-Made speeches.
London: Rautledge and Kejan Paul) 3.
Steve, A., (1986) How to make a Speech Minsk-Belanus: Print Corp Ltd. 102 PAD 412 INTRODUCTION TO ADMINISTRATIVE PRACTICES AND PROCESSES UNIT 2 PROCEDURE FOR WRITING A SPEECH 1.0 INTRODUCTION 2.0 OBJECTIVES 3.0 MAIN CONTENT 3.1 Procedure for Writing a Speech 3.2 Hints on Speech Delivery 4.0 CONCLUSION 5.0 SUMMARY 6.0 TUTOR-MARKED ASSIGNMENT 7.0 FURTHER READINGS 1.0 INTRODUCTION 2.0 OBJECTIVES At the end of this unit you should able to: i.
Know the procedures for writing a speech; ii.
Identify the procedure for writing a good speech.
3.0 MAIN CONTENT 3.1 PROCEDURE FOR WAITING A GOOD SPEECH Carry out a Research Having had a topic or theme for your speech, there may be the need to do research.
According to Allen (1986), this will enable you to study your remarks with specifics.
You will probably get all the information you need from books, newspapers, magazines and the internet.
Such resources can be found in libraries and bookstores.
It is important to note however, that it is ordinarily not necessary to do an enormous volume of research when all you 103 PAD 412 INTRODUCTION TO ADMINISTRATIVE PRACTICES AND PROCESSES are preparing for is the writing of a speech that would not take more than twenty minutes of deliver.
You may decide to use statistics to spice up your speech where necessary and applicable.
There is the need to visit the library and glean from encyclopedias, yearbooks, newspaper cuttings, and other works of reference, and from publications dealing specially with your subject.
In addition to this, you will generally be able to get valuable information and statistics from public bodies which concern themselves with the subject on which you are going to write.
In government circles, the speech writer who wants to succeed must cultivate the habit of consulting files in which past speeches dealing with the subject matter are filed.
This will enable the officer, familiarize himself with how it has been done in the past and even explore the possibility of improving upon the status quo.
Writing the Speech At this stage do not try to compose your speech in a hurry.
The speech writer must give himself sometime not only to do research, but to clarify his thoughts before proceeding to write.
After completing the first draft, there may be the need to reshuffle some portions of the speech.
For instance, something originally conceived as part of the ending or conclusion might turn out to be more suitable for the opening.
The primary objective when writing your speech should be to express, educate and inform rather than to impress.
Therefore extreme verbosity should be completely avoided.
Edit the Speech The speech writer must learn to subject his speech to serious scrutiny.
In other words, you should serve as your own editor.
However, the draft can also be given to a colleague who is knowledgeable in editorial work to do the editing.
This is very important as public servants, as it would be better to reduce errors to the barest minimum before passing draft speeches to 104 PAD 412 INTRODUCTION TO ADMINISTRATIVE PRACTICES AND PROCESSES superior officers.
It was in this sense that Allen (1986) opined that it is better to be a harsh critic of yourself at this stage when no one but yourself has seen your speech.
Allen added that failure on this point can mean that you will eventually be subject to the judgments of several hundred ‘editors’ comprising your audience, some or all of whom may be more sensitive to your errors than yourself.
The draft speech must be checked and cross - checked for impact and accuracy.
Care must also be taken to ensure that the speech is improved upon by checking its reasoning and that the arguments therein will appeal to the audience.
Typing the Speech Whether you are typing your speech yourself or having it done for you, ensure that it is typed in characters or font sizes that are large enough to be convenient for easy reading of the speech.
Any speech typed in a font size less than 14 is in my opinion, inappropriate.
Never type a speech in single line spacing.
Double line spacing is the norm.
some public speakers even prefer a line spacing that is higher than double spacing.
This enables the reader of the speech to easily return after looking away from the script.
You may consider typing important thoughts in separate paragraphs or highlighting them so that it will be convenient for the eye when reading the speech.
The more paragraphs and headings you have in a speech the better and easier it would be to read.
Revise your Speech Revision is essential to good speech writing.
In revising your speech, according to the Microsoft Student 2008 DVD, make sure the following questions can be answered.
 Ideas: Have I written a clear opinion statement?
Do I have enough evidence to support my argument?
105 PAD 412 INTRODUCTION TO ADMINISTRATIVE PRACTICES AND PROCESSES  Organization: Do my main points appear in the best order?
Is it easy to follow my argument?
 Tone of Voice: Does my tone of voice suggest that I am excited about my topic?
Will it appeal to the audience and persuade them to accept my argument?
 Word Choice: Will my audience understand the words I used?
Do I use specific nouns and active verbs?
 Sentence Fluency: Have I written clear, complete sentences?
Remember that the audience will be listening to you, not reading your words.
They may fail to follow your argument if your sentences are complicated and too long.
HINTS ON SPEECH DELIVERY Never begin your speech till you have risen from your seat and taken up your position facing the audience.
Try not to consult your script (speech) before you begin.
You should be able to handle the first few sentences without need of recourse to your script.
Ensure that your eyes are fixed on the audience.
Not on any particular person but on some points around the centre of the auditorium.
Carefully watch the way you make use of your hands.
Employ a very moderate use of your gestures and note that awkward gestures are far worse than none at all.
Every gesture you make should appear to be natural and should emphasize your words; none should be made for its own sake.
The most boring speeches are probably those that are simply read from a script.
Before delivering your speech, try to make the speech your own regardless of who wrote it.
This is done by familiarizing yourself with it through reading and digesting the speech.
Since nobody likes to be bored, put yourself in your audience’s shoes and find an interesting way to start your speech by getting the attention of your audience.
Another point to note about speech delivery is that you can not just mumble to yourself.
You have to say it out loud.
Remember that you are talking to a 106 PAD 412 INTRODUCTION TO ADMINISTRATIVE PRACTICES AND PROCESSES group and as such, deliver your speech by talking distinctly and clearly.
Speak naturally and distinctly being careful not to strain your voice.
Clear articulation must be matched with loudness.
A good public address system will be helpful in this regard.
It is better to begin your speech in a comparatively low voice, which rises as you “worm up”.
Make distinct pauses between each clause and wherever else the sense of your sentence or paragraph allows.
Some prefer to read their speech from beginning to the end, but it is better to talk to your script.
However, care must be taken not to get entangled in unnecessary digressions.
There may also be the need to mark up your script (your speech).
Using a pencil, pen or a special marker, make marks on the speech to help you remember how you want to sound or explain some points at particular junctures during your speech delivery.
You can underline words that you want to emphasize uponby saying them louder or with more energy.
You can also mark places where you want to pause for dramatic effects, or where you need to take a breath.
Finally, it is a good idea to end your speech with a rousing conclusion.
Leave your audience feeling excited and interested in the subject matter of your speech.
For instance, you can close with “Ladies and gentlemen, together we can make this organization truly great.
And together we can build a better world for our children”.
4.0 CONCLUSION Face-to-face communication is the most powerful weapon in a manager’s skills’ arsenal.
That’s why the speech writing and delivery can galvanize and mobilize employees around common goals, values and mission, it can motivate customers.
Since successful speakers are made and not born, and practice makes perfect.
With the insights provided in this chapter on speech writing and delivery, any manager who gets acquainted with the issues discussed herein 107 PAD 412 INTRODUCTION TO ADMINISTRATIVE PRACTICES AND PROCESSES coupled with constant practice, will be on the path to good speech writing and delivery.
5.0 SUMMARY Speech waiting involves trying to inform an audience and to persuade them to agree with a point of view.
A good speech must be well researched and should present a careful structured argument.
Hence in this unit, time was taken to detail particularly the procedure for undertaken the exercise which includes: Researching the topic, or theme; writing; editing; typing; and revising the speech.
6.0 TUTOR-MARKED ASSIGNMENT 1.
Prepare a speech to be delivered by the Vice-Chancellor National Open University of Nigeria (NOUN) at the Matriculation ceremony of newly admitted students of the University.
2.
Outline the procedure for writing a good speech.
7.0 FURTHER READINGS 1.
Greville, A., (1982) Janner’s complete speech maker (London: Business Books) 2.
Samuel, G.
(Ed.)
(1975) The Book of Ready-Made speeches (London: Rautledge and Kejan Paul) 3.
Steve, A., (1986) How to make a Speech (Minsk-Belanus: Print corp Ltd. 108 PAD 412 INTRODUCTION TO ADMINISTRATIVE PRACTICES AND PROCESSES MODULE FIVE CONDUCT OF MEETINGS CONTENT 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objectives 3.0 Main Content 3.1 Definition and Types of Meetings 3.2 Pre-Meeting Activities 3.3 Meeting Activities 3.4 Post-Meeting Activities 3.5 Recording and developing Minutes of meetings 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutor-Marked Assignment 7.0 Further Readings 1.0 INTRODUCTION Meeting is an opportunity for people to come together to share ideas on certain issues.
In management it is identified as a tool for planning.
With this recognition, it becomes apparent that units, departments and organizations should meet from time to time to review their activities and identify the way forward.
And such formal undertaking should have a procedure which we refer to as servicing a meeting.
2.0 OBJECTIVES At the end of this unit, you should be able to: (i) Identify types of meetings; (ii) Identify the stages involved in meetings; and (iii) Outline the format of minutes of a meeting 109 PAD 412 INTRODUCTION TO ADMINISTRATIVE PRACTICES AND PROCESSES 3.0 MAIN CONTENT 3.1 DEFINITION AND TYPES OF MEETINGS A meeting can be defined as a gathering of three or more people sharing common objectives, where communication (verbal and/or written) is the primary means of achieving those objectives.
(Haynes, M. E. 1991:9) The above definition shows that participants in a meeting share common objectives.
Discussions and deliberations in the meeting must have a bearing on the shared objectives and goals.
For a meeting to be said to be effective, therefore, it must achieve its set objectives which have direct relevance to the shared objectives, in minimum time, to the satisfaction of the participants.
The following are the characteristics of effective meetings: (a) An agenda is prepared prior to the meeting.
(b) Meeting participants have an opportunity to contribute to the agenda.
(c) Advance notice of meeting, time and place is provided to those invited.
(d) Meeting facilities are comfortable and adequate for the number of participants.
(e) The meeting begins on time.
(f) The meeting has a scheduled ending time (g) The use of time is monitored throughout the meeting (h) Everyone has an opportunity to present his/her point of view.
(i) Participants listen attentively to one another.
(j) There are periodic summaries as the meeting progresses.
(k) No one tends to dominate the discussion.
(l) Everyone has a voice in decisions made at the meeting.
(m) Ends with a summary of accomplishments.
(n) The meeting is periodically evaluated by participants.
(o) People can be depended on to carry out any action agreed upon during the meeting.
110 PAD 412 INTRODUCTION TO ADMINISTRATIVE PRACTICES AND PROCESSES (p) Minutes of the meeting are provided to each participant following the meeting.
(q) The meeting leader follows up with participants on actions agreed during the meeting.
(r) It is worthy of note that no meeting can have all the qualities or characteristics enumerated above; but any meeting to which 60% of the qualities can be attributed can rightly be described as an effective meeting.
TYPES OF MEETING For the purpose of this chapter, we shall group meetings into two broad types namely; Information meeting and, Decision-making meeting.
The elements listed in the table overleaf will assist us in appreciating the differences between the two types, and therefore enable us to appropriately locate the meetings we attend.
ELEMENTS INFORMATION DECISION-MAKING MEETING Number of attenders Any number Preferably not more than 12. Who should attend Those who need to Those responsible and know.
those who can contribute Communication One way from leader Interactive discussion Process to participants with among all attending.
opportunities for questions Meeting room set-up Participants facing Participants facing front of room- each other – classroom style.
Conference style.
Most effective style of Authoritative Participative 111 PAD 412 INTRODUCTION TO ADMINISTRATIVE PRACTICES AND PROCESSES leadership.
Emphasis should be Content Interaction and on Problem – solving.
Key to Success Planning and Meeting climate that preparation of supports open, free information to be expression.
presented 3.2 PRE-MEETING ACTIVITIES By these we mean the activities which the convener, the leader, or the Secretary is expected to carry out prior to the day or commencement time of a meeting.
They include:- (a) Establishing the need for the meeting even for regular meetings, there is a need for the officer in-charge to ensure that there are cogent issues to discuss in a meeting before a meeting is convened.
A meeting that is called for the mere reason that it is the date or period that such meeting is supposed to be held, will end up being purposeless, and nothing is expected to be achieved in such meeting.
For instance a meeting that holds in a University in April after the first semester examination cannot be justifiably convened in April unless the first semester examinations are completed.
(b) Deciding on who to participate: depending on the agenda or purposes of a meeting, the secretary or convener decides those that are to participate in meetings.
The implication of this is that in situations where the extant regulations guiding the operation of a group, provides, the purposes or agenda for the meeting will determine the participants.
(c) Choice of Venue, Date and Time: The convener of a meeting and/or the Secretary chooses the venue of a meeting.
Again, these are sometimes determined by statutory provisions, and sometimes by the purpose of the meeting.
112 PAD 412 INTRODUCTION TO ADMINISTRATIVE PRACTICES AND PROCESSES When and where the meeting is held can affect its success.
Many meetings arrange their own times and venues.
It must be today and not next week; the conference room is only available at 2.00p.m; and so on.
Within the inevitable constraints of a busy organization, do what you can to influence these matters for the better (Barker, Alan 1997:24).
d) Constructing the Agenda: every meeting has an agenda.
It may not have been written, discussed or even thought about.
But the agenda is there, all the same.
Whoever controls the agenda controls the meeting.
If the agenda is not made public, the meeting may be hijacked by private agendas; the result will be confusion, frustration and failure.
A written agenda allows everyone to focus on what they are to do; before, during and after the meeting.
It acts as: - a plan of the meeting to aid preparation; - an objective control of the meeting’s progress; - a measure of the meeting’s success (Barker, 1997:29) The contents of an agenda include: (a) Title of Meeting (b) Date, time and venue (c ) Minutes of the previous meeting (d) Reports from sub-committees (where applicable0 (e) Any other business.
Agenda items are often supported by briefing papers.
These may outline the issues to be discussed in some details, give background information and indicate the preferred direction the ‘task owner’ would like the meeting to take.
They may also form the basis of a formal presentation at the meeting (Barker, 1997:33).
113 PAD 412 INTRODUCTION TO ADMINISTRATIVE PRACTICES AND PROCESSES (e) Issuance of notice of meeting: having taken care of the four pre- meeting activities outlined above, the secretary or convener now goes ahead to issue notice of meeting to the qualified participants.
It is important for the notice of meeting to be sent well ahead of the meeting date.
This will enable those who cannot attend the meeting for genuine reasons, to send their apologies to the signatory.
(f) Provision of a comfortable meeting venue: as the date of the meeting draws closer, it is the duty of the secretary to provide a very conducive environment for the meeting.
Every thing must be done to ensure the comfortability of the participants as anything that reduces their comfort will make them irritable and ultimately affect their contributions to the meeting.
This also makes some participants leave the meting before the end.
To avoid these, participants must be made to relax throughout the duration of the meeting.
This can be done through; (i) Provision of a clean environment: If a meeting is held in a filthy irritating venue, the participants will not feel comfortable or at ease.
This will make them look frequently at the clock while the meeting lasts.
(ii) Provision of adequate public address system/audio visual aids: For meetings held in large halls, public address systems and audio visual aids must be used.
A situation where participants can hardly hear themselves or follow the proceedings will defeat the very essence of the meeting.
(iii) Provision of conveniences: This is very crucial and must be kept clean.
People who are ‘pressed’ will only be longing for the closing prayer.
This must be guarded against.
114 PAD 412 INTRODUCTION TO ADMINISTRATIVE PRACTICES AND PROCESSES (iv) Provision of refreshment: a hungry man is known to be an angry man.
This accounts for the aggressive disposition of some people during meetings.
Depending on the duration of the meeting, therefore, full meal or light refreshment must be provided.
3.3 MEETING ACTIVITIES Two main activities pre-occupy any person servicing a meeting during the meeting.
These are: (a) Compilation of attendance: An attendance register must be made available for people to sign as they come to the meeting.
This helps to check late coming as no one would like to be recorded as habitual late corner.
(b) Recording of proceedings:-This is chiefly the duty of the secretary or his assignee.
Whoever is doing this must ensure that trivial issues are not recorded to the detriment of more salient ones.
To avoid this, it is advisable to concentrate on resolutions rather than individual contributions.
Verbatim recording must also be avoided.
Movers of motions and their seconders must be captured.
3.4 POST MEETING ACTIVITIES The word ‘post’ means ‘after’.
The expression ‘post meeting activities’ therefore, refer to those activities that are carried out at the end of a meeting, in relation to the meeting.
After your meeting has taken place, perhaps the first question you should ask yourself is whether it was successful.
Bad points as well as good ones can be analysed and used to help plan meetings in the future.
To determine whether the meeting was successful or not, the following questions need to be answered.
115 PAD 412 INTRODUCTION TO ADMINISTRATIVE PRACTICES AND PROCESSES - Was the meeting held on the best day and at the best time to achieve a satisfactory out-come?
- Did it start and finish on time?
- Were the correct people in attendance?
- Was the agenda followed in the correct order?
- Were accurate notes taken?
- Were the right decisions taken?
- Did the meeting achieve what it set out to achieve?
The more answers of ‘yes’ you can give, the better.
Any ‘nos’ need to be investigated, so that future meetings stand a chance of being as near to perfect as anything involving the human element can ever be (Bobson, 1999:100).
In addition to what transpired while the meeting lasted, there are, however, certain after-meeting activities which go a long way in determining the success or failure of the meeting.
These are what we refer to in this unit as, the post meeting activities.
They are: (1) Writing of Minutes of Meeting Servicing a meeting is not an activity that begins and ends in the meeting venue.
The proceedings of a meeting is jotted down by the secretary during the meeting but developed into a minute later.
A good secretary does not record discussions verbatim rather, he records resolutions.
The reason is that, if the contribution of every participants in the meeting is recorded, the minutes of the meeting will be unnecessarily voluminous.
116 PAD 412 INTRODUCTION TO ADMINISTRATIVE PRACTICES AND PROCESSES RECORDING AND DEVELOPING MINUTES OF A MEETING Although the format of minutes varies with the nature of the meeting, most minutes have the following subheads in their formats.
(i) The Title of the Meeting: this comprises the description of meeting i.e the name of the group holding the meeting, the venue and the date.
For instance, Minutes of the meeting of the Association of Licenced Customs Agents of Nigeria, Ikorodu Branch, held on February 12th, 2006 at C.K.C.
Grammar School, Igbogbo’.
(ii) Attendance: in most minutes, the attendance section has three parts: (a) Present: this lists all that are present, including those attending in representative capacity.
(b) Apologies or Excused: this contains the names of all those that notified the Secretariat in advance, of their inability to attend the meeting owing to a stated reason.
(c) Absent: here the names of all those that are supposed to be present but are absent without apologies are listed.
(iii) Commencement: this captures the take-off time of the meeting, as was as the welcome remarks of the presiding personnel.
(iv) Reading and Adoption of the Minutes of the Previous Meeting: Under this, inaccuracies in the read minutes and the amendments thereto, are pointed out.
This is followed by the mover and seconder of motion for adoption of the minutes.
(v) Matters Arising from the Minutes: this captures the issues that were raised in the minutes but never concluded.
These are discussed before the substantive issues.
117 PAD 412 INTRODUCTION TO ADMINISTRATIVE PRACTICES AND PROCESSES (vi) Agenda: (this is) an itemized list of the business to be transacted at a meeting.
The order of the business should normally be as shown in the agenda, as some members might be inconvenienced if they had made arrangements to attend for only that part of a meeting where the business concerning them was due to be transacted (Austin, 1978:99).
(vii) Any Other Business: under this heading comes business discussed or validly transacted which has not figured in the agenda.
It will be appreciated that matters of importance may not be validly transacted unless due notice was given in the agenda.
“Any other business” is therefore restricted to minor matters or to the agreement that certain important matters be put on the agenda for the next meeting (Austin, 1978:103).
(viii) Adjournment: this depicts where the day’s business terminates, and states, where practicable, the date, time and venue of the next meeting.
(2) Follow-Up Post meeting activities in servicing meetings do not begin or end with writing of minutes of meetings.
It is rare that meetings end without some need for follow-up activities, including thank you notes, implementing action times, paying bills, catching people up who were not there, phone calls, minutes, etc.
Part of planning any meeting ought to be thought given to the follow-up after the meeting, so that the meeting was worth having (Schindler-Rainman et al, 1975:18).
4.0 CONCLUSION Servicing meetings is a very interesting but demanding and challenging activity.
The demanding and challenging aspect of the concept emanatesfrom the fact that it is one phenomenon that can make or mar the meeting of very serious minded participants.
This goes to say that the success or otherwise of a meeting and by extension the activities of an organization or group, depends largely on how the meetings, where the decisions that decide the fate of that organization or group are taken, are serviced.
Officers that service meetings should therefore, recognize the 118 PAD 412 INTRODUCTION TO ADMINISTRATIVE PRACTICES AND PROCESSES importance attached to their roles, and do everything possible to ensure that meetings are serviced to the best standard.
5.0 SUMMARY The importance of meetings cannot by now be overemphasized so is adequate procedure for undertaking it.
The unit therefore identified those activities that must be carried out in order to ensure successful meetings.
These include: pre-meeting activities; meeting activities and post meeting activities.
More importantly, records of proceedings at meetings are kept as instruments of implementation of decisions of such meetings.
Such records are referred to as Minutes.
This unit also explained the format of good minutes of meetings.
6.0 TUTOR-MARKED ASSIGNMENT 1.
Outline the format of Minutes of a Meeting.
2.
Enumerate the various stages in a meeting.
7.0 FURTHER READING Austin, E. (1978) Senior Secretarial Duties and Office Organisation Plymouth: Macdonald and Evans Ltd. Barker, A.
(1997) How to Hold Better Meetings London: Kogan Page Ltd. Haynes, M.E.
(1991) Effective Meeting Skills U.S.A.
Crisp Publications Inc. Schindler-Rainman, E. et al (1975) Taking Your Meetings out of the Doldrums California: University Associates Inc. 119 PAD 412 INTRODUCTION TO ADMINISTRATIVE PRACTICES AND PROCESSES MODULE SIX Unit 1 How to organise a Conference Unit 2 How to organise a Seminar Unit 1 HOW TO ORGANISE A CONFERENCE 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objective 3.0 Main Content 3.1 Organising a conference 3.2 Pre-Preparation 3.3 Last Preparations 3.4 Benefits of a Conference 4.0 Summary 5.6 Conclusion 6.0 Tutor Marked Assignment 7.0 References/Further Reading 1.0 Introduction In this unit, an attempt will be made to provide a detailed description of all the steps to be followed for the organization of a conference.
Before we do this it is pertinent to define a conference and a seminar and showcase the difference between the two.
A conference is a “prearranged meeting for consultation or exchange of information or discussion, a discussion among participants who have an agreed topic” (Princeton University, 2006), whereas a seminar is “any meeting for an exchange of ideas [... which] is offered for a small group of advanced students” (Princeton University, 2006).
Seminars are instructional and are geared toward providing training and education.
People attend seminars as a quick way to gain information without having to take long classes on that particular subject.
In some cases, seminars take place before the conference starts.
These are called pre-conference seminars.
Conferences are usually the main event and are of longer duration than the seminars.
Some conferences include the morning plenaries with presentations and panels and in the afternoon they have breakout, which are round table discussions on the subject.
There are also morning and afternoon coffee breaks and lunch.
In this unit, guidelines for organising a conference will be provided which could be extended for seminar as well.
2.0 Objectives It is expected that at the end of this unit, the student should know all about conference and be able to plan and or organise a conference successfully.
120 PAD 412 INTRODUCTION TO ADMINISTRATIVE PRACTICES AND PROCESSES 3.0 Main Content 3.1 Organising a Conference Organising a conference is not an easy task.
It requires months of planning, strict attention to detail as well as the ability to foresee and forestall disastrous events before they happen.
However, the organisation process can be a lot intimidating if you have knowledge of how to plan a conference effectively.
A group of two- three persons will not be enough for the organization of a conference, hence; you will need to recruit more people in your group.
If you have not got prior approval or be assigned to organise a conference, you should inform the department about your ideas and goals and have their approval before inviting more people to help you organise it.
If you have a small team you will need to “call for volunteers” so as to expand your team.
A “call for volunteers” should outline the purpose of the team - which can now be called a committee.
You should provide a general description of what the new members will do.
Make sure that you provide a ‘response deadline’ for those who would like to volunteer and before admitting anyone in the committee it is advised that you make an interview.
Before having the interview make sure you have a list of all the questions you and your colleagues would like to ask as well as what it is that you are looking for from the new members.
What you are looking for should be determined by what the conference is all about.
The most important restriction for a person to become a member of the committee should be to be available during the conference preparation period.
3.2 Feature of a conference It is important to specify the nature of the conference and also address the following issues:  Who is the conference going to address?
That is, who are the target group?
 Who is most likely to attend it?
 Which area or subject will be covered?
 Will it have a specific theme within the area?
 Is it going to be a regional or international conference?
 Where will it be held?
 How long should it last?
 What is the scope of the conference?
3.3 Conference Preparation Committee A conference organizing team or committee will need among others the following: 121 PAD 412 INTRODUCTION TO ADMINISTRATIVE PRACTICES AND PROCESSES HEAD OF THE CONFERENCE COMMITTEE The Head of conference is usually also the Head of organizational committee.
She/he is in charge for technical and organizational preparation of the conference.
She/he directly leads, organizes and supervises the work of entire organizational team.
She/he takes part in all phases of preparation, execution, ending and evaluation.
His/her specific tasks include: - she/he is responsible for executing all the tasks of the organizational team; - she/he takes part, with her/his suggestions, in preparation of the lists of needed materials (office and other); - she/he is responsible for updating the home page of the conference; - she/he is available for the members of her/his team for help and advice; - she/he is responsible for a normal course of events; - she/he passes out the tasks to her/his team; - she/he pronounces praises and rebukes; - together with the members of the team sets up a time frame of the event; - deals with conflicts inside the team in case they emerge During her/his work the Head of organizational team takes into consideration suggestions and advices of other members of the team.
For the needs of harmonization of the work he organizes regular meetings of the team.
An essential part of these meetings is also analysing of the work that has been already done.
After the conference, she/he takes an active role in evaluation and drawing of the final report of the event.
The “Head” position could be field either by an individual or a team.
HEAD OF FINANCE The person will know exactly how much money you have and what you spent the rest of the money on.
The most important task is drawing up the budget and gathering the funds needed for the event.
All the other members of the team help her/him with her/his task, especially the Head of conference.
Head of finances is responsible for positive management of the event.
She/he is coordinating the needs (financial, material) of other members of the team.
With the available resources she/he tries to satisfy as much needs as possible.
Individual tasks are: - she/he’s in charge of financing before, during and after the event; - she/he collects and keeps track of delegation payments; - during the event she/he’s in charge of common purse; - responsible for appropriate security of common purse; - responsible for setting up the final financial report.
HEAD OF THE PROGRAMME Her/his job is to prepare the programme of the conference.
This means she/he has to plan every event from getting up in the morning to going to 122 PAD 412 INTRODUCTION TO ADMINISTRATIVE PRACTICES AND PROCESSES sleep.
She/he can conduct this task with the help of the team or other people, but if the task is not completed in time or not done properly she/he is the one responsible.
Individual tasks are: - preparing the order of the day; - getting in touch with the speakers, participants of round tables etc.
; - informing the Head of technical support which rooms are need and when; - planning the evening events, making reservations if required; - informing the Head of accommodation when should the meals take place; - responsible for a contingency plan in case speakers cancel their attendance some minutes prior to start of the session.
HEAD OF ACCOMMODATION This person will organize all the accommodation facilities and offers provided for the conference, as well as inform the participants or attendees about all the tourist information needed.
The hotel must be very neat and affordable and must offer as much as possible.
Avoid, if possible, accommodating your participants in different hotels around the city as this will pose a big problem for Head of logistics.
She/he has to make reservations in a hotel early enough.
Here she/he must work closely with Secretary of the organising committee as she/he is the one who can give the exact number of participants.
Once you have the exact number of participants you can make reservations for lunch and dinner.
Add to the number five more meals, just in case.
And don’t forget that the organizers need food too☺.
A few days before the conference starts check if everything is O.K.
with your reservations.
Make sure that the hotel and restaurant management are prepared for the incoming participants.
HEAD OF TECHNICAL SUPPORT/WEBMASTER This person(s) will know how to handle audio-visual equipment as well as support the organization and maintenance of the webpage.
Her/his task is to prepare the classrooms in time, make sure that the audio-video equipment is working properly.
For successful conducting of this task she/he should have 4 – 5 people helping her/him (depending on the size of the conference).
Some other tasks are: - she/he is responsible for update of info – point and materials available there; - she/he also photocopies all needed materials for the conference.
This task is conducted before and during3 the conference; - other tasks as providing the white board markers, floppy discs for the delegates, WEBMASTER Her/his task is to maintain and refresh the home page of the conference (if you have 123 PAD 412 INTRODUCTION TO ADMINISTRATIVE PRACTICES AND PROCESSES one).
She/he is not in charge of the content of the home page, only the outlook of the page.
Individual Heads provides her/him the content for the home page.
PR team can be responsible for the outlook of the page and the webmaster becomes in charge for the technical side of the page.
HEAD OF LOGISTICS This task includes all transport of participants around the city during the event.
It also includes transport from/to airport, train station, etc.
The arrival of delegates probably represents the most demanding part of this task as they arrive at different times and different locations.
This means you need to have enough people and transport means to transport the delegates to the hotel.
The easiest part is therefore transport from hotel to faculty and back as it takes place at the same hours every day.
And you already have all the delegates in one place.
You’ll probably use public means of transport so make sure to give the participants the tickets.
You also need to organize transport for sight-seeing.
If this event takes place in the city this poses no problem - you can use public means of transport in the city.
If you plan a trip outside the city and visit some distant places, then you should rent a bus to take the participants for a field trip.
HEAD OF PUBLIC RELATIONS If you want to be mentioned in the media then you need your PR team.
Task of this team is to get in touch with as many journalists, reporters as they can and keep them informed about your events (lectures, round tables, etc.).
Prepare special maps with materials for journalists and make sure that they have a seat in front of the conference room.
FEEDING/COFFEE/TEA BREAKS This is usually contracted out to professional food vendors depending on the nature and size of the conference.
3.4 PREPARATION TIMETABLE There should be a timetable for the preparation, execution and follow-up.
The timetable should be divided into the above mentioned three sections with respect to the remaining months until the conference is held.
When planning the timetable you should consider that you should provide at least some months for preparation.
This is vital for both the organizers and the presenters.
The following guidelines are very vital for a successful planning of a conference.
124 PAD 412 INTRODUCTION TO ADMINISTRATIVE PRACTICES AND PROCESSES Secure a day In order to be able to secure a good timeframe for the conference you should search for a convenient period for the stakeholders within the year you are interested in organizing your conference.
Make sure that you choose a period that it is at least some months away and that there is no other similar conference in that period within the same area as the one where you are thinking of having your conference.
Room bookings Once you decide on the day you need to allocate room bookings (committee- style or lecture style).
When making room bookings you should think about how many parallel sessions you are going to have.
The more parallel sessions the more rooms you will need.
Depending on the length of the conference the attendance will vary.
Therefore, you need more rooms that you may use at the end which are good sized rooms where your participants will not seem to be too few or too many.
Ensure that the rooms you book have appropriate requirements such as audio visual (AV) equipment.
Catering Like we mentioned earlier, the catering services can be contracted out to the catering professionals that suites your requirements.
Consider that when being asked to give the catering service the program of the conference you should tell them to bring everything 10-15 minutes earlier so as to avoid any delays and be able to have a back-up plan in case that something goes wrong; with respect to catering services.
Funding If you are planning a big conference, your organisation alone may not be able to shoulder all the expenses.
In order to be able to pay for all the conference expenses an organisation may need a sponsor.
But before you consider the option of a sponsor, you should first discuss with your organisation to see whether they could fund the conference.
Thereafter, you may approach other organizations for sponsorship.
Plenary Speakers High rated conferences tend to have two or three plenary speakers who are well informed in the topic of discuss.
As a conference organizer you should have decided whether the conference you are organizing will be of a specific subject or not.
If the conference covers a specific area then you should choose the leading Professional in that field and invite them to become the plenary speakers.
Hence, if you would like to have a conference which covers 125 PAD 412 INTRODUCTION TO ADMINISTRATIVE PRACTICES AND PROCESSES different areas, invite as plenary speakers professors who are working on such areas.
Advertising the event When confirming your plenary speakers then you can advertise the event.
Initially the event should be advertised to your audience, depending on the nature of the conference.
You can choose any mode of advertisement that will reach your target audience.
Call for abstracts The ‘call for abstracts should include information such as:  (cid:31)time and place of the conference  (cid:31)names of the plenary speakers  which departments / associations support the event  deadline for abstract submission  description of the abstract format required; named, word count etc.
There should be a reasonable deadline for abstract submission.
Although this may be extended, especially, when you don’t have enough abstracts to complete the required slots.
Call for attendees The ‘call for attendees’ should be distributed once the deadline of the ‘call for abstracts’ has passed, so as to invite more participants to attend and to remind them of the event.
This should include:  (cid:31)time and place of the conference  (cid:31)names of the plenary speakers  (cid:31)which institutions / organisations support the event  (cid:31)deadline for registration  (cid:31)the exact link of your webpage which they should visit in order to register.
 contact details in case of any further enquiries  registration form Registration form The form should include among others:  (cid:31)name and affiliation details  (cid:31)information about registration packs/fees  information regarding dietary requirements or any other individual needs  (cid:31)a box to indicate whether they are presenting or just attending the conference  (cid:31)information about accommodation packs 126 PAD 412 INTRODUCTION TO ADMINISTRATIVE PRACTICES AND PROCESSES Webpage design There should be a webpage through your organisation’s server or through one of the sponsor’s; this depends on the status of your conference and whether it is sponsored by a bigger organisation.
The actual webpage should include:  (cid:31)information about the nature of the event  information about the place and the surrounding area where the event will take place  travel information, bus, trains, metro timetables etc  hotel lists  contact details of all committee members  information about the committee members  abstract guidelines  fares for registration/ packs available for students  ways of payment  registration form  previous events etc.
Receiving/Reviewing the abstracts Make sure that the abstracts submitted follow the format you requested.
Those that abide to the guidelines can be categorized depending on their field.
The ‘call for reviewers’ should include information about possible areas which will be addressed by the abstracts as well as a deadline for notification of interest.
When sending the abstracts to reviewers you should give the reviewers an anonymous copy of the abstract so as to avoid any biased answers.
You should also provide the reviewers with reviewing guidelines, in order to obtain clear comments and avoid more subjective recommendations.
(cid:31)Acceptance/ Rejection of abstracts When receiving reviewers’ comments and their suggestion for accepting or declining the abstract you should inform the presenters beforehand that you should try to crosscheck reviewers’ comments so as to make sure that you also agree with their comments.
The abstracts that were rejected could be accepted as a poster presentation or nothing at all.
Conference programme When creating the program there are several factors you should consider, such as:  enough time for registration in the morning 127 PAD 412 INTRODUCTION TO ADMINISTRATIVE PRACTICES AND PROCESSES  include a few minutes slot in the first session for the opening of the conference which should be made by a member of your sponsoring organization and the chair of your committee  adequate breaks between sessions  coffee breaks should last for at least 40 minutes  lunch breaks should last for at least 1 hour  have extra time for poster presentations  allow for a few minutes break between presentations so that attendees can choose to leave or change the lecture room  try to have presentations in each session and same lecture room that cover the same or similar area of discuss.
 have both the name of the presentation and the presenter on the program.
Advertising conference program Once you have created the program you should send it to all concerned organisations and your target audience.
Last Preparations Make the conference packs for the event.
This should include the following:  abstract booklet  conference timetable  information about local events and the area, which you can get from the tourism office from your town/city  any advertising leaflets given by your organisation or any other funding body  taxi telephone numbers, Train, metro, bus timetables  name tacks (make sure that committee’s name tacks differ in color or layout to the ones given to presenters and attendees  food vouchers (if any)  area maps  delegate lists  feedback form  Make preparations in case that the event has to be cancelled.
That is, you may need to have a cancellation notice ready which you could distribute to everyone who was registered as well as to any mailing lists.
 Ask your plenary speakers, attendees and presenters whether they would require any extra help with their arrival at the place of the event.
.- Have a list of all the telephone numbers for all possible services needed.
That is, catering, safety services as well as hospital telephone numbers.
128 PAD 412 INTRODUCTION TO ADMINISTRATIVE PRACTICES AND PROCESSES  Make sure you have at least two extra laptops for the day of the event, in case that a computer or the AV equipment in any of the rooms is not working properly.
 Have an announcement advising attendees to enter/leave the lecture room if they are late by the emergency exits not the front doors so as not to interrupt the presenter.
On the day of the conference, arrive early and prepare the registration desk and make sure that everybody is on their position.
Check the room layout, provision for speakers (AV, water in the conference rooms).
(cid:31)Advise the presenters as soon as they register to check their presentation with the person who has been allocated for this job.
Before the beginning of the first presentation thank everyone for coming and also make sure you acquaint them with safety and room evacuation procedures.
Ensure that safety measures are in place and that first aid attendants are in position to render their services if necessary.
After the conference Record the attendance and prepare and send ‘Thank you letters’ to speakers.
Prepare general report to all sponsors and delegates.
(cid:31) Finally, settle the accounts of the proceedings 3.4 Benefits of a Conference A conference since it is the broadest of the two kinds of meetings (seminar and conference) can provide among others the opportunity to:  meet people.
from other departments of your organisation or other organisations  become aware of other cultures and ideas related to the subject of discuss  familiarize yourself with other research work, projects etc.
 promote your organisation, university / department within the field  attract new and active personnel in your organisation, university / department  build connections and create a network of co-workers and institutions  travel and get to know the hosting country (geographically, culture, religion etc.)
 promote your own research and get feedback  gain and train management skills  train interpersonal skills  learn how things are behind the scenes - become an active member of the department or organisation - promote your association inside and outside your faculty, - gain connections, build networks with institutions important to your organisation’s work, 129 PAD 412 INTRODUCTION TO ADMINISTRATIVE PRACTICES AND PROCESSES - create an opportunity to travel outside your domain if it is hosted elsewhere, - gain new life experiences, - gain new friendship, - and a lot of other professional and personal reasons, 4.0 SUMMARY We have discussed extensively on what needs to be done in the preparation or organisation of a conference.
The guide provided in this unit can be used for organising a local or international conference of any standard.
When you are executing the tasks provided here, it is not absolutely necessary to keep to the strict line between the competences of each Head of the committee.
You need to be flexible and adjustable as it will not be possible to conduct particular tasks due to different reasons (illness, absence of the person in charge, etc.).
5.0 CONCLUSION In this unit we observed that there is no stereotype manual for organising conference.
What we have done here is to provide a guide which you are free to modify to suit your requirement or the requirement of your organisation.
Depending on your needs you can have additional people for carrying out some special tasks.
For example, we can put here a “second in command”, a person that will the place of Head of conference during her/his absence.
You can have a special person for this or it can be one from your organizational team.
It doesn’t really matter as long as she/he is well informed and prepared to take such a responsible place.
Some of the tasks mentioned in the organising committee are shorter and less demanding than others.
This gives to team members the chance to help each other in accomplishing their tasks.
If the personal relations within the team are good then the work inside the team should pose no problem at all.
Good Team Spirit will make for a successful and effective organisation of a conference.
6.0 Tutor Marked Assignment 1.
What is a conference?
2.
An organisation has approached you for advice on how to organise a five days conference for health workers.
Make your presentation.
7.0 References/Further Reading Dictionary.com http://dictionary.reference.com/browse/workshop>.
Modern Language Association (MLA), (2008).
WordNet.
Great Britain: Princeton University.
Peter B.
(2003).
How to Organise a Conference Step by Step Manual.
USA: IAPSS 130 PAD 412 INTRODUCTION TO ADMINISTRATIVE PRACTICES AND PROCESSES Unit 1 HOW TO ORGANISE A SEMINARS 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objective 3.0 Main Content 3.1 Seminar: its’ objectives and importance 3.2 How to Organise a Seminar 4.0 Summary 5.0 Conclusion 6.0 Tutor Marked Assignment 7.0 References 1.0 Introduction Organising a seminar is not the easiest tasks.
It is not something you can do in a day.
It requires proper planning, strict adherence to detail and the ability to think ahead and foresee and foreclose all the pitfalls that can mar the success of the seminar.
Organising a seminar requires extensive preparations and definitely not a one man’s affair.
It involves a group of people who are knowledgeable in the field.
Training seminars provide employees and members of professional organisations with an opportunity to learn business and industry practices.
In this unit, we are going to outline seminar organisational process which if followed will make an organisation of a seminar less tedious and less stressful.
2.0 Objective At the end of this unit, you are expected to know how to organise and host a successful seminar of any magnitude.
3.1 Seminar: its’ objectives and importance Seminar refers to a forum or any form of academic or any other meeting that is used for a training or academic discussion.
Seminar is instructional in nature and is geared toward providing training and education.
It is usually organised in form of a lecture, presentation or discussion for a group of attendees about a particular topic or industry.
It is characterised by a formal presentation by one or more specialists.
Most seminars are done by people in academic fields.
Students may be asked to present a seminar in their courses.
This is usually done with an objective of inculcating presentation and leadership skills in the students.
It is also done to make students or attendees have in-depth knowledge as they research deeper into the topic.
Seminar helps inculcate a comprehensive understanding of the functions and operations of a group, an organisation (public or private) or an academic discipline.
In other words, it equips participants with additional knowledge on the topic of discuss.
Seminars are an excellent way of promoting your business.
The overall aim of seminar presentation is to help develop an emerging field at the intersection of multi-disciplinary understanding of the topic in question.
Seminar incorporates a variety of teaching methods including plenary sessions for the entire group, smaller topical breakout sessions where 131 PAD 412 INTRODUCTION TO ADMINISTRATIVE PRACTICES AND PROCESSES attendees choose from a variety of topics, and video discussion groups.
These small groups work with their faculty advisors each day, which provides for individualization of each team’s learning goals.
Each team prepares a unique “Action Plan” to serve as a blueprint for participants to use once the members of the team return to their respective organizations.
The intensive training experience includes a pre-seminar self-assessment and post-seminar support from the organisers’ staff.
Participants sometimes refer to these intensive training Seminars as participants ‘boot camp’.
This is because participants work hard, learn a lot, laugh a lot, and network across disciplines.
3.2 How to Organise a Seminar Before you start planning for a seminar, you need a clear view or understanding of what the seminar is intended to achieve.
You equally need to set out term of reference for the seminar as well as a committee to make the seminar happen.
The term of reference is the pivot around which the entire planning revolves.
It is a key to knowing how long the seminar will last.
A budget should be set out to be used to plan for the event.
Where your resources cannot accommodate your budget, you can appeal for sponsorship.
The remaining cost can be offset by the participants by charging a fee.
It is necessary and desirable to confirm the topic and the location of the event prior to the date of the seminar.
When organising a seminar, there are many factors that are very crucial to the success of the seminar presentation.
Here are some of the guidelines to organising a successful seminar; i. Seminar Objective(s) Decide on the main objective of the seminar.
In other words, what exactly is the purpose for your seminar?
Choose the areas you want your seminar presentations to be focused on.
Try and make your seminar stand out.
Identify those areas that will make people in your niche very excited about the event.
Are there any hot topics or controversial debates happening in your industry that people are craving to learn more about?
ii.
Fundraise Identify the short-term plans and the long term goals of your seminar.
Make projections on the cost and technological requirements for seminar.
Securing the money to fund seminars can be quite challenging.
If your organisation can make the necessary fund available that is well and good.
However where this is not possible, it is advisable to source for fund by approaching some 132 PAD 412 INTRODUCTION TO ADMINISTRATIVE PRACTICES AND PROCESSES investors or lenders for sponsorship.
Put together some promotional materials too.
The sponsors will like to know that they will get value for the money invested.
In view of this, you will probably need to convince them on the things that will be the main draw that will get people to your seminar.
In other words, what are those things that will make your seminar stand out from others in the industry?
Other pertinent issues are; - How much will the seminar cost, such as speakers fees, venue and equipment rentals?
- How much do you plan to sell admission form?
- How do you plan to market the seminar?
- When do you expect to pay back your investors and lenders and at what rate of return?
iii.
Choose a venue Once you have decided on the type of programme you want to put on, the next is to select a venue for the event that meets the requirements of your seminar profile.
Such requirements will include such issues as the event dates, price, room style, room size, audio/visual requirements, parking lots, and enough seats for expected participants etc.
iv.
Accommodation If the seminar will last for more than one day, then you will need to arrange for an accommodation for the attendees.
Such accommodations should be affordable for the participants or classified according to attendees’ status and affordability.
v. Catering Services If the seminar is to occur over meals times, there will be a need to arrange for professional caterers.
You should give them your feeding specifications and enough notice to meet your requests.
vi.
The Speakers Once you have decided on the content areas, identify speakers who are well versed on the topic your seminar offers.
The keynote speakers should be very knowledgeable, well-respected and have the ability to provide a general 133 PAD 412 INTRODUCTION TO ADMINISTRATIVE PRACTICES AND PROCESSES information on all areas of the field covered by the seminar.
However, secondary speakers should be experts in specific areas and able to better elaborate on individual topics.
When you have identified potential speakers, reach out to each one of them via e-mail to get a feel of their interest level.
Find out their availability on the date you intend to host the seminar and their rate.
This is necessary as it will enable you see who fits your budget.
vii.
Seminar Agendas Create agendas highlighting the major events for the seminar.
Allot speaking times and schedules for your seminar.
The participants will appreciate given the opportunity to quickly check event times.
viii.
Time blocks for the speakers Keynote speakers should be allotted greater time for their presentation and also for the questions and answers session.
Secondary speakers should be given only enough time to present their topic and a short question and answer session.
ix.
Free time The attendees or participants will appreciate free time to visit local sites.
Giving free time will make attending your seminar feel like a vacation.
It will also increase attendance.
4.0 CONCLUSION In this unit, we discussed extensively on seminar and its preparations.
We observed that just like in conference organisation, similar process may be used in seminar preparation.
The guide provided in this unit will produce a successful seminar both within and outside the organisation.
When you are executing the tasks provided here, it is not absolutely necessary to follow them rigidly.
You may apply some flexibility depending on your choice and interest.
Just bear in mind that there is no stereotype guideline for organising seminar.
134 PAD 412 INTRODUCTION TO ADMINISTRATIVE PRACTICES AND PROCESSES 5.0 SUMMARY Seminar is interesting if well prepared.
All the issues mentioned in the preparation of a seminar are very important and should to a greater extend be adhered to.
Try to make a good budget and source for fund if necessary.
Remember that the money realise should be adequately accounted for and disbursed judiciously to the stakeholders.
Rendering a good financial account after the seminar is very important and should not be overlooked.
6.0 Tutor Marked Assignment 1.
Differentiate between a seminar and conference?
2.
Give the dean of your faculty or the head of your organisation an advice on how to host a local seminar on a topical issue.
7.0 References/Further Reading Modern Language Association (MLA), (2008).
WordNet.
Great Britain: Princeton University.
Peter B.
(2003).
How to Organise a Conference Step by Step Manual.
USA: IAPSS 135 PAD 412 INTRODUCTION TO ADMINISTRATIVE PRACTICES AND PROCESSES MODULE SEVEN CONDUCT OF GOVERNMENT BUSINESS Unit 1 Policy making and Policy Implementation Unit 2 Values and Ethics in Government Business Unit 3 The Nigerian Civil Service Unit 1 Public Policy Making and Implementation 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objective 3.0 Main Content 3.1 Definition of Public policy 3.2 Types of Public policy 3.3 Reasons for the study of Public policy 3.4 Policy Making Process 3.5 Environmental Impact on Policy Making and Implementation 3.6 Major Actors in Policy Formulation and Implementation 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutor Marked Assignment 7.0 Reference/Further Readings 1.0 Introduction You are welcome to this particular unit which deals with public policy making.
In this unit, we are going to examine the meaning and nature of public policy.
We will examine in detail the processes by which public policy are made or what we call the policy cycle.
We will also examine the relevance of public policy making in public administration.
As a public sector manager, you will benefit immensely if you understand this unit very well.
It is an interesting topic and we have tried to simplify and make it an interesting reading.
So give this unit your maximum attention.
2.0 Objective At the end of this unit, you will be able to do the following.
136 PAD 412 INTRODUCTION TO ADMINISTRATIVE PRACTICES AND PROCESSES  Explain the concept of public policy  Define and explain fully the public policy process  Understand the environmental impact on public policy making.
 Understand the actors in public policy process.
 Understand fully the policy cycle stages 3.0 Main content 3.1 Definition of Public Policy There are various angles and controversies surrounding the definitions of public Policy and up till now there is no consensus to the Define.
Let us examine some of these definitions.
Nwiza (1997) defines Public Policy as pronouncement of government intention(s) by people in position of public trust demanding government actions or in actions and having impact either negative or positive on the majority of the members of a given society.
This definition is flawed in that were declaration of intentions, wishes or principles, or expression of desires cannot be regarded as public policy.
Maduabum (2008) posit that public policy is an aggregation of peoples hopes, aspirations and intentions embodied in official documents such as legislative enactments, white papers, estimates, government circulars, conclusions of the council of the council of ministers (executive councils) development or rolling plans, etc, or otherwise enunciated and enacted as the current stand on certain issues.
Accordingly, it is a deliberate and binding action by the authoritative organs of the state designed to influence the behavior of the society.
It is not a haphazardons action but rather a systematic method of society fundamental national problems.
The systematic approach is vital so that the numerous public problems will be prioritized against the available resources.
As well as harmonize the various sectoral aspects of the total policy.
Asliford, (1981) Ezeani, (2005:289) take it to mean a pattern of purposive action by which political institutions shape society.
This involves varieties of efforts to tackle identified societal problems.
It has direct relationship with politics.
Public policies are shaped by the manner in which power is 137 PAD 412 INTRODUCTION TO ADMINISTRATIVE PRACTICES AND PROCESSES organized within the government.
It is a guide to government actions since those values which set priorities and roles within the government and societies are encompassed in it.
It is a road map for politicians to follow in the examination of their political agenda.
It equally gives the public, who are the beneficiaries of these policies, an idea of what to expect from the government.
In some instances, government’s inaction can also be as a result of its policy too.
According to Dye (1981:8).
Public Policy is “whatever government chooses to do or not to do”.
It has to be borne in mind that policy does not mean the same thing as decision.
Policy has a longer time frame and wider in scope than decision.
It is policy that provides the framework for day-to- day decisions that are needed for the attainment of the organizational goals.
Public policy is a written statement of government’s action or inaction in a given political environment.
It can equally be called a guiding practices or actions in a particular activity or a problem areas (Ezeani, 2006:290).
Public Policy is an attempt by the government in power to address a public issue.
The government which may be local, state or federal develops this policy within the context of the laws, regulations, decisions and actions of the government.
The distinctive features of the Public Policy according to Maduabum (2003:36) are: I.
Public Policy is not a random or a chance behavior but rather a purposive or goal-oriented action; II.
Public Policy consists of courses or patterns of action by governmental officials; III.
Public Policy is what government actually do, not what they intend to do, or say they are going to do; IV.
Public Policy involver some form of overt government action to affect a particular problem; 138 PAD 412 INTRODUCTION TO ADMINISTRATIVE PRACTICES AND PROCESSES V. Public Policy involves also a decision by government officials not to take action, to do nothing, on some matter on which governmental/ involvement is sought; and VI.
Public Policy is based on Law and is authoritative.
This means that if has legal qualities that distinguished it from the policies of the private organization.
It is pertinent to note that policies remain ‘ideas’ unless subjected to thorough analysis to ensure that they address the goals for which they are being formulated.
3.2 Types of Public Policy There are various terminologies which you will see in the study of public policy.
These include: Policy demand, Policy decisions, Policy statements, policy outputs and Policy outcome.
Let us examine these definitions.
1.
Policy demands.
These are agitations emanating from the public or individual or groups to the government or its representative demanding for action or in action on certain issues.
2.
Policy Decisions—these are decisions which government or its representatives have made that given direction to its public actions or in actions.
3.
Policy Statements --- these are formal expressions or articulations of public policy.
Examples are legislative statute, presidential orders, decrees, administration rules.
4.
Policy Outputs--- these are those things that are actually done as a result of policy decisions or statements.
It is pertinent to note that sometimes policy outputs many differ from initial policy statements.
5.
Policy Outcomes--- these are the consequences that results from government’s actions or in actions.
Example is the consequences (intended or unitended) of the removal of fuel subsidy.
139 PAD 412 INTRODUCTION TO ADMINISTRATIVE PRACTICES AND PROCESSES 3.3 Reasons for the study of Public Policy The study of Public Policy is very crucial to public sector managers because public policy is one subject that affects the lives and well-being of the people and the knowledge of it will adequately equip the stakeholders with clearer understanding of the reasons for some, if not all, of governments thought process and its actions or inactions.
This will help stakeholders to proffer intelligent advice to the government.
A part from this, there is also three reasons for studying public policy.
They include: a) Professional Reasons b) Scientific reasons and c) Political reasons.
a.
Professional reasons: The study of public policy will enhance your knowledge of the causes and effects of the public policy.
This will in turn help you to give a professional advice on public policy issues.
b.
Scientific reasons: Then can study public policy so as to acquire greater knowledge on the origin, the processes of its development or analysis and its benefits to the society in general.
This will increase the public of the workings of the government.
c. Political reasons: We can also study public policy for political reasons.
For instance, to check the activities of the government and ensure that they adopt the right policies that will yield the desired goals and objectives.
This will help to correct the excesses of the government.
3.4 Policy Making Process Public policy making process involves what we call ‘policy cycle’.
The policy cycle is made up of policy initiation, policy formulation, policy 140 PAD 412 INTRODUCTION TO ADMINISTRATIVE PRACTICES AND PROCESSES implementation, policy monitoring and evaluation, and policy reformulation.
The policy cycle Policy Initiation Policy Formulation Policy Reformulation Policy Implementation Policy Monitoring and Evaluation Before we go further to discuss the stage of this cycle, we to understand what public making is all about, what exactly is public policy making?
Public policy making according to maduabum (2008), is an actively which provides the necessary framework for major decision that lead to concrete actions aimed at solving specific problems or improving an existing situation.
In the political sphere, policy making serve as the instrument for authoritative allocation of resources and values to various sectors and activities towards achieving specific socio-political and economic objectives of the government.
Having understood the meaning of public policy making, we can now go ahead to explain the stages of the policy making cycle.
a) Policy Initiation: This involves intensive research effort geared towards the collection and generation of relevant information, ideals, and facts and figures to appraise a proposed policy in terms of its chances of success or otherwise.
141 PAD 412 INTRODUCTION TO ADMINISTRATIVE PRACTICES AND PROCESSES At this initial stage, a group of experts from multi- disciplinary sector or ‘think-tank’ may be utilized.
Other groups who may e used to initiate policies are politicians, legislative class, judiciary, community, professional bodies, pressure groups, or other interact groups.
This stage will also revel the popularity or otherwise of the policy, the anticipated problems, the benefits, the cost implication etc.
the cost- benefit analysis if thoroughly done at this stage will facilitate the policy formulation and passage into law.
It will also greatly enhance the success of the policy.
In Nigeria, policy initiation is undertaken by government and the politicians.
Sometimes the interest groups gets involved but government’s reaction towards society’s popular demand are still weak.
This is not so in the developed countries where lots of think-tank’, data and information are readily available for the government to articulate any proposed policy.
b) Policy Formulation: These are a thin line between policy initiation and policy formulation.
In policy formulation, all the major and vital features of the policy such as unambiguous definition, policy statement and content, policy objectives, plans, programmers, projects and key activities policy priorities and its strategies, the resources available, implementation agencies and their roles, enabling environment for successful implementation are brought to the drawing table and initially reviewed at this stage.
A good policy formulation is sine qua non to sustainability and positive impact of the policy to the society.
In other to achieve this following stage should be taken in the formulation stage: i.
Identification of the problem ii.
Unambiguous definition of the policy issue, iii.
Identification of the source of data.
iv.
Collection of data and data analysis.
v. Formulation of all the policy options.
142 PAD 412 INTRODUCTION TO ADMINISTRATIVE PRACTICES AND PROCESSES vi.
Organization and institutional framework for policy formulation (e.g.
relevant civil servant departments).
vii.
Collection and Analysis of data is done after adequate consultation with the target groups and political leaders.
viii.
Draft content of policy proposal (involving the primary/ secondary data) as well as stakeholders input, and availability of human and material resources.
The public servants acts as chief advisers in the public policy process but the responsibility for policy formulation and the policy itself rests with the politicians or the political decision makers.
c) Policy Implementation This is a very critical stage to the success of any policy process.
It is made up of the following: identification of policy plans, programmers, projects and activities, explicit, definition of the roles of implementing agencies, detailed strategies and linkages as well as coordinating mechanisms, resources (human and materials) acquisition and utilization.
For an effective and efficient policy implementation to take place, sound and proper managerial capabilities in terms of resource mobilization, and rationalization, budgeting, cost- benefit analysis, proper activity scheduling, supervision, problem solving and sound decision making technique is required policy performance standards and targets should be set and met.
The principal implementing agency or machinery for policy implementation is the public service.
Sometimes, government may use committees or task force or commission for the implementation of its policy.
Nigeria governments have many good policies but have the problem of implementation.
This is as a result of indiscipline and corruption.
The public service which in the major of organ for policy implementation has been accused as being inefficient and ineffective to respond adequately and promptly to government needs.
There are some other factors which have been identified for poor policy implementation in 143 PAD 412 INTRODUCTION TO ADMINISTRATIVE PRACTICES AND PROCESSES Nigeria there are: financial misappropriation, lack of political will on the part of the government in terms of financial allocation and prompt release of same, as well as lack of commitment and discipline by the implementing agencies, undue rivalry, diversion of resources, poor definition of policy or overlapping roles of the implementing agencies.
To avoid these problems the under listed conditions should be adhered to: I.
Policy objectives should be explicit and unambiguous II.
Principal factors and linkage must be identified.
III.
Implementing agencies should be forfeited with adequate and capable staff.
IV.
The implementing agencies should be given the necessary incentives and independence.
V. Supportive roles and procedures for proper accountability, and transparency should be provided.
VI.
Adequate financial resources should be provided.
VII.
The stakeholders must be consulted from time to time.
d) Policy Monitoring and Evaluation This stage involves proper and continues observation of all the activities and output of the policy, especially the planned activities, programmers undertaken at various stages of the implementation.
It is at this stage that problems are identified and necessary corrections, adjustments are effected so as to ensure the success of the policy objective.
The major concern at this stage is to ensure that the implementation is in compliance with the policy specifications, strategies in terms of timing, resources rationalization, adherence to planning etc.
The evaluation of the policy access the successful implementation on the basis of efficiency and effectiveness, responsiveness as well as the impact and innovation of the policy.
This may be called appraised.
The distinguishing factor between monitoring and evaluation is that while monitoring is a feed- forward mechanism, evaluation is a feed- back mechanism.
144 PAD 412 INTRODUCTION TO ADMINISTRATIVE PRACTICES AND PROCESSES Monitoring provides information about the activity as it progresses with a view to identifying derivations (if any) and effecting necessary corrections before they get out of hand.
While policy evaluation, provide information on a finished project.
This can be regarded as a post-mortem activity which will be utilized as a guide to future plans on similar event or activity.
e) Policy Reformation The data gathered at the policy evaluation stage will dictate the possibility or otherwise of policy reformation.
3.5 Ecological Impact on Policy Making and Implementation The environment where a policy is formulated and implemented exercises a lot of influence on the making and successful implementation of that policy.
Constraints of the policy makers also come from the environment.
These constraints can be political, economical or social issues.
a.
Social Ecology This includes such factors as: (1) level of literacy If level of literacy is low, ignorance will be on the high side.
this will also reduce peoples participation in policy making thereby firing the policy makers, and policy implementers the opportunity their selfish interest.
(2) Ethnicity Nigeria is a heterogeneous country with many cultural differences which influence the life styles and values of the people.
Each of their tribes tries to protect the interest of their people.
Often times this is done at the expense of others with the result that most policies in Nigeria are crippled became of ethnic sentiments or interest.
(3) Religion 145 PAD 412 INTRODUCTION TO ADMINISTRATIVE PRACTICES AND PROCESSES Nigeria is a ‘secular society’ but finds it hard to make a unified policy that can accommodate every member of the society.
Sharia practices and policies are offensive to other religious practices.
(4) Dichotomy between the haves and the have-nots There is a sharp distinction between the rich, who are in the minority, and the poor.
The former uses their position to influence the policy in their favour.
b.
Political Ecology The political environment involves such factor as: i.
Leadership styles The type of leadership in the society freats affects the type of policy that emerges.
The leadership style may be (a) autocratic (b) democratic or (c) laissez – faire ii.
Political system The political system in any society plays is major impact on the nation policy.
The political system may be capitalist, socialist, democratic, military etc.
Some policies may help to stabilize the country or state while others may lead to instability of the government.
c. Economical Ecology These are policies which indicate the rates of society economic development on the policy.
They are:  Technological development  Information technology  Tax policy  Employment opportunity  Gender equality  Education policy Other major constraints to policy success especially in Nigeria are;  Political instability 146 PAD 412 INTRODUCTION TO ADMINISTRATIVE PRACTICES AND PROCESSES  Unstable government policy  Planning without adequate fact  Selfish interest  Military intervention in government  Lack of accountability  Lack of patriotism  Lack of Evaluation of policy impact  Lack of investigative media  Lack of proper implementation  Lack of political agenda  Non adherence to party’s manifesto.
3.6 Major Actors in Policy Formulation and Implementation.
Policy process has two crucial levels; a. the strategic level and the operational level.
Policy making in done at the strategic level while that its implementation is done at the operational level.
The strategic level, especially in government, is made up of the political class while the operational level has the civil servant, which is the bureaucrats, as its members.
Let us examine the major actors in policy formulation and implementation.
3.6.1 Major Actors in Policy Formulation and Implementation a.
The legislature This is the major players in policy making process.
This is because they represent various constituencies whose problem they bring to the house and sponsor for the passage of such bills into law.
They also have the power to ensure that the policies are implemented.
They do this by setting up monitoring committees.
147 PAD 412 INTRODUCTION TO ADMINISTRATIVE PRACTICES AND PROCESSES b.
The Executive The President and his chief aids are another vital source of public policy.
The executive lays down policy guidelines and the types of policies to be pursued.
The success of the government depends on a good and viable policy agenda set out by the executive and his term.
c. The Bureaucrats These are the career civil servants.
In most cases they initiate policies using their expertise, the information and data gathered as well as their awarneen of societal needs and demands of various agencies.
They have been classified as partners with the politicians in the collaborative effort of policy – making but they should not arrogate to themselves the position of policy makers.
Their position is important, no doubt, but should be restricted to collecting, collating, analyzing data or advising on policy options or alternative courses of action.
But the actual choice of which policy to adopt rests with the political class.
d. Interest Groups These groups play important role in policy formulation.
They send their proposals to the legislature and also lobby to influence some policy proposals to suit their interest.
The success of these groups of people depends on their financial capabilities resources both human and material at their disposal, the skill and influence of their leadership.
They equally influence policy implementation by show of support and active participation as well as monitoring the performance of those policies that affect them by making sure that such policies are properly implemented to meet their specific goals.
The cooperation of the interest group is crucial to the survival of policy implementation.
Any protest from them will bring adverse effect on the policy.
e. The courts Court through the exercise of their statutory powers can influence the formulation and interpretation of public power to review the constitutionality of certain decisions and actions of the legislative and executive arm of the 148 PAD 412 INTRODUCTION TO ADMINISTRATIVE PRACTICES AND PROCESSES government and declares them null and void if such actions ultra vires the constitution when this happens, the rhust of the policy is usually affected.
An example of such action is the 1981 Revenue Allocation Act controversy (Ade molekun 1983:147).
The important lesson here is that the courts can prohibit, facilitate or nullify the formulation or the implementation of public policy through their decision.
4.0 Conclusion This unit examines public policy.
Policy is a vital tool of governance and the extent to which any nation can progress in the governance of its people is contingent on the ability of its citizens to accept and support policies.
The environments within which policies are formulated and implemented have a lot of influence in shaping the policy.
The same environment places limits and constraints on the actions of the policy makers.
5.0 Summary The unit dealt with the meaning and stages of the policy making process.
These stages are policy identification and formulation, implementation, monitoring and evaluation as well as policy reformulation.
These stages are also known as the policy cycle.
The symbiotic relationships between all the phases of the cycle were examined.
We also examined the environmental effects of the policy making and its implementation.
We also examined the key players in policy formulation and implementation and the effect of their actions in shaping and executing the policy process in the society.
We hope you have learnt the necessary feature of the policy making and implementation.
In the next unit, we will discuss the political system process and forms of government.
149 PAD 412 INTRODUCTION TO ADMINISTRATIVE PRACTICES AND PROCESSES 6.0 Tutor-marked Assignment 1.
What is Public Policy?
2.
With the aid of a diagram discuss the policy cycle 3.
What is the importance of ecology in the formulation and implementation of public policy?
4. Who are the key players in policy making?
Discuss their roles.
7.0 References/Further Readings Ashford, D. (1981).
Policy and Politics in Britain, as quoted in Maduabum, C. Ed.
(2003).
Contemporary Issues in Public Administrative.
ASCON, Badagry Anderson, J.A.
(1975), Public Policy Making: London: Thomas Nelson and Sons Ltd. Dye, T. (1997), Understanding Public Policy.
New Jersey: Prentice Hall.
Ezeani E.O (2006).
Fundamentals of Public Administration.
Enugu: Zik Chuks Publishers Maduabum, C.P.
(2008).
Mechanics of Public Administration in Nigeria.
Lagos: Concept Publications Limited.
Maduabrum, C. (2003), ‘Policy Making in Nigeria: Implementation Strategies’; Contemporary Issues on Public Policy Analysis in Nigeria, Lagos: ASCON press Nwizu, C. (1997), Organization: Basic Concepts.
Enugu: John Jacob Classic Publishers Olanigan, S.A. (2003), “Public policy – Making Process in Developing Countries” in contemporary issues on public policy Analysis in Nigeria Lagos, ASCON press.
Okoye, J.C, Chuckwaemeka E.E.O., Anazodo R.O (2004), Politics and Government: Introduction and Element., Enugu: HRV Konsult 150 PAD 412 INTRODUCTION TO ADMINISTRATIVE PRACTICES AND PROCESSES Unit 2 Values and Ethics in Government Business 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objective 3.0 Main Content 3.1 Concept of Ethics and Values 3.2 Functions of Ethics Principles 3.3 Ethics in Nigeria’s Public Sector 3.4 Institutions in-charge of Ethics in Nigeria 3.5 Reasons for inefficiency in the System 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutor Marked Assignment 7.0 References/Further Reading 1.0 Introduction In this unit, we shall be discussing values and ethics of Public Administration.
Ethics is bothered about the conduct of man, his happiness, pleasure, what he considers to be good or bad conduct, and conditions under which these values may be impeded or realized.
Ethics is all about moral principles and values.
It emphasizes discipline, dealing with good and evil as well as moral duty, moral principles or practice which guide the behavior of man.
Every entity or organization all over the world, whether religious, private or public organization, has its own acceptable ways of behavior, norms, interest or values which it expects its members to imbibe.
So also it is with Public Sector Administration in Nigeria.
As we progress in this unit, we shall examine the ways of determining and guaranteeing an adoption of the right behavior that is desired of the various actors in the conduct of government business in Nigeria.
151 PAD 412 INTRODUCTION TO ADMINISTRATIVE PRACTICES AND PROCESSES 2.0 Objectives At the end of this unit, you are expected to:  know all about ethics,  learn about moral values,  know ethical principles in the Public Sector Administration in Nigeria,  and be able to assess whether Public and Civil Servants are applying ethical principles in the conduct of their business and why, and  be able to correct the wrongs in the system as an informed Public Administrator.
3.0 Main Content 3.1 Concept of Ethics and Values Ethics concepts or explanations are proffered regarding what affects or guides the moral conduct of man.
Maduabum (2008) posit that every organization has its norms, values, interests and acceptable ways of behavior and at the same time, employees of the same organization individually or collectively have their own peculiar behavior acquired prior to joining the organization.
The employees’ behavior reflects and protects their interests, which may be at variance with the organizational interests.
Therefore for an organization to continue to survive and grow there must be that congruence between the organization’s interest and those of its employees.
This will forestall conflicts, lack of productivity, disenchantment and even industrial actions.
This informs the emphasis on ethic and code of conduct.
An organization that does not enforce its ethics and code of conduct of its employees will collapse.
What then is ethics?
Omoregbe (1993:3-4), states that ethics “can be defined as the branch of Philosophy which deals with the morality of human actions, or a branch of Philosophy which studies the norms of human behavior… (or) the systematic study of the fundamental principles of the moral law; or as the normative science of human conduct.” 152 PAD 412 INTRODUCTION TO ADMINISTRATIVE PRACTICES AND PROCESSES Okafor and Eloagu, (2002:85) defines ethics as follows:”Ethics” means discipline dealing with good and evil and with moral duty, moral principles or practice”.
Values, on the other hand, are abstract ideas or principles which help to decide what to do because they define what is important in our dealings with other people and things.
What we ‘value’ will be very important in deciding how we live our lives, and what methods we well choose to attain our goals (Murray, 1997:44).
The vital points in these definitions are moral values or principles and all these though not the same are all geared towards public morality.
3.2 Functions of Ethical’ principles (1) They set down specific values which are important to an individual, such as ‘honesty’, fairness, integrity, reliability, selflessness; (2) Principles provide general guidance which assists a person to make decisions; (3) They invite other people to trust that the person can be relied on to observe the ethical standard for judgment so that everyone can make judgment about the ethics of the person.
Nigerians accepts ‘high’ standards of ethics from the civil servants and public officials, including the judiciary and elected representatives, who undertake the tasks of government and public management on its behalf.
Ethics problems are generally concerned with choosing between “right” and “wrong” when we are required to decide what we ought to do in a ‘particular’ situation.
In private life, we generally approve of promise keeping, selflessness, responsibility, reliability, hard work, commitment, courage, honesty, frankness, and above all, trustworthiness.
Ethics involves obligation, duty and conflict of interests, responsibility, integrity, fairness, and trust.
On the other hand, special words used to show disapproval of 153 PAD 412 INTRODUCTION TO ADMINISTRATIVE PRACTICES AND PROCESSES many kinds of ‘unethical’ conduct or behavior are: lying, selfness, cheating, dishonesty, unreliability, abuse of position, abuse of trust, etc.
Accroding to Whitton (2001:13), the key ethics ideas in civil service rules are that civil servants and public officials, including judges, ministers and politicians should do the following: (1) Occupy a position of trust, on behalf of the whole community; (2) Exercise power assigned by a lawful authority, or law; (3) Are expected to use that power for a propose as expressed in law; (4) Are expected to act competently (that is with relevant skill) and responsibly (that is, with due consideration of the consequences of their actions).
(5) Are expected to be accountable for their actions to a manager, the head of their organization, and perhaps ultimately to an external authority; (6) Are expected to recognize that this accountability includes being required to give reasons for decisions they make; (7) Are expected to act in the public interest – that is, for the overall good of the community as a whole; (8) Are expected to be personally disinterested – that is, to exclude conflicts between their personal interests or advantage and the public interest, so that their advice, decisions and actions should be, and appear to be, unaffected by any private interest or personal advantage; and (9) Are expected to comply with a civil service code of ethics which will emphasize the values of responsibility, legitimacy, fairness, efficiency and effectiveness, diligence, accountability, and integrity.
3.3 Code of Ethics in the Nigerian Public Service Code of ethics implies a framework within which staff can be expected to work.
Maduabum (2008) posits that a code of ethics is an important 154 PAD 412 INTRODUCTION TO ADMINISTRATIVE PRACTICES AND PROCESSES management tool which can positively shape the culture of an organization.
He went further to say that it is used to help prevent corruption in the society by specifying punitive measures for corrupt officials.
It helps staff in the conduct of their day-to-day activities.
It must also include clearly stated example of conduct and relationships that are relevant to the particular function of the organization.
A code of ethics should function as a positive guide to decision-making and it must provide specific, concrete examples to illustrate the ethical problem that might arise in an organization and strategies for dealing with them.
Areas specific concern or ethical risk to the organization such as bribery, theft, abuse of public office, etc, should be carefully considered and included in the code.
Since no two organizations are the same, the code of ethics should reflect the peculiarity in the organization if such a code should be relevant.
We shall concern ourselves with the code of ethics or conduct for public servants in Nigeria.
The 1999 constitution stipulates the following as the code of conduct for public officers: (1) A public officer shall not put himself in a position where his personal interest conflicts with his duties and responsibilities.
(2) Without prejudice to the generality of the foregoing paragraph, a public office shall not: (a) Receive or he paid the emolument of any public office at the same time as he receives or is paid the emoluments of any other public office; or (b) Except where he is not employed on full-time basis, engage or participate in the management or running of any private business, profession or trade; but nothing in this sub-paragraph shall prevent a public officer from engaging in farming.
(3) The President, Vice-President, Governor, Deputy Governor, Ministers of the Government of the Federation and Commissioners of the Government of the States, members of the National Assembly and of 155 PAD 412 INTRODUCTION TO ADMINISTRATIVE PRACTICES AND PROCESSES the Houses of Assembly of the States and such other public officers or Persons as the National Assembly may by law prescribe, shall not maintain or operate a bank account in any country outside Nigeria.
(4) (1) a public officer shall not, after his retirement from public service and while receiving pension from public funds, accept more than one remunerative position as chairman, director or employee of: (a) A company owned or controlled by the government; and (b) Any public authority.
(2) A retired public servant shall not receive any other remuneration from public funds in addition to his pension and the emolument of such one remunerative position.
(5) (1) retired public officers who have held offices to which this paragraph applies are prohibited from service or employment in foreign companies or foreign enterprises.
(2) This paragraph applies to the office of President, Vice-President, Chief Justice of Nigeria, Governor and Deputy Governor of a State.
(6)(1) A public officer shall not ask for or accept property or benefits of any kind for himself or any other person on account of anything done or omitted to be done by him in the discharge of his duties.
(2) For the purpose of sub-paragraph (1) of this paragraph, the receipt by a public officer of any gifts or benefits from commercial firms, business enterprises or persons who have contracts with the government shall be presumed to have been received in contravention of the said sub-paragraph unless the contrary is proved.
(3) a public officer shall only accept personal gifts or benefit from relatives or personal friends to such extent and on such occasions as are recognized by custom, provided that any gift or donation to a public officer on any public ceremonial occasion shall be treated as a gift to the appropriate institution represented by the public officer, and accordingly, the mere acceptance or receipt of any such gift shall not be treated as contravention of this provision.
(7) the President or Vice-President, Governor or Deputy Governor, minister of the government of the federation or commissioner of the government of a 156 PAD 412 INTRODUCTION TO ADMINISTRATIVE PRACTICES AND PROCESSES state, or any other public officer who holds the of a permanent secretary or head of any public corporation, university, or other parastatal organization, shall not accept: (a) A loan, except from government or its agencies such as, a bank building society, mortgage institution or other financial institutions recognized law; and (b) Any benefit of whatever nature from any company, contractor, or businessman, or the nominee or agent of such a person.
Provided that the head of a public corporation or of a university or other parastatal organization may, subject to the rules and regulations of the body, accept a loan from such a body.
(8) No person shall offer a public officer any property, gift or benefit of any kind as an inducement or bribe for the granting of any favour or the discharge in his favour, of the public officer’s duties.
(9) a public officer shall not do, or direct to be done, in abuse of his office, any arbitrary act prejudicial to rights of any other person, knowing that such act is unlawful, or contrary to any government policy.
(10) A public officer shall not be a member of, belong to, or take part in any society, the membership of which is incompatible with the functions or dignity of his officer.
(11) (1) subject to the provisions of the constitution, “every public officer shall, within three months after the coming into force of the code of conduct or immediately after taking office and thereafter: (a) at the end of every four years; and (b)at the end of his term of office, submit to the code of conduct Bureau a written declaration of all his properties, assets, and liabilities and those of his unmarried children under the age of eighteen.
(2) any statement in such declaration that is found to be false by any authority or person authorized in that behalf to verify it, shall be deemed to be a breach of the code.
(3) any property or assets acquired by a public officer after any declaration required under the constitution and which is not fairly 157 PAD 412 INTRODUCTION TO ADMINISTRATIVE PRACTICES AND PROCESSES attributable to income, gift, or loan approved by the code unless the contrary is proved.
(12) any allegation that a public officer has committed a breach of, or has not complied with the provisions of this code shall be made to the code of conduct Bureau.
(13) a public officer who does act in a manner prohibited by this code through a nominee, trustee, or other agent, shall be deemed ipso facto to have committed a breach of this code.
3.4 Institutional In-charge of Ethics in Nigeria Public Service The following organs are charged with the responsibilities of enforcing ethical principles in Nigeria Public Service organizations.
(a) Code of Conduct Bureau: – its functions are fully explained in the Third Schedule, Part 1, of the constitution of the Federal Republic of Nigeria, 1999.
(b) Code of Conduct Tribunal: - its functions are equally explained in Part 1 of the Fifth Schedule of the same constitution.
(c) Anti-Corruption Law which was passed as an Act of the National Assembly, 2000 and known as accountability and Transparency Act, 2000.
(a) Code of Conduct Bureau In accordance with the provisions of the Third Schedule, Part 1, of the Constitution of the Federal Republic of Nigeria, 1999, this body was set up to, among others: (1) receive from every public officer, written declaration of all his properties, assets, and liabilities and those of his unmarried children under the age of eighteen immediately after taking office and therefore, at the end of every four (4) years, and at the end of his terms of office; (2) examine the declaration in accordance with the requirements of the code of conduct or any law; (3) retain custody of such declarations and make them available for inspection by any citizen of Nigeria on such terms and conditions as the National Assembly may prescribe; 158 PAD 412 INTRODUCTION TO ADMINISTRATIVE PRACTICES AND PROCESSES (4) Ensure compliance with, and, where appropriate, enforce the provisions of the code of conduct or any law relating thereto; and (5) Receive complaints about non-compliance with breach of the provisions of the code of conduct or any law in relation thereto, investigate the complaint and, where appropriate, refer such matter to the code of conduct Tribunal.
(b) Code of Conduct Tribunal: this was established by the same Constitution as contained in Part 1 of the Fifth Schedule, to (1) Impose on officers found guilty of contravening provisions of the code of conduct Bureau such punishment as:  Vacation of office or seat in any legislative house, as the case may be;  Disqualification from membership of a legislative house and from holding any public office for a period not exceeding ten years; and  Seizure and forfeiture to the state of any property acquired in abuse of office, or corruption.
(2) Where the conduct is a criminal offence, the above sanctions will merely be in addition to the penalties that may be imposed by any law.
(3) Where the Tribunal gives a decision as to whether or not a person is guilty of a contravention of any of the provisions of the code, “an appeal shall lie as of right from such a decision or from any punishment imposed on such person to the Court of Appeal at the instance of any party to the proceeding”.
3.5 Reasons for the Inefficiency in the System a.
Corruption and abuse of office by political office holders.
b.
Public offices are the shopping floors of government business.
c. Non-compliance with due process 4.0 Conclusion Code of ethics as we have seen from all the discussions above is a framework within which individuals are expected to conform to in their place 159 PAD 412 INTRODUCTION TO ADMINISTRATIVE PRACTICES AND PROCESSES of work or association.
It is a vital management tool which can positively shape the culture of an organization if adhered to.
It is a useful instrument for the prevention of corruption in the society by specifying punitive measures for corrupt officials.
It helps staff in the conduct of their day-to- day activities.
It include clearly stated example of conduct and relationships that are relevant to the particular function of the organization.
A code of ethics function as a positive guide to decision-making and provides specific, concrete examples to illustrate the ethical problem that might arise in an organization and strategies for dealing with them.
It is indeed an inevitable instrument for the success of any organization or society.
5.0 Summary We have discussed ethics and values in Public Administration extensively in this unit.
We brought the code of conduct in the public service in Nigeria as specified in the constitution of the Federal Republic of Nigeria.
We also noted the failures in the public service and why they occur.
The agencies that are in- charge of the code of conduct as well as their duties were discussed too.
We hope you have learnt a lot in this unit and we believe also that you will put this knowledge into positive use to remedy the wrongs in the public sector administration in Nigeria.
In the next unit we will be discussing the principles of the separation of powers.
6.0 Tutor Marked Assignment 1.
Write short notes on the following: a.
Ethics b.
Code of conduct c. Values 2.
What are the reasons for inefficiency in public service in Nigeria?
3.
How can the inefficiency in the system be corrected?
160 PAD 412 INTRODUCTION TO ADMINISTRATIVE PRACTICES AND PROCESSES 7.0 References Federal republic of Nigeria (1999).
Constitution of the federal Republic of Nigeria (1999).
Abuja: Government Press.
Maduabum, C.P.
(2008).
Mechanics of Public Administration in Nigeria.
Lagos: Concept Publications Ltd. Murray, D. (1997).
Ethics in Organizations.
London: Kogan Page.
Ogbinaka, K. (2010).
A Window into Philosophy.
Lagos: Joja Educational Research and Publishers Ltd. Okafor, A. O.
And U. O. Eloagu, (2002).
“National Ethics and Good Government”.
Lecture Modules for the intensive Training Programmer for federal Civil Servants.
Abuja: Samfort Associates.
Omoregbe, J.I.
(1993).
Ethics: A systematic and Historical Study.
Lagos: Joja Educational Research & Publishers Ltd. 161 PAD 412 INTRODUCTION TO ADMINISTRATIVE PRACTICES AND PROCESSES Unit 3 The Nigerian Civil Service 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objectives 3.0 Main content 3.1 History and Development of the Nigerian Civil Service 3.2 The Structure of the Nigerian Civil Service 3.3 Management of the Civil Service 3.4 Functioning of the Civil Service 3.5 Recruitment in Civil Service 3.6 Training and Processes of Managing Government Business 4.0 Summary 5.0 Review Questions 6.0 Reference/Further Readings 1.0 Introduction The Nigerian civil service consists of employees in Nigerian government agencies other than the military and other armed forces.
Structurally, even some specialized institutions such as the universities and research centres do not belong to the core civil service and are as such insulated from some of the civil service laws and regulations.
The Civil Service is that organ of government that enjoys perpetuity, job security, and assists in the formulation and implementation of government policies.
The Nigerian Civil Service is fashioned to suit the British Colonial masters to acquire their ulterior motive for the colonization of Nigeria nay African.
Abinitio, the colonialists did not intend the system to be developmental in nature and, sadly, when the Nigerian elites took over, they towed the foot prints of the ‘whites’ and did not do much to develop the system.
This has occasioned series of reforms which are intended to make the system become more efficient.
In this chapter, we are going to discuss these reforms, the structure of the civil service, its management, its functions, the recruitment process, training and processes of managing government departments.
162 PAD 412 INTRODUCTION TO ADMINISTRATIVE PRACTICES AND PROCESSES 2.0 Objective At the end of this chapter you are expected to have acquired the following knowledge:  Origin of the Nigerian Civil Service  The structure of the Nigerian Civil Service  The management of the Nigerian Civil Service  Functions of the Nigerian Civil Service  Recruitment in the Nigerian Civil Service  Training and processes in managing government departments.
3.0 Main Content 3.1 History and Development of the Nigerian Civil Service The Nigeria civil service has its origins in organizations established by the British in colonial times.
Nigeria is a complex country with numerous ethnic groups.
These ethnic groups were brought together to form one country called Nigeria.
Prior to 1914, Nigeria was two different countries known as the Southern and the Northern protectorates.
It was in 1914 that the two protectorates were fused together to form what is known today as Nigeria.
Nigeria gained full independence in October 1960 under a constitution that provided for a parliamentary government and a substantial measure of self- government for the country’s three regions.
After the departure of the British colonial government, the Nigerian government took over the civil service the colonialists left behind but did nothing to restructure or develop it.
They system, instead of improving, became worse as the indigenes devoted more time in behaving like ‘African oyinbo’ (Maduabum, 2006), a term which is commonly referred to as ‘black man in a white man’s skin’.
As a result of this, various panels have studied and made recommendations to reform the civil service.
Notable among them are: the Morgan Commission of 1963, the Adebo commission of 1971, and the Udoji Commission of 1972-74.
A major change occurred with the adoption in 1979 of a constitution modelled on that of the United State.
The Dotun Philips 163 PAD 412 INTRODUCTION TO ADMINISTRATIVE PRACTICES AND PROCESSES panel of 1985 attempted to reform the civil service too.
Then again, 1988 civil service reorganization decree promulgated by General Ibrahim Babangida had a major impact on the structure and efficiency of the civil service.
The later report of the Ayida panel made recommendations to reverse some of the past innovations and to return to the more efficient civil service of earlier years.
Apart from the afore mentioned reforms, the civil service has been undergoing gradual and systematic reforms and restructuring since May 29, 1999 after decades of military rule.
However, the system is still considered stagnant and inefficient, and the attempts made in the past by panels have had little effect on its efficiency and effectiveness.
3.2 The Structure of Civil Service The civil service is mainly organized around the federal ministries, headed by a minister appointed by the president, who must include at least one member of each of the 36 states in his cabinet.
The president’s appointments are confirmed by the senate of Nigeria.
The Civil Service is present in the 36 states in the federation.
In some cases a federal minister is responsible for more than one ministry (e.g environment and housing may be combined), and a minister may be assisted by one or more ministers of state.
Each ministry also has a permanent secretary, who is a senior civil servant.
The ministries are responsible for various parastatals (government-owned corporations) such as universities (Education), National Broadcasting commission (information) and Nigerian National petroleum Corporation (Petroleum).
Other parastatals are the responsibility of the office of the presidency, such as the Independent National Electoral Commission, the Economic and Financial Crimes Commission and the Federal Civil Service Commission.
The service has six additional units which provide services to all the departments on the Civil Service: 164 PAD 412 INTRODUCTION TO ADMINISTRATIVE PRACTICES AND PROCESSES  Establishment & Record Office (E&RO)  Career Management Office (CMO)  Manpower Development Office (MDO)  Management Services Office (MSO)  Common Services Office (CSO)  Bureau of Public Service Reforms (BPSR) Characteristics of the Civil Service Generalizations as to features and characteristics of the civil service may be misleading particularly where changes in the structure and operation of the service are continuously being made to enable the administrative machinery be more proactive.
This notwithstanding, over the years, certain characteristics have been attributed to the civil service the world over.
According to E.N.
Gladden (Padfield and Byne, 1989:162).
The requirements of the Civil Service are that is shall be impartially selected, administratively competent, politically neutral and imbued with spirit of service to the community.
In addition to these, the civil service is known to be comprehensive, permanent, anonymous and professional (cf.
Olisa et al, 1979:76).
It is important to explain each of these characteristics briefly: a. Impartiality Impartiality is one of the basic principles of the civil service.
This is not only about impartial selection but also about objectivity.
Civil Servants are appointed by open competition.
This involves certain levels of academic qualification, written examination and interviews and tests.
However, it has to be noted that this is the general picture, there are societal exigencies – representativeness, federal character, feminine demands and so on that may and do occasionally put merit in the second place.
b. Permanence The Civil Service is permanent as its members continue in office notwithstanding changes of government or ministers.
Ministers, 165 PAD 412 INTRODUCTION TO ADMINISTRATIVE PRACTICES AND PROCESSES governments, administrations may come and go but civil servants continue to carrying on services that are vital to the community and remaining to serve the various sets of rulers as they come and go.
Since independence in 1960, the Nigerian Civil Service, at state and federal levels, has served several elected civilian political leaders and several military leaders who took over government by force.
Civil servants have security of tenure of office and may look forward to a full and work life career with reasonable pay and prospects.
The issue of permanence is the base of the continuity aspect of the Civil Service.
c. Neutrality This underscores the issue of loyalty and dedication to duty.
Civil servants are non-political, that is, they serve different governments in power impartially and disinterestedly.
The Civil Service is there to serve any government of the day and to hold the fort when there is no government on the ground (examples, Nigeria after the 29th July, 1996 coup d’etat; Italy, Britain and so on upon resignation of particular head of government).
In this connection, Lord Attles, Winston Churchill and Harold Wilson all testified to the vigour of the British civil service in applying policies under their administrations.
Thus, in 1949 labour proposed that the Iron and steel industry be nationalized.
In 1951, the conservative government proposed denationalization.
Both policies were carried through by virtually the same officials (Padfield and Byrne, 1989:163).
In their relations with the general public, civil servants are also expected to be impartial.
This means no discrimination, except so far as special circumstances justify this, between one member of the public and another.
d. Anonymity This means that the Civil Service must work behind the scene, without praise or blame.
Thus, while civil servants take part indirectly in formulating government policies, they do not publicly take the credit for such policies when they are good and successful nor do they publicly take the blame for the failure of such policies.
The minister takes all the credit or blame as the 166 PAD 412 INTRODUCTION TO ADMINISTRATIVE PRACTICES AND PROCESSES case maybe.
He runs his department and is politically responsible for its activities.
With regards to a policy, the top civil servants (permanent secretaries or director- generals etc) may suggest alternative courses, pointing out the difficulties of each or the advantages and disadvantages.
However, the minister must decide which course to follow.
He alone will be answerable in the parliament or to the AFRC or the public for the results, good or bad.
As finer puts it; When a minister knows that he cannot put the blame on his civil servants, he is stimulated to judge their advice independently and carefully, and to insist that they shall do their best.
That he is answerable to the parliament causes him to insist that others shall be answerable to him (Padfield and Byrne, 1989: 163).
However, this tradition has been considerably shaken.
In this connection, the question of ministerial responsibility for the work of officials within a department was highlighted by the crichel- Down case of 1954 (Padfield and Byrne, 1989: 163-164).
The facts of this case in brief were that a farmland owned by Lt. Com.
Marten was compulsorily purchased by the Ministry of Agriculture in 1973.
The land was used during World War II and, subsequently, as a bombing range.
By 1952 Lt. Com.
Marten applied to buy back his former farmland which he proposed to use again as agricultural land.
Within the same period, however, officials of the Ministry wanted to acquire the land for a model farm.
Many difficulties were placed in the way of Lt. Com.
Marten’s repurchase of the land.
He persisted in his endeavours and eventually (as a result of pressure in parliament) the minister (Sir Thomas Dugdale) agreed to a public enquiry, conducted by sir Andrew Clark.
The report of the enquiry criticized the work of the officials which had taken place before the minister assumed office.
In a debate that subsequently ensured in the House of commons, sir Thomas Dugdale as a result of pressure from his own political backbenchers assumed moral responsibility and resigned his office.
However, during the Crichel-Down debate in 1954, the Home secretary made the following statements: 167 PAD 412 INTRODUCTION TO ADMINISTRATIVE PRACTICES AND PROCESSES where action has been taken by a civil servant of which the minister disapproves and has no prior knowledge, and the conduct of the official is reprehensible, then there is not obligation on the part of the minister to endorse what he believes to be wrong, or to defend what are clearly shown to be the errors of his officers.
The minister is not bound to approve an action of which he did not know, or of which he disapproves.
But of course, he remains constitutionally responsible to parliament for the fact that something has gone wrong and he alone can tell parliament what has occurred and render an account of his stewardship (Padfield and Byrne, 164).
Thus, according to Padfield and Byrne, the doctrine of “Ministerial responsibility” is today one of doubtful validity, as occasionally ministers have failed to observe the consequences of such responsibility (Padfield and Byrne, 1989:131-132).
The fact of the matter is that owing to the complex nature of Public Administration today, a Minister cannot know all that goes on in his own department, much less take all the decisions done in his or her name.
Mistakes and maladministration occur from time to time and when they do, they usually pose an embarrassment to the minister and the government.
Where these happen and a civil servant is at fault, he may be removed from the department or his promotion prospects may be impaired.
3.3 The Management of Civil Service The Civil Service Commission This is a constitutional body created by the Constitution of the Federal Republic of Nigeria.
This constitutional status is aimed at guaranteeing its effective impartial operations as well as ensuring its autonomy.
The power and functions of the Federal and State Civil Service are entrenched in the constitution.
The task or responsibility of posting, recruitment, appointment, transfer, and discipline are its primary responsibility.
However, the administration of Ibrahim Babangida, in 1988, during the civil service reforms reduced their powers and functions and distributed them to the 168 PAD 412 INTRODUCTION TO ADMINISTRATIVE PRACTICES AND PROCESSES other Ministries and Extra-Ministerial Departments.
Therefore, the present arrangement is that the civil service commission should delegate personnel management powers and functions as follows: i.
The respective ministries and extra-ministerial departments have the responsibility of appointments, promotion, and discipline of civil servants on GL 01-06. ii.
Appointments, promotion and discipline of civil servants on GL.07-10 are not delegated.
These are however handled directly by the civil service commission.
iii.
Appointments, promotion and discipline of officers on GL 12-14 are delegated in the senior management committee of various ministries and extra-ministerial departments or relevant staff pools.
Functions of the Civil Service Commission a.
Recruitment: The Civil Service Commission is responsible for the recruitment of officers on grade levels 07-10.
It is provided that the principle of Federal character should be strictly applied in this process, at the point of entry.
Also it should monitor the activities of various Ministries and Extra-ministerial departments, on the appointment of officers as done by the Personnel Management Boards on the levels of officers delegated to them by law.
One of the means of achieving this is the provision of a Personnel Management Board of each Ministry or Extra- ministerial department as an observer.
Although the attendance of the commissioner is on an observer status, his presence is mandatory.
When a personnel management board meeting is conducted without the presence of a commissioner, the decisions of such a meeting are declared void, invalid and of no effect to the concerned civil servants who are supposed to be part of its institutional body.
169 PAD 412 INTRODUCTION TO ADMINISTRATIVE PRACTICES AND PROCESSES b. Appellative body: In respect of appointments, promotion and discipline, the Commission serves as an appellate body for all petitions from Civil servants in all Ministries and Extra-ministerial departments; as this forms part of their Personnel Management functions.
It is provided that the decisions of the Civil Service Commission are binding on all Ministries and Extra- Ministerial departments.
Appeal cases are lodged with the Commission.
However, the Minister or Commissioner is given the power of appeal to the President or Governor respectively, where and when the need arises.
c. Monitoring functions: The Civil Service Commission is also empowered to monitor the activities of Ministries and Extra-Ministerial departments on the discipline and promotion of officers, in order to ensure that the guidelines provided are strictly and uniformly followed.
d. Maintenance of personnel records: Another function of the civil service commission is the maintenance of up-to- date personnel records of the entire Civil Service of the Federal or State government, as the case may be.
These records are very vital for manpower planning and effective personnel utilization and management.
e. Staff welfare: The welfare of staff at both the Federal and State Civil Service are the joint responsibility of the Civil Service Commission, the Establishment Department and Extra-Ministerial Departments.
Personnel Management Board In 1988 the Babangida administration carried out a reform of the Civil Service in Nigeria, and subsequently introduced the Personnel Management Board for each ministry and Extra- Ministerial department at the state and federal levels, sequel to the decentralization of the personnel management 170 PAD 412 INTRODUCTION TO ADMINISTRATIVE PRACTICES AND PROCESSES functions of the civil service.
The Personnel Management Board which now handles the Personnel Management functions of the civil service is structured into three tiers which are briefly discussed below: i.
Junior Staff Committee of the Personnel Management Board (Local) According to the recommendations of the 1988 Federal Government Civil Service Reforms, this committee consisted of a membership of five senior officers who are not below the rank of grade level 08.
The committee is chaired by the most senior office in the state, not below the rank of grade level 10. the committee is establishment for federal government field officers in various states of the federation.
It is charged with the responsibility of having staff matters relating to appointments, promotion and discipline of junior officers on grade levels 01-06. ii.
Junior Staff Committee of the Personnel Management Board (headquarters) This consists of a membership of not less than five senior officers not below the rank of grade level 12 with the Director of Personnel Management department of the Ministry, Extra-Ministerial Department as the chairman.
Furthermore, it is charged with the duty of handling personnel matters on the recruitment, appointment, promotion and discipline of officers on grade level 01-06.
The committee exists at both the state and federal levels.
Those at the federal level consider only officers at the headquarters.
iii.
Senior Staff Committee Of Personnel Management Board According to the reforms of 1988, the committee consists of nine members of officers not below the rank of G.L.
14.
A commissioner from the civil service commission should be in attendance as an observer.
Although he is to attend the meeting of the committee as an observer, the commissioner’s presence in the meeting is quite mandatory in order to make its decisions valid.
The permanent secretary of the ministry concerned is the chairman of the committee.
The committee is charged 171 PAD 412 INTRODUCTION TO ADMINISTRATIVE PRACTICES AND PROCESSES with the responsibility for personnel matters of all officers on grade level 11-13 iv.
Personnel Management Board This consists of all grade level 17 officers.
According to the reforms, the permanent secretary in the ministry and a civil service commissioner will be in attendance on an observer status.
But for the decisions of the board to be valid, the commissioner must be in attendance.
The board is presided over by the minister at the federal level or commissioner in the case of a state ministry or the civil executive of an extra-ministerial department.
The responsibility of the board is to supervise the activities of other personnel management committees within the ministry and to handle all personnel matters of officers on grade levels 14-17.
There is also a provision that the composition of these committees should as far as possible reflect the Federal character principle.
However, where this is not possible, the Personnel Management Board is expected to inform the commission for guidance.
Ministries and Extra-Ministerial departments should forward the names of members of the Personnel Management Board and its committees to the Civil Service Commission, and changes in their membership should be equally notified to the commission.
It should be emphasized that the activities of the committees of the Personnel Management Board should be subjected to the general direction, supervision and control of the Personnel Management Board.
5.
Permanent Secretaries According to the reforms, the position of Permanent Secretary forms the apex of the Civil Service career.
Thus, it is crucial in the Personnel Management of their respective ministries.
The successes or failures of the Civil Service will ultimately depend on the managerial capabilities of individual Permanent Secretaries.
They are Principal Personnel Managers on the spot who know the problems and needs of civil servants under them and the best way to utilize these public servants for the maximum benefit to the 172 PAD 412 INTRODUCTION TO ADMINISTRATIVE PRACTICES AND PROCESSES government.
The Personnel Management responsibilities of the Permanent Secretary are many and these are summarized below: i.
He is responsible for the overall direction, supervision and control of all the civil servants within his ministry.
He ensures high performance and productivity on the part of other civil servants under him.
ii.
The Permanent Secretary serves as an essential link between the civil servants within his ministry on the one hand, and the civil service commission, the department of establishments and the head of service on the other hand.
iii.
The Permanent Secretary is the chairman of the Personnel Management Board, senior staff committee, which handles personnel management functions.
These include appointments, promotion and discipline, for officers on grade levels 11-13. he is also a key member of the Personnel Management Board of the ministry which is charged with the duty of supervising the work of other committee’s of the personnel management board, in addition to handling directly the cases of officers on grade levels 14-17.
In these committees, he exerts a lot of influence on personnel management maters, which are brought before the committee.
iv.
The Permanent Secretary has the duty of inspiring, encouraging and motivating all the civil servants under him.
He ensures their general welfare and seeks to improve their regular promotions.
v. He maintains a link between his ministry and other government ministries and extra- ministerial departments, and between his ministry and the public.
He ensures a good image of the civil servants within his ministry.
vi.
He regularly and continuously assesses the staff needs of his ministry and sees that these are adequately met.
vii.
He is expected to make constant evaluation of the performance of the civil servants under him as a means of raising standards and improving performance.
173 PAD 412 INTRODUCTION TO ADMINISTRATIVE PRACTICES AND PROCESSES 3.5 Functions of personnel management in the Nigerian civil service The personnel management functions of the Civil Service in Nigeria are discussed under the following sub-themes: a. recruitment b. training and development c. promotion and discipline Recruitment: The overall aim of the recruitment and selection process in an organization is to obtain the quantity and quality of employees required by the workforce with maximum efficiency, that is, at least with fulfilment of the overall organizational objectives.
These processes can be broken down into three main stages: a.
The definition of recruitment including the preparation of job description and specification; b.
The attracting of political employees including the evaluation and use of various methods of reaching sources of applicants inside and outside the organization; and c. The selection of candidates.
In the recruitment of civil servants, the Civil Service Commissions at both the Federal and State levels are empowered to delegate their recruitment functions as follows: a.
Appointment of officers on GL 01-06 delegated to the respective ministries, extra-ministerial departments b.
Appointment of officers on GL 07-10 not delegated c. Appointment to positions on GL 12-14 delegated to the senior management committee of the ministry and extra-ministerial departments or relevant staff pool.
174 PAD 412 INTRODUCTION TO ADMINISTRATIVE PRACTICES AND PROCESSES d. Appointment to posts on GL 15-17 by the federal civil service commission on the recommendation of the respective ministries and extra-ministerial departments or staff pool and endorsement of the head of service at both state and federal levels.
e. According to the reform, it is a policy requirement that appointments to GL 12-14 posts must be advertised in at least three popular national newspapers; and a copy sent to the civil service commission.
It is also stated that the screening of applicants should be done by the ministry while funds approval would be by the civil service commission.
It should be observed that grade level 12-17 post are essentially promotion positions to which appointment from outside the service should be done with great care and under extreme exigency.
The selection process governed by a progression is expected to be based normally on merit.
It is interesting to note that the white paper on the Ayida panel report on the Nigerian civil service provides that “officers being transferred into the federal civil service from the states and other services should be placed on the grade they would normally have been had they joined the federal civil service in the first instance”.
This unacceptable provision was designed to make it difficult for officers from the state and local governments to join the Federal Civil Service.
Recruitment process The procedure of recruitment in the Nigerian Civil Service is as follows: 1.
Identification of vacancy: The recruitment process starts with the identification of the existence of a vacancy in a given areas.
A vacancy may occur when someone has left the service of the organization by way of transfer, dismissal, death, etc., when new posts have been created, when new departments or branches have been opened.
It is the head of the department unit or organization that identifies the existence of a vacancy.
175 PAD 412 INTRODUCTION TO ADMINISTRATIVE PRACTICES AND PROCESSES 2.
Requisition to fill vacancy: Once vacancies have been identified in a particular department or section, the head of that department or section now applies to the personnel department or any other section entrusted with the functions for such positions to be filled.
If the request is approved by top management, the personnel department is supplied with the job specifications and job description, where the personnel department has not got the job specification and job description.
Here job specification refers to the minimum human requirements necessary to perform the job.
It spells out the required calibre, training and qualifications of the personnel needed, while job description spells out the major aspects of a job such as purpose, scope, duties and responsibilities attached to the job.
3.
Choosing the correct source(s) of recruitment: there are two major sources of recruitment in an organization in Nigeria today.
These are: a.
Internal recruitment and b.
External recruitment i.
Internal recruitment This normally happens by way of promotion, upgrading and transfer.
Also included in this category are those workers who have been on the payroll of a firm, but were laid off, retrenched; casual workers and contract staff who want their appointments regularized.
The greatest advantage attached to the internal process of recruitment is that the employees recruited are well known to the organization.
ii.
External recruitment: This is the process of recruiting workers from outside the firm.
It means employing entirely new workers in the organization.
The different sources of recruitment are as follows: I. Advertisement: Establishments use various advertising media, both electronic and print, to fill in job openings.
This has the advantage of attracting many applicants.
176 PAD 412 INTRODUCTION TO ADMINISTRATIVE PRACTICES AND PROCESSES II.
Schools, colleges and universities: Sometimes, organizations liaise with placement officers in various schools, colleges and universities to interview and recruit final year students or postgraduate students or NYSC members for job openings.
This is a very cheap source of external recruitment especially when job experience is not a prerequisite for the efforts of some multinational firms like shell petroleum development Co, mobil Oil Nig Plc, banks and other allied agencies.
III.
Employment agencies; These are both public and private agencies that specialize in recruiting employees for other firms.
The private agencies in the form of consultancy firms charge fees for their services.
Examples of public employment agencies are the various civil service commissions at the federal and state levels that are also charged with the responsibility of recruiting employees into the civil service.
However, there are some organizations that specialize in recruitment and placement of employees in organisation.
IV.
Labour Unions: The labour unions help in recruiting workers by recommending their members and relations.
V. Professional bodies: Most professional organisations engage in employment service for their members and students.
The greatest advantage of this source is that well-qualified workers are employed.
VI.
Employed recommendations: existing employees also serve as a good source of recruiting staff by recommending suitably qualified people for appointment.
4.
Short-listing: the fourth stage in the recruitment process is to short-list qualified applicants by matching their qualifications with job descriptions and job specifications.
5.
Arrangement for Interview: Once candidates are short listed, they are informed of the test or interview that will follow.
6.
Referees: references can be made before the interview because it will help in the selection decision during the interview proper.
The purpose of the employment references is to ascertain and confirm the qualifications, experience, character and dexterity claimed by 177 PAD 412 INTRODUCTION TO ADMINISTRATIVE PRACTICES AND PROCESSES candidates.
References can be obtained from the candidate’s past employers, last school heads, etc.
depending on what is sought.
7.
Interview: This is oral interaction between prospective employees and the interviewer in order to elicit the necessary information from both parties.
Interviews may be conducted by a single person or a panel.
However, the panel type is preferable.
Interviews can be structured or unstructured.
The structured ones are those pre- written questions that are asked candidates, while the unstructured ones are not pre-planned.
It is advisable to have the prospective employee fill an application blank before the interview.
The applicant blank supplies all the information about the candidate.
Limitations of an Interview: a. Halo-Effect: This is a phenomenon which describes how an interviewer may be unduly influenced by one particular personality trait of the applicant and uses such traits to establish the overall picture of the applicant.
For example, if an applicant is smart and good looking or well dressed, an interviewer suffering from a halo-effect may be led to believe that the applicant is efficient, well qualified and appropriate in all aspects.
b.
Highly subjective: subjectivity is bound to creep in during an interview because of the inherent human nature.
Two different interviewers, for instance, may have different opinions on a candidate who has given some answers to a question.
c. Attributes may not be easily and precisely quantified.
Personal trait and attributes such as personal appearances cannot be easily qualified.
d. Similarly, some attributes such as proficiency cannot be measured with the help of an oral interview.
178 PAD 412 INTRODUCTION TO ADMINISTRATIVE PRACTICES AND PROCESSES e. It is as a result of these limitations that selection tests appear to be better than job interviews.
The subjective and un- quantitative nature of job interviews can be taken care of by selection tests.
However, this does not mean that selection tests per se should be used in selection decisions.
Most firms these days combine both tests and interviews in their selection decisions.
This mode is applauded because the deficient area of the one is more than compensated for by the other.
Other issues to be taken into consideration when conducting interviews are as follows: 8.
Administration of tests: Tests should be administered especially for that job in which dexterity can be measured, for example, computer operation.
Typewriting etc.
test should also be used when it is necessary to reduce the number of applicants for an interview 9.
Medical Examination: It might be necessary for candidates who passed the interview or test to undergo a medical examination before finally being selected.
The reasons for medical examinations are as follows: a. to discover if they are physically fit for the job they applied for; and b.
To find out also if prospective employees have contagious diseases.
10.
Selection decision: Based on the finding from the foregoing, decisions are finally made on which candidate(s) should be employed and those unsuccessful candidates should be written to and informed of the decision.
11.
Placement: Successful candidates are deployed and placed to the office where they are expected to work.
12.
Induction: This is the last of the steps in the recruitment process.
It is also the bridge between newness and contribution.
Induction is a very important aspect of personnel administration.
Orientation or induction refers to the kind of training given to new employees to acquaint them with the 179 PAD 412 INTRODUCTION TO ADMINISTRATIVE PRACTICES AND PROCESSES environment in which they are to work.
Simply put, induction means introducing new staff to the establishment or organization.
It is the process of making the new worker aware of the conditions, organizations policy, his colleagues, etc.
3.6 Training and Development It is one of the responsibilities of the personnel department to provide on- the-job and various forms of formal training for employees, and development programmes for supervisory and management personnel.
Training is viewed as a process by which the aptitudes, skills and abilities of employees to perform specific jobs are increased.
This conception of training will entail the production of necessary skill and learning to perform specific jobs.
The degree of skill attributed to jobs in sociological classifications of skilled, semi-skilled and non-skilled work in associated with the following: a. the amount of learning required to master the necessary techniques and methods, b. the amount of understanding that is involved in them, c. the extent to which initiative is required in the application of those techniques and methods, that is, the command of knowledge required to make any necessary analyses, judgments, plans decisions etc, and d. by a stricter, technical definition of “skill” the amount and complexity of sensory motor activity involved, i.e.
the sensory picking up of stimuli and action taken in response to signals from the train, adjusted in anticipation of later stages of activity.
Purpose of Training: The primary purpose of training is to achieve a positive change in the behaviour of employees in the performance of their assigned duties.
Training equips employees with new skills, technical knowledge, problem-solving capability and new attitudes and values required for effective performance of their official duties.
Training is different from education; it therefore provides the organization with the most suitable human resources for the task and environment.
It is an ongoing process.
It involves not only recruitment and selection but also the training and development of employees prior to 180 PAD 412 INTRODUCTION TO ADMINISTRATIVE PRACTICES AND PROCESSES employment, or any time during their employment, in order to help them meet the requirements of the demands of the job.
Therefore, both training and selection are concerned with: a. fitting people to the requirements of the job; b. securing better occupational adjustment; and c. in methodological terms setting and achieving targets, and defining performance criteria against which the success of the process can be monitored.
Major Objectives of Training.
a.
Training is a practical approach to improving the job performance of civil servants by helping employees raise the level of their job performance.
b.
It helps employees to get a proper understanding of the entire organization in which they work.
c. It helps them appreciate their roles and their relationship with other members of the organization.
d. It assists them to play their roles more meaningfully and effectively.
e. It tends to reconcile the attitudes, norms and values of individual officials with those of their organization, thereby bringing about organizational harmony, cooperation, individual conformity and congruency between individual needs and organizational demands.
f. It reduces labour turnover, absenteeism, aggression, frustration and apathy in the civil service by improving supervisory skills and techniques, especially in the areas of human relations techniques, clinical approach to supervision, communication and positive and democratic leadership styles.
g. It enhances the job security and social status of employees, through the acquisition of new knowledge and new skill, retrains civil servants for new skills and techniques in order that they keep pace with the demands of a changing society.
181 PAD 412 INTRODUCTION TO ADMINISTRATIVE PRACTICES AND PROCESSES Training Methods and Techniques Training methods and techniques are discussed as follows: a.
Formal Learning By internal or external residential courses, day course or lectures, distance learning, programmed learning or computer aided learning.
Here, the internal courses are run by the organization’s training department, while the external courses may vary, and will involve: i. Day-release, which means that the employee works with organization; and on one day per week attends a local college for theoretical teaching.
ii.
Evening classes, which make demands on he individual’s time outside work; this is commonly used, for example by typists wishing to develop or refresh their shorthand skills and iii.
Revision courses for examinations of professional bodies b. On-the-Job Training On-the-job training is very common, especially when the work involved is not complex.
Finance managers require more coaching, and may be given assignments or projects as part of a planned programme to develop their experience.
Unfortunately this type of training will be unsuccessful if: (ii) the assignments do not have a specific purpose from which the trainee can learn and gain experience or (iii) The organization is intolerant of mistakes, which the trainer makes.
Mistakes are an inevitable part of on-the-job learning.
c. Group Learning This is not common in industry but is more common in organizations such as the social services department of local governments authorities.
The purpose of group learning is to: i.
Give each individual in a training group a greater insight into his/her own behaviour; 182 PAD 412 INTRODUCTION TO ADMINISTRATIVE PRACTICES AND PROCESSES ii.
To teach an individual how he/she “appears” to other people as a result of responses from other members of the group, and iii.
To reach an understanding of intra-group processes, that is, how people interrelate.
d. In-Service Training In-serving training can be divided into local and overseas training.
It can also be divided into state/ federal government sponsored and foreign technical aid financed.
In-service training lasts between a period of one month to a maximum period of two years.
Local training courses are obtainable in Nigerian universities, colleges of technology, polytechnics, and specialized institutions.
Conferences, Workshops and Seminars are among other types of training offered by states and federal governments in Nigeria.
According to Beach, conference is a small group meeting conducted according to an organized plan, in which the leader seeks to develop knowledge and understanding by obtaining a considerable amount of oral participation from the trainers and students.
Conferences, workshops and seminars when properly organized and executed are very effective in dealing with operational problems of management organizations because of their “clinical” and participative approach.
It should be stressed that they are very irregular, and only very few of them are organized.
Most of these seminars and workshops are initiated mostly by the universities, professional organizations, and training consultants.
The State/Federal governments usually organized these conferences and seminars for the management staff of the civil service.
In very few cases, some governments of the federation organize them for all categories and all grades of civil servants including clerical officers, messengers, cleaners, hall porters, drivers, store keepers, security guards, representatives from the civil service union, technical officers, professionals, executive officers and administrative officers.
183 PAD 412 INTRODUCTION TO ADMINISTRATIVE PRACTICES AND PROCESSES Promotion This is the third function of the Personnel Management of the Civil Service of Nigeria.
The traditional managerial approach also stresses efficiency and productivity as the basis for promotion.
Accordingly, promotions are generally made on the basis of written examinations and/or performance appraisals.
The promotional examination resembles the merit entrance examination, except that it is open only to those employees who qualify for consideration for promotion.
Promotion remains a controversial aspect of public personnel management.
In hierarchical organizations, there are fewer positions at the top than at the bottom.
Therefore, there is a limit on how high up an employee can rise.
Most employees will always be lower down in the organization’s ranks.
Thus, promotion tends to the “zero-sum”, that is, one employee’s gain is another’s lost opportunity.
The competition can be fierce and can lead to discord among employees.
This is one of the virtues of a written promotional examination.
As long as the examination is accepted as legitimate and fair, it settles the issues without any possibility of favouritism or office politics playing a role.
Similarly, promotion by seniority is a principle often stressed by unions in collective bargaining and it tends to discourage it.
Sometimes, merit-oriented promotion and seniority are combined by restricting the opportunity for promotion to those who have been on the job for a given number of years.
Presumably, in the flexible, flatter organization favoured by the situation, employees can be rewarded for the results they produce without having to be promoted to new positions.
However, in the Nigerian Civil Service, the procedure for promotion as stated in the guidelines for the implementation of the 1988 Civil Service Reforms is as follows: All promotions shall be based on relativity of that is performance and seniority.
Flexibility shall be exercised in extreme, unusual cases where there is a dire need to balance merit with federal or state character.
Ministries and extra- ministerial departments (shall) have the power to promote and give advancements to all subject to the following guidelines: 184 PAD 412 INTRODUCTION TO ADMINISTRATIVE PRACTICES AND PROCESSES i.
Each ministry or extra-ministerial department shall prepare at the end of every year a comprehensive staff list showing the order of seniority of all the staff in each grade within each cadre.
ii.
All officers who fall within the field of selection for any promotion exercise shall be considered, except those who are under disciplinary action.
The minimum number of years that an officer must spend in a post before being considered eligible to come within the field of selection for promotions shall be as follows: 01-06 minimum of 2 (two) years 07-14 minimum of 3 (three) years 15-17 minimum of 4 (four) years iii.
All personnel management committees shall take into account the APER (Annual performance Evaluation Report) of each officer for the service.
Each “APER” shall be summarized and their equivalent marks shall be confirmed or vetted by the moderating officers and shall be shown on the APER form.
iv.
Staff on GL.07 and above who are being considered for promotion must appear before the appropriate personnel management committee (PMC) for promotion interviews.
In the case of officers entering into the senior management cadres at grade level 15 they must in addition pass a proficiency examination or based on prescribed courses.
There must also be promotion examination for promotion for GL 06-07.
However, where the GL.06 post is a training post then advancement from GL.06 to GL.07 shall be based on APER score only.
However, in the case of officers on the professional cadres moving from GL.
08 to GL.09, where the promotions are not subject to vacancies, each of such officers shall be required to pass suitable advancement test during the stipulated period or based on prescribed courses.
The criteria for promotion shall normally be weighted as follows: Performance .
.
.
50% Interview .
30% Additional qualification system .
15% Seniority .
.
.
.5% Where additional qualification examination is not an applicable criterion, then the weigh assigned to performance shall be increased by 15.
Similarly, in case where interview is not applicable the weight for performance shall be increased by 30.
185 PAD 412 INTRODUCTION TO ADMINISTRATIVE PRACTICES AND PROCESSES Discipline The concept of discipline as it applies in Personnel Management entrails the achieving and maintenance of orderly employee behaviour in accordance with established codes of conduct.
Discipline also refers to punishment of wrongdoers.
The Personnel Department is responsible for formulating disciplinary rules with corresponding penalties for those who break them.
Taking the conception of discipline further, and applying it to the Nigerian civil service, by virtue of the 1988 reforms, there are certain laid-down procedures for discipline to be applied.
Therefore, discipline involves the conditioning or moulding of behaviour by applying rewards or penalties.
This implies that there are two types of discipline, namely: positive discipline and negative discipline.
i. Statutory Discipline: By positive discipline, we mean the kind of discipline that all management should seek to create in their departments and agencies.
Positive discipline involves the creation of an attitude and an organizational climate, which enable the employees to willingly conform to established rules and regulations.
It is achieved when management applies the principle of positive motivation.
When sound leadership is exercised by supervision and when the entire organization is managed efficiently.
ii.
Punitive Discipline: By negative discipline, we mean the use of penalties to cause people to obey orders and to live up to expected norms of the organization.
Negative discipline should be used only when it is necessary.
In all, both in the public or the organized private sector, regardless of whether positive or negative discipline is utilized, some individuals will sometimes break the rules.
Corrective action against them should be applied by using some form of punishments.
This is positive discipline, which seeks to correct or rehabilitate the offender.
Negative discipline, on the other hand, is for retribution and seeks to scare others so that they will not commit the same offence.
Disciplinary action needs to be exercised with a sense of proportion and fairness.
In other works, punishment given for an offence should 186 PAD 412 INTRODUCTION TO ADMINISTRATIVE PRACTICES AND PROCESSES be proportional to the offence.
Furthermore, rules should be simple and clear and should be explained to all employees.
Conforming behviour should be rewarded.
5.0 Summary We have discussed in detail the Civil Service of the Federal Republic of Nigeria.
We noted its history and development as well as its structures, characteristics and management.
We equally discussed the Personnel Management Board of the Nigerian Civil Service and the three major functions of the board such as recruitment, training and development and promotion.
The chapter was rounded off with discipline in the Civil Service.
This is an interesting chapter and should be read carefully so as to acquaint you with the happenings in the Civil Service of the Federation.
6.0 Tutor Marked Assignment 1.
What do you understand by the term Civil Service?
2.
List and explain the characteristics of the Civil Service.
3.
What are the functions of the Civil Service?
4.
Mention the processes of recruitment in the Civil Service.
5.
Discuss the major functions of the Personnel Management Board of the Civil Service.
6.
What are the purposes of Training?
7.
Mention the various criteria for promotion in the Nigerian civil Service.
7.0 References/Further Reading Uduma, D. O.
(2003), Contemporary Public Administration: The Nigeria Perspective.
Enugu: Agmasum Classic Publishers.
Federal Republic of Nigeria, 1997.
Government White Paper on the Allison Ayida Report of The Civil Service Review Panel.
Abuja: Government Printer.
Federal Republic of Nigeria, Report of Jerome Udoji (1974) public service review commission (Lagos: government printer, Federal Republic of Nigeria, (1988), General Guidelines on the Implementation of the Civil Service Reform.
Lagos: Federal Ministry of Information Printing Division Federal Republic of Nigeria (1988).
The Civil Service (re-organization) decree, decree No 43.
187 PAD 412 INTRODUCTION TO ADMINISTRATIVE PRACTICES AND PROCESSES MODULE EIGHT RECORD MANAGEMENT Unit 1 Records Management In Organizations Unit 2 Handling of Files UNIT 1 RECORD MANAGEMENT RECORDS MANAGEMENT IN ORGANISATIONS CONTENT 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objectives 3.0 Main Content 3.1 Importance of information 3.2 Records management 3.3 Types of records 3.4 Functions of records 3.5 Challenges facing Records Manager 3.6 Guidelines to good Records management 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutor Marked Assignment 7.0 References and Further Reading 1.0 INTRODUCTION Organisations of whatever nature require data, either processed data or raw data, to perform its activities.
The data base is regarded as the foundation on which to build a management information system.
Most of these data may come from past records while some may be from current affairs.
Records contain information and data from which decisions are made.
If these data are not adequately managed, most of the vita information necessary for the successful operation of the business activities may be lost.
Record management is, therefore, very important in organization and that is why most of the modern organizations invest so much in Information and 188 PAD 412 INTRODUCTION TO ADMINISTRATIVE PRACTICES AND PROCESSES Communication Technology (ICT) or Management Information Systems (MIS).
They not only invest heavily on ICT but also accede the management of their records to this unit.
The role of the ICT unit as the link between one department, school or faculty and another includes acting as the repository of records.
The advisory role of the Human Resources department, legal department or any committee on facts finding cannot be achieved without access to data and information.
Their key source of information is the records kept from year to year.
Also accurate and timely information based on facts and figures is an asset to any organization, whether public or private.
Obsolete, incorrect and untimely information adversely affect decision making and input into policy formulation.
In this unit, we are going to discuss the key issues in record management in organizations.
We will also proffer guidelines on good record management.
2.0 LEARNING OBJECTIVE To give students and employees, in their various organizations, knowledge and skill necessary for effective record management that will help them do well in their examinations and in the practice of their profession in general.
3.0 MAIN CONTENT 3.1 IMPORTANCE OF INFORMATION IN ORGANISATION Globally, information is adduced as indispensable in the organization whether it is service oriented, profit-oriented, growth-directed or survival- inclined.
It is an essential ingredient in the efficient and effective management of organizations.
Information is the backbone of any organization and also a vital resource which must be properly harnessed, managed and controlled.
When we talk of information, we mean data which has been processed into meaningful and perceivable form for use by managers, in decision –making.
Data, on the other hand, are the ‘raw materials from which information, as finished goods, is produced.
Data therefore serve as the raw material for information.
Information is indispensable to planning and controlling organizational operations 189 PAD 412 INTRODUCTION TO ADMINISTRATIVE PRACTICES AND PROCESSES effectively.
It is necessary for fast, economic and efficient decision making.
Some of the uses of information are; ‐ Planning ‐ Organizing ‐ Directing the labour force; ‐ Decisions making, especially as it relates to the following: a.
Appointment, b.
Promotion, c. Transfer, d. Discipline, e. Resources acquisitions and allocation, f. Determination of prices of goods and services, g. Coordinating and controlling organizational activities, h. Provision of incentive schemes and welfare programmes, and i.
Dispute settlement.
3.2 RECORD MANAGEMENT The Concise Oxford Dictionary (1970), defines Records contain information and data from which decisions are made a record as “a register set down for remembrance or reference and which has been put in writing or other legible shape”.
It is the bases upon which present action is based in an effort to determine the future.
To be of value, records must contain correct information in the proper form and be available to those who need them.
An organization that wants to have good Records management must develop programmes that will efficiently manage their records and information.
They must see that records essential for successful operation of organizations are created and that only the records that are useful are created or retained.
They should determine the appropriate mix of records media (paper, microform, computer or optical disk) and develop efficient systems for records storage and retrieval.
The systems for communicating and distributing data/ information should be refined.
A good plan should be put in place for the availability and organization of the records and information.
190 PAD 412 INTRODUCTION TO ADMINISTRATIVE PRACTICES AND PROCESSES They should equally develop and implement records retention schedules so that vital and archival records will be identified and appropriately protected.
Finally, the organisation should evaluate and implement viable storage system of the records to facilitate economic and timely flow of these records and information.
They should also recognize the need to co- ordinate and manage the various technologies (communications, data processing.
micrographics, reprographic, word processing, etc.)
into a total programme.
Efficiency and cost saving is difficult if different technologies procured by the organization are not adequately catered for.
3.3 TYPES OF RECORD Organsiations do not have uniform set of records.
The record of company A may not be the same as that of company B.
The nature, type, and structure of organisational record will invariably depend on the organisational objectives, its peculiar needs, and the nature of its productive tasks and transactional activities.
This being the case, there could be no generalized prescription as to the type of records an organization could have.
However, there are certain records that are peculiar to all organization, irrespective of its goal or structure.
Such records are as itemized below; (a) Personnel Records, (b) Financial Records, (c) Legal Records, (d) Administrative Records, (e) Historical or Archival Records, (f) Policy Records, (g) Staff Training/Development Records, (h) Maintenance records, (i) Project records etc.
Records kept by departments within an organization sometimes differ from one department to another each reflecting the peculiarities of their transactions and operations but at the same time conformity with the corporate information systems.
191 PAD 412 INTRODUCTION TO ADMINISTRATIVE PRACTICES AND PROCESSES 3.4 FUNCTIONS OF RECORDS Organizations have variety of reasons for keeping written records.
As has been said earlier, this depends on the objectives, functions and the changing environment of the organization.
The bigger an organization and the more complex and diversified its activities, the greater the need for written records to supplement the human memory in the organization (Fagbemi, 2012).
Record are very essential in an organization due to the following reasons: (a) It facilitates quick retrieval of necessary data for processing and analysis on request.
(b) Records provide a systematic and complete picture of the daily transactions in the organization.
(c) It serves as a platform upon which present actions are based in an effort to determine the future; (d) Serve as the store-house for the much needed factual data about organizational policies, procedures, performance and productivity status; (e) Provide facts and figures as a background for long range planning and management control; (f) Furnish information on the human resources of the organization in terms of their capability and productive profiles, training and development needs; (g) Provide factual data as a basis for decision making in the effective management of the organization; (h) Generate day-to-day transactions for inputs into the results of the organization; and (i) Serve as the database upon which the information system of the organization is built.
Records in an organization pass through certain stages.
The first stage is during its creation, followed by the stage when the record is put into active use.
When the record has served its current usefulness, it is then transferred into inactive storage.
The record is, thereafter, retained in the active storage until such a time when it is needed for administrative or legal 192 PAD 412 INTRODUCTION TO ADMINISTRATIVE PRACTICES AND PROCESSES purposes.
The final stage is when the record is disposed of or placed in a permanent archive.
3.5 GUIDELINES TO GOOD RECORDS MANAGEMENT For any organization to have a good records management system there is the need to have: 1.
Clear definition of user’s needs 2.
Systems designed to meet needs.
This should be sufficiently flexible to adopt to change in needs.
3.
Information and co-operating users.
4.
Constant communication between users and registries.
5.
Ability to identify redundant records.
6.
Constant monitoring of techniques.
7.
Intelligent and focused operators.
8.
Constant updates on various information processing technologies.
9.
Comprehensive knowledge about the organization.
10.
Ability to manage change.
11.
Ability to persuade senior managers to keep good records.
12.
Analytical abilities.
4.0 CONCLUSION Information can be equated as the spiral cord or life wire of an organization.
Be that as it may, information cannot be derived without adequate, timely and correct data.
Since data have to be recorded in one form or the other, records management becomes imperative for all organizations.
The continuous nature of organizations makes records keeping an indispensable tool.
Record management is quite imperative in organizations because present and future administrations depend on historical records of the organization to forge ahead.
Public servants are very much aware of leaving a good record of service as they can be called back to account for their actions years after they have left office.
Without records this would not be 193 PAD 412 INTRODUCTION TO ADMINISTRATIVE PRACTICES AND PROCESSES possible.
Political, economic and social activities of governments and public servants are well recorded for posterity and eventualities.
5.0 SUMMARY In this unit, you learnt that Records contain information and data which are vital in decision making.
You have also learnt about records management and its importance.
We noted that records are not kept forever, that some records outlive their usefulness.
We observed also that such records that outlive their usefulness are not destroyed but archived.
Furthermore, we have also learnt about the keys to good records management.
6.0 TUTOR MARKED ASSIGNMENTS 1.
Define in your own words the term records.
2.
Enumerate the importance of Records in organizations.
3.
Draft a proposal to the head of your organization on the need for proper record management in your organization.
7.0 REFERENCES AND FUTHER READING Administrative Staff College of Nigeria (ASCON), (2000).
Record Management Handbook, Topo Badagry: ASCON Press.
Lucey, T. (1987).
Management Information Systems.
Eastleigh, Hampshine: DP Publications Robin, L. Chandler (1983), Archived and the Public Good.
Edited by Reharch S. C. 194 PAD 412 INTRODUCTION TO ADMINISTRATIVE PRACTICES AND PROCESSES UNIT 2 HANDLING OF FILES CONTENT 1.0 INTRODUCTION 2.0 OBJECTIVES 3.0 MAIN CONTENT 3.1 Handling of Files 3.2 Handling of Correspondence 3.3 Precautionary Measures on Movement of Files and Correspondences 3.4 Priority Classification of Correspondence 3.5 Classification of Documents 3.6 Security of Classified Documents 3.7 Good Records Keeping 3.8 The Registry 4.0 CONCLUSION 5.0 SUMMARY 6.0 TUTOR-MARKED ASSIGNMENT 7.0 FURTHER READINGS 1.0 INTRODUCTION In the last unit, we viewed record as the life wire of an organisation.
In this unit, we are going to discuss about documents which are kept as records for the organisational transactions.
According to Oxford Advanced Learner’s Dictionary, document is an official paper or book that gives information about something or that can be used as evidence or proof of something.
In organisations, every official document are recorded and kept in files.
Some of these documents are classified as ‘official’ while some are referred to as ‘personal’.
A document could be referred to as ‘official if it contains information on the operations of a corporate organization, whether public or private.
Since such documents contain information which is the live-blood of any organization, it becomes quite imperative that the formation, circulation, storage and use of such vital components must be done in a standardized and systematic manner, to avoid disastrous consequences.
195 PAD 412 INTRODUCTION TO ADMINISTRATIVE PRACTICES AND PROCESSES Considering the importance of information in any organization, care must be taken about the way information in the document is generated, collated, stored, retrieved and disseminated.
This is the crux of record management which we discussed in unit one above.
Such standardized way of handling records would give the organization the required level of attention and exposure to official documents.
In this unit, we will discuss the ideal ways of handling official documents for secure and effective operational performance of the organization.
2.0 LEARNING OBJECTIVES At the end of this unit, students are expected to have proper knowledge and understanding of the following:  official documents,  procedure for handling files and correspondences in the office,  Classified Documents  Good record keeping.
3.0 MAIN CONTENT 3.1 Handling of Files: File is the medium through which various forms of written communication are channelled from one officer to the other.
It is a collection of documents on same subject, enclosed in a jacket for easy identification, circulation, storage and reference.
In handling of official documents, all matters on related subject are originated and concluded in the same file.
At the end of each transaction, files related to that transaction are stored or kept in the Registry as records of the operations of the organization.
In organisations with corporate image, files are classified as “open”, “secret” and “confidential”.
These classifications determine the way such files must be handled.
There must be kept in place the IN-COMING and OUT-GOING trays for files.
All in-coming and out-going files must be subjected to due registration in a 196 PAD 412 INTRODUCTION TO ADMINISTRATIVE PRACTICES AND PROCESSES ‘File Movement Register’ kept for the purpose.
In situations where only one register is used as movement register, the front side is used for out- going while the back side is used as in-coming.
This is usually not advisable because the recorder may mistakenly record one under the other.
But when separate registers are kept, the title on the cover of the register guides the recorder.
Both the in-coming and out-going registers are drawn up in columns and for the out-going, the following are written: Date; File Reference Number; File subject; and destination.
For the in-coming, we require; Date; File Reference Number; File subject matter and where it came from.
The file movement register shows the location of any file whenever such a file is needed.
Files taken in or out of an office without recording in the file movement register cannot be located with ease.
Each file has an action sheet in which the designation of the officer required to treat the file and the page of the file requiring action will be indicated.
The Registry officers must ensure that the file is sent to the exact officer indicated in the action sheet and that this is recorded accordingly in the File Movement Register.
3.2 Handling of Correspondence: By correspondence, we mean letters that come into or go out of the organization.
Individual organizations receive and send their correspondence in different ways.
But from whichever way correspondence is received, there is a standard way of handling them.
All letters received are recorded in the Correspondence Register.
After the Schedule Officer or Chief Executive must have seen the letter, it is treated according to his directive.
This may require sending such a letter to a schedule officer/a head of Department/Division etc, for further necessary action.
Such out-going correspondence must be recorded in the out-going Correspondence Register, indicating the Reference Number, Subject, Source, date and the Destination.
The Correspondence Register is a critical factor in the handling of correspondence in an office because; it shows the movement of all letters at each point in time.
197 PAD 412 INTRODUCTION TO ADMINISTRATIVE PRACTICES AND PROCESSES 3.3 Precautionary Measures on Movement of Files and Correspondences: Cases abound where officers request for a file and deny having ever taken such a file.
Such a file may be potential exhibit for either police investigation or decision on staff matters, bordering on discipline or crucial personnel issues.
To prevent such denials, files are sent to officers with their signature confirming the receipt.
This may be recorded in a dispatch book with a column for signature of receiver, or an additional column drawn on the Movement Register, where receiver of files signs.
Receivers of correspondence in loose form must sign for their receipt, as a way of compelling the individual to handle the letter with care.
3.4 Priority Classification of Correspondence: In organisations, different ways are used to indicate the speed with which a document should be treated.
There are different systems of denoting priority classifications of correspondence in a government office.
(Civil Service Handbook (1997)).
These can be grouped into three (3) namely: (i) Printed Slips (Classification in Words); (ii) Coloured Slips (Classification by sign); (iii) Red Xs (Classification by Symbols) (i) Printed Slips: Printed slips are words printed on paper slips that could be easily attached to any document.
The slips have the following words boldly printed on them: - Immediate or At Once; - Today - Urgent (ii) Coloured Slips:- Another form of priority classification is by attaching red and green/blue slips to documents requiring speedy attention.
Coloured slips are made from coloured papers, cut into small slips that could be 198 PAD 412 INTRODUCTION TO ADMINISTRATIVE PRACTICES AND PROCESSES attached to documents.
A red slip denotes priority immediate attention; while green/blue slip suggests urgent action.
(iii) Red X Markings:- Priority classifications could be denoted by the marking of Xs with a red pen or pencil on the papers or document requiring urgent action.
Three (3) Xs i.e.
XXX mean Immediate, Priority, At Once Two (2) Xs i.e.
XX mean Today One (1) X i.e X means Urgent Whether the officer prefers to use the printed slips, colored slips or Red X markings, the message is for the recipients to treat the accompanying document with a prescribed rate of speed.
When a document bears indications of any of the above three status, certain actions and steps are required of the recipient and they are as follows: Immediate / At Once / Priority: If this action is indicated on any document sent to an officer, it means that the receiver should put aside any other job in hand and treat the one with this priority classification.
‘Immediate’ classification is an order, to leave every other job and do the one just received.
This classification takes precedence over all others.
If such a classification is attached to a job, it should be handed personally to the officer required to take necessary action.
He should, after completing his action, return it by hand to the officer who had ordered the work.
Today: The next in importance is “Today”.
This takes precedence over a job marked “urgent” and all unclassified work.
The emphasis on this is that the job should be completed and submitted to the officer ordering the work, before the office closes for the day.
Urgent: Urgent classification is superior to all unclassified correspondence.
It also denotes that action should be completed on the file or correspondence within 24 hours of its receipt.
199 PAD 412 INTRODUCTION TO ADMINISTRATIVE PRACTICES AND PROCESSES In order to ensure that priority action is taken on files as requested, files with such classifications should NEVER be placed in an officer’s in-Tray with other files, but rather, on the officer’s desk in front of him, to attract his immediate attention.
3.5 Classification of Documents: In-coming and out-going correspondences are classified, to determine the degree of security required, according to the degree of their importance and contents.
Classified correspondence means any correspondence which has been accordingly graded as Restricted, Confidential, Secret or Top Secret.
Each of the four classifications calls for the observance of certain different security measures.
The higher the classification, the better the standard or protection required.
The order of superiority is: Top Secret, Secret, Confidential and Restricted.
The sole criterion for deciding on which classification is appropriate is the degree of harm the unauthorized disclosure of the information would cause.
According to the Federal Republic of Nigeria Security Instructions (1987), the definitions given below must be followed by all government ministries and departments.
(i) Top Secret: Information and material the unauthorized disclosure of which would cause exceptionally grave damage to the nation.
(ii) Secret: Information and material the unauthorized disclosure of which would cause serious injury to the interest of the nation.
(iii) Confidential: Information and material the unauthorized disclosure of which would be prejudicial to the interest of the nation.
200 PAD 412 INTRODUCTION TO ADMINISTRATIVE PRACTICES AND PROCESSES (iv) Restricted: Information and material the unauthorized disclosure of which would be undesirable in the interest of the nation.
Official documents should be given appropriate security classification in accordance with their importance so that adequate security protection is provided to safeguard them against espionage, subversion and sabotage.
With the exception of open files containing unclassified correspondence, all other files are always kept under lock and key in a restricted area for security reasons.
3.6 Security of Classified Documents: The following precautions should always be observed with respect to the security of classified documents: (i).
All classified documents may be passed directly by hand from one authorized officer to another.
Or in a locked box or by hand of an authorized subordinate and addressed to an individual by name.
(ii).
Classified documents could be transmitted in sealed envelope with the flaps signed.
(iii).
Discussion of classified information.
Do not discuss sensitive aspects of your work with unauthorized persons or outsiders.
This includes your spouse or relatives.
In your Ministry or Department etc.
discuss classified matters only with officers who need to know such matters for the effective performance of their official duties.
(iv).
Storage: This is taken to mean the manner official documents are kept to prevent damage, theft, pilferage or Leakage.
Detailed guidelines for storage of classified documents are contained in Chapter 6 of the Federal Republic of Nigeria Security Instructions.
201 PAD 412 INTRODUCTION TO ADMINISTRATIVE PRACTICES AND PROCESSES 3.7 Good Records Keeping: Official documents constitute the records of the organization.
The public service operates through extensive use of precedence, decisions and rules.
These are kept in files usually made available on demand.
In order to engender easy access to such authority documents, documents and correspondence are kept in files separated under subject headings.
Hence, all matters of the same subject are put in one file under one subject.
Every subject file is usually given a reference number to facilitate easy identification, storage and retrieval.
There is usually a File Index, containing the reference number of all files opened and their subject.
The file Index serves the purpose of providing information on the existence of a subject file and the last number used for opening files.
Files are stored in metal filling cabinets that are fire-resistant, to prevent total destruction of documents in case of fire outbreak.
The filing cabinets should be fitted with key to prevent access of documents by unauthorized persons.
Files are usually arranged in numerical order in the filling cabinet for easy retrieval.
The hallmark of a good filling system is that which allows good tracking and quick retrieval of documents.
3.8 The Registry: Files are opened, closed and stored in the Registry.
We have the Open and Secret / Confidential Registries.
Documents kept in the Secret Registry are highly classified and officers working in such places are required to swear an oath in accordance with the Official Secret Act of 1962.
Entry into the Secret Registry is often tightly restricted.
Documents are stored away in metal cabinets with iron bar fitted across the drawers and provided with padlock.
Confidential Registry keeps mostly personal files of staff of the organization.
This gives it enhanced security.
Whether an open or secret Registry, visitors should not be allowed into them.
Staff of the organization may be allowed into the Registry strictly on official business.
202 PAD 412 INTRODUCTION TO ADMINISTRATIVE PRACTICES AND PROCESSES The purposes of keeping good records in an organization include: (i) Calculation of staff benefits; (ii) Showing details of progress in the service e.g.
promotions; (iii) Determination of Seniority; (iv) Determination of incremental dates; (v) Training and qualifications obtained (vi) Tax deductions, salary, leave matters etc.
(vii) Discovery of Ghost Workers.
4.0.
CONCLUSION: Information is very crucial in Organisations.
Organisations operate by use of information gathered in documents.
The quality of documents available to the organization determines its performance and ability to withstand the turblence of business.
It is pertinent that organizations must know how the information in their documents are generated, categorized, stored, retrieved and disseminated.
Also organization should have at the back of its mind, its competitors and the general public and ensure that they are not given undue advantage, through improper handling of official documents.
5.0 SUMMARY Successful conduct of government business will required properly and well documented Official documents.
This is because, most of such documents aid decision making by the government.
Some official documents are secret whereas others are marked confidential.
These are some of the measures to protect government affairs.
We explained the procedures for classifying the documents in files and treating correspondences in this unit.
We also outlined the advantages of records keeping and the features of good records keeping.
We hope you have acquired the necessary knowledge about handling files and official documents in the organisations.
6.0 TUTOR-MARKED ASSIGNMENT 1.
Explain the importance and features of good records keeping.
203 PAD 412 INTRODUCTION TO ADMINISTRATIVE PRACTICES AND PROCESSES 2.
Name the different systems of denoting priority classification of correspondence in a government office.
.
7.0 FURTHER READINGS Ajulo, S. B.
(2002) The President-in-Council; The Rebirth of Democracy in a Great Nation (Ibadan: Vantage Publishers.)
Armstrong, Michael (2008): How to be an Even Better Manager, 7th Edition, (London, Kogan Page.)
Austin, E. (1978) Senior Secretariat Duties and Office Organisation, (Plymouth: Macdonald and Evans Ltd).
AVERY, Catherine B (1974).
Words into Type.
(Englewood Cliffs, N.J; Prentice-Hall).
Maduabum, C.P., (2008) The Mechanics of Public Administration in Nigeria (Lagos: Concept Publications) 204
