 NATIONAL OPEN UNIVERSITY OF NIGERIA SCHOOL OF MANAGEMENT SCIENCES COURSE CODE: PAD 812 COURSE TITLE: INTERGOVERNMENTAL RELATIONS 1 PAD 812 INTERGOVERNMENTAL RELATIONS COURSE GUIDE NATIONAL OPEN UNIVERSITY OF NIGERIA 2  CONTENTS PAGE Introduction ............................................................... 1 What You Will Learn in This Course ............................. 1 Course Aims ............................................................. 2 Course Objectives ..................................................... 2 Working through this Course ..................................... 2 Course Materials ...................................................... 3 Study Units ............................................................... 3 Assignment Files ........................................................ 3 Presentation Schedule ................................................ 4 Assessment ............................................................ 4 Tutor-Marked Assignment ........................................ 4 Final Examination and Grading.................................. 5 Course Marking Scheme..................................……….
5 How to Get the Most from this Course......................... 5 Facilitators/Tutors and Tutorials.................................. 7 3 Summary.................................. .................................. 8 INTRODUCTION PAD 812: Intergovernmental Relationsis a first semester year one, two credit and 600 level core course.
It willbe available for allstudents offering Post-graduate studies in Intergovernmental Relations.
This course will expose you to understanding of many of the conceptsand theories in Intergovernmental Relatios as they affect business organizations in Nigeria.
It will assist you to be able to apply these concepts and theories to the task and roles that you 4 perform as an entrepreneur, business manager, employer in the corporate business setting.
The course consists of 15 units, which include course guide, evolution of federalism, meaning and nature of federalism, models of federalism, rationale for federalism, theoretical/ideological perspectives of federalism, models of intergovernmental relations, structures and patterns of intergovernmental relations, Federal- State –Local Government Relations, State-Local government relations, Conflict in intergovernmental relations, fiscal intergovernmental relations theory, allocation of jurisdictional powers among levels of government, intergovernmental fiscal relations, non-governmental organisations and intergovernmental relations and institutions for managing intergovernmental relations.
This course guide tells you briefly what the course is about, what course materials you will be using and how you can work your way through these materials.
It suggests some general guidelines for the amount of time you are likely to spend on each unit of the course in order to complete it successfully.
It also gives you some guidance on your tutor-marked assignments, which will be made available in the assignment files.
There are regular tutorial classes that are linked to the course.
You are advised to attend these sessions.
WHAT YOU WILL LEARN I THIS COURSE 5 PAD 812Intergovernmental Relations introduces you to various techniques, guides, principles, practices, etc.
relating to intergovernmental relations in Publicorganizations.
COURSE AIM The aim of the course can be summarized as follows: This course aims to give you an understanding of the meaning of Intergovernmental Relations, dynamics and issues, what they are and how they can be applied in everyday public activities.
It also aims to help you develop skills in the intergovernment fiscal relatiobns.
You can also apply the principles to your job as business managers, top management of corporate organizations in both the private and public enterprises.
All these will be achieved by aiming to: COURSE OBJECTIVES To achieve the aims set out, the course sets overall objectives.
Each unit also has specific objectives.
The unit objectives are always included at the beginning of a unit; you should read them before you start working through the unit.
You may want to refer to them during your study of the unit to check on your progress.
You should always look at the unit objectives after completing a unit.
In doing so, you will be sure that you have followed the instructions in the unit.
6  Below are the wider objectives of the course as a whole.
By meeting these objectives, you should have achieved the aims of the course as a whole.
On successful completion of the course, you should be able to: (1) Explain the evolution of intergovernmental relations (2) Understand the meaning and nature of intergovernmental relations as a discipline (3) Understand the models of federalism (4) Explain the rationale for establishing a federal system (5) Understand the theoretical/Ideological perspectives of federalism (6) Understand the models of intergovernmental relations (7) Understand the structures and patterns of intergovernment relations (8) Understand the Federal-State-Local government Relations (9) Explain the State-local government relations (10) Explain the role of conflict in intergovernment relations (11) Explain the Fiscal intergovernmental relations theory (12) Understand the allocation of jurisdictional powers among levels of government (13) Describe how to resolve intergovernmental fiscal relations (14) Understand the role of non-governmental organizations in intergovernmental relations (15) Describe the institutions for managing intergovernmental relations 7 WORKING THROUGH THIS COURSE To complete this course, you are required to read the study units, read set hooks and read other materials provided by the National Open University of Nigeria (NOUN).
Each unit contains self- assessment exercises, and at a point in the course, you are required to submit assignments for assessment purposes.
At the end of the course, is a final examination.
The course should take you about 16 - 17 weeks in totalto complete.
Below you will find listed all the components of the course, what you have to do, and how you should allocate your time to each unit in order to complete the course successfully on time.
Below are the lists of all the components of the course: COURSE MATERIALS Major components of the course are:  Course Guide  Study Units  References  Assignment  Presentation Schedule STUDY UNITS 8 The study units in this course are as follows: Module 1 Unit 1Evolution of Federalism Unit 2Meaning and Nature of Federalism Unit 3Models of Federalism Unit 4Rationale for Federalism Unit 5Theoretical/Ideological perspective of Federalism Module 2 Unit 1 TheModels of Intergovernmental Relations Unit 2Structures and Patterns of Intergovernment Relations Unit3Federal-State-Local government Relations Unit 4State-Local government Relations Unit 5Conflict in Intergovernmental Relations Module 3 Unit 1Fiscal Intergovernmental Relations Theory Unit 2Allocation of Jurisdictional powers among levels of government Unit 3Intergovernmental Fiscal Relations: Nigerian Experience 9 Unit4Non-governmental organisations and intergovernment Relations Unit 5Institutions for Managing Intergovernmental Relations The first two units explain the evolution of federalism and the meanings and nature ofintergovernment Relations The next three units give insight on models, rationale , theoretical and ideological perspectives in intergovernmental relations The next units explains the dynamics, structures and patterns of intergovernment relations This is followed by five other units, which tend to describe the intergovernment fiscal theory, relations, allocation of jurisdictional powers among levels of governments, role of non- governmental organizations and machinery for managing intergovernmental relations.
ASSIGNMENT FILES There are fifteen assignments in this course.
The fifteen-course assignment which cover all the topics in the course material are there to guide you to have proper understanding and grasp of the course.
10  PRESENTATION SCHEDULE The presentation schedule included in your course materials gives you the important dates for this year for the completion of tutor- marked assignments and attending tutorials.
Remember, you are required to submit all your assignments by the due date.
You should guard against falling behind in your work.
ASSESSMENT There are three aspects to the assessment of the course: first are self-assessment exercises, second, are the tutor-marked assignments; and third, there is a written examination.
In tackling the assignments, you are advised to be sincere in attempting the exercises; you are expected to apply information, knowledge and techniques gathered during the course.
The assignments must be submitted to your tutor for formal assessment in accordance with the deadlines stated in the Presentation Schedule and the Assignment File.
The work you submit to your tutor for assessment will count for 50% of your total Course mark.
11 At the end of the course, you will need to sit for a final written examination of ‘three hours’ duration.
This examination will also count for 50% of your total course mark.
TUTOR-MARKED ASSIGNMENT (TMA ) S There are nine tutor-marked assignments in this course.
You only need to submit five of the eight assignments.
You are encouraged, however, to submit all eight assignments in which case the highest five of the eight marks will be counted.
Each assignment counts 10% towards your total course mark.
Assignment questions for the units in this course are contained in the Assignment File.
You will be able to complete your assignment from the information and materials contained in your reading, references and study units- However, it is desirable in all degree level education to demonstrate that you have read and researched more widely than the required minimum.
Using other references will give you a broader viewpoint and may provide a deeper understanding of the subject.
When you have completed each assignment, send it together with a TMA (tutor marked assignment) form, to your tutor.
Make sure that each assignment reaches your tutor on or before the deadline given in the Presentation Schedule and Assignment File.
If for any reason, yon cannot complete your work on time, contact your tutor before the assignment is due to discuss the possibility of an 12 extension.
Extensions will not be granted after the due date unless there are exceptional circumstances.
FINAL EXAMINATION AND GRADING The final examination PAD 812will be of three hours’ duration and have a value of 50% of the total course grade.
The examination will consist of question, which reflect the types of self-testing, practice exercise and tutor-marked problems you have previously encountered.
All areas of the course will be assessed.
Spend the time between finishing the last unit and sitting for the examinationto revise the entire course work.
You might find it useful to review the self-tests, tutor-marked assignments and comments on them before the examination.
The final examination covers information from all parts of the course.
COURSE MARKING SCHEME Total Course Marking Scheme ASSESSMENT MARKS Assignment 1-9 Nine assignments, best six marks of the nine count @ 5% each= 30% of course marks 13 Final Examination 70% of overall course marks Total 100% of course marks COURSE OVERVIEW This table brings together the units, the number of weeks you should take to complete them and the assignments that follow them.
Unit Title of Work Weeks Assessment Activity (end of unit) 14  Course Guide Module 1 1 Evolution of federalism 1 Assignment 1 2 Meaning and Nature of 1 federalism 3 Models of federalism 1 Assignment 2 4 Rationale for federalism 1 Assignment 3 5 Theoretical/Ideological 1 perspectives of federalism 15  Module 2 1 Models of intergovernmental relations 1 Assignment 4 2 Structures and patterns of 1 intergovernmental relations 3 Federal-State-Local government 1 relations 4 State-Local government relations 1 Assignment5 5 Conflict in intergovernment relations 1 Assignment 6 Module 3 1 Fiscal intergovernmental Relations 1 theory 2 Allocation of jurisdictional powers 1 Assignment 7 among levels of government 3 Intergovernmental Fiscal 1 Assignment 8 Relations:Nigerian Experience 4 Role of Non-governmental organisations 1 Assignment 9 in intergovernment relations 5 Institutions for Managing 1 intergovernmental Relations 16  Total 15 9 HOW TO GET THE MOST FROM THIS COURSE In distance learning, the study units replace the university lecturer.
This is one of the great advantages of distance learning.
You can read and work through specially designed study materials at your own pace, and at a time and place that suits you best.
Think ofit as reading the lecture that a lecturer might set you some reading to do, the study unit will tell you when to read your other materials.
Just as a lecturer might give you an in- class exercise, your study units provide exercises for you to do at appropriate points.
Each of the study units follows a common format.
The first item is an introduction to the subject matter of the unit, and how a particular unit isintegrated with the other units and the course as a whole.
Next is a set of learning objectives.
These objectives let you know what you should be able to do by the time you have completed the unit.
You should use these objectives to guide your study.
When 17 you have finished the unit, you must go back and cheek whether you have achieved the objectives.
If you make a habit of doing this, you will significantly improve your chances of passing the course.
The main body of the unit guides you through the required reading from other sources.
This will usually be cither from a Reading Section of some other sources.
Self-tests are interspersed throughout the end of units.
Working through these tests will help you to achieve the objectives of the unit and prepare you for the assignments and the examination.
You should do each self-test as you come to it in the study unit.
There will also be numerous examples given in the study units, work through these when you come to them too.
The following is a practical strategy for working through the course.
If you run into any trouble, telephone your tutor.
Remember that your tutor's job is to help you.
When you need help, do not hesitate tocall and ask your tutor to provide it.
(1) Read this course guide thoroughly.
(2) Organize a study schedule.Refer to the course overview for more details.Note the time you are expected to spend on each unit and how the assignments relate to the units.
Important information e.g.
details of your tutorials, and the 18 date of the first day of the semester will be made available.
You need to gather all this information in one place, such as your diary or a wall calendar.
Whatever method you choose to use, you should decide on and write in your own dates for working on each unit.
(3) Once you have created you own study schedule, do everything you can to stick to it.
The major reason that students fail is that they get behind with their coursework.
If you get into difficulties with your schedule, please let your tutor know before it is too late for help.
(4) Turn to unit I and read the introduction and the objectives for the unit.
(5) Assemble the study materials.Information about what you need for a unit is given in the ‘Overview’ at the beginning of each unit.
You will always need both the study unit you are working on and one of your references, on your desk at the same time.
(6) Work through the unit.
The content of the unit itself has been arranged to provide a sequence for you to follow.
As you work through the units, you will be instructed to read sections from your other sources.
Use the unit to guide your reading.
19  (7) Well before the relevant due date, check your Assignment File and make sure you attend to the next required assignment.
Keep in mind that you will learn a lot by doing the assignments carefully.They have been designedto help you meet the objectives of the course and, therefore, will help you pass the exam.
Submit all assignments not later than the due date.
(8) Review of the objectives for each study unit confirms that you have achieved them.
If you feel unsure about any of the objectives, review the study material or consult your tutor.
(9) When you are confident that you have achieved a unit's objectives, you can then start on the next unit.
Proceed unit by unit through the course and try to face your study so that you keep yourself on schedule.
(10) When you have submitted an assignment to your tutor for marking, do not wait for its return before starting on the next unit.
Keep to your schedule.
When the assignment is returned, pay particular attention to your tutor's comments, both on the tutor-marked assignment form and also written on the assignment.
Consult your tutor as soon as possible if you have any questions or problems.
20 (11) After completing the last unit, review the course and prepare yourself for the final examination.
Check that you have achieved the unit objectives (listed at the beginning of each unit) and the course objectives (listed in the Course Guide).
FACILITATORS/TUTORS AND TUTORIALS There are 17 hours of tutorials provided in support of this course.
You will be notified of the dates, times and location of these tutorials, together with the names and phone numbers of your tutor, as soon as you are allocated a tutorial group.
Your tutor will mark and comment on your assignments, keep a close watch on your progress and on any difficulties you might encounter and provide assistance to you during the course- You must mail your tutor-marked assignments to your tutor well before the due date (at least two working days are required).
They will be marked by your tutor and returned to you as soon as possible.
Do not hesitate to contact your tutor by telephone, e- mail, or discussion board if you need help.
The following might be circumstances in which you would find help necessary.
CONTACT YOUR TUTOR IF:  You do not understand any part of the study units or the assigned readings.
 You have difficulty with the self-test or exercise.
21  You have a question or problem with an assignment with your tutor's comment on an assignment or with the grading of an assignment You should try your best to attend the tutorials.
This is the only chance to have face-to-face contact with your tutor and to ask questions which are answered instantly.
You can raise any problem encountered in the course of your study.
To gain the maximum benefit from course tutorials, prepare a question list before attending them.
You will learn a lot from participating in discussions actively.
As earlier stated above, this coursePAD 812 Intergovernmental Relations relates to relations among levels of government in public sector.
It makes in-depth analysis of the intergovernment relations in public sectors for understanding of the practices and principles governing relationships among levels of government.
We hope you enjoy your acquaintances with the National Open University of Nigeria (NOUN).
We wish you every success in the future.
22  23  NATIONAL OPEN UNIVERSITY OF NIGERIA SCHOOL OF MANAGEMENT SCIENCES 14/16, AHMADU BELLO WAY VICTORIA ISLAND, LAGOS COURSE CODE: PAD 812 COURSE TITLE: INTERGOVERNMENTAL RELATIONS COURSE DEVELOPER/WRITER: DR AUGUSTINE NDUKA ENEANYA NATIONAL OPEN UNIVERSITY PROGRAMME LEADER: DR C.I.
OKEKE NATIONAL OPEN UNIVERSITY OF NIGERIA COURSE COORDINATOR: MRS MARTHA ORUKU NATIONAL OPEN UNIVERSITY OF NIGERIA MODULE 1 24  CONCEPTS, MODELS AND THEORIESOF FEDERALISM UNIT 1 EVOLUTION OF FEDERALISM UNIT 2 MEANING AND NATURE OF FEDERALISM UNIT3 MODELS OF FEDERALISM UNIT 4 RATIONALE FOR FEDERALISM UNIT 5 THEORETICAL/IDEOLOGICAL PERSPECTIVES OF FEDERALISM UNIT 1 EVOLUTION OF FEDERALISM 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objectives 3.0 Maincontents 3.1 Alliances and Confederations 3.2 Federal-DecentralizedSystem 3.3 Central-DecentralizedSystem 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutor – MarkedAssignments 7.0 Reference/FurtherReadings 1.0 INTRODUCTION 25 Federalism is derived from Latin word “Foedus” which means treaty or agreement.
It denotes when a sovereign and independent states, either because they are too weak to resist foreign aggression individually or because they remain economically backward by standing alone.
Hence, they voluntarily agree to unite.
In this unit, we shall examine how federalism emerged as a system of government.
2.0 OBJECTIVES At the end of the unit, students would be able to.
 Understand how different forms of federalism emerged; and  Understand the dynamics of sharing powers to different levels of government.
3.0 MAIN CONTENTS 3.1 ALLIANCES AND CONFEDERATIONS In the beginning, there was Alliance – a coalition of states agreeing to help each other in the event of war or crises.
Alliances do not only involve cooperation and aggregation of capabilities, they are generally directed toward an actual or potential enemy and the actual or potential use of force.
The agreement on which an alliance is based is often embodied formally in a treaty, but it can also be based on a tacit or informal understanding.
Alliances can be between states that are relatively equal in power and involve mutual security guarantees, or they can be between unequal states – in which case the more powerful state generally extends a unilateral guarantee to the less powerful one.
This is always a dangerous situations for the weaker state.
Too often a willingness to protect and preserve has turned into a desire to take over and annex.
Then came the 26 confederation, a group of independent states that delegate powers on selected issues to a central government.
In a confederation, the central government is deliberately limited, designed to be inherently weak, and has few independent powers(Shafritz et.
Al., 2011).
3.2 FEDERAL DECENTRALIZED SYSTEM History indicates clearly that the principal factor in the formation of federal system of government has been a common external threat.
“Tribes, villages, cities, colonies or states have joined together in voluntary unions to defend themselves”(Shafritz, Russell and Borick, 2011:134) Every federal state has a devised system of emergence.
In some cases, in new state is created to which the hitherto sovereign states surrender their sovereignty and agree to become its component parts.
Some countries call the federation that emerged as state an in case of United States of America, Nigeria, Austria, India and so on.
In the case of Canada and Pakistan they are referred to as provinces; cantons in the Switzerland; Union Republics in the former Soviet Union and Lander in German Federal Republic.
The central governments which come into existence as a result of that federation is entrusted with powers of general character such as: defense, currency, foreign affairs, military etc, while the constituent units are empowered with certain issues within their jurisdiction as spelt out by the constitution.
Sovereigntyliesonthestateagainstexternal control (Ugoh, 2011:23).
27  3.3 CENTRAL – DECENTRALIZED SYSTEM In this system, a federation may also come into existence when a unitary state with a large area which needs unity out of its diversity; divides its power into two sets of government and grants constitutional autonomy to its units.
The system formed in this way in known as centrifugal type of federalism.
The new apparatus of government comes to be the central government, which retains only those subjects of national importance, such as: currency, defense, security and transfers to rest or to the justification of component units.
Both the central and component units constitute part and parcel of one governmental system and their relationships are one of partnership and collaboration in a single organization, possessing one common, alternate purposes and integrated system of institution for that purpose.
The relation between the central and local authorities is not that of an omnipotent controlling authority and its agents, but of partners in an enterprise – the carrying on of efficient administration.
These features can be found in Norway and Sweden (Eneanya, 2012: 252) 4.0 CONCLUSION In this unit, we have discussed factors leading to the evolution of federalism.
it could be a new state created to which other regions or states or province surrender their sovereignties and agree to become its component parts.
Another pattern in which a federal system can also emerge could be when a unitary state with a large area which needs unity out of its diversity divides its power 28 into two sets of government and grants constitutional autonomy to its component units.
5.0 SUMMARY Federalism is practiced by many countries.
It could emerge as a result of states agreeing to surrender their sovereignties, and remaining part of the federation unit.
As a political system, federalism is adopted to cater for diversities and heterogeneity of these societies.
According to Wheare (1964), it is a method of dividing powers so that general and regional governments are each within a sphere, coordinate and independent.
Generally, the central government controls the subjects of national importance, while state or regional or provincial governments control subjects within their jurisdictions as allotted by the constitution of the state.
The federally – decentralized and centralized – decentralized patterns are the basis of the formation of federal system of governments in various countries of the world.
6.0 TUTOR – MARKED ASSIGNMENT 1.
Explain the factors that led to the emergence of federalism in Nigeria?
2.
What was the factor that brought about the federal system in USA?
7.0 REFERENCES/FURTHER READING Eneanya, A. N. (2012).
Local Government Administration in Nigeria: A Comparative Perspective.
Lagos: University of Lagos Press Ltd. 29 Ogbuishi, A. F. (2007).
Fundamentals of Inter-governmental Relations.
Enugu: Academic Publishing Company.
Shafritz, J.M, Russell, E.W.
and Borick, C.P.
(2011).
Introducing Public Administration, 7thEdition.
New York: Longman.
Ugoh, S. C. (2011).
Understanding Inter-governmental Relations in Nigeria.
Lagos: Sam Iroanusi Publications.
Wheare, K. C. (1963).
Federal Government.
London: Oxford University Press.
30  MODULE 1 UNIT 2 THE MEANING AND NATURE OF FEDERALISM CONTENTS 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objectives 3.0 Maincontents 3,1 Meaning of Federalism 3.2 Nature of Federalism 3.3 Types of federalism 3.3.1 Dual Federalism 3.3.2 Cooperative Federalism 3.3.3 Creative Federalism 3.3.4 Competitive Federalism 3.3.5 Fiscal Federalism 3.3.6 Centrifugal Federalism 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutor – MarkedAssignments 7.0 References/FurtherReadings 1.0 INTRODUCTION Some scholars on federalism argue that governments within federal system have not been independent of each other but have in practice been inter-dependent and interacted with each other in a relationship of both cooperation and rivalry.
Others argue that federalism involves cooperation, bargaining and conflict.
31 Thus, there has always been a measure of cooperation between two levels of government.
In this unit, we shall examine the meaning and nature of federalism.
2.0 OBJECTIVES At the end of the unit, students should be able to:  Understandthemeaning of federalism  Explainthenature of federalism 3.0 MAIN OBJECTIVES 3.1 MEANING OF FEDERALISM Federalism has been defined differentlybys many scholars.
Wheare (1963: 10) defines federalism as “a system where there is more than one tier of government with the tiers each within a sphere, coordinate and independent Friedrich (1963) views it as “a process by which a number of separate political organizations, be they states or any kind of association enter into agreements for working-out solutions, adopting joint policies and making decisions on joint problems….” Ramphal (1979) describes federalism as a situation, where “communities accept to live and works together nationally on a limited number of matters and for those matters only; but are determined, at the same time, to preserve their separate identities and to remain competent authority in their own territories for the regulation of other matters”.
According to Katz (1984:20) federalism “is a form of political organization designed to promote both effectiveness and liberty in which separate politicizes (or nationalities) are united within an 32 over-arching framework in such a way that all maintain their fundamental integrity”.
Federalism contrasts with a unitary system of government where there is one predominant central government, which assumes full powers and responsibility for all government functions and may delegate some of its power and functions to the local authority that it has created (Oates, 1972: 3 – 20).
On the other hand, federalism is sometimes confused with pluralism.
Although, they share certain similarities, they are in no way identical.
Federalism operates within an entity that is composed of territorially defined groups, while pluralism is not characterized by any well-defined territory.
Pluralist system is a social system of politics where the state which is a gathering of private group’s organizations and individuals interest represented by such associations enjoy the distribution of power.
Nevertheless, these groups of interest have no territorially defined boundaries.
Every pluralist society represents a multitude of diverse social interests with organized representation in political decision-making.
Thus, federalism represents a principle for the organization of decision-making in an association of groups of people within a nation – state.
It possesses a relative autonomy that is constitutionally recognized.
The federal system recognizes and respects the co-existence of concurrent governments as against the unitary form of government.
3.2 NATURE OFFEDERALISM 33 Federalism is a political system adopted to cater for diversities and heterogeneity of societies.
It is designed to address the twin issues of maintaining unity, while preserving diversity.
To Wheare (1963) it is a method of dividing powers to that general and regional governments are each within a sphere, coordinate and practiced.
Federalism is practiced by many countries of the world, such as: Nigeria, Australia, Canada, United States of America etc.
A federal system of government is one in which powers are distributed between the centre and the states.
The constitution of a federal state is always written because it clearly spells out the powers and functions of both the central government and the state governments: the essence is to avoid conflict and controller by that may arise between these governments.
3.3 TYPES OF FEDERALISM There are different types of federalism, namely: a) Dual federalism b) Cooperativefederalism c) Creativefederalism d) Competitivefederalism e) Fiscal federalism f) Centrifugalfederalism 3.3.1 DUAL FEDERALISM The concept of dual federalism is set against the background of classical thinking.
It represents the classical theory of federalism.
Dual federalism is based on the conception of the autonomy of 34 the various levels of government within a federation.
This is considered the basis for the existence of true federalism.
3.3.2 COOPERATIVE FEDERALISM Cooperative federalism is a compromise of dual federalism or true federalism.
The emphasis here is on cooperation between the levels of government in a federation.
Such cooperation is necessary for the proper functioning of the overlapping functions and responsibilities of these governments.
As such, in cooperation federalism, the various units of government have interdependent relationship among themselves despite the constitutional division of powers and the provisions for independence and autonomy.
3.3.3 CREATIVE FEDERALISM Creative federalism sought to foster the development of a singular “Great Society” by integrating the poor into mainstream America.
Its expansive efforts were marked by the rapid development of categorical grant programmes to state and local governments and direct federal grants to cities, frequently bypassing state governments entirely.
3.3.4 COMPETITIVE FEDERALISM Competitive federalism is characterized by regular conflictual patterns of relationship among the various government units: This is an undersirable situation since it does not promote peace and unit and is likely to slow the pace of development and self- reliance.
35 3.3.5 FISCAL FEDERALISM Fiscal federalism implies the allocation of tax powers and expenditure responsibilities among various tiers of government, while fiscal decentralization takes place when sub-national governments are given statutory powers to raise some taxes and carryout spending activities within some specified legal criteria.
This also involves the allocation of centrally – generated revenue to lower tiers of governmentthrough some revenue sharing formula (Ekpo, 1999).
In Nigeria, thus involvesthree tiers of government – federal, state and local.
Here, fiscal federalism exists mainly as revenue allocation directed by award of special grants from federation account.
To avoid conflict revenue commissions are often established to work out the best acceptable formula for revenue allocation from federation account.
3.3.6 CENTRIFUGAL FEDERALISM A federalism may also come into existence when a military state with a large area which needs unity out of its diversity, divides its power into two sets of government and grants constitutional autonomy to its units.
The system formed in this way is known as centrifugal type of federalism.
The new apparatus of government comes to be the central government “which retains only those subjects of national importance (such as currency, defence, railway, security, and transfer the rest to the jurisdiction of the units” (Ugoh, 2011: 24).
In other words, inter-government relations also exist in a unitary system of government.
As Graves (1974) and Ayoado (1980) pointed out, that there are at least three levels of inter-governmental relations in a unitary system, 36 namely: national – local relations inter-local relations and federal centre relations.
SELF – ASSESSMENT EXERCISE What do you understand by the concept of federalism?
4.0 CONCLUSION In this unit, we have discussed the meaning, nature, features and types of a federal system.
Federalism as option of government has a strong appeal for communities that desire to unite for limited purposes, while retaining a large measure of autonomy.
Basically, a federal system seeks to unite in a general government system several diverse component units that desire some degree of unity without sacrificing their own identity or autonomy in local affairs.
5.0 SUMMARY Federalism is a form of political organization designed to promote both effectiveness and liberty in which separate politics (or nationalities) are untied within an overarching framework in such a way that all maintain their fundamental integrity (Katz, 1984).
It seeks to unite several diverse component unites that desire some degree of unity in diversity.
There are different types of federalism, namely: dual, cooperative competitive and fiscal federalism, fiscal federalism is an off-shoot of federalism, it refers to the statutorily defined financial transaction between the different tiers of government within a federation.
It could also be seen as the existence, in one nation- 37 state, of more than one level of government, having responsibility for both taxation and expenditure (Okigbo, 1965 and Anyanwu, 1995).
Within a fiscally federated state a citizen can be subjected to the influence of fiscal operation of different levels of government.
Federal, state and local governments, the principles of federalism and its concurrent concept, fiscal federalism have been accepted in Nigeria since 1946.
In this different levels of government have been allotted their functions within their 6.0 (i) Describe the features of federalism (ii) Explains different types of federalism 7.0 REFERENCES/FURTHER READINGS Anyanwu, J. C. (1995).
Revenues Allocation and Stable Fiscal Federalism in Nigeria”.Journal of Economic Management 2(2), October.
Ekpo, A.
(1999) “Fiscal Federalism: Nigeria’s Post-Independence Experience”, 1960 – 90”.
World Development 22 (8), 1129 – 46.
Friedrich, C. (1963).
Federalism: National and International.
New York: Oxford University Press, P. N. C. Katz, E. (1984).
Aspects of American Federalism.Philadelphia, Pennsylavania: Centre for the Study of Federalism at Temple University.
38 Oates, W. E. (1972).
Fiscal Federalism.
New York: Harcourt Brace Jovanovich.
Okigbo, P. N. C. (1965).Nigerian, Public Finance.
London: Longman.
Ramphal, S. S. (1979).
Keynote Address in Readings on Federalism.
Lagos: Nigerian Institute of International Affairs.
Wheare, K. C. (1963).
Federal Government.
London: Oxford University Press.
39  MODULE 1: UNIT 3 MODELS OF FEDERALISM 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objectives 3.0 Maincontents 3.1 DevolutionModel 3.2 AggregationModel 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutor – MarkedAssignments 7.0 References/FurtherReadings 1.0 INTRODUCTION Federalism is a political system in which two level of government – federal and state exist side by side, with each possessing certain assigned functions.
The fundamental character of this system is that it is a political system characterized by the central and component governments with distinctively recognized autonomous in its own sphere but interact with each other cooperatively.
In this unit, we shall examine the forms or models in which federalism evolved.
2.0 OBJECTIVES At the end of the unit, students should be able to:  Explain how federalism evolved through development process.
40  Explain how federalism evolvedthrough bargaining or aggregation process.
3.0 MAIN CONTENTS There are two forms or processed federalism evolved, namely (Ogbuise 2007:7 – 8).
 Devolutionmodelorprocess,  Aggregationmodelorprocess.
3.1 DEVOLUTION MODEL OR PROCESSES An analysis of the evolution of federalism in Nigeria would show that Nigeria existed as a unitary state before it decide to reconstitute itself by devolution governmental legislative power to other levels of government, such that these levels of government become coordinates with the central government and enjoying autonomy in the exercise of legislative, executive and administrative powers allotted by the constitution of that country.
In Nigeria, for example, federalism originated form an entirely unitary set-up prior to the coming into force of the Richards Constitution in 1946; which also created regional councils.
This marked the beginning of decentralization in Nigeria.
The reason for devolution is because of the presence of strong and continuous demand for autonomy over certain local issues, especially in multinational societies with high socio-cultural 41 diversities.
Another example of a country who formerly was unitary but devolved into federation is Canada.
3.2 AGGREGATION MODEL OR PROCESS This model is characterized by a bargain or agreement made among previously sovereign polities, such that each agrees to give up part of its sovereignty in order to pool its resources with the others and thereby increase the security, prestige and economic potential of the federated state as a whole.
At the end of the day, a common central government is formed to take charge of certain issues of common interest to all of them.
The component units, however, retain autonomy over certain issues and functional areas, especially matters of relative local government examples of federal states that have emerged through this process include the United States of America, Switzerland and Australia.
SELF-ASSESSMENT EXERCISE Describe the process sin which a country emerged through devolution?
4.0 CONCLUSION In this unit, we have examined the conceptual models of federalism.
This defines the mode and character of inter- governmental relations in a federal state.
The models determine the inter-relationship among the states as well as between the states and the federal government.
The constitutional provisions made it possible for powers to be distributed, which would allow 42 all the entities to work separately, while still working together as a nation.
5.0 SUMMARY This unit has discussed the processes of the emergence of federalism.
The conceptual models are vital for the understanding of inter-governmental relations.
Federalism as a political system binds group of states into a larger, non-centralized and superior state.
Federalism can be classified into two major models based on their formation and existence.
The models are the devolution and aggregation models.
The devolution model describes the situation, where a state which has existed over a period of time as a unitary state decides to reconstitute itself by devolving governmental legislative power to other levels of government in the country.
Nigeria and Canada are examples of countries that emerged as a federal states through this model.
On the other hand, the aggregation model is characterized by a bargain or agreement, made among previously sovereign polities, such that each agrees to give up part of its sovereignty, in order to pool its resources with the others and increase economic development of the federated state as a whole.
6.0 TUTOR – MARKED ASSIGNMENTS 1.
Describe the devolution model that characterized federal system in Nigeria 43 2.
Describe the aggregation model that characterize federal system in United States of America.
7.0 REFERENCES Friedrich, C. (1963).
Federalism: National and International.
New York: Oxford University Press, P. N. C. Katz, E. (1984).
Aspects of American Federalism.Philadelphia, Pennsylavania: Centre for the Study of Federalism at Temple University.
Oates, W. E. (1972).
Fiscal Federalism.
New York: Harcourt Brace Jovanovich.
Ogbuishi, A. F. (2007).
Fundamentals of Inter-governmental Relations.
Enugu: Academic Publishing Company.
44 MODULE 1: UNIT 4 RATIONALE OF FEDERALISM 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objectives 3.0 Main contents 3.1 Economic factor 3.2 Political factor 3.3 Institutional factor 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutor – Marked Assignments 7.0 References/Further Readings 1.0 INTRODUCTION The rationale for federalism continues to be relevant because not all government systems are federal.
Federalism is about partial decentralization of government systems.
Therefore in this unit there is need to examine the justification for federalism.
2.0 OBJECTIVES At the end of this unit, students should be able to:  Understand the economic justification of federalism,  Understand the political justification of federalism, and  Explain the institutional bases for operating a federal system 45 3.0 MAIN CONTENTS 3.1 ECONOMIC FACTOR The economic argument for decentralization has been partitioned into two categories,namely: the ex-ante (ortheoretical) argument and the expost (or practical) argument (Cremer et al, 1994) the exantearguemnet can be traced to the work of Buchanan, (1950), Musgrave (1961) and Oates (1972).
The theoretical economic argument for decentralization is as follows: tastes and preferences (hereafter referred to as tastes) for some public goods vary from one locality to another.
Such variations in tastes can be as a result of historical and socio-economic factors.
The scenario is therefore, one wherein, for some goods, there is an identical taste within each locality and variations in tastes across localities.
Simultaneously, we have a situation wherein public goods differ in their spatial characteristics, particularly in terms of the spatial incidence of the benefits enjoyed.
At the extreme, we have national public goods whose consumption is collective nationally.
For example, national defence; and local public goods whose consumption is collective, locally, for instance, street lighting.
If the central government provides a local public good, one possibility is for this tier of government to seek information on each locality’s preferences and then respond to it.
Such information, however, would be costly and the central government may be reluctant to use it.
The tendency, therefore, is for the central government to provide a uniform level of the good for all localities, in spite of the observed variations in tastes.
The uniform provision of the local public will, in different degrees, 46 make some localities to over consume, and others to under- consume, the public good.
If we have more than one public good, the uniform provision of each and every good to all localities could adversely affect not only the level but also the bundle of the goods that are consumed.
In order to improve the efficiency of government systems, a system has to evolve that would differentiate the provision of local public goods according to local tastes and circumstances (Woller and Phillips, 1998: 139 – 140).
This requirement is met by a decentralized system of government.
According to Groenewegen (1987: 366), decentralization permits better matching of public goods, supply to local tastes.
This theoretical case for federalism has now been made since we have at least one function that is better performed by sub-national governments, and at least one other function that is better performed by the central government.
Thus, the economic argument is that decentralization could enhance experimentation and innovation because some jurisdictions will want to explore better ways of providing their services.
3.2 POLITICAL FACTOR Turning to political argument, decentralization can enhance political cohesion in countries with regional, ethnic, racial, linguistic or cultural diversity like Nigeria (Tanzi, 199: 301 – 302).
Decentralization can also provide the opportunity for local governments to serve as training grounds for democracy.
It has also been argued that stronger local or regional governments can service as an instrument for curtailing the natural tendency for the central government to become too powerful.
47  3.3 INSTITUTIONAL FACTOR There is institutional argument for decentralization.
Provisioning at the grass roots level is not likely to be for only one good.
It is likely to be for a bundle of public goods.
There is then the need for effective coordination of this bundle of goods.
Given their closeness to the grassroots, local governments are in a better position to achieve the desired level of coordination of local public goods than the central government (Taiwo, 2004:39) 4.0 CONCLUSION In this unit, we have discussed the rationale of operating a federal system.
Federalism entails power devolution to different geographical levels within a nation.
Federalism allows for a great degree of decentralization.
Federalism, therefore, can be justified on the around of decentralization of economic, political and institutional benefits.
5.0 SUMMARY The unit has described the justification for operating federal system.
The exercise is useful not only for the countries that have deviated from the norms of the federal system of government, but also for those that are fine turning their systems or are in transition from other government systems to federal one.
The economic justification for operating a federal system stems fro the logic that decentralized system of govern could enhance competition among jurisdictions or tiers of government and 48 enhance better ways of providing goods and services.
On political argument, it can enhance cohesion in countries with regional, ethnic racial linguistics or cultural diversity.
Finally, the justification for operating federal system could be on the ground of the institutional factors.
Provision of public goods can better be achieved by local governments or units.
6.0 TUTOR - MARKED ASSIGNMENTS 1.
Explain the economic justification of operating a federal system.
2.
Describe the political and institutional justification for operating a federal system.
7.0 REFERENCES/FURTHER READINGS Buchanan, J. M. (1950).
“Federalism and Fiscal Equity”.American Economic Review 40(40 pp.
583 - 99.
Cremer et al (1994).
“The Decentralization of Public Services: Lessons from theory of the form”.
Policy Research Working Paper 1345, Washington D. C. World Bank Musgrave, R. A.
(1961) “Approaches to a Fiscal Theory of Political Federalism” in: Public Finances: Needs, Sources and Utilization.
Princeton, New Jersey: Princeton University Press.
Oates, W. E. (1972).
Fiscal Federalism.
New York: Harcourt Brace Jovanovich.
49 Woller, G. M. and K. Phillips (1998).
“Fiscal Decentralization and LDC Economic Growth: An Empirical Investigation”.
Journal of Development Studies 34(4) 139 – 48.
Goenewegen, P. (1987).
“Fiscal Federalism”.In Eatwell, J. and M. Milgate (eds.).
The New Palgrave: A Dictionary of Economics 2, London: Macmillan.
Tanzi, V. (1995), “Fiscal Federalism and Decentralization: A Review of Some Efficiency and Bruno, M. and B. Pleaskovic (eds.)
Annual World Bank Conference on Development Economics, pp.
295 – 316.
Washington, DC: World Bank.
Taiwo, I. O.
(2004).“Principles of Multilevel Government in a Democratic System of Government”.Fiscal Federalism and Democratic Governance in Nigeria.
Ibadan: NCEMA/ACBF.
50  MODULE 1: UNIT 5 THEORETICAL AND IDEOLOGICAL PERSPECTIVES ON FEDERALISM 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objectives 3.0 Maincontents 3.1 TheoreticalPerspectives 3.1.1 FederalistSchool 3.1.2 DecentralizationSchool 3.2 Ideology of Federalism 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutor – MarkedAssignments 7.0 References/FurtherReadings 1.0 INTRODUCTION Federalism is a device for dividing decisions and functions of government.
It contrasts with unitary system where there is one predominant central government that assumes full power and responsibility for all government functions but may delegate some of its powers to the local authority.
Federalism is different form political and fiscal.
Whereas, political federalism deals with the allocation, usually through the instrumentality of the constitution, of powers and authority to tiers of government,fiscal federalism, on the other hand, is essentially about the allocation of government spending and resource to tiers of government 51 (Oates, 1972: 16 – 20; Asobie, 1998:15).
In this unit, we shall examine the conceptual and theoretical issues in federalism.
2.0 OBJECTIVES At the end of the unit, students would be able to  Explain the theoretical perspectives in federal system.
 Understand the ideology of federalism.
3.0 MAIN CONTENTS 3.1 THEORETICAL PERSPECTIVES OF FEDERALISM It is helpful at this point to examine some of the theoretical perspectives that have been used by experts in the field to analyze explain and predict inter-governmental events.
However, it will be helpful to define what is meant by theory.
A theory is a coherent set of statements describing and explaining the relationships and underlying principles of some aspect of the world.
A useful (although somewhat oversimplified distinction may be made between two kinds of theory: normative theory, which offers explanations and predictions for how some part of the world actually is or ought to be.
And empirical theory, which offers explanations and predictions for how some part of the world, actually is or will be.
These two types are directed at quite different goals.
However in the field of intergovernmental relations efforts to explain an inter- governmental system are simultaneously bound up with attempts to persuade others that certain forms of intergovernmental relations are preferable.
52 In other words, many intergovernmental theories have been both normative and empirical.
3.1.1 FEDERALIST SCHOOL Moreover, federalism is seen either as alliance or decentralization (Gibson, 2004: 4 – 6).
The Alliance or federalist school argues that federalism allows for the surrender of power to the centre and gives allowance for self-government.
In other words, inherent in the federal armament is generalized rule and particularistic rule.
Federalist school is concerned with the combination of “self- rule and shared rule”.
The logic is that a process of “defederation” begins when the centre gets so powerful to the extent that it erodes the powers of the other component units of the federation to run its own affairs within the constitutionally quarantined him it, without reference to the central authority.
Thistypes of federationisseen as alliance.
3.1.2 DECENTRALIZATION SCHOOL Decentralization school view federalism as entailing power devolution to different geographical levels within a nation.
This school argues that mere decentralization of power is more important to whether it is a “particular political or constitutional order”.
Thus, federalism allows for a great degree of decentralization.
The logical is that political exigencies might make federalism desirable but power calculation and domination may make decentralization the empirical reality of powers organization.
53 3.2 IDEOLOGY OF FEDERALISM The ideologists of federalism do not, of course, utter arguments justifying the benefits that accrue to these beneficiaries.
To do so would be to admit that not everyone gets something out the institution of federalism.
Yet it is the nature of ideology to be a claim of universal benefit…the ideology of federalism consists of a claim that everyone gets such and such a benefit from it.
Since we know, however, from the examination of beneficiaries just completed, that in fact, some people often a majority do not benefit at all, it is easy enough to spot an ideology because it is presented as a claim that everyone gets something good from the institutions of federalism (Riker, 1985:70).
Letus look at some of theseclaims: 1.
That federalism promotes democratic polity.
It should be abundantly clear, just from looking at the list of federal governments, that not all of them are democracies or even pretend to be democracies, although their claim to be federations is indisputable,.
Examples are: Mexico, Yugoslavia and Nigeria.
2.
That federalism promotes democracy by promoting an interest in state government.
However, studies conducted by Deye (1966); Jacob and Lipsky (1968) generally support the proposition that state governments are more influenced in their actions by the state of their economics than by the demands of their citizens.
Jennings and Ziegler (1970) have shown on the basis of survey research that citizens simply do not follow state politics very well.
And when people do not know what a government is 54 doing, they cannot hold it responsible.
And if they cannot hold it responsible, it can hardly be particularly democratic, especially by comparison with national and local governments, which are more visible.
A general, one would expected that the greatest interest of the citizens would be centred on that level of government that does the most important things.
Thus, in a centralized federation one would expect interest to centre on the national govnernet, while in a peripherialised federation one would expected the interest to focus on the constituent governments for example, in Nigeria allegiance was on regional governments.
3.
That federalism maintains individual freedom.
This is by far the most decentralization in the organization of power.
From discussion shown so far, the claim of ideologists of federalism that federal system strengthens freedom is false.
Sometimes, federalism reduces freedom.
4.0 CONCLUSION In this unit, we have discussed the theoretical perspectives and ideology of federalism.
Two major schools of thought view federalism in two perspectives.
The first school, the federalist school is concerned with the principle of self-rule and shared rule”.
The school views federalism as an alliance.
On the other hand, decentralization school argues that federalism entails power devolution to different geographical levels within a nation.
However, in practice federalism is a mixture of centralization and decentralization.
Every nation embraces a creative proportionality of centralization and popular of the ideological arguments in favour of federalism.
Freedom is the right to make rules as one chooses.
Rules in turn impose constraints on all those who would 55 not by preference have made exactly those rules.
The ideal of freedom is then to minimize the external costs suffered by some persons in the society.
In aristocratic society one minimizes the external costs of the well – born; but in the equalitarian society of today, presumably one minimizes the external costs of some representative citizen’schosen at random from the whole.
The best way to minimize costs for such a citizen is to have policing made by the largest relevant unit of government.
For all issues of national concern, then, maximum, freedom is attained when policy is made nationally.
Conversely, for all issues of local concern, maximum freedom is attained when policy is made locally.
So the claim by ideologists of federalism that the system strengthens freedom is thus false.
Indeedfederalismweakensfreedom (Riker, 1985:71).
5.0 SUMMARY Federalism allows for the surrender of power to the centre while allowing self-governments.
Given human nature, power serves as instrument of state craft.
Those with power allow different centres of power to perform certain responsibilities in order to accommodate heterogeneous nature of the state.
Inherent of such constitutional arrangement is to make way for nation-building.
Beyond the potentials for managing diversities and conflictual relations, there is also an economic imperative of federalism.
This calls for the decentralization of decisions-making and the distribution of state powers between governmental levels.
Necessitating this is the different nature of public goods, which warrants the handling of their production and distribution in multidimensional ways.
56 A concurrence to the conceptualization and theories is the idea of federalism as a national polity with dual or multiple level of government, exercising exclusive authority over constitutionally determined policy areas, but in which only one level of government – the central government is sovereign before international communities (Gibson, 2004).
In general, therefore in any federal system, but especially in asymmetrical ones, like Nigeria or United States, federalism weakens freedoms.
So, the claim of the ideologists of federalism that the system strengthens freedom is thus false.
Indeed, federalismweakensfreedom.
6.0 TUTOR – MARKED ASSIGNMENTS 1.
Describe the theoretical perspectives of federalism?
2.
Explain the ideology of federalism?
7.0 REFERENCES/FURTHER READINGS Oates, W. E. (1972).
Fiscal Federalism.
New York: Harcourt Brace Jovanovich.
Asobie, H. A.
(1998) “Centralizing Trends in Nigerian Federalism”.
In Babalade T. K. Olufemi and F. Adewumi (eds.).
Re- Inventing Federalism in Nigeria: Issues and Perspectives.Friedrich Ebert Foundation, pp.
14 – 56.
Gibson, E. L. (2004).
“Federalism and Democracy Theoretical Connections and Cautionary Insights”.In Gibson, E. L. Federalism and Democracy in Latin America.Baltimor: The John Hopkins University Press.
57 Riker, W. H. (1985).
“Federalism: Origin, Operation, Significance”.
In Bell, D. V. J. Deutsch, K. W. and S. M. Lipset; Uses in Politics and Government.
Boston: Houghton Mifflin Company.
Dye, Thomas (1968).
Politics, Economics and the Public: Policy Outcomes in American State.
Chicago: Rand McNally.
Jacob, Herbert and Lipsky, M. (1968) “Outputs, Structures and power: An Assessment of changes in the study of state and local political”.
Journal of Politics, 30, 50 – 38.
Jennings M. K. and Ziegler, H. (1970).“The Salience of American State Politics”.American Political Science Review 64: 523 – 35.
58 MODULE 2: DYNAMICS OF INTER-GOVERNMENTAL RELATIONS UNIT 1 MODELS OF INTERGOVERNMENTAL RELATIONS UNIT 2 STRUCTURES AND PATTERNS OF INTERGOVERNMENTAL RELATIONS UNIT 3 FEDERAL-STATE-LOCAL GOVERNMENT RELATIONS UNIT 4 STATE-LOCAL GOVERNMENT RELATIONS UNIT 5 CONFLICT IN INTERGOVERNMENTAL RELATIONS UNIT 1 MODELS OF INTER-GOVERNMENTAL RELATIONS 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objectives 3.0 Maincontents 3.1 Coordinate-authorityModel 3.2 Inclusive-authorityModel 3.3 Overlapping-authorityModel 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutor – MarkedAssignments 7.0 References/furtherReadings 59 1.0 INTRODUCTION In inter-government relations, it is important we examine how a group of states are bound into a larger, non-centralized and superior state.
The inter-governmental relations may be classified into three conceptual models.
We can formulate some simplified models of authority relationships among national, state and local jurisdiction.
In this unit, we shall examine the features of intergovernmental relations arrangement.
2.0 OBJECTIVES At the end of the unit, students should be able to:  Understand the authority relationships that exist between political entities;  Understand how the models can be used to formulate hypotheses;  Understand that by testing these hypotheses, we can discover which model best fits predictions of inter-governmental relations policies.
3.0 MAIN CONTENTS There are three models that express visually the three generic types of authority relationship that can exist between political entities namely: coordinate – Authority model; inclusive authority model.
(Wright 1985: 58 – 65) overlapping – Authority model.
Each model concentrates on the essential features of a possible Intergovernmental Relation arrangement and guides us in formulating hypotheses.
Testing these hypotheses we can 60 discover which model best fits the political system being operated(Wright, 1985:59): 3.1 THE COORDINATE – AUTHORITY MODEL Stategovernment Nationalgovernm ent Local government Fig.
1: CoordinateAuthorityModel In the coordinate-authority model of Intergovernmental Relation, sharp, distinct boundaries separate the national government and state governments.
Local units, however, are included within and are dependent on state governments.
The most classic expression of state/local relations is Dillon’s Rule, which summarizes the power relationship between the states and their localities quoted in (Otole, 1985:58): 61 1.
There is no common-law right of local self-government.
2.
Local entities are creatures of the state subject to creation and abolition at the unfettered discretion of the state (barring constitutional limitations) 3.
Localities may exercise only those power expressly granted.
4.
Localities are “mere tenants at the will of the legislature.
This, coordinate – authority model, therefore, implies that the two types of entities are independent and autonomous.
They are linked only tangentially.
However, when the respective spheres of action put the national government and the state in conflict, they ceased to be tangential and clashed directly.
In such case, the Supreme Court becomes the arbiter of national/state relations.
3.2 THE INCLUSIVE – AUTHORITY MODEL This model is represented in fig.
2 by concentric circles diminishing in size from national to state to local government(Wright, 1985:59): NationalGover nment StateGovernm ent Local 62 Government Fig.
2: Inclusive – Authority Model Let us suppose that the area covered by each circle represents the proportion of power exercise by that jurisdiction with respect to others.
Suppose the national government wants to expand its proportion of power in relation to states and localities.
Twostrategies are possible.
 One, reduce the various powers of either the states or localities or both; or  Two, enlarge the national government’s circle with or without enlarging the state and/or local circles.
Both strategies can be understood by means of game theory: a systematic way of studying behavior in decision making situations.
The theory assumes that all participants strive to optimize their behaviour – each trying to maximize gains and minimize losses within the limits of allowed behavior (hence the analogy with games).
The outcome is seen to depend not only on the behavior of any one participant but on the responses of other participants as well.
In the first strategy, is the classic case of a three – person, zero – sum game?
The sum of the player’s winnings equals the sum of their losing.
An illustration of this in the Intergovernmental Relation contexts is the usury case in USA and the legislation requiring state and local units to meet minimum wage and maximum hour requirements.
The national government attempted to exercise (expand) its power at the expense of 63 state/local powers.
The gain in national power equaled the power or discretion lost by state and local units.
Thus, the national gains equaled state/local losses.
In game theory, the second strategy is called a “non-constant - sum game.
All participants in this type of game can “win” or make gains.
Perhaps the best Intergovernmental Relation illustration of the second strategyis fiscal: the conditional grant – in – aid.
The national sector can expand by raising more money to offer and grants to states and local governments.
The funds can be offered with conditions (“losses”) imposed on the recipients.
But the benefits (winnings) are so attractive that they appear to outweigh the attached constraints.
From these examples of the two strategies, we would expect national Intergovernmental Relation policies to lean far more toward the strategy – such as grants in aid.
The strategy assume that the total resources (“winnings”) can be expanded.
However, the inclusive – authority model serves other uses besides allowing predictions of Intergovernmental Relation policies.
The model also conveys the essential hierarchical nature of authority.
The dependency relationships imply powers patterns that are similar to Dillon’s rule for state/local relations.
That is, states and localities would be mere minions of the national government with insignificant or incidental impact on American politics and public policy.
To the question of who governs, this model provides an unequivocal answer – the national government.
64 3.3 THE OVERLAPPING – AUTHORITY MODEL The overlapping – Authority Model of Intergovernmental Relation comes from the early 1970s and from efforts by the Nixon administration to innovate and decentralized decision – Making in categorical grant – in – aid programmes (Wright, 1985:59): Overlapping – authority model is illustrated in Fig.
3 as below: NationalGover StateGovernm nment ent N/S N/L S/L Local Government The overlay among the circles conveys three characteristics features of the model: 1.
Substantial areas of governmental operations involves national, state and local units (or officials) simultaneously; 65 2.
The areas of autonomy or single-jurisdiction independence and full discretion are comparatively small; 3.
The power and influence available to anyone jurisdiction (or official) is substantially limited.
The limits produce an authority pattern best described as bargaining.
Bargaining is used in common dictionary sense of “negotiating the terms of a sale, exchange, or agreement”.
In the Intergovernmental Relation context, sale is far less relevant than exchange or agreement.
For example, the national government offers more than 1000 assistanceprogrammes to states and localities in exchange for their agreement to implement a programme; carryout a project, or pursue anyone of a wide variety of activities.
Of-course, as pat of the bargain, the recipient of assistance must usually agree to conditions, such as; the providing of matching funds and the satisfaction of accounting, reporting, auditing and performance requirements.
In sum, the chief characteristics of the overlapping – authority models are:  Limited, dispersedpower  Interdependence  Limitedareas of autonomy  Bargaining – exchangerelationships  Cooperation and competition Contacts and exchanges between national, state, and local officials may be cooperative or competitive; the determining factors include: the policy issue or problem, the status of the officials, the partisan leanings of participants, and the constituency being represented.
66 4.0 CONCLUSION In this unit, we have examined the coordinate – authority model; inclusive – authority model and overlapping – authority model.
In the coordinate – authority model is sharp, distinct boundaries which separate the national government and state government.
In this model, there is autonomy in authority pattern and the relationship is independent.
The inclusive – authority model allows for predictions of inter- governmental relations policies.
The model conveys the essential hierarchical nature of authority.
The relationship is dependent on power patterns between the federal and state/local relations.
That is, states and localities are mere minions of the federal government with insignificant impact on politics and public policy.
The over-lapping authority model depicts that substantial areas of governmental operations involves national, state and local units (or officials) simultaneously.
In this model, relationships is interdependent and authority pattern involves bargaining.
Bargaining in wide areas of Intergovernmental Relations involves exchanges or agreements.
However, each model, by concentrating on the essential features of a possible Intergovernmental Relations arrangement guides us in formulating hypotheses of-course; no two models will generate identical sets of hypotheses.
However, by testing these hypotheses, we can discover which model best guides the Intergovernmental Relations policies.
67 5.0 SUMMARY Fiscal Federalism is essentially about the allocations of government spending and resources to the various tiers of government.
From a theoretical perspective, the nature and character of Intergovernmental Relations could be conceptualized in terms of three dominant models: separated authority, overlapping authority and inclusive authority models (Ozumba, et al (eds.
); 1999).
The separated authority model expects peripheral linkages between component parts, while inclusive authority model postulate close federal supervision and control to assure that national purpose is served.
The overlapping model is often considered more realistic because federalism is a system of government where all the laws passed by all the theirs of government affect all the people depending on the state and local government area in which they live.
6.0 TUTOR – MARKED ASSIGNMENTS i) Describe the relevance of overlapping authority model of intergovernmental relations in Nigerian federal system?
ii) Explain how inclusive – authority models can be applied in intergovernmental relations in Nigeria?
7.0 REFERENCES/FURTHER READINGS Wright, D.S.(1985).
“Models of National/State/Local Relations”.
InO’toole, L. J.
(Jr.) O’toole, L. J.
(Jr.) American Intergovernmental Relations.O’toole, L. J.
(ed.)
Washington, DC: Congressional Quarterly Inc. 68 Wright, D. S. (1985).“Models of National, State, Local Relations”, American Inter-governmental Relations.
Washington, D.C.: Congressional Quarterly Inc. Eneanya, A. N. (2012).
Policy Research Analysis and Effective Policy-Making.
Lagos: University of Lagos Press Ltd. 69 UNIT 2 STRUCTURES OFFEDERAL AND INTER-GOVERNMENTAL RELATIONS CONTENTS 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objectives 3.0 Maincontents 3.1 Federal Structure 3.1.1 Features of Federal System 3.2 IntergovernmentalStructure 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutor – MarkedAssignments 7.0 References/FurtherReadings 1.0 INTRODUCTION Federalism is practiced by many countries of the world.
As a political system, it was adopted to cater for diversities and heterogeneity of these societies.
Federalism simply refers to a division of power between national, state and local governments.
In this unit, we shall examine the structure and patterns of federal system.
2.0 OBJECTIVES At the end of the unit, students should be able to patterns  Explain the structure and of federal system 70  Relate the structures and patterns that are operative in Nigeria federal system 3.0 MAIN CONTENT 3.1 FEDERAL SRUCTURE The federal structure of governmental offers the more defined platform for the operations of inter-governmental relations.
In federal system, Elekwa (1995) in Ikejana – Clark and Okoli (eds.)
identify six levels of inter-governmental relations namely: i.
Federal – staterelations ii.
Federal – state – local relations iii.
Federal local relations iv.
State – local relations v. State – staterelations and vi.
Local – local relations The levels of enumerated above represent both vertical and horizontal Ayoade (1980) also defines inter-governmental relations as comprising nine patterns: i.
Federal – state ii.
Federal – local iii.
Federal – civicgroups iv.
State – state v. State – local vi.
State – civicgroups vii.
Local – local viii.
Local – civicgroups, and ix.
Inter-civicgroups.
71 From this pattern, it could be seen that four new levels have been added to former structure, namely; federal – civic groups, state – civic groups, local - civic groups, and inter - civic groups (civic – civic).
This structure excluded “federal – state – local relations”.
Despite these differences, the core levels of inter – governmental relations present within a federal structure are represented (Ogbuishu, 2007).
3.1.1 FEATURES OF A FEDERAL SYSTEM A federal system of movement is one in which powers are distributed between the centre and the states.
The constitution of a federal state is always written and spells out the power and functions of central, state and local governments.
The essence in to avoid conflict and controversy that may arise between these levels of government.Thus, a federal systemischaracterizedbythefollowing: i.
Division of powers – separation of powers between the federal, state and local governments.
The constitution provides for the distribution of powers between these levels of governments.
ii.
Supremacy of the constitution – the constitution is supreme and any laws from the state or local governments that are inconsistent with the constitution are null and void.
iii.
Bicameral legislature – the federal system legislature is often patterned according to bicameral system.
That is, the federal systems consist of two houses – the upper house and the lower House.
72 iv.
Written and rigid constitution – the federal constitutions of most states are often written and rigid.
It means that the constitution cannot be altered with a simply majority vote.
v. Greater central control – superiority of the centre in practice.
3.2 INTERGOVERNMENTAL STRUCTURE Intergovernmental relations structures are almost always designed to accommodate differing communities of interest – social, ethnic, and political- as the boundaries of governments often possess, or soon acquire, symbolic meanings for communities that identify with them.
Sometimes, a community is so dominated by one ethnic group that this impacts their relations – their intergovernmental relations – with other levels of government.
Thus, the people of Quebec, because of their strong French cultural identity, have been able to get special advantages from the Canadian national government.
Alternatively, ethnically dominated communities in other countries have complained that they get fewer resources from their national government because of their minority status 4 CONCLUSION In this unit we have examined the structure; pattern and features a federal system.
The structure and patterns are such that the central government is entrusted with powers of general character, which concern the nation as a whole.
The other levels of governments, state local governments are given powers within their jurisdictions, as spelt out by the constitution.
Neither of the two can encroach upon the jurisdiction of the centre.
73 SELF – ASSESSMENT EXERCISE Describe the structure and pattern of federal system in Nigeria.
5 SUMMARY We have noted the structures and patterns of political systems offers more defined platform for the operations of inter- governments relations.
The unitary structure and pattern could take the form of nation – local relations or inter-local relations.
The federal structure and pattern could be: federal – state, federal – local, federal – state – local, state – state, state – local, local - local.
These patterns represent both vertical and horizontal dimensions.
However, the federal, state – level patterns reflect Nigeria federal system.
The pattern is cooperative, coordinative and mutually beneficial to different levels of government.
6 TUTOR – MARKED ASSIGNMENT 1.
Describe the structure and pattern of inter-government relations in a federal system.
2.
Explain the structures and patterns that are operative in Nigeria federal system.
7 REFERENCES/FURTHER READINGS Ayoade, J.
A.
(1980).
“Inter-governmental relations in Nigeria”.Quarterly journal of administration, Vol.
xiv.No.
2.
Federal Republic of Nigeria 1999 Constitution.
74 Ogubishi, A. F. (2007), Fundamentals of Inter-governmental relations.
Enugu: Academic Publishing Company.
75 MODULE 2: UNIT 3 FEDERAL – STATE - LOCAL GOVENRMENT RELATIONS CONTENTS 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objectives 3.0 Main contents 3.1 Federal-State and Local Government Relations 3.2 Collection of Taxes 3.3 Mechanism for Managing Federal-State and Local government Relations 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutor – Marked Assignments 7.0 References/FurtherReadings 1.0 INTRODUCTION In most federal countries, there exists a strong centre, while preserving the diversity reflected in individual states.
In Nigeria, federal and state governments exist side by side, with each possessing certain assigned functions.
In this unit, we shall discuss federal – state – local government relations.
2.0 OBJECTIVES At the end of the unit, students should be able to explain:  The powers of federal state and local governments and  How conflicts between the two levels of government are resolved.
76 3.0 MAIN CONTENTS In federal systems, devolution of power between he central and component units is to design issues that concern the federal and others of common interest.
Presently, Nigeria is highly centralized as the central government had enormous powers conferred on it by section 4, sub-section 5 of 1999 constitution.
By this, the federal government is constitutionally granted two sets of legislative powers, namely: those contained in the exclusive list and those contained in the concurrent list.
Besides, laws made by states can be overridden by federal laws of there is conflict.
The federal government exercises statutory responsibility creation of new local governments.
3.1 FEDERAL - STATE AND LOCAL GOVERNMENT RELATIONS Finance is the most critical policy issues in intergovernmental fiscal relations.
The issues concerning fiscal relations among the constitutional units of the Nigerian federation that remain mostly unresolved are the divergence between assigned functions and tax powers; the principle of horizontal and vertical revenue allocation; dependence of state and local governments on the federal sources of funding; the tendency towards concentration and federal presence in the state (Mbanefo, 1998).
As the federal – state and local governments have powers under the concurrent list on collection of taxes, there were overlaps in tax and levy collection by various tiers of government necessitating a new schedule of taxes being published for all tiers of government.
77  3.2 COLLECTION OF TAXES According to the new schedule of 1999 constitution, the federal government is empowered to collect the following taxes (Eneanya, 2009: 254):  Companyincometax  Petroleumprofittax;  VAT  Educationtax;  Capital gainstax;  Stamp duties of corporate entities ;  Personnel income tax of armed forces;  Foreignaffairs;  Police;  Residents of the federal capital territory of Abuja.
State governments are empowered to collect the following taxes;  Personal incometax;  Withholding and capital gainstax  Stampdutiesfromindividuals;  Road taxes;  Developmentlevy; and  Business premises and registrationlevel Local governments are to collect the following taxes;  Levy on shops and kiosks; 78  Slaughterfees;  Marriage, birth and death fees;  Motor parkfees;  Cattletax;  Radio and televisiontax; and  Advertisementtax.
There was another fiscal amendment in 1999 arising from the 1994 – 95 constitutional conference as a prelude to the 1999 constitution, which increased the list of items on the exclusive list from 66 in 1979 to 68 in 1999 and not less than 13% of proceeds from natural resources (offshore production proceeds commenced in March 2000).
3.3 MECHANISM FOR MANAGING FEDERAL STATE AND LOCAL GOVERNMENT RELATIONS However, under the federal system, a number of administrative mechanisms are often devised to manage intergovernmental relations.
In Nigeria, a number of meetings and conferences with administrative standing committees, constitutional boards, council or commissions have been associated with federal, state, local or interstate constitutions (Eneanya, 2009: 255).
With the emergence of democratic governance, since 1979, management of inter-governmental relations has followed these dimensions (Eneanya, 2009: 256 – 7): i.
The use of national economic council and national council of states; 79 ii.
Crucial role of courts in resolving inter-governmental disputes of supreme court ruling mollifying the revenue allocation act of 1981 and the dispute at the supreme court between the Lagos State government and the federal government over creation of new local council.
iii.
The role of national and state assemblies in their inter- governmental relations, example, the assembly of speakers and the position of the national assembly in resolving federal – state – local governments revenue sharing formula; iv.
The impact of political parties’ competition in the management of inter-governmental relations.
Elected officials of various parties now align to resolve inter- governmental conflicts.
v. The reactions of citizens to the activities of public officials who operate at different levels of government, especially the support given to officials on inter-governmental conflicts.
All these conferences and meetings were aimed at managing inter-governmental relations in order to minimize areas of conflict.
4.0 CONCLUSION In this unit, we have been able to discuss the inter-governmental relationship.
Evidently, the principle underlying the devolution of power in federal systems is to design matters of common interest and concern to the federal government.
Basically, certain matters are contained in the exclusive list, such as: foreign affairs defence, external trade, interior, etc.
the state and local 80 governments are assigned to perform matters in the concurrent and residual lists, respectively.
However, crisis often arise especially in financial relationships.
A number of administrative mechanisms are often devised to manage inter-governmental relations.
Through, the relationships often face some hiccups, more efforts should be made to allow true federalism emerge.
SELF – ASSESSMENT EXERCISE Describe the fiscal relationships between the federal, state and local governments 5.0 SUMMARY Evidently, intergovernmental relations between the federal, state and local governments have witnessed the introduction of administrative mechanism for managing conflicts; there has been a lot yet to be achieved in fiscal relationships.
In the area of fiscal relations, the federal government levies and collects variety of taxes on behalf of the entire country which goes into a pool called the federation account.
The lower tiers, states and local governments are responsible for taxes that are inelastic.
Though, revenue allocation formulas were adopted, the high degree of centralizing federal collected revenues and this constituting 90 percent, has created room of agitation for the review by state and local governments.
There is an urgent need therefore, for an overhaul of the revenue allocation formula for peaceful relationships between federal, state and local governments.
81 The federal – state – local government transactions are adjudged cooperative and mutually beneficial when higher levels respect the constitutional prescriptions outlining their respective jurisdictions and functional areas.
On the other hand, conflictual inter-governmental transaction are likely to arise when higher levels of government employ their superior position to interfere in their affairs of lower levels of government.
However the possibility that a lower level governmental unit could initiateconflictual situations by venturing into areas outside their jurisdictional allocations.
6.0 TUTOR – MARKED ASSIGNMENTS (TMAS) 1.
Describe the mechanism for managing federal, state and local relations 2.
Mention five areas of collecting taxes by federal, state and local governments?
7.0 REFERENCES /FURTHER READINGS Eneanya, A. N. (2012).
Policy Research Analysis and Effective Local Government.
Lagos: Concept Publications Ltd. Mbanefo, G. (1998).
“Unsettled issues in Nigeria Fiscal Federalism and National Question in 1998.Conference Papers”.Nigerian Economic Society (NES).
Ugoh, S. C. (2011).
Understanding Inter-governmental, Relations in Nigeria.Lagos: Sam Iroanusi publications.
82  83 MODULE 2: UNIT 4 STATE - LOCAL GOVENRMENT RELATIONS CONTENTS 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objectives 3.0 Maincontents 3.1 AdministrativeRelationships 3.2 Fiscal Relationship between State and Local governments 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutor – MarkedAssignments 7.0 References/FurtherReadings 1.0 INTRODUCTION State – local government relations may not necessarily be a constitutional matter in a federal system, yet such relations may provide the evidence of a working federalism.
In this unit, students would examine the relationship between the state and local governments.
2.0 OBJECTIVES At the end of the unit, students should be able to:  Describe administrative, financial legislature, political and judicial relationships between states and local governments.
 Understand areas of constant conflicts between states and local governments 84  3.0 MAIN CONTENTS 3.1 ADMINISTRATIVE RELATIONSHIPS State – local government relations may not be a constitutional matter in a federal system.
Overt the years before 1976, local government units have treated part of state governments.
State governments created by by-laws and have effective control on their administration.
However, the nationwide local government reform of 1976 brought local government units into constitutional, especially with the entrenchment of the functions of local government functions entrenched in the fourth schedule of 1979 modified significantly state – local government relations.
This is significant because the local government units were assigned role to play in management of primary school education and primary Healthcare services.
These roles createdforum for the state and local govnemnt interact as they are beneficiaries of revenue allocation.
This constitutional provision in Nigeria helped to establish a formal role for the federal government in local government affairs.
A formal state – local government relations was now created in the process, as state – local government joint account became inevitable to share revenue allocated to local councils from federal account.
When it was even realized that state governments were “short – changing” the local government units from the state – local government units’ joint accounts, the 85 national assembly approved an executive bill to enable the federal government allocated revenue directly to the local council units.
It was even attached with a clause that should a state government short-change a local government on funds allocated to them, such state government would be surcharge with equivalent amount the council was short changed.
As expected, many state governments protested on this, and called for its abrogation.
However, these provisions for the functions of local government units are encouraging political developments they are yet to be resolved as constitutional accepted state – local government relations.
In spite of this, it is an evidence of a working federalism.
3.2 FISCAL RELATIONSHIP BETWEEN STATE AND LOCAL GOVERNMENTS Financial relationships also exist between the states and local governments.
The annual budgets of local government require the approval of the state government before they can be executed.
In fact, the state government sets out guidelines for the preparation of such annual budgets.
Expenditures above certain limits required approval.
Moreover, local government autonomy is not absolute.
The third tier of government retains functional and fiscal relations with the higher tiers of government.
Thestategovernment relates with local governments as follows: 86 i. Allocate 10% of its internally generated revenue to the local governments within the state; ii.
Enact through the state House of Assembly, a law providing for the structure composition, revenue, expenditure and other matters, such as staffing meetings and other relevant matters provided such laws are not in conflict with the constitution or any existing federal legislation.
iii.
Establish a joint planning Board, through a law enacted by the state House of Assembly; to require each local government within the state to participate in the economic planning and development of the local government area.
iv.
Establish the office of the state auditor – general for local governments for enhanced public probity and accountability at the local government level through the regular auditing of the accounts of all the local governments within the state; v. Offer advice, assistance and guidance (but not control), as and when necessary, to local governments in the state.
4.0 CONCLUSION In this unit, we have examined the relationship between the state and local governments.
Local government bye-laws operate strictly within the laws of Nigeria.
Any bye-law passed by a local government shall void to the extent of its inconsistency with law validly passed by the state.
Even the executive powers of the chairman of local government shall be exercised as not to impede or prejudice the exercise of the executive powers of the federation or of a state in which the local government areas concerned with situated or to endanger 87 the assets or investments of the government of the federation or the state.
However, the state – local governmentreactions would continue to witness crises, especially on the issues of “joint account”.
Until, federal allocated funds are paid directly to local governments; their autonomy is “widow-dressing”.
SELF – ASSESSMENT EXERCISE  Describe the administrative relationships between states and local governments.
5.0 SUMMARY In all democracies, state or central government exercise some relationships, such as; fiscal relations – giving grants – in - aid, maintain joint account; and approval of budgets by the House of Assembly.
The state also relates to the local government administratively, such as: making rules and regulations that service as guidelines of performance; approval of contract award and projects; borrowing, audit of accounts, statutory consultations, making periodic inspections on programmes and projects, confirmation of by-laws and staffing matters.
In spite of local government autonomy as guaranteed in the fourth schedule of 1979/1999 constitutions, it still operates strictly within the laws of Nigeria.
Any bye-law passed by a local government shall be void to the extent of its inconsistency with state and federal laws as enshrined in the 1999 constitution.
6.0 TUTOR – MARKED ASSIGNMENTS 88 1.
Describe the fiscal relationship between state and local government?
2.
Explain the administrative relationship between the state and local government 7.0 REFERENCE/FURTHER READINGS Eneanya, A. N. (2012).
Local Government Administration in Nigeria: A Comparative Perspective.
Lagos: University of Lagos Press Ltd. Ugoh, S. C. (2011).
Understanding Inter-governmental Relations in Nigeria.
Lagos: Sam Iroanusi Publications.
Eneanya, A. N. (2012).
Policy Research Analysis and Effective Policy-Making.
Lagos: University of Lagos Press Ltd. 89  MODULE 2 UNIT 5 CONFLICT IN INTER-GOVERNMENTAL RELATIONS CONTENTS 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objectives 3.0 Main Contents 3.1 Meaning and Nature of Conflict 3.2 Causes of Conflict 3.2.1 Excessive power at the Centre 3.2.2 Revenue Allocation-oriented conflict 3.2.3 Encroachment of Local Government functions 3.2.4 Security-oriented conflicts 3.2.5 Constitution-oriented conflict 3.2.6 Jurisdictional Allocation of powers conflict 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutor-Marked Assignment 7.0 References/Further Readings 1.0 INTRODUCTION The incidence of conflict in inter-governmental relations could arise as a result of serious disagreements or arguments between one level of government and the other.
Such a conflict could result in the temporary stalling of the machinery of government.
In this unit, we shall examine the patterns of conflict in inter- governmental relations.
2.0 OBJECTIVES At the end of the unit, students should be able to: 90  Know the meaning and nature of conflict ; and  Explain the causes of conflict in inter-governmental relations.
3.0 MAIN CONTENTS 3.1 MEANING AND NATURE OF CONFLICT Conflict in inter-governmental relations means manifestations of serious disagreements or arguments between one level of government and the other.
It can aalso emanate from any form of inter- relationship, ranging from interpersonal, inter-group, inter- governmental to international relations (Ogbuishi, 2011:93).
The incidence of such conflicts as well as severity determines the stability of inter-governmental relations.
However, in most relationships, conflict is undesirable but inevitable.
In inter-governmental relations, conflict arise because certain causative factors.
3.2 CAUSES OF CONFLICT IN INTER-GOVERNMENTAL RELATIONS There are many issues that create conflict in inter-governmental relations.
Among other causes are: 3.2.1 EXCESSIVE POWER AT THE CENTRE There is likelihood that conflict will arise when the central government concentrates too much powers and functions at the centre to the detriment of federating units.
To avoid conflict, there is need to devolve and “deconcentrate” power or functions to other component units of the state as presecribed by the principle of federalism.
91 A situation where the central government controls many issues, including the construction of roads and housing in every part of the country; secondary education in every part of Nigeria is not a reflection of “true” federalism.
In Nigeria, the federal government has power to legislate on 68 matters.
In the concurrent list, the federal government still has power to legislate on 30 subject matters.
And where there is a conflict on areas state governments have power to legislate with that of the federal government, the states’ legislation will be null and void.
Besides, less powers are allotted to local governments in the 4th schedule of 1999 Constitution.
The concentration of too much powers to the Federal government has been a spource of conflict, leading to the struggle to control power at the centre by different ethnic groups, This has created crisis of confidence and suspicion in Nigerian political system.
3.2.2 REVENUE ALLOCATION –ORIENTED CONFLICT Most federal systems often experience the challenge of evolving an acceptable reveunue allocation principle.
Disputes often arise over what should form the bases for revenue sharing among the various units of the federalism.
In Nigeria, the question of revenue allocation has remained a stormy issue and has defied solution.
The 1999 constitution of the Federal Republic of Nigeria, recognizes the Revenue Mobilization and Fiscal Commission (RMFC), to establish a durable revenue allocation formula for the federating units.
Moreover, the constitution recognizes the principles of population; equality of states; internal revenue generation; landmass terrain as well as population density upon which allocation to state and local units should be made.
The constitution also provides expressly that “the principle of derivation” shall be constantly reflected in any approved formula as being not less than theirteen (13) per cent of the revenue accruing to the federation Account directly from any natural resources.
This 92 clarification, notwithstanding, the issue of revenue allocation cases have continued to rage, especially over which tier of government has possession over off-shore mineral resources., derivation principle of 13% to oil producing states and constitutional review on “State-local governments” joint account issue.
These cases have even reached Supreme Court for adjudication.
The intervention of Supreme court, especially its ruling of April 5, 2002 is an evidence of conflict in revenue allocation.
3.2.3 ENCOROACHMENT OF LOCAL GOVERNMENT FUNCTIONS The State governments have continued to encroach upon what would normally have been the exclusive preserve of the local government.
In short short, state governments have not allowed local governments to enjoy autonomy and initiatives, especially in the determination of the contents of annual budgets.
Instead of posturing as advisers, the state governments interfere in the articulation of estimates of the local governments.
3.2.4 SECURITY-ORIENTED CONFLICTS The position of Nigerian police in the security of the country has often brought conflict between the federal and the state governments.
The Governors at the state level are the chief security officers of the state.
But, when orders are given to state Commissioners of police, they are ignored and act on orders from Inspector-General of Police at the federal level.
As a result, state governors have been demanding for a review of the constitution to enable the states establish their own police.
In fact, it has been suggested that the Nigerian Police should be centralized in order to allow the zonal commands to be more responsive to local situations(Ugoh, 2011).
93  3.2.5 CONSTITUTIONAL-ORIENTED CONFLICTS There are distortions in the practice of federalism, especially in Nigeria.
The military hurriedly packaged the 1999 constitution without proper consultation with other major stakeholders in Nigeria.
Major areas of conflict and concern is contained in 1999 constitution, include:  The federal character principle, which encourages discrimination of Nigerians in employment, educational admission and political in their own country should be reviewed as it is a source of conflict;  Secularity issues in terms of religious rights of every Nigerian to be respected.
Many Christians have been killed in certain parts of Nigeria, for example, on account of their religion;  Fiscal federalism or resource control.
Each of the three-tiers of government should be given power by the constitution to collect taxes, controls its resources derived from the area and pay taxes or royalties to the federal government.
This is another source of conflict.
 Labour laws in the federal system.
Federal government legislates on labour laws on behalf of states, and local governments.
Crisis has often arises as a result of super-imposed National minimum wage established by federal government of Nigeria.
All these areas have constituted points of conflict in inter-governmental relations.
3.2.6 JURISDICTIONAL ALLOCATION OF POWERS CONFLICT Conflict of diverse dimensions often arise from inter-jurisdictional transcations in a federal system.
Interference in the jurisdictional preserve of one level of government by another could lead to serious 94 conflict.
For instance, the concurrent legislative list in Nigeria as provided for by the 1999 constitution of the Federal Republic contains functional jurisdictional areas where both the Federal and state tiers may exercise control.
Such joint power sharing arrangements present a likely platform for conflicts.
)(Ogbuishi, 2007).
4.0 CONCLUSION In this unit, we have discussed the nature and causes of conflict in inter-governmental relations.
The incidence of conflict is inevitable, especially when it bothers on relationship between the central government and federatring units.
Conflict between one level of government and the other may result in temporary stalling the machinery of government or create instability in the federal system.
5.0 SUMMARY Conflict in inter-governmental relations is inevitable in any form of inter-relationships.
Many causes of such conflict could be excessive power at the centre; constitutional issues; jurisdictional allocation of powers; revenue allocation; resource control; status of state’s security and security issues.
There are distortions in the practice of federalism, for example, as contained in 1999 Nigerian constitution.
Others issues that have brought tension in federal-state-local government relations is federal character principle and fiscal federalism.
These issues need to be reviewed and amended in the 1999 constitution in order to uphold the tenets of “true” federalism as suggested by Wheare (1964).
Only this line of approach would gurantee peaceful and harmonious inter- governmental relations among and between tiers of government.
6.0 TUTOR-MARKED ASSIGNMENTS (1)Explain the meaning and nature of conflict in inter-governmental relations?
95 (2) Explain the causes of conflict in inter-governmental relations in Nigeria?
7.0 REFERENCES/FURTHER READINGS Ogbusihi, A.F.
(2007).
Fundamentals of inter-governmental relations.
Enugu: Academic Publishing Company Ugoh, S.C. (2011).
Understanding inter-governmental Relations in Nigeria.Lagos: Sam Iroanusi Publications.
Wheare, K.C.
(1964).
Federal Government, 4th edition.
London: Oxford University Press.
96 MODULE 3: INTER-GOVERNMENTAL FISCAL RELATIONS UNIT 1 FISCAL INTERGOVERNMENTAL RELATIONS THEORY UNIT 2 ALLOCATION OF JURISDICTIONAL POWERS AMONG LEVELS OF GOVERNMENT UNIT 3 INTERGOVERNMENTAL FISCAL RELATIONS UNIT 4 NON-GOVERNMENTAL ORGANISATIONS AND INTERGOVERNMENTAL RELATIONS UNIT 5 INSTITUTIONS FOR MANAGING INTERGOVERNMENTAL RELATIONS UNIT 1 FISCAL INTER-GOVERNMENTAL RELATION THEORY 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objectives 3.0 Maincontents 3.1 Conceptualization of Fiscal Federalism 3.2 Theories of Fiscal Federalism 3.3 PublicChoiceTheory 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutor – MarkedAssignments 7.0 References/FurtherReadings 97  1.0 INTRODUCTION Federalism is a form of political organization designed to promote both effectiveness and liberty in which separate polities (nationalities) are united within an over-arching framework in such a way that all maintain their fundamental integrity.
In another sense, federalism can be seen as fundamental principle of social organization that has to do with human relationships in the economics, religious, cultural as well as the political spheres.
For fiscal federalism, it is the off-shoot of federalism and refers to the statutorily defined transaction between the different tiers of government within a federation.
In this unit we shall examine the theories of fiscal federalism.
2.0 OBJECTIVES At the end of this unit, students should be able to:  Explain the concept of fiscal federalism  Understand the theory of inter-jurisdictional cooperation; and  The theory of multi-jurisdictional community 3.0 MAIN CONTENT 3.1 CONCEPTUALIZATION OF FISCAL FEDERALISM The word “fiscal” is derived from the Latin word “fiscus”, which means a basket or purse, and pertains to the public treasury or revenue generation.
A fiscal systemis, the arrangement of how sovereignty manages the public treasury – revenue generation 98 and spending.
Fiscal federalism, therefore, refers to the fiscal (financial) relationships that exist between and among units of government in a federal system.
It defines statutory structure within which government functions, such as allocation of resources distribution of income and stabilization are carried out in a multi-level government structure (national, regional state or province and council or district).
The fiscal relationships so defined are usually founded upon mutual agreement.
The sub- national governments, while independent in local affairs, pool their common resources together for the provision of national public goods and improved economic welfare within their jurisdiction.
Thus, in a way, fiscal federalism is concerned with revenue generation and allocation between various levels of government (Tayzi, 1999; Alade 1999, Taiwo, 1999 and Tella 1999).
3.2 THEORIES OF FISCAL FEDERALISM Fiscal federalism is based on four fundamental theories.
First, is the theory of fiscal location, which is concerned with the functions to be performed by each level of government?
Then, there is the theory of inter-jurisdictional cooperation, which refers to areas of shared responsibility by the central state and local governments.
Finally, there is the theory of multi- jurisdictional community, which posits that each jurisdiction provides services whose benefits accrued to the people within its boundaries and so uses only the resources that internalize such costs.
99 The theory of fiscal federalism or multi-unit governmental finance addresses the question of the optimal design of governments in a multilevel (or federal) governmental system.
The public sector has three principal economic problems to solve: i.
The attainment of the most equitable distribution of income ii.
The maintenance of high employment with stable prices iii.
The establishment of an efficient pattern of resources allocation(Shafritz, et.
al., 2011: 154).
The theory of fiscal federalism postulates that a federal form of government can be especially effective in solving these problems because of the flexibility it has in dealing with some problems at the national or central levels and some at the local or regional levels.
It argues that, for a variety of reason, the first two problems, equitable distribution of income and maintenance of high employment with stables pricesare problems that the national level of government is best equipped to handle.
However, according to the theory, the decentralized regional or local units of government can more efficiently deal with the third problems, allocation of recourse because such units of government are more familiar than the central or national government with local needs and the desires of citizens for public services.
Even so, grants in – aid from the national level of government to local levels may be needed to stimulate local government spending for national purposes, to provide for uniform or minimum service levels (as in education), or to compensate citizens of one area for benefits form services they finance that spill over to residents of another areas.
Spillover benefits are 100 especially frequent in such programmes as clean water and air pollution control, health and education.
In theory, an accountablegovenrmnet should involve representatives only voting for programs for which they have voted the taxes.
The representatives would be accountable to the voters, who could directly assess whether the “purchases” of services and programmes they had they wanted and whether they got good value for their tax money.
But in a large nation, need for services can vary greatly between communities and the capacity to pay taxes also varies greatly between communities and the capacity to pay taxes also varies greatly among the categories of those who are taxes.
This issues focuses attention on several of the central problems of the federal concept: the difficult notion of two or more governments overlaid on the same geographical territory; the difficulty of persuading voters that they need to pay their taxes twice (or money to different levels of taxing authority; and the difficulty of persuading tax payers that it is fair that some of their taxes should produce no direct benefit to them but be used to assist some other community or some ill-defined goal dear to an official in a remote office in another city.
Attitudes toward these issues illustrate the level of confidence citizens have in a democratic federation.
If confidence is high, and a sense of common national purpose is high citizens are more prepared to trust politicians and bureaucrats to redistribute taxes to promote national goads elsewhere.
If, however, confidence in politicians and the bureaucracy is low, citizens may well take some convincing that spending programmes are fair and necessary.
A confident, successful federal democracy that has confidence in its political leaders and 101 has honest and efficient bureaucrats and well-articulated national aspirations will be one in which there is more room for redistributive programmes – an admirable goal to strive for – or perhaps not.
3.3 PUBLIC CHOICE THEORY Public choice theory advocates argues in favour of placing governmental action (and expenditure) at the lowest possiblelevels that is, at the local government level.
The feeling here is that local government would provide more experimentation, true competition and innovation.
At the local level, citizens could of the citizens have access to appropriate information.
They would be able to readily comparedthe levels of taxation to the quality of services they received.
They could then reject inefficient or unresponsive governments by voting down budgets, by voting out big spenders, or even by moving elsewhere – or note moving in at all.
Thus, the solution to evolution offered by the public choice advocate is to increase the discretion in the hands of the individual voter by maximizing “user – pay system” (whether for trash collection or through fees at state park camping grounds) and by placing vouchers (for schools or housing) for spending in the hands of recipients rather than compelling them to use particular government services or institutions.
4.0 CONCLUSION In this unit, we have examined the theory of fiscal federalism.
It refers to the financial relationship that exists between units of government in a federal system.
The theory addresses the 102 question of the optimizedesign of governments in a multilevel (or federal) governmental system.
It postulates that a federal form of government can solve the problems of equitable distribution of income pattern of resource allocation and maintenance of high employment with stable prices.
According to the theory, the decentralized regional (state) or local units of government can more efficiently deal with the problem of establishment of an efficient pattern of resources allocation.
Thus, fiscal federalismisbasedonthesetheories.
5.0 SUMMARY The theory of fiscal federalism is based on the following theories.
First, is the theory of fiscal location, to be performed by each level of government?
Second is the theory of inter-jurisdiction cooperation, which refers to areas of shared responsibility by the central and local government.
Thirdly, there is the theory of multi-jurisdictional community, which posits that each jurisdiction provides services whose benefits accrue to the people within its boundaries and so uses only the resources that internalize such cost.
Finally, there is the theory of public choice, which argued in the favour of placing governmental action (and expenditures) at the lowest possible levels, that is, at the local government level.
Thus, all these theories address the question of the optimal design of governments in a federal government system.
6.0 TUTOR – MARKED ASSIGNMENTS 1.
Explains the theories of fiscal federalism?
2.
Describe the public choice theory of fiscal federalism 103 7.0 REFERENCES/FURTHER READING Alade, S. O.
(1999) “State Governments Financial Crisis”: causes and consequence sfor economic groth and development”.
Proceedings of the Annual Conference of the Nigerian Economic Society, p. 145.
Shafritz, J.M., Russell, E.W, and Borick, C.P.
(2011).Introducing Public Administration, Seventh Edition.
New York: Longman.
Tanzi, V. (1995).
“Fiscal Federalism and Decentralization: A Review of some Efficiency and Macroeconomic aspects”.
In Conference on Development economic.
Washington DC.
Taiwo, I. O.
(1999) A Theoretical Framework”.Proceedings of the 1999 Annual Conference of the Nigerian Economic Society on Fiscal federalism and Nigeria’s economic development pp.
32 – 23.
Tella, S. A.
(1999) “Promoting States’ Economic independence”.Proceedings of the 1999 Annual Conference of the Nigerian Economic Society, pp, 171 – 87.
104  MODULE 3: UNIT 2 ALLOCATION OF JURISDICTIONAL POWERS AMONG LEVELS OF GOVERNMENT CONTENTS 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objectives 3.0 Maincontents 3.1 Exclusive Functions 3.2 ConcurrentFunctions 3.3 Residual Functions 3.4 Local governmentFunctions 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutor – MarkedAssignments 7.0 References/FurtherReadings 1.0 INTRODUCTION Federalism as a political system is meant to cater for diversities and heterogeneity of societies.
According to Wheare, (1965), Federalisms is a method of dividing powers so that general and regional governments are each within a sphere, coordinate and independent.
In this unit, we shall examine the distribution of 105 jurisdictional powers among each level of government in a federal system.
2.0 OBJECTIVES At the end of the unit, students should be able to:  Explain the legislative powers of the central government in a federal system.
 Explain the legislative powers of states in a federal system.
 Describe the functions allotted to local government in the 1999 constitution 3.0 MAIN CONTENTS 3.1 EXCLUSIVE FUNCTIONS The 1999 constitutions provides for exclusive jurisdictional powers to the federal government.
The exclusive list contains issues on which the federal government only can legislate, such as: the currency, foreign affairs, policy, army, prisons, immigration, customs and exercise duties, and so on.
The constitutions of the federal republic of Nigeria vests legislative powers in the National Assembly, which consist of the senate and House of Representatives.
Part 1 of the second schedule of the 1999 constitution of the federal republic sets out all matters contained in the Exclusive list.
It follows, therefore, that by the use of the term “exclusive” only the federal government has jurisdiction to make laws and/or policies on matters contained therein.
3.2 CONCURRENT FUNCTIONS 106 This list contains matters where both the federal and state governments possess constitutional jurisdiction.
Thus, the concurrent list defines the extent of federal and state legislative powers.
Part II of the second schedule to the 1999 constitution of the Federal Republic of Nigeria sets out details of the concurrent list.
Although, both federal and state levels may exercise legislative jurisdiction on mattes set out in the concurrent on matters set out in the concurrent list it must be understood that in the event of any conflict between the federal and state laws in respect of any matter, the federal government laws supersede.
This is contained in section 4(5) of the 1999 constitution.
This no doubt presents the federal legislations as superior within the federal system.
Subjects contained in the concurrent list that both federal states can legislate concurrently include: health, education, industry agriculture, collection of taxes, etc.
3.3 RESIDUAL FUNCTIONS The Residual List contains subjects which only the states can legislate.
They include: functioning of local government, customary laws, rural development, social welfare and so on.
3.4 LOCAL GOVERNMENT FUNCTIONS The foregoing, no doubt, shows that the actual constitutional distribution of jurisdictional powers seemed not to have reckoned with the third tier of government – the local government.
This is in consonant with traditional perception of local government as exclusive concern of the state and provincial government (Agi 2002).
107 In spite of this perception, with the introduction of presidential system of government the constitution of 1979 recognized local government as the third- their of government of federal system in Nigeria.
The of 1999 constitution that succeeded 19179 also contains the function of local government in the fourth schedule of the constitutions.
The provisions of this schedule contain the functions of local government councils such as: participation with the state in economic planning and development; establishment and maintenance of cemeteries maintenance and regulation of slaughter houses, street lightings, parks, sewage and refusal disposal, collection of rates etc.
4.0 CONCLUSION Powers among level of government this unit, we have discussed distribution of jurisdictional.
Thus, the distribution of jurisdictional powers among the three levels of government, federal – state and local governments.
SELF – ASSESSMENT EXERCISE Explain the term “Exclusive list” and the powers allotted to the federal government of Nigeria.
5.0 SUMMARY The inclusive of the three legislative lists in the constitution is to maintain separation of powers in the federal system of Nigeria.
Moreover, it is mean to each level of government maintains its political authority and responsibilities.
Nevertheless, the critical point to emphasize in discussing the allocation of jurisdictional 108 powers is the inevitability of overlapping and its it the effort to achieve some degree of coordination that accounts in part for the inter-governmental interactions.
6.0 TUTOR – MARKED ASSIGNMENTS 1.
Describe the powers contained in the “Exclusive list” in federal structure of Nigeria?
2.
What do you understand by “concurrent list” and is conflict explain what happens when there federal and state laws?
7.0 REFERENCES/FURTHER READINGS Wheare, K. C. (1963).
Federal Government.
London: Oxford University Press.
Agi, S. P. I.
(2002).
“Local Government as a Third – Tier of government: Theoretical Problems”.Nigerian Journal of Public Administration and Local Government, vol.
11(1).
Lagos: Concept Publications Ltd. Eneanya, A. N. (2012).
Local Government Administration in Nigeria: A Comparative Perspective.
Lagos: University of Lagos Press Ltd. Federal Republic of Nigeria 1999 Constitution.
Ugoh, S. C. (2011).
Understanding Inter-governmental Relations in Nigeria.
Lagos: Sam Iroanusi Publications.
Ogubishi, A. F. (2007), Fundamentals of Inter-governmental relations.
Enugu: Academic Publishing Company.
109  110  MODULE 3: UNIT 3 INTERGOVERNMENTAL FISCAL RELATIONS 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objectives 3.0 Maincontents 3.1 Objectives of Intergovernmental Fiscal Relations 3.2 ExpenditureAssignment 3.3 TaxAssignment 3,.3.1 Tax Assignment at Federal Level 3.3.2 Tax Assignment at State level 3.3.3 Tax Assignment at Local government level 3.4 Revenue Allocation 3.4.1 Revenue Allocation: A Case Study of Nigeria’s Current Experience 4 Conclusion 5 Summary 6 Tutor – MarkedAssignments 7 References/FurtherReadings 1.0 INTRODUCTION There are two major forms of federalism, namely; political and fiscal federalism (Hommes, 1995: 332).
Political federalism deals with how to divide powers and allocate authorities.
In contrast, fiscal federalism deals with the allocation of government spending and resources to the various tiers of government, so that each one can perform its responsibilities.
For each major forms 111 centralization decentralization framework, we have devolution of responsibilities.
This involves the transfer of functions formally performed by the central government to autonomous localities with popular representation and participation: Second there is deconcentration of powers.
This involves the delegation of powers formerly held by the central government to localities, with the central government still having the responsibility for decision – making.
Lastly, the central government could transfer some of its specific functions to semi-autonomous bodies such as parastatals.
In this unit, we shall focus on fiscal federalism of the devolution type.
2.0 OBJECTIVES At the end of this unit, students should be able to:  Understand the objectives of intergovernmental relations;  Explain how responsibilities or expenditure is assigned;  Understand the allocation of independent sources of revenue or revenue assignment; and  Explain the principle of revenue sharing aspect of fiscal federalism.
3.0 MAIN CONTENTS 3.1 OBJECTIVES OF INTERGOVERNMENTAL FISCAL RELATIONS According to Litrack and Wallich, (1993) and Sewell and Wallich, (1994), the system of intergovernmental fiscal relations should be designed in such a way as to: 112 i.
Ensure that both the macroeconomic management and income distribution goals of the government are not compromised; ii.
Improve the efficiency of public spending and minimize administrative costs; iii.
Match the expenditure profile of each tiers of government with its revenue profile; iv.
Encourage sub-national governments to generate revenue internally, and enhance accountability and transparency in public sector management.
These requirements will guide subsequent discussions as outlined in our objectives.
3.2 EXPENDITURE ASSIGNMENT Here an attempt is made to address the question; which government functions should be decentralized or how should government functions be shared among various tiers of government?
This question can only be addressed by knowing the set of functions that are to be performed.
However, government functions can be determined theoretically or empirically.
The theoretical approach is largely based on public finance literature (Musgrave, 1989: 3 – 1`4), which presumes three economic objectives, or functions for the government, namely; allocation, distribution and stabilization functions.
For allocation of functions the rationale for decent4ralisaiton indicates that it would be potentially more efficient to leave the provision of national public goods to the central government and the provision of location public goods to sub-national governments.
For the distribution function, the main issue is whether a sub- 113 national government can sustain any programme of redistribution (income) better.
The third function of the government is economic stabilization.
This stabilization programme can take the form of employment generation, price stabilization or export promotion.
The argument is that the benefits of the programme, no matter how it is financed is likely to suffer from sever leakages to other localities.
This is the case as long as goods or people or some other resources are mobile between jurisdictions.
Thus, allocation, distribution and stabilization functions should be distributed as follows (Taiwo, 2004:42); a) The central government should be responsible for the provision of national public goods, such as; defense, regulation of the economy and redistribution of income and wealth; and b) Sub-national governments should be responsible for the provision of local public goods such as feeder roads and street lighting.
However, this allocation does not cover the provision of private goods that may be provided by the public sector.
It also does not cover the provision of quasi-social goods, such as: education and health.
These goods are more difficult to allocate because of the need for supportive empirical information.
3.3 TAX ASSIGNMENT 114 For it tax assignment to be meaning functions by tier must be accompanied by an appropriate mechanism for sharing the resources of the public sector, so that each and every tier of government would be able to effectively performed its assigned responsibilities.
It the public sector resources are monetized as revenue, it can be mobilized for a tier of government by assigning revenue sources to the tier of government, or by a system of intergovernmental transfer, or both.
The problem of tax assignment is whether it should be completely centralized or partially decentralized or completely decentralized.
If tax assignment should be decentralized, then the question is should which tax bases should be assigned to sub-national governments and which should be retained by the central government?
It is relatively difficult to tackle issues in tax assignment because of the several dimensions to a tax.
The dimensions include the power to choose the tax base, define the tax base, set the tax rates, administer the tax, and the right to revenue.
Of these dimensions, the most important is the power to set the tax rates (McHure Jr. 1995: 317).
To address the question, whether tax powers should be shared or not, decentralized system is generally favoured when the objective of tax policy is provision of local public goods and where sub-national governments need to be fiscally autonomous, accountable and responsible and in tax competition with one another.
To make the best of complete centralization and complete decentralization of tax powers, it is expedient that tax collection should be shared by the various tiers of government.
This, in effect, implies that partial decentralization of government 115 functions should be matched by partial decentralization of tax powers.
This leads us to ask which tax bases should be decentralized.
Shah, 1991 and Norregaard, (1997) suggest the following guidelines for determining whether or not tax powers should be shared or not: i.
Progressive redistributive taxes, such as personal income tax and estate duties should be centralized; ii.
Taxes suitable for economic stabilization, such as progressive income tax, should be centralized; iii.
Taxes whose bases are distributed highly unequally across jurisdictions, such as natural resource taxes, should subject to political considerations, be centralized; iv.
Taxes on bases that are geographically mobile, such as; the corporate income tax, should be centralized; v. Taxes that need to be made uniform across jurisdictions, such as; the value added tax, should be centralized; vi.
Taxes that can be centrally collected at relatively low administrative cost, such as import and export duties, should be centralized; vii.
Benefit taxes or user changes could be levied at all levels; viii.
Residence – based taxes, such as excise duties, should be decentralized; and ix.
Taxes on highly immobile factors such as taxes on real property should be decentralized.
In Nigeria, the task of articulating on appropriate fiscal relationship among the different tiers of government is delegated to the Revenue Mobilization, Allocation ad fiscal commission.
Contemporary experience 116 in Nigeria shows the gradual relaxation of the imitations on state and local government finances.
Presently, the state and local governments can now borrow to acquire the required fiscal resources for the execution of government programmes and services, especially as it has been appreciated.
Moreover, tax powers jurisdiction among different levels of government have been provided by part 1 of the second schedule of 1999 constitution (state- collectable revenue and fourth schedule of 1999 constitution (local government collectable revenue).
3.3.1 TAX ASSIGNMENT AT FEDERAL LEVEL.
The federal government controls the most inscriptive sources of revenue in Nigeria.
Part 1 of the Second schedule to the constitution of the Federal Republic of Nigeria, 1999 contains the Exclusive Legislative List.
A number of other sources of revenue for the federal government are:- (i) Exportduties (ii) Companytax (iii) Maritime and navigationactivities (iv) &&& and minerals (including oil fields, oil mining and natural gas) (v) Nationalparks and Tourist (vi) Partents, trade marks, and industrial designs, etc.
(vii) Stampduties (viii) Posts, telephones and telephones (ix) Railways (x) Taxation of incomes, profits and capital gains (xi) Trade and commerce 117 The collection of sundry fees and other payments related to the activities above by the federal government forms the basis for itemizing these functional areas as sources of revenue collected by the federal government are first paid into the Federation Account before they are disbursed according to laid down principles and criteria.
3.3.2 TAX ASSIGNMENT AT STATE LEVEL The major source of revenue to states in Nigeria appears to be the statutory allocations from “the Federation Account”.
Section 152 (3) of the 1999 constitution provides for the mandatory allocation of revenues among the three thiers of government in Nigeria.
Thefollowing are sources of revenueforthestates:- (i) Statutory allocations (from Federal Account) (ii) Federal grants (of all sorts) (iii) Personal incometaxorduty (iv) Capital grants and profit tax (of persons other than, companies) (v) Industrial, commercialoragriculturalactivities (vi) Loan (vii) Trade and commercialactivities 3.3.3 TAX ASSIGNMENT AT LOCAL GOVERNMENT LEVEL Like the states, the local government’s major source of revenue in Nigeria are both the federal and state governments).
Othersources of revenuegeneratedinternally are: 118 (i) Rentfrommarketstalls (ii) Chargesfrombusinesspremises (iii) Gate- takingfrom motor parks (iv) Proceeds from mass transit buses operating in their areas of Judiction (v) Polltax (vi) Rates, etc However, these jurisdictional tax powers among different levels of governments determined by a number of factors, namely: administrative efficiency and fiscal independence.
The efficiency criterion demands that a tax s assigned to that level of government that will administer it efficiently at minimum cost, while the fiscal independence criterion requires that each level of government is permitted, as much as possible, to raise adequate resources from the revenue sources assigned to it to meet its needs and responsibilities.
(Bello-Imarn, 1999:255).
In reality, however, the efficiency criterion tends to conflict with the principle of fiscal independence.
This is because whereas the efficiency criterion calls for a great deal of concentration of tax powers at the highest tier of government due to limited administrative capacity of the lower tiers of government.
On the other hand, fiscal independence criterion demands the devolution of more tax powers to the lower units of government to match the functions, assigned to them.
In reality, the weight of the two criteria has always tilted in favour of the efficiency criterion, and that is why the Federation Account of most federations, like Nigeria, has a domineering effect on their fiscal federalism.
However, whatever the fiscal relationships 119 between the different tiers of government in a federation and the volume of funds available to the political leadership within , their success can only be measured by their efficiency and effectiveness in promoting the citizenry, which is the essence of governance (Bello, Imam, 2004:24).
3.4 REVENUE ALLOCATION Revenue is allocated between and within tiers of government ultimately to promoted inter-jurisdictional equity, enhances the efficiency of the public sector and minimizes the cost of administering the tax system.
In any federation, a minimal level of inter-jurisdictional fiscal equalization is desired.
The equalization can be vertical if it refers to different levels of government or, horizontal, if it refers to the same level of government.
Accordingly, the efficiency argument the central government may set and impose standards of some public services on sub- national governments.
Such services may have to be financed by the central government partly because sub-national governments may be unable or unwilling to do so, and partly because the implied financial burden may vary across jurisdictions.
The problem can be resolved by bargaining and regulations.
However, when these strategies fail, the central government may have to adopt a compensatory tax subsidy scheme through revenue sharing.
Lastly, we have the administration cost argument.
Where some taxes are centrally collected (partially or fully) on behalf of sub-national governments, because it is cheaper to do so, the yield should be shared with these governments.
120 However, once the objectives of intergovernmental transfers are known, the appropriate criteria for revenue sharing have to be determined or set.
It is very unlikely that a single criterion will be able to satisfy more than one policy objective.
A set of criteria will therefore, most liley emerge.
Even on each policy objective, several options are likely to be open, in which determined, preferably after some analysis has been conducted.
For example, to measure fiscal strength, per capita income of the locality can be determined.
Grants may be given to those localities whose per capita incomes fall below the national average.
A grant may be general or selective.
General grants are usually more suitable for fiscal equalization and for making the revenue from central taxes available to sub-national governments.
In contras, specific grants are generally more suitable for the provision of merit goods and correction of externalities (Taiwo, 2004:44 – 6).
Furthermore, it should be noted that central collection of taxes could lead to the criterion of derivation.
So, revenue sharing should be made to supplement the internally generated revenue of sub-national governments.
3.4.1 REVENUE ALLOCATION: CASE STUDY OF NIGERIA’S CURRENT EXPERIENCE Finance is the most critical policy issue sin intergovernmental fiscal relations.
In the area of fiscal relations between he federal, state and local governments, certain principles or criteria have often been adopted.
There are levies and taxes that are centrally collected on behalf of all federating units.
These revenues go into 121 a pool called the federation account.
The sharing of revenue from the federal account is based on the federal revenue allocation formular, managed by Revenue Mobilization Allocation Commission (RMAFC).
Since its establishment in 1992, RMAFC shared revenue as follows: Federal government = 48.5% State governments = 24% Local Government = 20% (5% for the transfer of primary education) Special funds = 7.5% Decree 23 of 1992 setting up the RMAFC abolished on shore and off shore dichotomy in revenue.
The federal government also an additional source of revenue in 1994.
The formula for the distribution of VAT has been reversed several times.
As at 1998, it was 25 percent to the federal government, 45 percent to the state governments and 30 percent to the local governments (Eneayan 2009:253).
Since 2005, revenue has been shared as follows:- Federal Government = 52.7% State governments = 26.7% Local governments = 20.6% 122 Besides, there has been calls for changes to the rules governing the allocation of revenue between the three – tiers of governments, highlighting recurring tensions within the federation.
The 13 per cent derivation formular for oil – producing state sis applied each month by the Federation Account Committee (FAAC) before its standard distribution of available resources to all states.
When the forum of worthier states, governors queried why the oil – producing states enjoyed the revenues from offshore production from the continental shelf, they were reminded that derivation had been 50% under the first republic and advise not to revise the sensitive terrain of the “ on shored offshore dichotomy.
The derivation principle controversy has continued to rage.
It explains the court case between AkwaIbom and Cross River states over 76 disputed oil wells and equally the heated response to the official designation of Anambra as oil producing state and reaction from Kogi State of being the owner of the areas.
From revenue allocation debates, states are purchasing for more powers and more resources, they have strong argument in their favour in view of financial burden of 2011 National minimum wage from N7,500 to 18,00 per month and poor internally generated revenue average of 15%.
Equally, the federal government advance reason for the revenue to be districted in the favour because of many matters of national interest within their jurisdiction.
This debates and court cases are part of conflict in inter-governmental relations.
4.0 CONCLUSION 123 This unit has stated and described the principles of multilevel government.
We have discussed a major issue in fiscal federalism.
It is the principles of intergovernmental relations, especially the fiscal aspect of federalism.
The unit has shown that among other things, that the allocation of responsibilities to the various tiers of government central government is responsible for the provision of national public goods and pursuit of equity and stabilization goals of government.
Sub-national governments should then be responsible for the provision of local public goods.
The sharing of government revenue among the various tiers of government should also complement the sharing of government functions and taxes that are geared towards the pursuit of central government functions should be centrally collected.
5.0 SUMMARY In this unit, we have discussed fiscal federalism.
There are at least four dimensions to fiscal aspect of federalism.
They are the objective, of intergovernmental fiscal relations, the allocation of responsibilities or expenditure assignment tax assignment and revenue sharing.
The objectives should be made to enhance accountability and transparency in fiscal federal relations.
The allocation of government functions by tier system must be accompanied by an appropriate mechanism for sharing the resources of the public sector, so that each and every tier of government would be able to effectively perform its assigned responsibilities.
If we revenue is generated solely form taxes, then the assignment of revenue sources boils down to the assignment of tax powers.
If this is the case, revenue can be mobilized for a tier of government by 124 assigning revenue sources to the tier of government or by a system of inter-government transfers (grants – in – aids) or is generally a complex exercise, as it involves both equity and efficiency issues and the value judgment of the government, there is need to supplement internally – generated revenue of sub- national governments.
6.0 TUTOR – MARKED ASSIGNMENT 1.
Describe the objectives of fiscal intergovernmental relations.
2.
Explain at least three dimensions of fiscal federalism 7.0 REFERENCES/FURTHER READINGS Shah, A.
(1991) “The New Fiscal Federalism in Brazil”.World Bank Discussion paper 124.
Washington, D.C: World Bank.
Hommes, R. (1995).
“Conflicts and Dilemmas of Decentralization”.
In Bruno, M. and B. Pleskovic (eds.).
Annual World Bank Conference on Development Economics, pp.
331 – 50, Washington, DC: World Bank.
Ltvack, Jyan DCI.
Wallich, (1993).
“Intergovernmental Finance: Critical to Russia’s Transformation?”.
Finance and Development 3(2): 6 – 9.
Sewell, D. and C. I. Wallich (1994) .“Fiscal Decentralisation and Intergovernemntal Finances in the Republic of Albania”.Policy Research Working paper, 1354.
Washington DC: World Bank.
Musgrave, P. B.
(1989).
Public Finance in Theory and Practice.
London: McGraw Hill, 5thed.
125 Taiwo, T. O.
(2004) “Principles of Multilevel Govenrment in Demogractic System of Govenrment Fiscal Federalism and Democratic Governanc in Nigeria.
Ibadan: NCEMA.
Norregaard, J.
(1997).
“Tax Assignment” in Ter-Minassian T.
(ed.)
Fiscal Federalism in Theory and Practice.
Washington, DC.
IMF.
126  MODULE 3 UNIT 4 NON-GOVERNMENTAL ORGANIZATIONS AND INTER- GOVERNMENTAL RELATIONS 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objectives 3.0 MainContents 3.1 Typology of NGOS 3.1.1 NGOS typebyorientation 3.1.2 NGOS type by level of operation 3.1.3 IRC-International water and Sanitation Centre 3.2 Internal Dynamics of NGOS 3.3 Techniques of NGOS 3.4 NGOS as Harbinger of Change and innovation 3.5 Training and Technical Assistance Role 3.6 Social Welfare Role 3.7 Mediatory Role 3.8 Consultative Role 3.9 Relevance of NGOS in intergovernmental Relations 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Intro-markedassignments 7.0 References/FurtherReadings 127 1.0 INTRODUCTION The term non-governmental organization (NGO) has bee used in many different ways.
Its use in its broadest sense is one that is not directly part of the structure of government.
In this work we shall examine the concept of non-governmental organizations (NGOS) and its relevance in inter-governmental relations.
2.0 OBJECTIVES At the end of the unit, students should be able to:  Understandthemeaning of NGOS  Understand the internal dynamics of NGOS, and  Examine the techniques employed by NGOS to influence decisions of government.
3.0 MAIN CONTENTS 3.1MEANING AND TYPOLOGY OF NGOS Non-governmental organizations came into existence with the establishment of the United Nations Organization in (1945) with provisions in Article 71 of chapter 10 of the role for organizations that are neither governments nor member states (Ogbushi, 2007:113).
The term non-governmental organization refers to organization of people, though not of government structure, combine their efforts and resources in attain certain specified objective that would assist anchorate societal problems.
It is a non-profiting body and cant across national boundaries.
It could also be community or national –based.
However, a good number of NGOS have goals which cover a broad range of areas, such as natural environment, human rights, political social welfare policies and philosophical issues.
128 3.1.1 TYPOLOGY OF NGOS The World Bank categorized NGOS into two, namely (Ogbuishi 2007: 114) references Sharma, mi petal.
(2011).
Public Administration in theory and practice, New Delhi.KitabMahal.
3.1.2 NGOS TYPES BY ORIENTATION (a) Domestic Charitable Organizations with little participation by the beneficiaries.
These are NGOS which undertake activities to meet the needs of the poor or to undertake relief measures like distribution of food or clothing, housing provisions, transport, etc.
(b) Participatory orientation includes NGOS with those self- help projects where the local people participate and cooperate in the implementation of it.
The locals contribute items of tangible and intangible goods like land, labour, material, cash, etc.
(c) Service orientation includes NGOS which devise certain programmes like family planning, communications, education, health, roads, etc, and members of civil society are expected to participate in the implementation or receiving of its services.
(d) Empowering orientations are NGOS that play a facilitating role in the empowerment of the people and strengthen their awareness in their own potential power to control their lives, access to credit, training and other inputs necessary to undertake employment generating activities.
129 3.1.2NGOS TYPES BY LEVEL OF OPERATION.
(a) community-based organizations (CBOS) are those which arise out of their own initiative like women’s organizations, sports club, religious or educational organizations, etc (b) City-wide organizations are created for helping the poor or become especially involved in helping the poor like rotary or Lions Clubs, chambers of commerce and industry, Association of community organizations, etc.
(c) National NGOS are those which include such organizations like the Red cross, YMCAS/YWCAS, professional organizations, etc.
(d) international Relief and development organizations which act very much like NGOS but these are established and mandated by agencies like Ford or Rockefeller foundation CARE, mercy corps, (e) IRC-INTERNATIONAL WATER AND SANITATION CENTRE, (i) there are also campaign issues based NGOS like Amnesty International, Greenpeace, human rights watch, refugees international, transparency international, etc.
(ii) There areautonomic non-governmental organizations which define themselves, as NGOS, but is a network of the government standards agencies for 147 counties like international organization for standardization (150) 130 (iii) Operational NGOS and advocacy NGOS Operational NGOS can be community based, national or international based, national or international, they are primarily concerned with the design and implementation of development- related projects.
Operational NGOS may also be further subjected into “relief-oriented” and “development- oriented organizations.
Other sub- classification of the organizational NGOS include whether they stress services delivery or participation; or whether they are religious or secular or whether they are more public or private oriented (Ogbunishi, 2007: 115).
On the other hand, Advocacy NGOS exist to defend or promote a specific cause.
Advocacy NGOS unlike operational NGOS, try to raise awareness, acceptance and knowledge by lobbying press work or activist events ( Ogbuishi, 2007: 116).
Most advocacy NGOS come in the form of pressure or interest group.
Example of such interest group in Nigeria are Professional groups, Business groups, Agriculture group, Religious group, Nigeria medical association, Nigeria Bar Association, etc.
3.2 INTERNAL DYNAMICS OF NGOS For management of NGOS, two management techniques are in diversity and participatory management.
Diversity management entails being involved in developmental activities that cut across cultural settings.
Here, personnel from a particular culture is faced with different ways of doing things in a different country, hence diversity management style becomes imperative.
Participatory management on the other side depicts that all 131 people within the organization are seen as sources of knowledge and skills.
All persons, therefore, participate in the management process.
(Ogbunishi, 2007: 117).
Another area of interest of NGOS is that most of their staff (personnel are volunteers.
Since it is not a profit-making body, paid staffs in the organization receives lower pay than those in private sector.
In spite of these, employees of NGOS are committed and passionate to the goals of their organization; NGOSfind their activities through government grants, membership dues, sale of goods and services grants from international institutions, private donations and grants from national governments.
For instance, a quarter or the 162 million us dollars income of Oxfam (NGO) a famine relief organization in 1998 was donated by the British Government and the European Union (Quoted in Ogbunishi, 2007 : 118).
3.3 TECHNIQUES OF NGOS TO INFLUENCE DECISIONS OF GOVERNMENT Non-governmental organizations play important roles in influencing government policies, namely, (Ogbunishi, 2007:  Lobbing – Appeal by logic, sentiments and lobby to drive home their points ad request  Conducing programmes and activities, organizing programmes and goal-directed activities aimed at creating necessary awareness among target populations.
Such programmes and activities include health fairs, seminars, workshops, road shows, sporting events, schools, competitions.
Interactive Sessions Involving specific groups 132 as well as government agencies /institutions also form of this strategy.
 Provision of equipment and skills needed for self development concerned empowerment of skill acquisition for poverty alleviation by this action, properties of government are directed along these lines.
 Developing effective public relations, maintaining healthy relationships with members of public, public relation campaign could be utilized to mobilize public support especially for foundations and charities organizations.
 Consulting and projectmanagement.
3.4NGOS ASHARBRIGERS OF CHANGE AND INNOVATION.
NGOS have an advantage over government by having the advantage of acting more quickly than the government and specifying place and time for which they would be supporting a particular project.
The state structures are criticized as being corrupted, hence instituted for performing either welfare or resource management functions, while NGOS are more accountable, responsive, and committed to being about social change.
They play the role of catalyst and motivation.
So, there should be partnership between governmental and non-governmental organization in sharing responsibilities for the information and execution of social policies between them in keeping with the spirit of true democracy.
3.5TRAINING AND TECHNICAL ASSISTANCEROLE NGOS can play an effective role in promoting good governance to the processes of training and a good capacity building to bridge the exhibiting community administrative gap.
The NGOS can develop 133 technical assistance and training capacity, which can get disseminated to the government, while preparing implementation of the place.
3.6THE SOCIAL WELFARE ROLE: Where relief and charity are key actions.
It is the traditional approach, NGOS in this role can be seen as militating internal programmes and projects, major secondary actors who would support the NGO in this role include international donor agencies and other charity institutions.
3.7THE MEDIATORY ROLE: Where communication as a skill is important for development and social action.
There has been a gradual shift/more of NGOS away from “creative” roles defined by relief and charity in that of “interactive” roles, NGOS in this role can be seen as participating or taking external programmes and project.
Major secondary actors include government agencies and projects.
Major secondary actors include government agencies and other formal institutions.
3.8 THE CONSULTATIVE ROLE: where support documentation and dissemination of information and expertise is critical, NGOS in this role can be seen as working in collaborative programs Local experts/professionals/resources persons play major secondary roles here.
All three roles of social welfare, mediation ad consultation, infact, go together as three facets of the same approach towards community development and empowerment.
Organizational independence and operational self-sustainability of an NGO can be achieved by an emphasis on their mediation and consultation roles, but without disregarding the social welfare role.
The voluntary organizations have 134 equipped themselves adequately and come up enthusiastically and contribute significantly in various fields(Shama et al, 2011:852-3).
3.9 THE RELEVANCE OF NGOS IN INTERGOVERNMENTAL RELIGIONS According to Sharma et al (2011:853 854),NGOS are importance in the following way  DISSEMMINATION OF INFORMATION A free and democratic society must find expression in more than one way and the growth of NGOS is one such expression.
The NGOS have the ability to communicate at all levels, from the neighbourhood to the top levels of government.
They also have ability to facilitate active participation and to recruit both the experts and highly motivated staff with fewer restrictions than the government.
Such advantages enable NGOS to reach and dissemmate information to the people more effectively.
NGOS are knowledgeable partners and deal both with the groups of civil society at one and government at the other end.
 NGOS, could be involved in consulting and project management for potential entrepreneurs.
They could also mobilize voluntary public support or contributions for aid.
Strong links with both government institutions and community groups is a strategy privity often adopted in developing countries.
Generally, NGOS which are private, have a community or environmental focus.
135 4.0 CONCLUSION In this unit, we have examined the meaning types internal dynamics and methods of ooperation of NGOS, NGOS play important roles in political process.
They employ a number of techniques or stratefies in their quest to influence the policies or decision of government to their favour.
Sometimes, they make direct representation to government offociales, or legislative to drive home their points or request, they do this to ahcieve their goals.
SELF ASSESMENT EXERCISE Describe the meaning and nature of NGOS.
5.0 SUMMARY Non-governmental organization refers to the organization of people, who are independent government, but pool their resources to attain specified goals.
They are non profiting making.
Examples are Redcross human rights NGOS, HW/Aids, NGOS, Environmental NGOS, professional group NGOS etc.
NGOS employ a number of methods or strategies in their quest to influence decisions of government.
They employ the following techniques: lobbying; organizing programmes and goals directed activities (seminars/workshops); empowerment styles that enable to function effectively and achieve their goals.
Most of their employees are volunteers and committed to the goals of their organizations.
They obtain the funds from grants from national governments, international institutions, private donations and sometimes, sale of their goods and services, aimed at influencing government legislative and policy –making process.
136 6.0 TUTOR-MARKED ASSIGNMENTS (1) explain the methods or strategies NGOS use to influence governet’s policy-making or decisions.
(2) describe the internal dynamics of any NGOS known to you 7.0REFERENCES/FURTHER READINGS Ugoh, S. C. (2011).
Understanding .intergovernmental relations in Nigeria.
Lagos: Sam &&& publications.
Udenta J. O. E. (1999).
Elements of government and public administration.
Enugu: New generation ventures Ltd. Ogbuishi A. F. (2007).
Fundamentals of inter-governmental Relations.Enugu academic publishing company.
www/en.wikipedia.orgn sharma, M.P.
B.L.
Sadana and Harprect Kaur (2011).
Public Administration: in theory and practice.
New delhi.
KitabMahal.
137 UNIT 5 INSTITUTIONS FOR MANAGING INTER-GOVERNMENTAL RELATIONS CONTENTS 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objectives 3.0 Maincontents 3.1 Role of RMAFC 3.2 ConflictResolutionMachinery 3.3 TaxJurisdictionMachinery 3.4 Resource control Machinery 3.5 OtherMechanisms 3.5.1 NationalPlanningCommission 3.5.2 Federal Account Allocation Committee (FAAC) 3.5.3 Central Bank 3.5.4 Meetings of Federal and State Accountant-Generals 3.5.5 Debt Management Office 3.5.6 Joint Tax Board 3.5.7 State and Local government Affairs Office *(SLGAO) 3.5.8 State-Local government Joint Account Committee 3.5.9 Other miscellaneous institutions 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutor – MarkedAssignments 7.0 References/FurtherReadings 138 1.0 INTRODUCTION The nature of fiscal relations in any federal system is crucial to the survival of the country.
Conflicts in inter-governmental relations have often centred on the issue of obtaining adequate financial resources to discharge essential political and constitutional responsibilities.
To manage inter-governmental relations in Nigeria various administrative institutions were established.
In this unit, we shall examine the institutions established by the 1999 constitution of the federal republic of Nigeria, the revenue mobilization allocation and fiscal commission (RMAFC).
2.0 OBJECTIVES At the end of the unit, students would be able to:  Under the causes of conflict in inter-government relations.
 Understand the role of revenue mobilization allocation and fiscal commission  Understand the role of other bodies in coordinating inter- governmental relations management.
3.0 MAIN CONTENTS 3.1 REVENUE MOBILIZATIONALLOCATION AND FISCAL COMMISSION (RMAFC) MACHINERY In a bid to reduce inconsistencies associated with the management of inter-governmental relations through ad-hoc approaches, the 1999 constitution of Nigeria provided for the establishment of a revenue mobilization allocation and fiscal commission.
The commission consists of chairman and one 139 member from each state of the federation and the FCT, Abuja.
The commission has the following as its major objectives and powers: i.
Monitor the accruals and disbursement of revenue from the federation accounts.
ii.
Review from time to time, the revenue allocation formula and principles in operation to ensure conformity with changing realities for oil producing communities.
It took the supreme court in April 5, 2002 to decide the case between eh federal and state governments to determine the conflict.
All the states of the federation were joined in the suit filed on the issue 13% derivation for oil producing states ties, some leaders, especially from the North have called for review of that revenue sharing formula.
The revenue allocation formula is another area of conflict, especially, the Arewa Consultative Forum (ACF).
The forum has urged the north to agitate for the review of the present revenue sharing formula, which stands as: federal 52.68%; state governments 26.72%; and local governments 20.6%.
While 13% is given to oil producing states as derivation.
The body claims that this formula has crated wide disparity between the north and south.
The Niger Delta leaders have reacted to this line of argument from the North, claiming that the 13% derivation is not even enough to address the environmental degradation caused by oil exploration.
Beside this there has been rancorous bickering between state – local governments over state – local government joint account and sharing of 10% internally generated state revenue, which the states have not been able to fulfill.
140  3.2 CONFLICT RESOLUTION MACHINERY The nature of conflicts in inter-governmental relations is basically jurisdiction.
Conflicts of jurisdiction can arise in areas, such as; tax jurisdiction road construction jurisdiction legislative jurisdiction, states security and federal jurisdiction on the use of political and so on.
Conflicts in these areas are often over which level of government has constitutional jurisdiction over certain powers as enshrined in the 1999 constitution.
Certainfactorsmay be identified: 3.3 TAX JURISDICTION MACHINERY This refers to conflicts arising from which level of government should collect what revenue over a particular area.
Most cases there is incursion into exclusive list by states and states also meddle in the revenue collection areas of local governments, causing conflict in their relations.
3.4 RESOURCE CONTROL MACHINERY Conflict on resource control often result on which tier of governments; federal or state has possession of off-shore mineral resources and 13% of i) Accept revenue formula by an act of the National Assembly, which shall remain in force for a period of not less than five years from the date of commencement of the Act.
ii) To advise the federal and state governments on fiscal efficiency and methods by which their revenue can be increased.
141 iii) To determine the salaries of political office holders, including the president, vice – president, Governors, Deputy Governors, ministers, commissioners, special advisers, legislator etc.
iv) Discharge such other functions as may be conferred on the commission by the constitution or any Act of the Assembly (part, items 31 of the third schedule of the 1999 constitution).
These functions, no doubt were aimed to evolve a generally acceptable revenue allocation formula for the nation, in view of number of review commissions/committees set upon since independence to manage resources/revenue sharing and allocation.
3.5 OTHER BODIES COORDINATING INTER-GOVERNMENTAL RELATIONS Other bodies established to coordinate inter-governmental relations are (Eneanya, 2009, 263): 3.5.1 NATIONAL PLANNING COMMISSION Weilds considerable influence in fiscal policy coordination.
3.5.2 THE FEDERATION ACCOUNT ALLOCATION COMMITTEE (FAAC) – which comprises the minister and commissioners of finance, the RMAFC, the Central Bank of Nigeria, the National Planning Commission and the Federal Inland Revenue Service; 3.5.3 THE CENTRAL BANK OF NIGERIA 142 3.5.4 THE MEETINGS OF THE FEDERAL; AND STATE ACCOUNTANT – GENERALS.
It mains brief is to standardize and harmonize fiscal data reporting.
Timelines of accounts and regular reporting of such data, the minimum reporting codes and the financial monitoring of spending, are areas that have engaged the attention of this body.
The body has, however, in large part, been unable to force compliance of its recommendations on federal and state authorities because of the absence of statutory endorsement.
3.5.5 THE DEBT MANAGEMENT OFFICE (DMO) The principal mandate of the DMO is to coordinate borrowing.
The DMO was set up to bring order to excessive borrowing by states.
3.5.6 THE JOINT TAX BOARD – which is charged with the responsibility of coordinating tax principles and policies among the three tiers of government.
In particular, the board ensure uniformity in tax principles, policies and practices across state and local government boundaries and mediates when disputes arise over tax jurisdiction.
3.5.7 STATE AND LOCAL GOVERNMENT AFFAIRS OFFICES (SLGAO) 3.5.8 STATE – LOCAL GOVERNMENT JOINT ACCOUNT COMMITTEE 3.5.9 Others, such as: The National Council of State ;National economic Council ;National Council on Establishments ;National Council on Trade ;National Councils on Agriculture; and the judiciary 143 These institutionalized administrative bodies provide convenient for a consultations and negotiation on behalf of the federal, states and local governments in the management and resolution of conflicts in inter-governmental relations.
4.0 CONCLUSION In this unit, we have discussed the role of RMAFC in inter- governmental relations.
Although, most of these bodies were set up to promote harmonious fiscal relations, due to lack of an enabling “legislative instruments” to provide the framework for intergovernmental fiscal relations as well as lack of fiscal discipline, fiscal policy coordination became problematic in Nigeria.
SELF – ASSESSMENT EXERCISE 5.0 Describe the objective sand powers of revenue mobilization, allocation and fiscal commission (RMAFAC) 6.0 SUMMARY The issue concerning fiscal relations among constitutional units of Nigeria remains mostly unresolved.
Revenue is shared between and within tiers of governmental ultimately to promote inter- jurisdictional equity, enhance the efficiency of the public sector and minimize the cost of administering the tax system.
The decision as to what parentage of centrally generated revenue that would be retained among the three – tier of government have always been a problems.
In a bid to reduce these problems associated with revenue allocation, through review commissions and adhoc approaches, the 1999 comment of a revenue 144 mobilization, allocation and fiscal commission.
One of the functions of the commission is to advise the federal and state governments on fiscal efficiency and methods by which their revenue can be increased.
Section 162, sub-section 2 of the 1999 constitutions says that “the president, upon receipt of advice fro the Revenue Mobilization Allocation and fiscal commission shall table before the national assembly proposals for revenue allocation from the federal account and in determining the formula, the National Assembly shall take into account, the allocation principle, especially those of population, equality of states, internal revenue generation, land mass, terrain as well as population density.
Beside, there are other bodies empowered to participate in the coordination of inter-governmental fiscal relations, namely; National Planning Commission, Federation Account Committee, Central Bank, Meetings of Federal and State accountant – Generals, Debt Management Office, Joint Tax Board, State and Local government Affairs offices, and State – Local Government Joint Account Committee.
All these bodies are established to promote harmonious fiscal inter-governmental relations.
7.0 TUTOR – MARKED ASSIGNMENTS i.
Describe the functions of revenue mobilization allocation and fiscal commission (RMAFC) in inter-governmental relations in Nigeria.
ii.
Explain the role of other institutions established to manage inter-governmental fiscal relations in Nigeria.
8.0 REFERENCES /FURTHER READINGS 145 Eneanya, A. N. (2009).
Policy Research Analysis and Effective Policy-Making in Nigeria.
Lagos: Concept Publications Ltd. Federal Republic of Nigeria 1999 Constitution.
Ugoh, S. C. (2011).
Understanding Inter-governmental Relations in Nigeria.
Lagos: Sam Iroanusi Publications.
146  147
