 NATIONAL OPEN UNIVERSITY OF NIGERIA SCHOOL OF MANAGEMENT SCIENCES COURSE CODE: PSM 802 COURSE TITLE: REFORMS OF THE PUBLIC SERVICE  COURSE GUIDE PSM 802 REFORMS OF THE PUBLIC SERVICE Course Team Dr. Jide Ayeni (Course Developer) 9, Ikorodu Road, Jibowu, Yaba, Lagos Professor Chuks P. Maduabum (Course Editor) NOUN Dr. C.I.
Okeke (Programme Leader)-NOUN Mrs. P.N.
Ibeme (Course Coordinator)-NOUN NATIONAL OPEN UNIVERSITY OF NIGERIA PSM 802 COURSE GUIDE National Open University of Nigeria Headquarters National Open University of Nigeria 14-16, Ahmadu Bello Way Victoria Island- Lagos Abuja Office 5.
Dar es Salaam Street Off Aminu Kano Crescent Wuse II, Abuja e-mail: centralinfo@nou.edu.ng URL: www.nou.edu.ng Published by National Open University of Nigeria Printed 2013 ISBN: 978-058676-1 All Rights Reserved ii PSM 802 COURSE GUIDE CONTENTS PAGE Introduction………………………………………………… iv What you will Learn in this Course……………………….. iv Course Aims………………………………………………... iv Course Objectives………………………………………….. v Working through this Course……………………………… vi Course Materials…………………………………………… vi Study Units………………………………………………….
vi Books……………………………………………………….. viii Assignment File…………………………………………….. viii Course Assessment………………………………………… viii Tutor-Marked Assignment (TMA)………………………… viii Conclusion………………………………………………….. ix iii PSM 802 COURSE GUIDE INTRODUCTION Reforms of the Public Service is a one-semester course for students offering the Masters Degree programme in Public Service Management.
It is one of the core courses and a 3- credit unit course consisting of 16 units.
Each unit is supposed to be covered in three hours.
The course consists of 5 modules and 16 units.
The modules are: Theoretical/conceptual framework, the pre-independence reforms, first republic reforms, public service reforms under military and Obasanjo reforms.
This course guide tells you briefly what the course is about, what course materials you will be using and how you can work your way through these materials.
It also highlights issues of timing for going through these units, and explains the activities and Tutor- Marked Assignments.
There are supposed to be tutorials attached to this course and taking advantage of this will bring you into contact with your tutorial facilitator which will enhance your understanding of this course.
WHAT YOU WILL LEARN IN THIS COURSE The overall aim of this course on Public Service Reforms is to expose how public service institutions and agencies are reformed, refocused or redirected at a particular point in time or over a period of time.
This is done to broaden your perspective on public service reform and stimulate your interest in public service reform.
It is also to make you appreciate the utility and indispensability of reform in the public service.
During this course, you will learn the concepts of innovation, best practices and reforms, bureaucratic or public service innovation, challenges of development, systems theory, new public management, public sector decentralisation and community-driven development, challenges of innovation and accountability in the public service as well as the details of all reforms both in pre and post-independence era in Nigeria to date.
Knowledge of all these will lead to the appreciation of the role, functions and features of public service institutions and agencies.
COURSE AIMS The aim of this course as pointed out earlier is to expose the students of public administration/service management to the concepts, structure, organisation and service delivery capacity of the public service.
It is also to make you appreciate the scope of public service, the way it operates and what the public service is capable of doing, especially if it is iv PSM 802 COURSE GUIDE reformed regularly along the new development and innovations taking place at all times or over a period of time.
This will be achieved by aiming to: i.
Introduce you to the basic concepts of the public service, reform, innovation, best global practices, new public management, challenges of innovation, knowledge and public sector management, creativity, backward-looking reforms, forward- looking reforms etc.
ii.
Compare the modus operandi of public service reforms in Nigeria with that of other African countries and the Western world iii.
Give an insight into public-private partnership as an element of public service reform iv.
Expose the source of the global best practices in selected countries and v. Appraise the development potentials of reform activities and efforts in Nigeria from 1900 to date.
COURSE OBJECTIVES To achieve the aims set out above, the course sets overall objectives.
In addition, each unit also has specific objectives.
The unit objectives are always included at the beginning of a unit.
You are advised to refer to them as you study each unit both at the beginning and at the end to ensure that you check your progress and that you have done what is required of you by the unit.
Below are wider objectives of the course as a whole, you should be able to: 1.
Identify and explain the main concepts associated with public service reforms and innovations 2.
Situate public service reform within the generic term of Public Administration and Management 3.
Appreciate the philosophy of public service reform, innovation and global best practices 4.
Describe and compare reform, innovations and modern trends as they apply to different countries bringing out the modus operandi in the countries being studied and compared 5.
Explain the development potentials of reform and innovations in the new millennium 6.
Read a set of articles and apply these to the concepts and issues covered in the preceding units of the course.
v PSM 802 COURSE GUIDE WORKING THROUGH THIS COURSE To complete this course, you are required to read the study units and recommended textbooks and explore more current materials on the internet.
You may also need to visit some Federal or State Ministries, Departments and Agencies (MDAs) around you to observe practically some of the things conveyed and covered in this course.
You could also have a chat with some public/civil servants on a wide array of issues including the problems the stakeholders face.
You also need to keep abreast of new development and innovations in the public service globally in the newspapers, magazines and even the radio.
In this course, each unit consists of exercises or activities to test your understanding from time to time.
At a point in your course, you are required to submit assignments for assessment purposes.
Below you will find listed all the components of the course, what you have to do and how you should allocate time to each unit in order to complete the course successfully in time.
COURSE MATERIALS Major components of the course are: 1.
Course Guide 2.
Study Units 3.
Further Reading 4.
Activities and Tutor Marked Assignments (TMAS).
Everything you need is in each unit except the textbooks which you may have to acquire.
You are advised to source current materials on the internet and avail yourself of newspapers, magazines and other publications on reforms.
You may contact your tutor where you run into problem about recommended textbooks.
STUDY UNITS There are sixteen (16) units in this course as follows: Unit 1 Bureaucratic Theory and Public Service Unit 2 The Concepts of Reform, Public Service Innovation and Development Unit 3 Lugard and Clifford Reforms Unit 4 Harragin Reforms Unit 5 Foot Reforms Unit 6 Gorsuch and Newns Reforms Unit 7 Morgan’s Reforms vi PSM 802 COURSE GUIDE Unit 8 Elwood Reforms Unit 9 Adebo Salaries and Wages Commission Unit 10 Udoji Public Service Review Commission Unit 11 Dotun Philips Study Team Unit 12 Review Panel on the Civil Service known as Ayida Panel Unit 13 Military Style of Reforms Unit 14 President Obasanjo Reforms Unit 15 Some Operational Institutions of Obasanjo’s Reforms Unit 16 Yar’Adua Reform Initiatives As pointed out earlier, these units are classified into modules as follows: Module 1 Units 1 – 2 Module 2 Units 3 – 6 Module 3 Units 7 – 8 Module 4 Units 9 – 13 Module 5 Units 14 – 16 Each module is representing a homogeneous body of issues on public service reform.
Module 1 addresses conceptual or theoretical issues.
Module 2 is about the pre-independence reforms which took place in Nigeria.
Module 3 looks at first republic reforms while module 4 is about public service reforms under the military.
Module 5 is the last and it deals with the Obasanjo Reforms You must read each unit carefully.
The basic knowledge on the topic is conveyed here.
An update of the knowledge is in reference to materials of currency.
Supplementary reading is advised.
As you work through each unit, the core of the units is at 3.0 level.
The conclusion (4.0) helps to round up what has been said so far while “summary” (5.0) gives a brief summary of the major issues discussed.
This is meant to assist you to remember the key issues and simplify the discussion at the end.
At the end of some issues discussed at the 3.0 level in unit, you will come across “Activity”.
These are meant to provide simple questions to enable you comprehend or remind yourself of the things discussed before the activity.
Answers are directly provided in most cases.
Do not consult the answers until you have attempted the questions.
You may sometimes observe that the answers provided give you more insight than may have been originally conveyed (especially with the tutor- marked question.
This is part of the characteristics of an essay question).
vii PSM 802 COURSE GUIDE BOOKS There is no compulsory textbook for this course.
However, as you go through the course, you will observe that some textbooks are recommended often.
This shows that it is crucial to a number of units.
Please try and consult these.
Moreover, each unit has its own assigned texts and document.
You should also lay your hands on these for further understanding.
ASSIGNMENT FILE The major assignment required is a Tutor-Marked Assignment (TMA) which you are expected to complete at the end of each unit and mail to your tutor.
COURSE ASSESSMENT Your assessment for this course is made up of two components: Tutor-marked assignment Final examination The practice exercises (or activity) are not of your formal assessments but it is important to complete all of them.
If you do the practice exercise, it will facilitate your understanding of the subject matter or topic and your tutor-marked assignments.
TUTOR-MARKED ASSIGNMENT (TMA) Each unit in this course has a TMA attached to it.
You can only do this assignment after covering the materials and exercise in each unit.
Normally, the TMAs are kept in a separate file.
Your tutor will mark and comment on it.
Pay attention to such feedback from your tutor and use it to improve your other assignments.
You can write the assignment by using materials from your study units and from textbooks or others sources.
It is, however, preferable that as a graduate student, you should demonstrate evidence of wide reading especially from texts and other sources, something to show that you have researched more widely.
But do remember that copying from any source without acknowledgment is plagiarism and is not acceptable.
You make references properly when you refer to other people’s work.
viii PSM 802 COURSE GUIDE The assignments are in most cases essay questions.
Examples from your own experience or environment are useful when you answer such questions.
This allows you to apply theory to real life situations.
CONCLUSION ‘Reforms of the Public Service’ is an interesting course.
It provides you with theoretical, comparative and case study perspective in understanding the subject matter.
It is designed to enable you understand the utility and modus operandi of reforms in public institutions i.e.
Ministries, Departments and Agencies (MDAs).
You will also understand and appreciate the indisputable role of reforms, innovations and development in public service as a whole.
Perhaps those of you who have been ignorant about the subject matter will after this course start to take interest and start applying yourself to it.
Good luck and enjoy the course.
ix  MAIN COURSE CONTENTS PAGE Module 1 Theoretical/Conceptual Framework………… 1 Unit 1 Bureaucratic Theory and Public Service……… 1 Unit 2 The Concepts of Reform, Public Service, Innovation and Development………………….
8 Module 2 Pre-Independence Reforms………………….. 17 Unit 1 Lugard and Clifford Reforms………………….. 17 Unit 2 Harragin Reforms……………………………… 21 Unit 3 Foot Reforms…………………………………... 27 Unit 4 Gorsuch and Newns Reforms………………….. 33 Module 3 First Republic Reforms……………………….
39 Unit 1 Morgan’s Reforms……………………………... 39 Unit 2 Elwood Reforms……………………………….
43 Module 4 Public Service Reforms Under Military…….. 46 Unit 1 Adebo Salaries and Wages Commission……….
46 Unit 2 Udoji Public Service Review Commission…….
51 Unit 3 Dotun Philips Study Team…………………….. 58 Unit 4 Review Panel on the Civil Service known as Ayida Panel…………………………………….
83 Unit 5 Military Style of Reforms……………………... 90 Module 5 Obasanjo Reforms…………………………… 112 Unit 1 President Obasanjo Reforms…………………... 112 Unit 2 Some Operational Institutions of Obasanjo’s Reforms……………………………………….. 123 Unit 3 Yar’Adua Reform Initiatives…………………... 138 PSM 802 MODULE 1 MODULE 1 THEORETICAL/CONCEPTUAL FRAMEWORK Unit 1 Bureaucratic Theory and Public Service Unit 2 The Concepts of Reform, Public Service, Innovation and Development UNIT 1 BUREAUCRATIC THEORY AND PUBLIC SERVICE CONTENTS 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objectives 3.0 Main Content 3.1 Concepts of Authority and Power 3.2 Types of Authority Structure 3.3 Basis of Legal-Rational Authority 3.4 Features of Ideal Type of Bureaucracy 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutor- Marked Assignment 7.0 References/Further Reading 1.0 INTRODUCTION In this unit, attempt is made to present the basic idea about the ideal bureaucracy.
This includes the rationale and target of the ideal bureaucracy.
You will need to understand these in order to grasp the nitty-gritty of the subsequent concepts to be discussed thereafter.
What is bureaucracy, types of authority structure, the basis upon which the authorities are erected and the features of the bureaucracy in particular.
2.0 OBJECTIVES At the end of this unit, you should be able to: • clearly define bureaucracy • identify the types of authorities in bureaucracy list the features of Bureaucracy.
• • discuss why bureaucracy needs to be reformed as and when necessary.
1 PSM 802 REFORMS OF THE PUBLIC SERVICE 3.0 MAIN CONTENT Bureaucracy exists everywhere, especially in the public service.
The word bureaucracy is derived from the French word ‘bureau’ meaning a writing table or desk.
The bureaucrat is the clerk or official that sits behind the desk or the writing table.
The term was indeed coined in the 19th century by the French encyclopaedists.
Max Weber similarly described bureaucracy as the most efficient administrative organisation for the conduct of the affairs of government.
His conceptualisation and typification of bureaucracy today, provide to a large extent, the framework for discussing and understanding the basis and functions of organisations.
In his enthusiastic analysis of this inevitable concept, Weber describes it as the only concept that guarantees efficiency and effectiveness to organisations, especially government organisations.
According to him, this results because experts as found within the bureaucracy are the best qualified to make technically correct decisions because of their disciplined performance typified by abstract and visible roles coordinated by authority and hierarchy, fosters a rational and consistent pursuit of organisational goals.
3.1 Concepts of Authority and Power In his study, Weber used the concept of authority to shed light on the functioning of the bureaucracy.
For him, the essence of the bureaucratic administration of public affairs is the exercise of control founded upon the possession of knowledge.
And the exercise of control by one man over other men is, in the final analysis, backed up by power.
To be sure, the very process of organisational control is a reflection of some form of power.
Thus, Max Weber distinguished between authority and power by defining the latter as: any relationship within which one person could impose his will, regardless of any resistance from the other, whereas authority existed where there was a belief in the legitimacy of that power.
3.2 Types of Authority and Power The source of legitimacy essentially formed the basis of Weber’s classification schema of organisations.
He identified three types of authority structure: the traditional, the charismatic, and the rational-legal types.
2 PSM 802 MODULE 1 The traditional type of authority has its basis in the veneration of, respect for, and belief in, the goodness, rightness, justness, and sacredness of long-standing and time-tested customs and traditions of the people.
The charismatic type of authority derives from a belief by people that the authority-giver has some personal qualities that are uncommon and extraordinary.
He/she is someone possessing some unusual character, traits and gifts, as the meaning of the word charisma (i.e.
gift of grace), suggests.
The legal-rational authority, which Weber believed to be the best of the three types, characterises the bureaucratic organisation.
Here, authority flows from an identified set of impersonal rules and regulations that govern the conduct of affairs in the bureaucracy.
In the words of John Kilcullen: Rational authority is the ‘rule of law’: it exists in a community in which there is a moral attitude of respect for the law as such, or because the law has been arrived at in a way that is regarded as legitimate...
Bureaucracy is the most efficient way of implementing the rule of law: the legal rules are recorded, studied, and applied in a carefully considered and reliable way to individual cases.
3.3 Basis of Legal-Rational Authority In the opinion of Weber, the enthronement of legal-rational authority was facilitated by the bureaucratic form of organisation, which has proved to be the most efficient method of organising public administration.
He proposed the following as the bases upon which the legal-rational authority is erected: 1.
A legal code can be established which can claim obedience from members of the organisation 2.
The law is a system of abstract rules which is applied to particular cases; and administration looks after the interests of the organisation within the limits of that law 3.
The person exercising authority also obeys this impersonal order 4.
Only through being a member does 5.
Obedience is due not to the person who holds the authority but to the impersonal order which has granted him this position.
3 PSM 802 REFORMS OF THE PUBLIC SERVICE 3.4 Features of Ideal Type of Bureaucracy Taking the ideal type concept further, Weber was of the view that an ideal type of bureaucracy, if one ever came about, would have the following features: 1.
A continuous organisation of official functions bound by rules 2.
Specialisation: Each office has a defined sphere of competence, involving division of labour.
The tasks of the organization are divided into distinct functions given to separate offices.
These functions are clearly specified so that the staff know exactly what is expected of them.
Job-holders are given the authority necessary to carry out their roles 3.
A clearly defined hierarchy of offices: A firm system of supervision based on clear levels of authority.
Each official knows whom to report to with specified rights of control and complaint procedures 4.
Rules: A stable and comprehensive system of conduct which can be learned and may require technical qualifications to understand and administer 5.
Impersonality: No hatred or passion with equality of treatment for all clients of the organisation.
Staff members are free from any external responsibilities and constraints.
They are able to attend to their duties in a fair and objective way 6.
Free selection of appointed officials: “selected” that is on the basis of professional qualifications, with proof shown by a diploma and certificate gained through examinations.
They are appointed rather than elected so that there is no question of bias or favour 7.
Full-time paid officials: These are usually paid on the basis of hierarchical rank, the office being their sole or major concern.
Officials are appointed on the basis of a contract.
They have a monetary salary, and usually pension rights.
The salary is graded according to the position in the hierarchy.
The officers can leave their posts, and under certain circumstances employment can be terminated; 8.
Career officials: There is a career structure and a system of promotion based on seniority or merit based on the judgment of superiors 9.
Private/public split: This separates business and private life.
The official works in a detached fashion from the ownership of the organisation.
The finances and interests of the two should be kept firmly apart; the resources of the organisation are quite distinct from those of the members as private individuals.
Officials may appropriate neither posts nor the resources 4 PSM 802 MODULE 1 which go with them a radical notion at a time when bribery was the norm and officials regularly took a cut of any fee or payment due to their office; 10.
There is a strict, systematic discipline and control of the official's work.
We also need to note that bureaucracy being what it is worldwide has the following global characteristics: 1.
Bureaucracies are everywhere; they are the chosen social instrument for addressing matters defined to be part of the public's business 2.
Bureaucracies are dominant in the implementation of programmes and policies and have varying degrees of importance at other stages in the policy process 3.
Bureaucracies have a number of different social purposes 4.
Bureaucracies function in a context of large and complex governmental programmes 5.
Bureaucracies rarely die; their instinct for survival is unquenchable.
6.
Bureaucracies are not neutral in their policy preferences; nor are they fully controlled by any outside forces.
Their autonomy allows them to bargain-successfully-in order to attain a sizeable share of their preferences.
Also, it should be noted that bureaucracy is inevitable in any society with characteristics we would recognise as modern.
The size and mandate of the bureaucracy - as well as the details of its organisation-are not inevitable, however.
Over time, a society decides how much government it wants and for what purposes.
Those decisions are almost never fixed or final but rather are continually evolving.
Basic political decisions shape the kind of bureaucracy that a society will have.
Bureaucracy is neither evil nor good in and of itself.
Individual pieces of the bureaucracy can function relatively well, or they can function badly.
At the most general level a bureaucratic unit serves the public well will: 1.
Process its work at a steady and brisk pace 2.
Treat all individuals with whom it deals fairly and equally 3.
Hire and retain a staff of qualified professionals who care about the quality of the unit's output 4.
Promote individual staff members on the basis of merit and proven worth 5 PSM 802 REFORMS OF THE PUBLIC SERVICE 5.
Maintain records that can be recovered quickly when the need arises.
A bureaucratic unit that serves the public badly will: 1.
Process its work at an unpredictable and often very slow pace 2.
Show favoritism in the treatment of some clients and discriminate against others 3.
Hire and retain a staff that shows low interest in professional standards of quality services or programmes 4.
Promote individuals on the basis of political favoritism or non professional criteria 5.
Create mountains of paper pointlessly and be unable to recover relevant file material in a timely fashion.
4.0 CONCLUSION Bureaucracy from the brief discussion on the usefulness, definition and roles above can be seen as a type of authority structure, the basis upon which any constituted authority is erected.
It has some clearly stated characteristics or features.
Bureaucracies are inherently political in their behaviour.
The choices they make in the allocation resources, interpretation of legislation, writing rules and regulations, applying eligibility standards –in short, in all of their implementation activities – inevitably confer rewards and penalties on different groups and individuals.
Individuals matter in bureaucracy.
This is because the personal values, beliefs and motivation of individuals contribute in important ways to their agencies’ implementation behaviour.
Such factors that affect implementation involve the organisation and reorganisation of staff and programmes, the internal and external resources that can be marshaled in support of agency preferences and the variety of bureaucratic relationships with other important agencies.
SELF-ASSESSMENT EXERCISE Now that you have read the importance of ideal bureaucracy and the purpose it serves in a big organisation, identify four basic features and suggest two reasons bureaucracy is a necessity and not a luxury.
ANSWER • ideal for a big organisation like public service • alternative yet to be discovered for replacement.
established acceptance for the rulers and followers • 6 PSM 802 MODULE 1 • survived through the ages as a life-long concept.
5.0 SUMMARY We need to recall the major issues we have talked about in this unit namely: Bureaucracy is an ubiquitous concept which exists everywhere, especially in the public service.
It provides the framework for discussing and understanding the basis and functions of organisations, especially government service.
Experts and bureaucrats found within the bureaucracy are best qualified to make technically correct decisions because of their training, experience, foresight and exposure.
We must also note that bureaucracies, also called bureaucratic units or agencies, are a normal and essential form of organisation in the conduct of public and private services.
Governmental bureaucracies are the most important actors in the implementation of public policy.
Benefits steaming from bureaucratic organisations include efficient processing of business by a professional staff that treats applicants and clients without favoritism.
Bureaucracies do not always perform up to their full potential, and they have associated costs.
They slowly change and incrementally which produce lots of red tape even when they are relatively efficient.
6.0 TUTOR- MARKED ASSIGNMENT Discuss the usefulness of bureaucracy to a large organisation and the reasons for its acceptance over the ages and centuries past.
7.0 REFERENCES/FURTHER READING Maduabum, C. (2006).
Reforming Government Bureaucracies in Nigeria: The Journey So Far.
ASCON, Topo-Badagry.
Ayeni, J.
(2007).
Perspectives and Reflections on Nigerian Civil Service Reforms.
Lagos: S & S Communications (Nig) Ltd.. Olaopa, T. (2010).
Public Service Reforms in Africa.
Ibadan: University Press PLC.
7 PSM 802 REFORMS OF THE PUBLIC SERVICE UNIT 2 THE CONCEPTS OF REFORM, PUBLIC SERVICE, INNOVATION AND DEVELOPMENT CONTENTS 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objectives 3.0 Main Content 3.1 Concepts of Reform, Public Service, Innovation and Development 3.2 The Need for Reform and Innovation in the Public Service 3.3 The Nigerian Public Service: Historical Perspective 3.4 Public Service and National Development 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutor- Marked Assignment 7.0 References/Further Reading 1.0 INTRODUCTION In this unit, attempt is made to present and analyze the concept of, and idea of reform, public service, innovation, development etc.
This includes the philosophy of, and the need for as well as indispensability of the role of the foregoing concepts.
You will need to understand them to be able to appreciate the specific issues in subsequent units.
These issues are actually the background issues like: What is reform?
What is public service?
What do we mean by innovation and development?
What contribution do we expect reform in public service to make towards national development?
What type of development can reform in public service bring forth or facilitate?
2.0 OBJECTIVES At the end of this unit, you should be able to: • advance five reasons public service reform is necessary • define and explain reform, public service, innovation and development • explain in details all interconnected concepts in public service reform • outline the key issues and targets of different types of reform.
8 PSM 802 MODULE 1 3.0 MAIN CONTENT For most of the world’s history, the central economic problems of mankind have been that of survival.
There have, of course, always been governments to design various public policies to guarantee this human survival.
After all, one of the classical political philosophers puts it that “government must serve the needs of man for the purpose of preserving and perpetrating the life, liberty and health of man.
To be able to do this, and for a long time to come, governmental agencies are expected to concern themselves with the effective organisation, management and delivery of public services as well as implementing various public policies decided by the legislature to carry out the executive work of government.
That is to say, it is the responsibility of the government to provide the public services in order to promote the socio-economic development of a country.
For this reason, the nature, effectiveness and response of the public/civil service cannot escape the constant attention of any government that is determined to fulfill its mandate and pledge to the masses.
Like any other instrument therefore, public/civil service has to be regularly serviced, reformed, reshaped and redirected as and when necessary.
3.1 Concepts of Reform, Public Service, Innovation and Development The New Webster’s Dictionary of English Language (International Edition) defines reform as “to improve by removing faults and weaknesses or by strengthening good qualities.
It is also to put an end to an evil, abuse etc.
It means to correct, to persuade (a person(s) to change his/their way or mode of operation for better.” Essentially, reform connotes a deliberate and planned change.
Any intervention which fails to produce fundamental change in the way the public service operates and conducts its business is not a reform.
Examples of such an intervention are administrative actions.
Public service is a systematic intervention aimed at improving the structure, operations, systems and procedures of the public service to enable its transformation as a multi- faceted agent of change, and as in our case in Nigeria, as a veritable instrument of national cohesion and socio-economic development.
Reform is neither a quick fix nor a random injection of solutions.
Reform is a sustained process that is people-focused on the realisation that while its target is the people, its tool for achieving the desired change is also the people.
The term ‘Public Service’ is used to refer to all the activities concerned with the management of government administration and the study of these activities.
Precisely, it deals with all activities that come directly 9 PSM 802 REFORMS OF THE PUBLIC SERVICE under governmental activities which had its roots in history and dates back to the times of ancient civilisation when Pericles introduced a scheme for the compensation of officials, thus facilitating continued people’s participation in public work for the survival of the society.
The broad term ‘public services’ could be spelt out under the following four sub-heads: the civil service of the federation, the civil service of the state; the public service of the federation and the public service of the state.
The exhaustive definitions can be summarised as covering the following ten categories of public organisations: (i) The Federal Civil Service (ii) The State Civil Service (iii) Local Governments (iv) Statutory Corporations of the Federal and State Governments (v) Companies or enterprises with full or majority ownership by either the Federal or State Government (vi) Authorities or Commissions established by the Federal or State Government (vii) Educational institutions established or financed mainly by Federal and or State Governments (viii) The Nigeria Police (ix) The Armed Forces; and (x) The Judiciary.
Furthermore, the public service according to Nigerian 1999 Constitution is “The Service of the Federation in any capacity in respect of the Offices of The Clerk or other staff of the National Assembly; members of staff of the Courts of Judicature of the Federation and States, members of staff of any commission or authority established for the Federation or States, staff of any company or enterprise in which the Government or its agencies hold a controlling share or interest; members of the Armed Forces and the Police; staff of a Local Government Council; of a statutory corporation; educational institutions established or principally financed by government.
Precisely, the public service refers to all organisations that exist as part of government machinery for implementing policy decisions and delivering services that are of value to the citizenry.
Little wonder the public service is regarded as a mandatory institution of the State under the 1999 Constitution of the Federal Republic of Nigeria, as succinctly outlined in Chapter VI of the Constitution under the title: the Executive, Part I (D) and Part" (C) which provide for a public service at both the Federal and State levels of government in Nigeria.
The foregoing definition of the public service could still be distilled through the Fifth Schedule of the same Constitution which defines 10 PSM 802 MODULE 1 public officers as persons holding any of the offices specified in Part II of the Schedule.
The list in Part II excludes from public office chairmen and members of adhoc commission, tribunals; committees, but it goes beyond the definitions of Part IV, Sections 318 (1), because it now includes elective as well as appointed offices - The President, Vice- President, Governors and their Deputies, Minister and Commissioners; members and staff of the Legislative Houses, Chairman, Directors of all Corporations, Companies in which the State has controlling shares or interest.
By and large, the public service as the name connotes, is the process and methods by which public office holders provide sound, accountable, desirable, reasonable, efficient and effective services to the public or citizenry of any country, Nigeria inclusive.
Government in most countries is structurally and constitutionally linked to the civil service as they are both interwoven and intimately connected and related.
For all intents and purposes, it is necessary for us to consider and accept the fact that a public officer or public servant is a term normally used to embrace the civil servants and political office holders.
Simply put, a public officer is a person who serves in an organisation or establishment in which he receives regular pay or stipend from government i.e.
A person employed and paid by government in its organisation or establishment.
Innovation means the generation of new ideas about a process or phenomenon or the development of new ways of doing things.
It constantly suggests to us that we can, and should, change our ways/methods of doing things as prevailing situations demand.
Imbibing the spirit of innovation enables us as human to come up with challenges that confront us.
In like manner, the notion of best practices complements the idea of innovation.
Since some methods or approaches are better than others, there is always a need to seek better ways of getting things done in various areas of human endeavour.
Development is a multi-dimensional process involving the reorganisation and reorientation of a system, personality, organisation or institution.
It typically involves radical changes in institutional, social and administrative structures, as well as in popular attitudes, customs, traditions and beliefs.
3.2 The Need for Reform and Innovation in the Public Service To reform is to “form again.” The idea of reform suggests readjusting a thing, system, organisation in order to meet its original conception after 11 PSM 802 REFORMS OF THE PUBLIC SERVICE it has gone through some form of deformation.
For instance a system or an organisation could be reformed in order to meet the standards of the progenitor, if the said system/organisation had, after some years, fallen below expectation.
An example that vividly illustrates this is the Public Service in Nigeria or in any African countries.
The service, for instance, as a result of various events and occurrences after political independence, derailed from the path of professionalism and near perfection on which it was set by the colonial masters.
This has been the basis of contemporary efforts to reposition the Nigerian Public Service.
Looking at REFORM as a concept, Jon Quah describes it as a deliberate attempt to change both the structure and procedures of the public bureaucracy and the attitudes and behavior of the public bureaucrats in order to promote organisational effectiveness and attain national development.
Reforms may be undertaken so as to restructure in order to accommodate certain new scopes of business which were not part of the original intent on which the organisation was founded.
This may be done in order to accommodate and reposition the organisation for certain challenges in the future.
By and large, reforms involve changes in bureaucratic structures, techniques, practices, procedures and behaviours.
But the changes are specifically in relation to certain goals.
The goals are important because they are informed by prevailing problems identified.
The key goal therefore is often administrative improvement.
Specifically, the goals may relate to the four areas enumerated below: (i) Reform may be undertaken to improve administrative effectiveness in response to functions and pathologies of the bureaucracy or public criticisms (ii) Reform could also be undertaken to accommodate new ideas, values, principles, techniques and modes of behaviours (iii) Reform may be institutionalised at any point in time purposely to re-orientate the bureaucracy towards national goals and aspirations or in relation to changes in the political and economic environment as perceived by the government of the day (iv) Reform may also be constituted to improve personnel management principles and techniques.
Essentially, reform of any kind has to do with a new method or methods of doing things in order to achieve desirable goals in an effective and efficient way within a minimal cost in terms of financial and human resources available.
Quite often, administrative reforms affect human and financial resources of an organisation.
When it affects human resources, it could be in the area of redeployment of staff, termination of appointment, right sizing or downsizing, forced retirement as the case 12 PSM 802 MODULE 1 may be.
In the area of finance, it could affect the reduction of budgetary allocations in certain operational sections of the organisation which in effect could be responsible for determining the staff situation.
Caiden in his “Awareness of Needs” categorised the following propositions that could necessitate conditions for reforms: (i) Failure of the administration to meet up with its demand (ii) Administration incapacity or inability to meet its extra demands (iii) Inability of any administration to anticipate future demands on its structure (iv) Failure of the administration to adopt the most effective methods to meet future demands within its functional role.
Perhaps there are other varieties that could necessitate conditions for reforms apart from the foregoing.
However, the factors that have necessitated and will continue to necessitate reforms in the Nigerian Public Service obviously fall within some or all of the conditions enumerated under the conceptual and theoretical clarification above.
The foregoing approaches i.e.
two of them are referred to as “backward-looking reforms” and “forward-looking reforms.” The first sense being backward-looking in that it seeks to reform an organisation/system in accordance with some ideas conceived in times past; and the second sense being forward-looking in that it seeks to reform an organisation/system in order to meet the challenges of the future.
These interpretations of reform are relevant to the issue of Public Service Reforms, for sometimes public service reforms are undertaken in order to restore the public service to a path from which it has derailed, while at some other times, public service reforms are borne out of the need to resituate the public service in order to enlarge its scope or restructure it to handle challenges that may arise in the nearest future.
In any case, the need for public service reforms is borne primarily out of the desire to respond to changes in and around the public sector.
For instance, reforms have been undertaken in order to respond to the existence of globalisation, advancements in science and technology, as well as events in other countries, among other factors.
In other words, the public service has had to respond, at various points in its history, to the challenges posed to its ways of conducting business by the advances made on the international scene, the information age, and technological advancement.
In addition to these, one major challenge that prompted reforms of public sector came from developments in the private sector.
This is because the public service was fast losing its customers to the private sector, where both provide the same goods and services – in education, health and telecommunication, for example.
And in response to this, new ideas and new approaches to doing business have been 13 PSM 802 REFORMS OF THE PUBLIC SERVICE introduced in the public sector in order to ensure that it does not entirely lose its relevance to the people it was established to serve.
Another reason, similar to the above but subtly different, for public service reforms relates to the repositioning of the sector for certain challenges in the future.
It is to be noted, as mentioned above, that an organisation or a system may need to go through reforms in order for it to be positioned for future challenges.
This kind of reform is necessary if an organisation enlarges its vision/mission and needs to implement some innovative ideas for which the structure(s) on ground is/are inadequate.
The structure(s) on ground may then be reformed to imbue it/them with necessary values, additional structures(s), management, tools, and skills, among others.
Generally, as government business expands, requiring the government to respond to more issues, there is a need to reform the public service to those significant changes taking place and those that, even though they have not taken place, are foreseen as challenges/threats in the nearest future.
In some cases, however, the need for the reform of the public service is as a result of the need to lift the public sector out of the quagmire it might have found itself.
The situation may arise, for instance, that a state experiences decay in its institutions as a result of a political crisis.
This has been the experience in Africa, for instance.
In Africa, one of the reasons for reforms in the public sector is that after independence, the public sector suffered decay.
As C. B. Okolo rightly noted, … the African quickly forgot soon after independence, what really go with it, namely, hard work, responsibility, accountability, self-discipline, sacrifice, initiative, resourcefulness, etc.
Political independence and its freedom actually meant time for work for full-scale unending celebration.
This basic fact eluded the African not long after his independence, and as a consequence and as actually happened in many newly independent nations, the African condition meant in practice a gradual worsening of the situation of things, the breakdown of law and order, indiscipline, etc… The reasons for reforms identified above are not mutually exclusive.
In some situations, a state may need to reform in order to ensure that it meets up with certain challenges posed by development on the global scene, while at the same time, it responds to certain degenerations that its public service had undergone over a period of time, as well as anticipating some future challenges.
For example, even if the career civil service which most African countries inherited after independence had not gone through some form of degeneration, reform of the public 14 PSM 802 MODULE 1 service would have still been inevitable.
For instance, there would still have been need for reorientation of service delivery of the inherited public service away from fulfilling the interests of the erstwhile colonialists to those of the new states.
This means, in many cases, more rapid expansion of the provision of services in agriculture, the social sector, and infrastructure than was the case during the preceding decades of colonial rule.
4.0 CONCLUSION The discussion and analysis of the interrelated concepts of reform, public service, innovation, and development focused attention on the need to service and redirect government organisations regularly so as to make it relevant, focused and dynamic.
SELF-ASSESSMENT EXERCISE Now that you have seen the need for reform, innovation and development, identify four reasons the reform of the public service is considered a necessity and not a luxury.
ANSWER readjust the functioning and structure of the public service regularly change the procedures and focus of the public service where and when necessary improve administrative effectiveness in response to functions and pathologies of the public service improve personnel management principles and techniques re-orientate the public service in relation to changes in the political and economic environment as perceived by the government of the day.
5.0 SUMMARY Let us recall here some salient points like the indispensability of the bureaucracy to government and the need to always pay attention to its structure, modus operandi, relevance and focus, purposely to ensure that it serves the purpose for which is it designed.
6.0 TUTOR -MARKED ASSIGNMENT Discuss the parameters considered necessary when embarking on the reform of the public service.
15 PSM 802 REFORMS OF THE PUBLIC SERVICE 7.0 REFERENCES/FURTHER READING Olaopa, T. (2009).
Innovation and Best Practices in Public Sector Reforms: Ideas, Strategies and Conditions.
Ibadan: University Press Plc.
Ayeni, J.
(2008).
Reforming Public Service in Nigeria: A Collective Responsibility.
Lagos: S & S Communications (Nig) Ltd. Okoli, C. B.
(2003).
“The African Condition” In: Maduabum Dukor (Ed.).
Philosophy and Politics and Power in Africa.
Lagos: Malthouse Press Ltd. 16 PSM 802 MODULE 2 MODULE 2 PRE-INDEPENDENCE REFORMS Unit 1 Lugard and Clifford Reforms Unit 2 Harragin Reforms Unit 3 Foot Reforms Unit 4 Gorsuch and Newns Reforms UNIT 1 LUGARD AND CLIFFORD REFORMS CONTENTS 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objectives 3.0 Main Content 3.1 Lugard Reforms 3.2 Clifford Reforms 3.3 Contributions of the Two Reforms 3.4 Relationship Existing between the Two Reforms 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutor- Marked Assignment 7.0 References/Further Reading 1.0 INTRODUCTION In this unit, attempt is made to discuss the importance of the two reforms separately and dependently as they related to one another.
You will need to understand the relationship and dependence of the two reforms which occurred at two different periods during the pre- independence era in Nigeria.
2.0 OBJECTIVES At the end of this unit, you should be able to: • state the salient contributions of the two reforms • explain the relationship between the two reforms • state the difference between Clifford and Lgard’s Reforms • distinguish between the two reforms particularly as they came in one after the other.
3.0 MAIN CONTENT The period of colonial rule in Nigeria can be succinctly described as an era of “minimum government” but “total administration.” It was a 17 PSM 802 REFORMS OF THE PUBLIC SERVICE period of minimum government because a number of circumstances restricted the scope of government.
It was also a period of total administration because the colonial bureaucracy monopolised the policy-formulation, policy execution and policy-adjudication roles.
This was due to the meager financial resources available to the colonial government at that time.
An important feature of the colonial bureaucracy, during this time, was the absence of local political control.
It was an era of technocracy or “administocracy” and the golden age of generalist administration.
However, as changes began to take place in the external environment, the bureaucracy had to make corresponding adjustment in style and philosophy.
The period after the Second World War provided the impetus for re-examination of the theory and practice of colonial administration.
3.1 Lugard Reforms The problems of legacy of an inherited bureaucracy handicapped and constituted a serious cog in the wheel of public service reforms before and during Lugard Era.
For instance, in the area of personnel, a significant characteristic of that service was the pre-dominance of its upper and middle reaches by expatriate personnel drawn essentially from Britain and other British dependencies while Africans, particularly Nigerians, were confined to the menial jobs of administration, regardless of their educational qualifications and skills.
This could be traced to 1890 when the colonial government discarded the policy of equal opportunity for Africans and Europeans within the administration of West Africa and adopted a racial discriminatory attitude towards the African public servants.
Since then, a particular trend had evolved in which the Nigerian public servant was left a completely disenchanted worker.
With the conditions stated above, little or no reform of significance actually took place during the era of Lugard.
3.2 Clifford Reforms Sir Hugh Clifford succeeded Lord Frederick Lugard as the Governor- General of Nigeria in 1922.
He was the right person who could claim credit of the institution of a structured and purposeful central administration for Nigeria in those early days.
Clifford and his Chief Helper, Cameron had the Herculean task of cleaning out an Augean stable of administrative chaos, after eight (8) years of one-man rule of Lugard without any proper central machinery of government.
18 PSM 802 MODULE 2 3.3 Contributions of the Two Reforms The contributions of the two reforms remained restricted and minimal simply because of the period and the conditions under which they operated.
However, it is instructive to emphasise that the important feature of colonial bureaucracy during their time was an era of technocracy or “administrocracy” and the golden age of generalist administration.
However, as changes began to take place in the external environment, the bureaucracy had to make corresponding adjustments in style and philosophy.
The period after the Second World War provided the impetus for re-examination of the theory and practice of colonial administration.
3.4 Relationship between the Two Reforms The two reforms as they were, merely deepened the golden rule of the colonialists in power as little or no recognition was given to the Nigerianisation of the public service.
Generally, during the colonial era, the public service was dominated by Europeans.
Out of the 22,071 posts in the senior categories, only 172 were occupied by Nigerians.
This sets the stage for the deliberate effort towards the “Nigerianisation” of the higher civil service, which commenced in 1942, when the Walwyn Committee considered the possibility of appointing Africans into the administrative service outside the secretarial posts.
4.0 CONCLUSION The reform under the two colonial regimes gave little or no chance or encouragement to Nigerians who were then working in government service.
SELF-ASSSESSMENT EXERCISE Now that you have read the details of the two reforms, give a brief description of the two reforms.
ANSWER operated under the colonial era did not encourage Nigerianisation training and manpower policy development not instituted for Nigerians gave no recognition to the ambition and career progression of Nigerian public servants.
19 PSM 802 REFORMS OF THE PUBLIC SERVICE 5.0 SUMMARY The two reforms namely Lugard and Clifford Reforms which were of little or no significance operated in Nigeria one after the other.
They made very little impact on Nigerian public servants as they both recorded little success, especially in the area of steady institutionalisation and development of reforms in the Public Service of Nigeria.
6.0 TUTOR-MARKED ASSIGNMENT Identify the salient features of both Lugard and Clifford Minimum Reforms at the time both of them operated in Nigeria.
7.0 REFERENCES/FURTHER READING Hicks, G. A.
& Gullet, R. C. (1976).
Organisation: Theory and Behaviour.
KogaKusha, Tokyo: McGraw Hill.
Okigbo, P. N. C. (1986).
In:“The Public Service.” A paper presented at the Anambra State Public Service Lecture Series, No.
5, Enugu, March 25th, 1986.
20 PSM 802 MODULE 2 UNIT 2 HARRAGIN REFORMS CONTENTS 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objectives 3.0 Main Content 3.1 Contributions and Landmark Achievements 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutor-Marked Assignment 7.0 References/Further Reading 1.0 INTRODUCTION In this unit, attempt is made to present the origin and landmark contributions of Harragin Reforms to the growth and development of the Nigerian Public Service.
2.0 OBJECTIVES At the end of this unit, you should be able to: • appraise the details of Harragin Reforms • state the impact of the reform on the Nigerian Public Service • specify the difference it made over and above other reforms before it • explain the basic issues in the reform.
3.0 MAIN CONTENT The antecedent to Sir Walter Harragin’s Administrative/Salary Review of Established Staff in 1946 could be traced to the end of the Second World War in 1945 and the attendant problems of that war such as inflation, scarcity of essential food items, and astronomical rise in cost of living.
The returning war veterans and other staffers of the Civil Service who were groaning under the weight of these problems were further disillusioned and frustrated when their request for improved conditions of service particularly payment of cost of living allowances was jettisoned by the government under the cloak of sacrifices which the civil servants had to make for fighting the war.
The situation became so bad that some European members of the service remarked that …they will do all in their power to dissuade their sons from following their footsteps, they will not 21 PSM 802 REFORMS OF THE PUBLIC SERVICE recommend young men or their acquaintances who may soon be on the look-out for jobs to accept a colonial career.
The following issues compelled the eventual setting up of the Harragin Commission: (i) the then Governor of Gold Coast, Sir Alan Burns not averse to improved condition of service in the services of the West African Colonies because he had earlier reiterated the imperative necessity of a pragmatic overhaul of the condition of service; and (ii) the pressure from the trade unions who consistently agitated for a review of the condition of living.
The Harragin Commission was eventually set up in 1945 with the following Terms of Reference: To review and to make recommendations upon the structure and remuneration of the Civil Service (with the exception of unestablished and daily-paid staff) of four West African Colonies with special reference to the following points: (i) the general standards of remuneration and super annuation payments (ii) the relationship of the salaries and conditions of service of locally recruited and externally recruited officers (iii) the machinery for adjusting remuneration to variations in the cost of living (iv) the provision of suitable arrangements for consultation between the government and organisations representing the interests of the staff on matters relating to salaries and conditions of service; and (v) the provision, by means of Public Service Commission or otherwise, of suitable machinery, where this is not already in existence, for regulating the selection and promotion of candidates for posts, the filling of which is not subject to the approval of the Secretary of State.
The Commission which constituted of Sir Walter Harragin a former Chief Justice of the Gold Coast as Chairman also had one Mr. C. E. Lambert as Secretary and Mr. J. E. King as Assistant Secretary.
It was appointed in 1945 and it submitted its report on 12th September, 1946.
While carrying out its assignment, it called for memoranda from interested persons including the Civil Servants and Unions.
It also interviewed a number of officers.
In the process, it spent 49 days in the Gold Coast, 12 days in the Gambia, 24 days in Sierra Leone and 70 days 22 PSM 802 MODULE 2 in Nigeria.
The Commission made 65 recommendations, prominent among those which had a great impact on the service are: (i) Award of substantial increase in salaries by way of cost-of-living allowances (ii) The creation of a higher entry point of salaries for African Technical Staff (iii) The introduction of ‘Expatriation Pay’ for European officers recruited from outside Nigeria as well as other African colonies (iv) The creation of a two-service scheme known as “Senior Service” and “Junior Service” respectively.
It furthermore created within the junior service category a dichotomy between the pure clerical grade and the technical grade (v) The establishment of Advisory Councils patterned after the Whiteley Councils in the United Kingdom to offer advice to the government on all issues relating to the salaries and conditions of employment of civil servants (vi) The introduction of Civil Service Examinations in the junior service and an emphasis on non-monetary benefits as an important factor in the area of Personnel Management.
In fact, this latter recommendation made the commission to take a hard look at the concept of ‘hidden emolument and an annual allowance of £100, and generally ruled against ‘Private Practice’.
Another issue which came under the hammer of the Commission was the demand made by married African Officers for special relief.
As it rejected this demand, the Commission advised the Africans to remain unmarried until they are finally ready to do so.
The Commission also rejected the setting up of Public Service Commissions in the then British West Africa.
It supported this action with the argument that “any Public Service Commission that might be established in West Africa would deal, in the main, with Promotions in and Selection for the junior service.
Very few European promotions and appointments would come within this purview.” A significant structural change brought about by the Commission was the setting aside of the old system of “African and European Posts”, and the replacement of this with the ‘Senior and Junior Services’, with the same basic salary for both Europeans and Africans, and in addition, “expatriation pay” for Europeans.
Prior to the setting up of the Harragin Commission, however, government employees were classified under four categories: Group 1 Mostly Senior Administrative and Professional Officers Group 2 Technologists and Technicians 23 PSM 802 REFORMS OF THE PUBLIC SERVICE Group 3 African Officers holding senior posts in the Junior Service (for example, Office and Secretarial Assistants and Chief Clerks) Group 4 All Subordinate Posts in the Junior Service.
The above four categories were merged into two by the Harragin Commission.
Groups 1 and 2 were merged and referred to as senior service while Groups 3 and 4 were similarly merged and referred to as junior service.
Some of the Commission’s recommendations were vehemently rejected by the trade unions particularly the Nigerian Civil Service Union (NCSU) and the Association of Nigerian Civil Servants (ANCS).
They were opposed to the award of higher entry points for African Technician Staff since it was viewed as injustice and discriminatory.
For instance, while an African with a School Certificate joined the Public Service in the Standard Technical Grade on £96 per annum, his counterpart entered the standard clerical Grade on £84 per annum.
The unions queried the job content examination and factors used in arriving at such a decision citing as example the jobs of Customs Officers and produce Inspectors categorised as technical jobs.
In real terms, the Harragin Commission’s Report could be perceived as the genesis of elitist class configuration as well as salary and status contradistinction was revisited in the Public Service up till today.
For instance, the senior service officers enjoyed enormous privileges and perquisites which include expatriation pay, car allowances, entertainment allowances, beautiful European Quarters as free houses located in choice areas of the cities where all amenities such as uninterrupted power and water supplies were guaranteed, provision of cooks, stewards, gardeners, day and night guards and some times, dog allowances.
The junior officers, on the other hand, were denied free accommodation and therefore, restricted only to the slums of cities where cheap accommodation was available.
They were merely granted shorter leaves, bicycle and motor-cycle allowances etc.
It should be emphasised, however, that salaries and allowances particularly cost-of-living awarded by the Harragin Commission were without prejudice to those of the Tudor-Davies Commission and its report will be addressed later.
The Harragin Commission’s Report which was preceded by Tudor-Davies was finally published in 1947 and it gradually set the stage for another commission which was set up in 1948.
3.1 Contributions The contribution of Harragin to the growth and development of Nigerian public service reform is visibly seen in the area of administrative and 24 PSM 802 MODULE 2 salary review of established staff in the civil service during his time.
It should also be noted that the reforms covered the established staff of four West African Colonies namely Nigeria, Gold Coast (Now Ghana), Sierra Leone and Gambia.
4.0 CONCLUSION As one of the pre-independence reforms, the Harragin Commission made its mark in the area of the institutionalisation of administrative and salary review for established staff in the sub-region of West Africa.
SELF-ASSESSMENT EXERCISE Now that you have read the details and main contents of Harragin Reforms, identify four basic impacts and two categories of staff covered by the reform.
ANSWER • creation of a higher entry point of salaries for African Technical Staff • award of substantial increase in salaries by way of cost of living allowance • creation of a two- service scheme known as “Senior Service” and “Junior Service” • introduction of Civil Service Examinations in the Junior Service Cadre.
The two categories of staff covered are: i.
Senior Administrative and Professional Officers ii.
All subordinate officers in the junior cadre.
5.0 SUMMARY The reform was a big relief to returning war veterans and other staffers of the civil service who were groaning under the backlash and pressure of the just concluded Second World War.
6.0 TUTOR-MARKED ASSIGNMENT Discuss the improvement made by the Haragin Commission over and above his predecessor.
25 PSM 802 REFORMS OF THE PUBLIC SERVICE 7.0 REFERENCES/FURTHER READING Olaopa, T. (2009).
Innovation and Best Practices in Public Sector Reforms: Ideas, Strategies and Conditions.
Ibadan: University Press Plc.
Ayeni, J.
(2008).
Reforming Public Service in Nigeria: A Collective Responsibility.
Lagos: S & S Communications (Nig) Ltd. Okoli, C. B.
(2003).
“The African Condition.” In: Maduabum Dukor (Ed.).
Philosophy and Politics and Power in Africa.
Lagos: Malthouse Press Ltd. 26 PSM 802 MODULE 2 UNIT 3 FOOT REFORMS CONTENTS 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objectives 3.0 Main Content 3.1 Contributions and Landmark Achievements 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutor-Marked Assignment 7.0 References/Further Reading 1.0 INTRODUCTION Attempt will be made in this unit to introduce and explain the details and nitty-gritty of the Foot Commission and its contributions to the growth and steady development of the public service reform in Nigeria.
Attempts will also be made to elucidate the particulars of Foot Commission vis-a-vis its landmark impact on the growth and development of Nigerian public Service at the time he was at the helm of affairs.
2.0 OBJECTIVES At the end of this unit, you should be able to: • state the achievements of Foot Reforms • mention all the targets set and met by Foot during his time • list the opportunities offered to Nigerians during his time • identify all personalities and supporters made use of by Foot to reform the service • identify some institutions engaged by Foot during his time • confirm when, where and how Nigerianisation policy took off in Nigeria.
3.0 MAIN CONTENT The antecedents and stimulants to setting up of the Foot Commission in the recruitment and training of Nigerians for appointments to senior posts were the need to offer opportunities to Nigerians to occupy the upper reaches of the service which, as were earlier stated, were predominantly occupied by the expatriates (British).
Hence, the Foot Commission is sometimes referred to as the Nigerianisation Commission.
It all began as a protest by the nascent nationalist movement of the 1920s against discriminatory practices in the 27 PSM 802 REFORMS OF THE PUBLIC SERVICE employment, placement, privileges, and career advancement of Nigerians based solely on racial considerations.
A sour point for the nationalist movement was the injustices suffered by such professionally qualified Nigerians as Henry Carr, H. M. Macaulay, and Dr. J. O. Johnson in their career as civil servants.
Additionally, the Movement demanded expansion of educational facilities and opportunities to enable suitable Nigerians acquire the required educational qualifications for entry into the civil service.
These dispensations, the Movement believed, would not only increase the number of indigenous officials, but would also substantially widen the scope of their participation in policy decision and implementation processes.
The initial thrust of this agitation, which found official channel in the Nigerian Legislative Council, established in 1922, was increased involvement of Nigerians in the administration of their country.
The heightened pressure on the colonial administration for a change in policy reached a crescendo in the 1930s to stimulate what may aptly be described as “education for the civil service career”.
Sir Hugh Clifford and his successor were sympathetic to the object of the agitation not only because of its unassailable merit but more importantly also, because it would provide a means of coping with the difficulty of securing the services of appreciable number of Britons for work in Nigeria.
Accordingly, the colonial administration initiated two strategies in that behalf viz: expansion of educational facilities to produce home- grown indigenes for civil service appointments, and the institution of a scholarship scheme for acquiring higher qualifications abroad.
The implementation of these strategies led to the establishment of 15 post- primary institutions between 1921 and 1939 for the purpose of producing: (i) Nigerians for clerical and allied posts in the service (ii) Nigerians with the pre-requisites for admission into the tertiary institutions abroad; and (iii) Those that were later to be trained at the Yaba Higher College.
The Yaba Higher College was, in addition, established in January 1934.
The purpose of the College as spelt out by officials in the Nigerian Legislative Council in 1930 was to provide well trained assistants for the various departments of government and private enterprises.
By 1944, the College had produced 20 medical assistants, 15 assistant agricultural officers, 58 teachers, 6 surveyors, 3 forest supervisors, 31 clerical officers in government service and in 9 commerce.
The strategy of awarding scholarships to deserving Nigerians to train abroad was put in place in 1939 following government’s acceptance of the recommendations of a 7-man committee set up in 1938 to deal with 28 PSM 802 MODULE 2 the salaries of African officers holding senior appointments.
By it, government instituted a scholarship scheme which offered two or more scholarship annually to enable suitably qualified Nigerians to proceed overseas for further education.
From 1939 to 1948, 137 scholarships were so awarded.
While the combination of the two strategies mounted in the 1930s had resulted in some improvements in the ratio of Nigerians to expatriate officials at the senior level, the level of achievement up to 1947 was a far cry from the aspirations of the invigorated nationalist movement which decried the continued predominance of expatriate officials as inconsistent with (a) government’s acceptance of the recommendations of the Harragin Commission of 1945-46 to associate Nigerians more closely with the running of the civil service, and (b) the greater measure of political advance granted Nigeria by the Richard’s Constitutional arrangement of the same year.
It accordingly demanded more positive active such as would secure for Nigerians as much control of the civil service as possible.
Following relentless pressure by the nationalist, the Legislative Council in 1947 appointed a Commission on the recruitment and training of Nigerians for appointment to senior posts in the civil service.
The Commission was headed by Mr. H. M. Foot, the then Chief Secretary to the Government.
It also consisted of two Europeans and five Nigerians.
The Nigerian members were C. Dadi Onyeama, Nnamdi Azikwe, Muhammadu Ribadu, J. Rosiji Turton, and Mrs. Oyinkan Abayomi.
The Commission which was popularly known as the Nigerianisation Commission submitted its report on 10th August, 1954.
In it, the Commission observed that the training and recruitment of Nigerians for posts in government services were not only necessary to enable Nigerian take on increasing share in management of their affairs and allow the service to keep in step with the pace of constitutional advancement, but also essential for the development and progress of the country.
It therefore recommended that: (i) Certain principles or policy should be accepted, chief amongst which is that no non-Nigerian should be appointed to any Government post except where no suitable and qualified Nigerian was available (ii) Public Service Board with non-official majorities should be appointed to select candidates for senior service posts as well as for scholarship and training schemes (iii) Departmental Selection Boards should be appointed to make recommendations for promotions to the senior service and for selection of junior officers for training with a view to ultimate promotion to senior posts 29 PSM 802 REFORMS OF THE PUBLIC SERVICE (iv) 385 scholarships and training awards should be made within the next 3 years to bring the total estimated cost scholarships and training schemes during that period to £255,500 (v) A special additional allocation of thirty scholarships be made for women; (vi) An experimental system of additional secondary school scholarships be introduced (vii) Members of the staff of Native Authorities, Local Government Authorities and Voluntary Agencies be considered on the basis of equality with Government offices for Government scholarships and training schemes (viii) Local training facilities be enlarged and improved (ix) The system of study leave be opened to the junior services; and (x) Special consideration be given to applicants for scholarships and training courses from the northern provinces.
As government was accepting these recommendations, a new development was emerging on the horizon destined to further augment the number and power position of Nigerians in the civil service.
It was the founding of the University College, Ibadan, in 1948, following the acceptance by the British Government of the recommendations made by two Commissions it inaugurated in 1943.
The Commissions were the Asquith and Elliot Commissions on Higher Education in British West Africa.
The Commissions had been mandated to determine the feasibility, location and organisation of an institution of University standard in the words of Elliot Commission, “research workers in the sciences for the development of engineering, agriculture, medicine, and animal health as well as to staff the civil service with graduates.” To this, the Asquith Commission Report added, “the production of men and women who had the standard of public service and capacity for leadership which self-government demanded.” The combined effect of the University College, Ibadan and the implementation of the Foot Commission recommendations was a substantial improvement in the Nigerian staff situation such that the Philips/Adebo Commission (1952) on the progress of Nigerianisation Policy reported that the number of Nigerians holding senior posts had increased from 245 in 1948 to 685 in 1952.
The tempo of success was stepped up thereafter such that in another of its reports (1954), the Philips/Adebo Commission observed that there could not have been any “materially better results during the years in question.” However, the Commission recommended the institution of special training schemes for the higher grades facilitate speedy take-over from the remaining European Officials.
30 PSM 802 MODULE 2 Another success that was recorded by these commissions was the establishment of Yaba Higher College and later the Northern Regional Institute of Administration –the two pioneer higher institutions, as a strategy for implementing the Nigerianisation of the public service in the 1950s, it was Yaba graduates (some of them having enhanced their training and qualifications by further overseas training) who moved into positions of power and responsibility in various government departments.
The impact of these two institutions was also felt in the field of politics and education.
3.1 Contributions and Landmark Achievements The Foot Commission succeeded in making indelible mark on the growth and development of public/civil service reforms in Nigeria in the following areas: 1.
Training and recruitment of Nigeria for notable civil/public service positions 2.
Establishment of Yaba Higher College for the training and education of qualified Nigerians 3.
Award of scholarship to qualified Nigerians to study abroad 4.
Empowerment in the ratio of Nigerians to expatriate officials for senior posts 5.
Institutionalisation and commencement of Nigerianisation policy for the benefits of Nigerians.
4.0 CONCLUSION As mentioned earlier on, the heightened pressure on the colonial administration for a change in policy reached a crescendo in the 1930s to stimulate what may aptly be described as “education for the civil service career.” This scenario created a golden opportunity for Sir Foot to record almost all the achievements recorded in his favour in the foregoing points.
SELF-ASSSESSMENT EXERCISE Now that you have read through the main content of the Foot Commission, identify the pace of constitutional development in the area of reforms which can be attributed to it.
ANSWER training and recruitment of Nigerians for Nigerian Civil Service establishment of training institutions offer of scholarships for brilliant and talented Nigerians 31 PSM 802 REFORMS OF THE PUBLIC SERVICE Increase in the number of Nigerians offered appointment in the service.
5.0 SUMMARY We need to recall the major achievements and landmark contributions made by the Foot Commission as clearly amplified under the heading referred to above as contributions and landmark achievements.
6.0 TUTOR-MARKED ASSIGNMENT Briefly discuss the content of the Nigerianisation Policy within the context of the benefits of Foot Reforms to Nigerians during his time.
7.0 REFERENCES/FURTHER READING Iwu-Egwuonwu, R. (2004).
Institutional Government: Behavioural and Ethical Issues.
Ikeja, Lagos: Strides Associates Ltd. Adamolekun, L. (1983).
Public Administration: A Nigerian Perspective.
Longman Group Ltd Maduabum, C. (2002).
“Transition and the Nigerian Civil Service.” In: B. Onuoha and M. M. Fadakinte (Eds).
TransitionPolitics in Nigeria, (1970-1999).
Ikeja, Lagos: Malthouse Press Ltd 32 PSM 802 MODULE 2 UNIT 4 GORSUCH AND NEWNS REFORMS CONTENTS 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objectives 3.0 Main Content 3.1 Gorsuch Reforms 3.2 Newns Reforms 3.3 Contributions and Landmark Role of the Two Reforms 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutor-Marked Assignment 7.0 References/Further Reading 1.0 INTRODUCTION In this unit, attempt will be made to discuss the salient issues treated by both Gorsuch and Newns Commissions established when the pre- independence era was getting to a close in 1959 i.e.
before 1st October, 1960.
You will need to know why the two Commissions came into being when Nigeria was almost getting her political independence.
The urgent need for the two reforms will also be discussed one after the other in view of the fact that Nigeria was almost attaining her political independence.
2.0 OBJECTIVES At the end of this unit, you should be able to: • state the targets of the two reforms • explain the similarities and dissimilarities between the two reforms 3.0 MAIN CONTENT The Gorsuch Commission The Commission on Public Service on Governments in the Federation of otherwise called Gorsuch Commission of 1954-1955 was set up specifically in September, 1954 to: (i) enquire into the structure, and recommendation of the Public Service, with special reference to problems arising from constitutional changes proposed at the Conference on the 33 PSM 802 REFORMS OF THE PUBLIC SERVICE Nigerian Constitution, provided that the enquiry in respect of the Eastern Region shall not extend to any general up-grading or to a general salary revision of posts in the public service with initial salaries of more than £475 per annum; (ii) examine the problems from the individual aspect of the future Federal and Regional Governments in the light of all the factors involved both of similarity and divergence; (iii) make recommendations in a from suitable for submission to the future governments of the Federation and the Regions.
The consequence of the Gorsuch Commission’s recommendations could be identified in two basic directions.
One is emphasis on the rule and modus operandi of the Public Service Commission.
In this direction, the Commission recommended that serving officials should cease as soon as possible to serve on the Public Service Commission ostensibly to ensure the neutrality of the commission and ensure that it commands the confidence of the public.
The commission’s argument was that the public might not feel entirely confident that the officers could remain unbiased and beyond the reach of influence and interference and in addition, officials were already too busy to carry on additional loads.
The basis of the foregoing argument and its attendant recommendation was the belief inherent in the British System of administration that the public service should be free from political influence or interference.
In exchange for this freedom, the individual public servant is bound to serve the government of the day with unvarying loyalty, whatever its political complexion or constitution may be.
Thus, the Public Service Commission was in effect to be a body whose sole purpose was to ensure that appointments to the service, promotions and disciplinary control in respect of inefficiency or misconduct, were dealt with on a continuing standard of detached impartiality and fairness, uninfluenced by political changes or pressures.
If this could be assured, the government would be served by a Civil Service which was contended, efficient and loyal, provided of course, that pay and other conditions were adequate.
In the area of structure, the Gorsuch Commission observed that the rigid division of the service into “Senior” and “Junior” Services was defective in view of the absence of an adequate middle part and to bridge the gap between the junior and the senior services.
The five main grades in the Administrative and Professional classes were as follows: 34 PSM 802 MODULE 2 Administrative Professional/Technical (i) Sub-clerical Minor Technical (ii) Clerical Technical (iii) Executive Higher Technical (iv) Administrative Professional (v) Superscale Superscale This remained the basic structure of the Civil Service until the Public Service Review Commission of 1972-74 introduced a unified salary grading structure in 1975.
The Newns Commission The spate of plethora reform under colonialists in Nigerian Public Service continued up to and including 1959 when a Commission headed by Mr. A. F. F. P. Newns was established specifically in January, 1959.
The objectives of the Commission were to: i.
To work out modalities for the integration of Ministries and Departments ii.
To define the role and functions of Permanent Secretaries iii.
To evolve an administrative machinery for the operations of the Ministries and Departments.
At the end of its eventful deliberations, the Commission had its recommendations considered and the Government White paper issued thereafter supported the merging of the professional departments with the administrative divisions and gave the Permanent Secretary an edge over his professional counterparts.
Among the functions of the Permanent Secretary arising from the recommendations is that of “Accounting Officers” of the Ministry.
The implication of this is that the Permanent Secretary would henceforth be responsible for acquisition and adequate utilisation of men and material resources in his ministry.
This did not go down well with the professionals who right from the inception of the service had been accounting officers of their departments.
Our analysis or perception of the situation is that this can be regarded as the genesis of the professional/administrator dichotomy, regular antagonisms and conflicts.
This is because, under the colonial administration, the departmental heads as we earlier posited out were also the accounting officers of their respective departments.
When ministerial government was introduced under the immediate independence constitution, the ‘ministries’ were simply super-imposed on the existing departmental structure.
The retention by the Permanent Secretary of the responsibility of “accounting officer” after this merger 35 PSM 802 REFORMS OF THE PUBLIC SERVICE was therefore “either an act of honest over-sight or a deliberate colonial design to circumscribe the authority and freedom of the nascent indigenous Ministers”.
The Permanent Secretary was a former officer of the Governor’s Secretary and was so addressed because he was a “Permanent Assistant” to the Governor/Minister.
This nomenclature had persisted in the defunct civil service despite the change in roles of the two.
By Newns’ integration, the Permanent Secretary was given the power of general supervision of the Ministry’s functions and was the link between the Minister and the ministry though the heads of departments were allowed access to the Minister.
This was gradually phased-out and the position had changed considerably in the civil service that operated between 1960 and 1988.
In fact, prior to the reforms of 1st April, 1988, the posts of Chief Executive Accounting Officer were vested in the Permanent Secretary.
By this nomenclature, administrative officers who were normally recruited as Assistant Secretaries were inadvertently nominated “heir apparent” to the throne of Chief Executive as earlier stated.
Administrators charged with policy matters and general supervision of the ministry’s functions gradually manipulated themselves into an enviable position in the ministry at the expense of the professionals.
The privileged position attained ‘class’ or ‘cult’ dimension which was jealously guarded by the least Assistant Secretary.
The implication was to the extent that even junior Assistant Secretaries became virtually immune from disciplinary actions by their heads of line departments.
The “psychological argument to this under-privileged position of professional was demotivation of the professionals charged with the execution of technical or development policies”.
Another Commission was equally set up in 1959 titled Salaries and Wages Commission headed by Justice J. J. N. Mbanefo.
The Commission had as its major concern, the review of salaries and wages in the Public Service.
3.1 Gorsuch Reforms It should be noted that Gorsuch in presenting his recommendations laid emphasis on the following: (i) The rule and modus operandi of the Public Service Commission (ii) The area of the structure of the service.
In the area of the rule and modus operandi, Gorsuch recommended that serving officials should cease as soon as possible to serve on the Public Service Commission ostensibly to ensure the neutrality of the Commission and ensure that it commands the confidence of the public.
36 PSM 802 MODULE 2 This is based on the belief that the public might not feel entirely confident that the officers could remain unbiased and beyond the reach of influence and interference.
In the area of Structure, the Gorsuch Commission observed that the rigid division of the service into “Senior” and “Junior” Services was defective in view of the absence of an adequate middle part and to bridge the gap between the junior and the senior service.
The grading adopted there and then remained the basis structure of the Nigeria Civil Service until the Public Service Review Commission of 1972-74 introduced a unified Salary Grading Structure in 1975.
3.2 Newns Reforms The Newns Commission was set up in January, 1959 essentially to work out the modalities for the integration of ministries and departments and also to define the role and functions of the Permanent Secretaries and also evolve as administrative machinery for the operations of the ministries.
Newns in his recommendations did the following: 1.
Merged the professional departments with the administration divisions and gave the Permanent Secretary an edge over his professional counterparts.
The Permanent Secretary now became the accounting officer for his ministry 2.
In view of the above, Newns stated the genesis of the professional/administrative dichotomy, regular antagonisms and conflicts 3.
Newns integration also ensured that Permanent Secretary was given the power of general supervision of the ministry’s function and was also the link between the minister and the ministry though the Heads of Departments were allowed access to the minister occasionally.
3.3 Contributions and Landmark Role of the Two Reforms The landmark contribution of the two reforms can be pointed out as: 1.
Institutionalisation of the rule and modus operandi of the Public Service Commission 2.
Fine-tuning of the structure into senior and junior grades 3.
Merging of the professional with the administration now under the Permanent Secretary 4.
Creation of the vexed issue of professional/administration dichotomy 5.
Giving more power to the Permanent Secretary over and above his professional counterparts.
37 PSM 802 REFORMS OF THE PUBLIC SERVICE 4.0 CONCLUSION The two reforms brought about the epoch recorded in points 1 – 5 in 3.3 above with problems lingering till the year 1975.
SELF-ASSSESSMENT EXERCISE Having read the details of the two reforms i.e.
Gorsuch and Newsn, assess the extent to which they both achieved their goals.
ANSWER • improvement on the structure of the service • Improvement on the conditions of service of Nigerian civil servants • career progression of the qualified Nigerians in the service • the prospects and hope of Nigerians yearning to form the service.
5.0 SUMMARY The two reforms made their mark in the areas of the structure of service, role of the Public Service Commission and the relationship between the administrative and professional officers in the civil service.
6.0 TUTOR-MARKED ASSIGNMENT Identify briefly the interconnected functions and achievements of Gorsuch and Newns Reforms.
7.0 REFERENCES/FURTHER READING Olaopa, T. (2010).
Public Service Reforms in Africa.
Ibadan: University Press Plc.
Ayeni, J.
(2007).
Perspectives and Reflections on Nigerian Civil Service Reforms.
Lagos: S & S Communications (Nig) Ltd. Maduabum, C. (2006).
Reforming Government Bureaucracies in Nigeria: The Journey So Far.
Topo-Badagry: ASCON.
38 PSM 802 MODULE 3 MODULE 3 FIRST REPUBLIC REFORMS Unit 1 Morgan’s Reforms Unit 2 Elwood Reforms UNIT 1 MORGAN REFORMS CONTENTS 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objectives 3.0 Main Content 3.1 Main Thrust of the Reform 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutor-Marked Assignment 7.0 References/Further Reading 1.0 INTRODUCTION This unit deals extensively with the details of wages and salaries and other conditions of service of the junior employees in the public and private sectors of the Nigerian economy.
The Commission covers the period of 1963 to 1964 even though it was set up in 1963.
The Commission, headed by Justice A. Morgan came into being as a result of the continued agitation by junior officers for the introduction of a National Minimum Wage and abolition of daily wage system for the general improvement on conditions of service.
2.0 OBJECTIVES At the end of this unit, you should be able to: • outline the type of relief the reforms brought • identify the salary structure adopted • state what grounds it prepared for additional improvement.
3.0 MAIN CONTENT After the attainment of political independence by Nigeria, precisely on 1st October, 1960, the new government of Tafawa Balewa established a Commission on Review of Wages and Salaries and other conditions of service of the junior employees in the Public and Private Sectors of the Nigerian economy.
The Commission was later referred to as the Morgan Commission.
Among all other Commissions set up immediately after 39 PSM 802 REFORMS OF THE PUBLIC SERVICE independence, Justice A. Morgan Commission set up in 1963 stood out as the leading one which came into being as a result of the continued agitation by Junior Officers for the introduction of a National Minimum Wage, the abolition of the daily wage system and for a general improvement in condition of service.
The Commission was, however, primarily concerned with the review of salaries and wages as could be seen from its terms of reference inter-alia: (a) To investigate the existing wage structure, remunerations and conditions of service in wage earning employment in the country, and make recommendations covering suitable new structure, as well as adequate machinery for a wage review on a continuous basis; (b) To examine the need for: (i) A general upward revision of salaries and wage of junior employees in both government and private establishments (ii) The abolition of the daily wage system; and (iii) The introduction of a national minimum wage and to make recommendations.
Based on the foregoing, the Commission made some recommendations, among which were: (a) Daily Wage System: That employers (Public and Private) should thereafter distinguish persons employed on a seasonal basis from those engaged for an indefinite period.
It also recommended that an employee should be transferred to the established permanent post if he or she has served an aggregate of three out of five years.
(b) Conditions of Service in Wage-earning Employment: That compensation for Sundays and public holidays should be paid to new and departing employees whether they are on daily wage, hourly or price-rate during their establishment.
Furthermore, all employers were given the statutory obligation to publish conditions of employment and benefits which should be made available to each worker on appointment.
(c) National Minimum Wage: It proposed what it termed the ‘living wage’ through which the minimum wage scheme was to be achieved.
According to the Commission, the ‘living wage’ was one “high enough to enable a wage earner who does a full day’s work to support himself and his family out of his wages.” It was to take into consideration rent, transportation, cost and prices of consumer goods.
40 PSM 802 MODULE 3 The Commission also recommended graduated increases in other salary scales as shown in Table 1 below: Table 1: Graduated increases in Salary Scales as Recommended by the Morgan Commission Graduated Equivalent for Private Sector Annual Salary Income Employees Up to 636 (£318) 72.00 (£36) Same as those recommended for public More than 636 up to 48.00 (£24) Employees except where 864 (£432) negotiated agreement More than 864 up to 24.00 (£24) Except and where no increase 1,176 (£586) equivalent to the public sector were recommended Source: Report of the Commission on the Review of Wages, Salary and Condition of Service of the junior employees of the Government of the Federation and in Private Establishments When government issued its White Paper, the increases recommended were scaled down.
This, with the delay over the release of the report, infuriated the workers and consequently, the various Trade Unions which had hitherto been divided on ideological lines, temporarily shelved their differences and formed the Joint Action Committee.
This Committee succeeded in calling worker out in 1964 on a nation-wide strike which crippled major services.
It should, however, be noted that the Morgan Commission introduced for the first time, a minimum wage in the country, but on geographical basis.
3.1 Main Thrust of the Reform The main thrusts of the Morgan Commission are: 1.
To investigate the existing wage structure, remunerations and conditions of service in wage earning employment in Nigeria 2.
To examine the need for a general upward review of salaries and wages of junior employees in both government and private establishments 3.
To look into the possibility of abolition of daily wage system as well as the introduction of a national minimum wage in the country.
Although the government scaled down the salary recommend by the Commission, the action which necessitated the joint Action Committee 41 PSM 802 REFORMS OF THE PUBLIC SERVICE to call all workers out for protest in 1964.
However, it should be noted that the Morgan Commission introduced for the first time in Nigeria a minimum wage on geographical basis.
4.0 CONCLUSION The Morgan Commission succeeded in making indelible impact on the existing salary and wages of workers, and by extension the general conditions of service of workers in Nigeria shortly after the attainment of political independence of Nigeria as a sovereign state.
SELF-ASSSESSMENT EXERCISE Now that you have read the particular details of the Morgan Commission, briefly summarise the salient points.
ANSWER • introduction of minimum wage on geographical basis • abolition of daily wage system • upward revision of salaries and wages • improvement of the conditions of workers in Nigeria.
5.0 SUMMARY It is pertinent to remark here that the Morgan Commission did not succeed in achieving all the contents of its terms of reference, but it succeeded to some extent in the area of salaries and wages review, abolition of daily wage system and introduction of a national minimum wage on geographical basis.
6.0 TUTOR-MARKED ASSIGNMENT Examine the extent to which Morgan was able to achieve the objectives of the terms of reference given to him.
7.0 REFERENCES/FURTHER READING Adamolekun, L. & Gboyega, A.
(1983).
Leading issues in the Nigerian Public Service.
University of Ife Press.
Gorsuch, L. H. (1956).
Report on the Nigerian Civil Service.
Lagos: Federal Government Printers.
42 PSM 802 MODULE 3 UNIT 2 ELWOOD REFORMS CONTENTS 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objectives 3.0 Main Content 3.1 Landmark Contributions 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutor-Marked Assignment 7.0 References/Further Reading 1.0 INTRODUCTION In this unit, we shall discuss the contents of Elwood Reforms which formed the plank of the Grading Team for the Grading of Posts in the Public Service set on by the government in 1966.
2.0 OBJECTIVES At the end of this unit, you should be able to: • state the rationale for the Elwood Commission • appraise the contributions and achievements of the Commission elaborate further on the extent of its success • • discuss extensively the reasons for the failure of the Commission • identify the improvement it made on the work of its predecessor.
3.0 MAIN CONTENT Consequent upon the consideration and acceptance of the Morgan Commission’s Report by the government, the government in 1966 was compelled to appoint a Grading Team named Grading Team for Grading of Posts in the Public Service in 1966 and was headed by Mr.
I. Elwood thus popularly referred to as the Elwood Grading Team of 1966.
The assignment of the Elwood Grading Team was to enquire into any anomalies in the grading and other conditions relating to all posts in the Public Services of the federation with a view to determining appropriate gradings and achieving uniformity in the salaries of officers performing identical duties.
The Elwood Report observed that the requirements regarding educational qualifications for direct entry at various levels in the public service had been or less standardised and that the underlying reasons for these requirements was the reasonable assumption that a certain standard of basic education is necessary at each level to equip the 43 PSM 802 REFORMS OF THE PUBLIC SERVICE officer for the job.
Schemes of service now exist of course, which specify the duties of each post, method of entry including qualification requirements and advancement within and beyond cadres.
The combination of the Morgan and Elwood exercises gave the civil service some motivation through improved compensation for services rendered and created an impetus for civil servants to strive for advancement to higher graded positions.
3.1 Landmark Contributions 1.
Establishment of Service-wide Scheme of Service 2.
Its combination with Morgan Report gave the Civil Service some motivation through improved compensation for services rendered and consequently created remarkable impetus for civil servants to strive for advancement to higher graded positions.
4.0 CONCLUSION The Elwood Commission successfully complemented the Morgan Commission which gave the civil servants some motivation through improved compensation for services rendered and consequently created a remarkable impetus for civil servants to struggle for advancement to higher graded positions.
SELF-ASSSESSMENT EXERCISE Briefly discuss the major achievements of the Elwood Commission and it impact.
ANSWER • complemented Morgan Report in the area of improving the welfare of workers • covered up the missing link existing in the Morgan Commission gave impetus and hope to workers • • made desperate efforts to look into the future of workers welfare.
5.0 SUMMARY The Commission was a remarkable lot on the efforts of Morgan Report which came before it.
The Commission succeeded in making its impact on the sand of time after the attainment of political independence of Nigeria.
44 PSM 802 MODULE 3 6.0 TUTOR-MARKED ASSIGNMENT Discuss briefly the visible achievements of the Elwood Commission on comparative basis with Morgan Commission.
7.0 REFERENCES/FURTHER READING Ayeni, J.
(2007).
Perspectives and Reflections on Nigerian Civil Service Reforms.
Lagos: S & S Communications (Nig) Ltd. Maduabum, C. (2006).
Reforming Government Bureaucracies in Nigeria: The Journey So Far.
Topo-Badagry: ASCON.
Olaopa, T. (2010).
Public Service Reforms in Africa.
Ibadan: University Press Plc.
45 PSM 802 REFORMS OF THE PUBLIC SERVICE MODULE 4 PUBLIC SERVICE REFORMS UNDER MILITARY Unit 1 Adebo Salaries and Wages Commission Unit 2 Udoji Public Service Review Commission Unit 3 Dotun Philips Study Team Unit 4 Review Panel on the Civil Service known as Ayida Panel Unit 5 Military Style of Reforms UNIT 1 ADEBO SALARIES AND WAGES COMMISSION CONTENTS 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objectives 3.0 Main Content 3.1 Landmark Contributions 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutor-Marked Assignment 7.0 References/Further Reading 1.0 INTRODUCTION In this unit, attempt is made to present the underpinning factors that informed the establishment of Adebo Salaries and Wages Commission in 1971, the first of its kind under the Military Government headed by Retired General Yakubu Gowon.
You will need to understand why the Commission was established at that material time and the success it achieved, if any, and what caused its failure to achieve its goal after the acceptance and implementation of its recommendations by the then Military Government.
2.0 OBJECTIVES At the end of this unit, you should be able to: • state why the Commission was set up • identify the objectives of the Commission appraise the success or failure of the Commission • • outline the key issues handled by the Commission 46 PSM 802 MODULE 4 • assess the extent of penetration of the Commission on the annals of the establishment and management of reform history on Nigerian Public Service.
3.0 MAIN CONTENT Over a long period of time (1966 to 1971), especially after the rise in cost of living, the need for remunerations in posts with comparable responsibilities in the private sector, the requirement for the rapid development of the national economy (that was ravaged during the Nigerian Civil War of 1967-70) and the adequate development and deployment of efficient manpower and other factors, the Adebo Commission was set up in July, 1970 to among others: (i) Review the existing wages and salaries at all levels in the public service, and in the statutory corporations and state-owned companies (ii) Examine the areas in which rationalisation and harmonization of wages, salaries and other remuneration and conditions of employment were desirable and feasible as between the public and private sectors of the national economy; and (iii) Consider the need to establish a system for ensuring that remuneration in the public services, the statutory corporations and state-owned companies was periodically reviewed and kept in proper national balance.
As a result of the above assignments, the Adebo Commission set in motion actions which led eventually to the abolition of the daily paid system.
One of the most significant results of the Commission’s work derived from the observation in its report that although it had not been asked to review the organisation or the structure of the public service but only “the existing wages and salaries”, it was of the opinion that a review of the structure of the civil service should include exhaustive consideration of issues like the role of the Public Service Commission, the Head of Service, the Permanent Secretary vis-à-vis the professional officers in his department and the role of the ministry in relation to a public corporation or state-owned companies reporting to it.
The Adebo Commission did make some observations on some of these issues but still recommended the setting up of a Public Service Review Commission to examine the organisation, management, conditions of service and the training arrangements of the Civil Services and to recommend what changes might be made therein, develop a unified grading structure for the civil service, undertake the regarding of all posts in the Civil Service on the basis of the new grading structure, etc.
and make suitable recommendations.
47 PSM 802 REFORMS OF THE PUBLIC SERVICE In its general comments on its first report, the Commission referred to certain pre-conditions that had to be fulfilled if the recommendations in its report were to have desired impact, since it believed that the conditions were the irreducible minimum, if government was to retain credibility and effectiveness.
These conditions which appear to be of relevance up till today were: (i) Recognition of the primary above all else of national survival and unity (ii) Consistency of government decisions and demonstrable willingness to implement them (iii) Discipline at all levels of government; and (iv) The need for integrity and higher productivity at all levels of public service.
It was clear by the recommendations of the Adebo Commission that a Public Service Review Commission should be appointed to review the structure of the service, develop a new grading structure and undertake a regarding of posts on the basis of the new structure, arose from its view that adjustments of wages and salaries on a meaningful basis were impossible without a review of the wage structure and a review of the structure of government itself.
It, however, made sixty two (62) recommendations, some of which had far-reaching effects on the management of personnel in the service.
These include: (i) Three levels of enforceable minimum wage should be established by zones (ii) Government should make its declared policy to abolish the differential treatment meted to unskilled and semi-skilled labour so that this class of workers can be paid the same scales throughout the country without any geographical differentiation (iii) More attention should be paid to the quality of the individual and his on-the-job performance and less to seniority or paper qualification (iv) Arrangements should be made to give professional officers the opportunity of exposure to the kind of experience and training that fit a person for the highest managerial positions (v) For the purpose of pay and other conditions of service, a distinction should be made between public corporations which are regulatory or welfare/service agencies and those which are commercial or industrial (vi) State-owned industries and companies should have complete freedom to operate outside civil service regulations and procedures and should be assessed or judged solely on the basis of their performance as business enterprise.
48 PSM 802 MODULE 4 Consequent upon the Adebo Commission’s views that a Public Service Review Commission be set up to review the structure of the service which will make grading and salary awards more meaningful, government eventually set up the Review Commission.
3.1 Landmark Contributions The Commission was able to draw the constituted authority and the masses attention to the fact that: (i) Recognition of the primary goal above all else of national survival and unity (ii) Consistency of government decisions and demonstrable willingness to implement them (iii) Discipline at all levels of government; and (iv) The need for integrity and higher productivity at all levels of the Public Service.
From the foregoing, it was clear by the recommendations of the Adebo Commission that a public Service Review Commission should be appointed to review the structure of the service, develop a new grading structure and undertake a regrading of posts on the basis of the new structure.
4.0 CONCLUSION In the final analysis, the Commission was able to unravel some hiding facts and prepared a propitious ground for the take off of an all- embracing Public Service Review Commission which came later the following year.
SELF-ASSSESSMENT EXERCISE Now that you have seen the aims and objectives of the Adebo Salaries and Wages Commission, identify the area of interest to the government, especially the one that led the government to its next line of action.
ANSWER • integrity and probity in government • consistency of government decisions • enthronement of discipline service-wide • recognition of the basic targets of individuals over and above national survival and unity.
49 PSM 802 REFORMS OF THE PUBLIC SERVICE 5.0 SUMMARY The rising cost of living and the need for remunerations in posts with comparable responsibilities in the private sector, among other reasons compelled the Military Government of General Yakubu Gowon to set up Adebo Commission in 1971.
Adebo finally abolished Daily Paid System which the subsequent commissions were not able to do successfully over a long time.
6.0 TUTOR-MARKED ASSIGNMENT From what you have read about the Adebo Salaries and Wages Commission, carefully identify the areas of its success and failure.
7.0 REFERENCES/FURTHER READING Ayeni, J.
(2007).
Perspectives and Reflections on Nigerian Civil Service Reforms.
Lagos: S & S Communications (Nig) Ltd. Maduabum, C. (2006).
Reforming Government Bureaucracies in Nigeria: The Journey So Far.
Topo-Badagry: ASCON.
50 PSM 802 MODULE 4 UNIT 2 UDOJI PUBLIC SERVICE REVIEW COMMISSION CONTENTS 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objectives 3.0 Main Content 3.1 Main Thrust of the Reform 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutor-Marked Assignment 7.0 References/Further Reading 1.0 INTRODUCTION An attempt is made in this unit to discuss pertinent issues like code of ethics, new public service, new structure and organisation of the public service, open reporting system, unified salary grading system, creation of unified senior management group etc.
You should be able to understand and know clearly why it is referred to as Public Service Review Commission 2.0 OBJECTIVES At the end of this unit, you should be able to: • state the target of the Commission • confirm whether or not the Commission achieved its set objectives • identify the difference over and above others before it • appraise all its far-reaching achievements • explain the extent of its failure and shortcomings.
3.0 MAIN CONTENT The Jerome Udoji Public Service Review Commission popularly referred to as Udoji Commission was set up in 1972.
Unlike other previous Commissions which tended to deal primarily with the review of wages and salaries, the Udoji Commission was required, having regard to the need to secure adequate development and optimum utilisation of manpower, and to increase the efficiency and effectiveness of the Public Services in meeting the challenge of a development- oriented society inter alia: 51 PSM 802 REFORMS OF THE PUBLIC SERVICE (i) To examine the organisation, structure and management of the Public Service (ii) To investigate and evaluate the methods of recruitment and conditions of employment and the staff development programmes of the Public Services and recommend such changes as may be necessary (iii) To undertake with the aid of appropriate grading teams, the regarding of all posts in the public services, establish scales of salaries corresponding to such grades, and as a result of job evaluation of posts, recommend salary scales to be applicable to each posts in the services; and (iv) To enquire into and make recommendations on any other matters which in the opinion of the Commission appear to be relevant to the foregoing and therefore ought, in the public interest, to be inquired into.
The Udoji Commission observed that all Nigerians must play their part in the effort to attain the goals of the society and that the adequacy and efficiency of the Public Services are vitally important for the entire nation.
The Commission covered the issues which the Adebo Commission felt required to be examined.
The report was critical of many aspects of the operations of the Public Services and set out to suggest improvements in the structure, the system and the way and means by which public affairs are conducted in the country.
The new ideas introduced by the Commission in the Public Service are: (i) A code of Ethics, which has substantially been incorporated in the Oath for Public Officers (ii) A new style Public Service, capable of meeting the challenge of development and using concepts familiar to the private sector such as a Result-oriented Management, which makes things happen by organising men, money and materials in order to achieve the particular objectives of the organisation within time targets; Project Management whereby various skills requirement can be brought together from ministries and departments in the execution of capital projects; Management by Objectives which is a process of identifying goals and objectives, defining management responsibility in terms of expected result, and measuring performance and achievements against those goals and objectives.
Management by Objectives was expected to foster such aspects of management as goal setting, time target, performance evaluation, manpower utilisation and management development and training; Programme and Performance Budgeting (PPB) whose objective is to base budget on the results derived, rather than the expenditure incurred.
The adoption of 52 PSM 802 MODULE 4 these concepts was supposed to enhance or co-ordinate pursuit of the overall goals of the organisation, rational decision-making and increased productivity, and economy and efficiency in the performance of the Public Service (iii) The structure and organisation of the Public Service was altered to provide for a unified grading structure which will embrace posts in the Public Service from the lowest to the highest and provide equal opportunity for every officer to advance to the highest post in the Service irrespective of his or her discipline.
The dual hierarchies in Ministries were abolished by the introduction of a unified and integrated structure by which authority and responsibility for overall management was vested in the Chief Executive of the organisation, i.e.
the Permanent Secretary.
The Head of Service was to be formally responsible for the coordination of all activities of the ministries and departments of the government, and for ensuring the efficiency of the functioning of the machinery of government (iv) Other matters covered were the role of the Head of Service, the Role of the Public Service Commission, recruitment, promotion and performance evaluation, discipline and staff training, salaries and benefits, manpower planning and training, etc.
Apart from the pay and compensation aspects, some of the recommendations of the Commission which were accepted by the government and which constitute significant reforms in the Civil Service include the following: (i) The Open-reporting system for annual performance evaluation (ii) A Result-oriented Public Service through the application of management techniques already in use in the Private Sector, e.g.
management by objective programme and performance budgeting and project management (iii) Unified salary and grading system which embraced all posts in the Civil Service from the lowest to the highest and provided equal opportunity for every officer to advance to the highest post in the service irrespective of his or her discipline.
Grade differences were to be based on significant differences in levels of responsibility (iv) Merit as the major yardstick for determining promotability of officers (v) The creation of a unified senior management group comprising both Administrative officers and Professional who should be given equal opportunity for advancement to the highest post in the Civil Service.
53 PSM 802 REFORMS OF THE PUBLIC SERVICE With the acceptance by government of the Report of the Public Service Review Commission that all officers within the Senior Management cadres should be centrally managed, the responsibility for processing recommendations for the appointment, promotion, acting appointment and discipline of all Administrative and Professional Officers on Grade Level 14 and above, came within the purview of the Public Service Department of the Cabinet Office, while the Executive Cadres Management Division oversees the recruitment, promotion, training and discipline of all Officers in the pooled services, viz: Executive, Secretarial, Library and Stored Cadres.
Administrative and Professional Officers are eligible for appointment as Permanent Secretaries or for advancement to Salary Grade Level 17 on personal merit.
This development has to a large extent minimised the long-standing conflict between the Administrative and Professional Officers in the Civil Service arising primarily from the fact that members of Administrative Class exercise financial control over the work of their counterparts in the professional cadres.
Representations were made that persons who were advanced to GL.
17 on personal merit still held down their former GL.
16 position thus preventing their subordinates from being promoted to such vacant positions.
These representations were rejected of course because the position held by a personal merit officer is not vacant.
He was only given the higher salary grade level in recognition of his personal merit.
Obvious cases of stagnation and expansion of the work load led the defunct Shagari Administration to consider the reorganisation of appropriate ministries to combine functionally separate directorates under the co-ordination of a Co-ordinating Director on GL.
17.
But after the merger of related ministries by successive Military Administration, this process was effectively halted based on the argument that such mergers would result in a reduction of the staff size.
While implementation of the Udoji Commission’s recommendations lasted, the vexed issue of the Administrative and Executive cadres reared its head.
In this connection, it was canvassed once again that the duties performed by Administrative and Executive Officers at some levels were so similar that the two cadres should be merged.
The issue of the integration of the Administrative and Executive Cadres in the Public Service however was addressed by Circular No.
3 of 1976 when the Federal Military Government approved the re-grading of posts in the Executive Officer Cadre and indicated how suitable Executive Officers could be transferred to the Administrative Officer cadre annually at the appropriate grade level through a competitive selection process.
Complaints arising thereafter, pontificated the reluctance of the higher bureaucrats to implement that policy decision.
This reluctance seemed to have been justified when the ‘Dotun Philips Study Team’ that was set up 54 PSM 802 MODULE 4 much later insisted that such a transfer can only be effected on acquisition of a university degree.
There was also provision for inter-cadre transfer between the Secretarial and Executive Officer cadre on successful completion of a Certificate in Public Administration course at the Administrative Staff College of Nigeria, Badagry, and from the Senior Typist or Chief Typist grade to Executive Officer cadre on the successful completion of a special course at the Federal Training Centres.
There is the provision in Circular No.2 of 1976 for entry into Unified Grade Structure at GL.
08 by holders of HND in Engineering and Allied subjects, the definition of which has been broadened considerably to accommodate holders of HND/HNC in Business Studies and Accounting subjects who are performing accounting duties.
Claims that the concessionary list should be enlarged were carefully considered.
Parastatals and the Unified Salary System As soon as the Udoji concept of the unified grading system for the Public Service was approved and implemented, the management of several of the public enterprises made representations to government on what they described as being forced into the straight jacket of a civil service salary structure which ignored the need to equate their conditions with the Private Sector and apply the principle of equal pay for substantially equal work to Public Enterprises which perform generally similar functions as Private Sector organisations in the same industry.
Subsequently, due to severe pressure during the defunct civilian regime, the Presidential Commission on Parastatals, the Onosode Commission, was set up with a clear mandate inter alia: (i) To examine the organisation, structure and management of parastatals in relation to one another and rest of the Public Service; and (ii) To consider whether any should be taken out of the contemporary unified grading and salary system which since the Udoji Commission’s Report completely put the Parastatals on exactly the same footing in terms of salaries and other prerequisites, as the Civil Service.
It made recommendations as to pay and grading in the parastatals and other recommendations regarding the composition of the board relationships between the Board and the Management and the relationship between parastatals and their supervising ministries.
55 PSM 802 REFORMS OF THE PUBLIC SERVICE 3.1 Main Thrust of the Reform The main thrust of the Udoji Public Service Review Commission included, but not limited to, the following: 1.
Examination of the organisation, structure and management of the public service 2.
Investigate and evaluate the methods of recruitment and the staff conditions of employment and the staff development programmes of the public service 3. Review the grading teams and regrading of all posts in the public service 4.
Enquire into any other matters which may be relevant to the foregoing.
4.0 CONCLUSION The Commission regarded ‘money’ as a poor motivator or put differently as a temporal motivator, and laid emphasis on that factors beside money which could competently motivate the workforce in the entire public service.
The far-reaching recommendations of the Commission were really not attended to like ‘Management By Objective’, Training and Manpower Development, but nonetheless, the Commission made a lasting impact on the steady development of Nigerian Public Service Reforms.
SELF-ASSSESSMENT EXERCISE Having gone through the nitty-gritty of the Udoji Public Service Review Commission, establish a critique of its objectives and achievements.
ANSWER • organisation, structure and management of the public service • methods of recruitment and conditions of employment and staff development programmes • grading and regrading of all posts in the public service.
5.0 SUMMARY In the annals of the history of public service reforms in Nigeria, the Commission made its indelible mark on the sand of time.
56 PSM 802 MODULE 4 6.0 TUTOR-MARKED ASSIGNMENT Attempt a reasoned analysis at success or otherwise of the Udoji Public Service Review Commission in Nigeria.
7.0 REFERENCES/FURTHER READING Adebo, S. O.
& Philipson, S. (1954).
The Nigerianization of the Civil Service: A Review of Policy and Machinery of Government.
Lagos: Government Printers.
Ayeni, J.
(2007).
Perspectives and Reflections on Nigerian Civil Service Reforms.
Lagos: S & S Communications (Nig) Ltd. Maduabum, C. (2006).
Reforming Government Bureaucracies in Nigeria: The Journey So Far.
Topo-Badagry: ASCON.
Olaopa, T. (2010).
Public Service Reforms in Africa.
Ibadan: University Press Plc.
Olugbemi, S. O.
(1987).
“The Nigerian Civil Service and National Development.” In: S. O. Olugbemi (Ed.).
Alternative Political Future for Nigeria.
The Nigerian Political Science Association (NPSAJ).
57 PSM 802 REFORMS OF THE PUBLIC SERVICE UNIT 3 DOTUN PHILIPS’ STUDY TEAM CONTENTS 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objectives 3.0 Main Content 3.1 Landmark Contributions 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutor-Marked Assignment 7.0 References/Further Reading 1.0 INTRODUCTION In this unit, an attempt will be made to analyse the details of the study team on the structure, strategy and operations of the Nigerian Federal Civil Service popularly called Dotun Philips’ Study Team.
You need to know the rationale for the reform and the outcome of the entire reform.
2.0 OBJECTIVES At the end of this unit, you should be able to: • appraise the rationale for the reform • state the objectives of the reform • outline the key issues involved • analyse the highlights of the reform • explain the basic institutional structure of the Philip reformed Federal Civil Service • describe the roles of the Permanent Secretary and that of the Minister as the new Accounting Officers of the Ministry.
3.0 MAIN CONTENT The Federal Military Government in 1985 under the duo leadership of General Buhari/Idiagbon set up a Study Team on the Structure, Staffing and Operations of the Nigerian Public/Civil Service otherwise known as Dotun Philips’ Study Team.
The Terms of Reference of the Team are: (a) to examine the adequacy of the Federal Civil Service in its structure, composition and methods of operation to cope with the demands of Government in the mis-80s and beyond (b) to examine the structure of the Civil Service and make recommendations with a view to streamlining the system where necessary 58 PSM 802 MODULE 4 (c) to determine the extent of overstaffing at various levels, if any, especially at the lower rungs (GL.
01–06) and make recommendations designed to prevent a re-occurrence of the phenomenon and ensure that staff numbers and personnel costs are kept to a minimum consistent with efficiency (d) examine the practices in the management and operations of the Civil Service which gives rise to avoidable overhead charges (e) recommend ways in which the efficiency of the Civil Service and its morale can be enhanced (f) examine the extent to which earlier recommendations on improving the Civil Service were implemented and determine the causes of failure to implement any such recommendations; and (g) make such other recommendations as are considered necessary to achieve the objectives of streamlining the service, reducing costs, eliminating delays and increasing efficiency.
One outstanding feature of this study is that perhaps it is about the first of such a study panel or commission whose assignment neither bordered on nor has a rub-off on wages and salaries and other fringe benefits of public servants.
Equally instructive is that government, in item (f) of the Terms of Reference, specifically asked the ‘Dotun Philips’ Panel to find out the extent to which earlier recommendations at improving the efficiency and effectiveness of the civil service was implemented and more importantly, to pin-point/address the issue as to why some of these recommendations, ostensibly including those of Udoji, did not see the light of the day.
The Report of the Panel contained as many as 149 recommendations and government in its own wisdom, accepted some of the recommendations.
The most fundamental of these reforms were broadcast to the nation by the then President himself in his budget address to the nation in 1988.
These include: (a) The designation of the Minister as the Chief Executive and Accounting Officer (b) Full participation of the post of Permanent Secretary (c) The professionalisation of the Civil Service which automatically compels every officer to make his career entirely in the Ministry or Department of his choice and by so doing acquire necessary expertise to function as a professional or expert in that specialist area of government (d) The decentralization of the powers of appointment, promotion and discipline of staff to the Ministry “under general and uniform guidelines to be provided by the Federal Civil Service Commission.” 59 PSM 802 REFORMS OF THE PUBLIC SERVICE The Rationale for the 1988 Civil Service Reforms The rationale for the 1988 Civil Service Reforms as provided by ‘Dotun Philips (1988) were as follow: (i) To enable civil servants make their career in particular ministries just as their counterparts in private companies and parastatals do (ii) Since the bulk of the civil servants such as the orthodox professionals like the Medical and Allied officers, Law and Engineering etc.
already make their careers in specific ministries, the practice should be extended to the entire Civil Service so that the administrative and executive cadre officers that were hitherto constantly “on-the-move” by way of transfer from one ministry to another should equally make their career in specific ministries (iii) Frequent movement of Administrative and Executive Officers cause incalculable disruption to policy formulation and execution (iv) Similarly, the effective conduct of Nigeria's International Affairs had suffered due to frequent postings (v) In the modem world, the “jack of all trade syndrome” is hardly tolerated.
The Nigerian Civil Service should therefore adopt a similar stance as in the private and public sector management in the modern world which requires specialisation, clear division of labour and inter-professional team work (vi) The British Civil Service along which the Nigerian Civil Service was fashioned had since moved away from a generalist civil service to a professional civil service as is the case in other countries particularly the developed ones; and (vii) professionalism will enhance the post-retirement market-ability of the erstwhile centrally-deployed administrative and executive officers.
It is noteworthy that reforms generally are instituted for a purpose.
Hence, in addition to the foregoing rationale for professionalising the civil service, which was a major revolutionary component of the 1988 Reforms, further justification of same lay in the urgent need to make the Civil Service more virile, dynamic, results-and development - oriented, so that it could implement government policies expeditiously and reduce expenditure.
Consequently, the rationale for the reforms became more pertinent in the light of the problems which had bedeviled the service and impaired its capability to deliver efficiently, effectively and economically and having regard to the increasing determination of the then Federal Military Government to effect rationally accelerated development and thereby improve the general weal.
Against this backdrop, it could be argued that the Civil Reforms were not only inevitable, but constituted a logical extension of the Structural 60 PSM 802 MODULE 4 Adjustment Programme (SAP) -a major-economic policy enunciated by the Federal Government in 1985.
Highlights of the 1988 Civil Service Reforms The 1988 Civil Service Reforms introduced fundamental changes in the service for the purposes of greater efficiency, effectiveness and productivity.
These changes are indicated hereunder: (a) Professionalisation of the Civil Service This was about the most important component of the reform because it totally transformed the civil service thus giving it a new look.
Professionalisation of the service entailed that all civil servants were expected to perform specialised or professional functions.
In addition, they were to spend their entire career life in their respective ministries rather than being posted from one ministry to the other.
To put professionalisation into effect, the following changes were made: (i) Structurally, there were three categories of employees in the service: Those on Grade Levels (GLs) 04 - 7, belonging to the Assistant Cadre; those on GLs 08 - 14, belonging to the officer cadre; and those on GLs 15 -17 belonging to the Directorate Cadre.
These cadres were put into consideration by their designations.
For instance, GL.
04 officers were referred to as X Assistant III, GL.
05 as X Assistant II, GL.
06 as X Assistant I and GL.
07 as Senior X Assistant.
Where 'X' refers to the officers specialised function or profession.
Hence, GL.
06 officer in the Personnel Department was Personnel Assistant 1; GL.
07 was Senior Personnel Assistant, GL.
08 was Personnel Officer II, GL.
09 was Personnel Officer I, GL.
10 was Senior Personnel Officer, GL.
12 was Principal Personnel Officer, GL.
13 was Assistant Chief Personnel Officer and GL.
14 was Chief Personnel officer.
Similarly, the GL.
15 officer was Assistant Director of Personnel, GL.
16 Officer was Deputy Director of Personnel and a GL.
17 officer was the Director of Personnel.
(ii) Horizontally, there were five operational departments which represented the area of concern of the ministry.
For instance, in the Ministry of Agriculture and Water Resources were operational departments such as departments of Forestry, Fisheries, Veterinary, Agriculture and Water Resources.
In addition to these five operational departments were three common management departments, namely; Personnel; Finance and Supplies, and Planning, Research and Statistics.
61 PSM 802 REFORMS OF THE PUBLIC SERVICE (iii) Vertically, each ministry had eight departments each of which was headed by a GL.
17 officer.
In each department were divisions headed by GL.
16 officers, then branches by GL.
15 officers and sections by GL.
14 officers.
The arrangement was however peculiar to the Federal Ministries.
There was a slight adjustment with regard to ministries at the state level.
In the states civil service therefore, a GL.
16 officer was a Director and Head of Department in a Ministry, GL.
15 officer was Deputy Director and head of a division.
GL.
14 officer was an Assistant Director and head of a branch, GL.
13 officer was a Chief X officer and head of a section.
GL.
12 officer was an Assistant Chief X officer, GL.
10 was a principal X officer, GL.
09 officer was a Senior X officer while a GL.
08 officer was an X officer.
(iv) In terms of Personnel Matters, every ministry was mandated to appoint, promote and discipline its officers.
However, the Civil Service Commission still retained authority to appoint officers on GLs 07 – 10 which were regarded as points of entry into the service at the senior level.
In addition, the Civil Service Commission acted as an appellate body, that is, it had authority to receive and attend to all petitions arising from appointment, promotion, and disciplinary procedures.
It was also expected to issue guidelines for appointment, promotion, discipline, and other personnel matters to the ministries among others.
The Decree No.
43 of 1988 on the reforms also provided for officers belonging to other cadres in the service such as the Executive Officer, Secretarial and others like Drivers, Artisans, Messengers, Porters, and Cleaners etc.
The arrangements for these cadres were as follows: (a) Executive Officer Grade Level Functional Title 13 Chief X Assistant 12 Principal X Assistant I 10 Principal X Assistant II 09 Principal X Assistant III 08 Principal X Assistant IV 07 Senior X Assistant 06 X Assistant I (b) Secretarial Cadre Grade Level Functional Title 13 Chief Secretarial Assistant 12 Principal Sec.
Assistant I 10 Principal Sec.
Assistant II 09 Principal Sec.
Assistant III 08 Principal Sec.
Assistant IV 07 Senior Sec.
Assistant 06 Secretarial Assistant I 62 PSM 802 MODULE 4 Indications from the foregoing were that for both the Executive and Secretarial Cadre Officers, the terminal position was Chief X Assistant on Grade Level 13 while the lowest was X Assistant I on GL.
06.
(c) Drivers, Artisans, Messengers, Porters, and Cleaners etc; these continued to use their current functional titles, with the existing Grade Levels attached to them.
In addition, the Policy and Management Departments in all the Ministries and Extra- ministerial Departments ceased to exist, while the Controller of Finance and Accounts (which was a Deputy Director Grade) was to head the accounts Division of the Department of Finance and supplies in the Ministry or in any Extra-ministerial Department.
The organogram of the reformed Civil Service, a ministry, and further breakdown of the three common management departments are indicated in figures I, II and III respectively as outlined from the Explanatory Notes Volume I.
Every Ministry Extra-ministerial Department was enjoined to adhere strictly to the sub-division, and positions indicated in the organogram.
For instance, each ministry was expected to have only three units which were: Internal Audit Unit; Legal Unit; and Public Relations Unit.
A Unit had no further sub-division as it consisted only of schedule Officers.
Similarly, no further sub-division was to be created after ‘Section’ as only schedule officers should be identified below that headship position.
(b) Authority and Responsibility Authority and responsibility were vested by the decree in the Minister (at the Federal level) or the Commissioner (at the State level) as the Chief Executive and Accounting Officer of his ministry.
However, certain measures were introduced to check possible abuses.
These were: (i) To ensure that only those who possess the relevant qualification and experience were appointed Ministers or Commissioners of respective ministries (ii) The Accounting Officer of each Ministry should establish and maintain an Internal Audit Unit to provide a complete and continuous audit of the accounts and records of revenue (iii) The Internal Auditor should be directly responsible to the accounting officer.
He should submit to his Accounting Officer and the Auditor-General a detailed audit programme and thereafter, he should report monthly to the Accounting Officer as well as the Auditor-General on the true progress of the audit 63 PSM 802 REFORMS OF THE PUBLIC SERVICE (iv) An ‘Audit Alarm System’ was put in place.
Here, the Auditor- General was given full powers to stop the payment of any money suspected to be irregularly authorized by the Minister/Commissioner.
In addition, he had free access to the President/Governor (v) To prevent irregular payments before they were made, an ‘Audit Alarm Committee’ should be established to comprise of the Auditor General as Chairman, Accountant-General, and one representative of the President/Governor as member, to examine all cases of alarm raised and brought before it 64 PSM 802 MODULE 4 (vi) The existing Rules and Regulations for protection of government revenues and expenditures were still fully in force and were fully applicable to the Ministers/Commissioners (vii) All instructions to expend government money should be made in writing; (viii) Monthly financial reports were mandatory; and (ix) Minister's/Commissioner's accountability did not end when he left office.
In other words, he could still be invited long after he had left the service to defend any uncovered ‘shady deals’.
(c) Permanent Secretary The post of Permanent Secretary was abolished and replaced with that of Director-General.
The holder of this new post was a political appointee who was expected just like the Minister/Commissioner to leave office with the Government that appointed him.
He may, however, be reappointed by an incoming administration.
In other words, the post of Director-General had become a political and not a career post as was that of Permanent Secretary.
The Director-General acted for his Minister/Commissioner.
In fact, he was regarded as a Deputy Minister/Commissioner.
He was to be appointed from within or outside the service.
65 PSM 802 REFORMS OF THE PUBLIC SERVICE (d) Other Issues: (i) Staff Training - this was to be systematic and continuous.
It was to be mandatorily undertaken before an officer could cross-over from officer cadre to the Directorate cadre.
-It was also one of the criteria for promotion.
For emphasis, systematic training is that which is designed and mounted essentially based on identified training needs of the employees concerned.
The aim is that at the end of the training, those identified training needs or problems shall have been resolved.
(ii) Performance Evaluation - In performing this function, target setting was made obligatory.
The implication of this is that every officer was expected to set targets for his subordinates both in quantity, quality, cost and/or time.
Directors, who were career heads in the ministry were annually evaluated unlike in the past when the then career heads -the Permanent Secretaries were never evaluated.
Each Minister/Commissioner was expected to submit a report of his ministry's performance to the President/Governor every year.
Performance evaluation in the ministry was based on four criteria viz: actual performance vis-a-vis standards set; character traits, attendance and punctuality at work; and leadership performance.
(iii) Promotion Scheme - Under the then dispensation, the maturity for promotion was as follows: * Grade Levels 01 - 06 a minimum of two years * Grade levels 07 -14 a minimum of three years * Grade Levels 15 -17 a minimum of four years Generally, civil servants were expected to attend promotion interviews.
The following were the criteria for scoring candidates during promotion exercises: (i) Performance as assessed by the 50 marks Annual Performance Evaluation Report (APER Form) (ii) Promotion Interview 30 marks (iii) Additional 15 marks qualification/examination (iv) Seniority 5 marks Total 100 marks 66 PSM 802 MODULE 4 Where promotion interview or additional qualification/examination was not relevant for a particular type of promotion, the weight for performance was to be increased correspondingly.
The Ministries and Extra-Ministerial departments were mandated to carry out the promotion exercise twice a year as appropriate.
Effective dates of promotion were 1st January or 1st July of the year.
(vi) Deadwood - In order to check the frequent purges in the civil service, the reforms had introduced a procedure by which only identified and acknowledged ‘deadwood’ were to be removed from the service.
Under this scheme, an officer was allowed a specific maximum number of years on a particular grade level.
This number was initially put at seven.
If not promoted within the set period due to poor performance, he should be relieved of his post.
Inter-ministerial Departmental Relationships As earlier stated, section 318, sub-section (1) of the Constitution of the Federal Republic of Nigeria, 1999, explains that the ministries and extra-ministerial departments collectively constitute the Civil Service.
The same constitutional provisions refer to the Civil Service as the machinery of government, that is, the main instrument which the government of the day either at the Federal or State level uses in implementing its policies, programmes and projects.
In this wise, the various ministries/extra-ministerial departments are supposed to play implementary roles to ensure efficiency, effectiveness and productivity of the civil service.
The inter-ministerial relationship which requires clarification due to implementation difficulties was that between the ministries of Justice, and that of water and housing on the one hand, and other ministries on the other.
The then Special Duties Office of the President in “Explanatory Notes for Guidance on important Elements of the Civil Service Reforms, Volume I”, pointed out that the Ministry of Works and Housing as well as that of Justice, performed certain constitutional and/or statutory duties which were service-wide.
For instance, the Ministry of Works and Housing was responsible for the construction and maintenance of public buildings, while the Ministry of Justice was responsible for any litigation involving government.
The “Explanatory Notes”, thus, provided that these two ministries could have staff whose schedule of duties included provision of professional service to each of the other ministries, but without posting such staff to the other ministries or having permanently occupying office space in these other ministries.
This was akin to the project management practice earlier proposed by Public Service Review Commission under the Chairmanship of Chief 67 PSM 802 REFORMS OF THE PUBLIC SERVICE Jerome Udoji.
In such a practice, a professional but competent officer could be temporarily drawn from his parent ministry/department for the purpose of executing a project at the end of which he reverts to his substantive position, ministry or department.
It further provided that other ministries which however, deemed it fit to employ their own professional staff (e.g.
Architect, Lawyer, etc) could do so, but without prejudice the constitutional and/or statutory duties of the ministries of Justice and of Works and Housing.
Thus, all ministries normally utilised the services of these two ministries on all matters requiring the professional services available in the two ministries.
A professional officer (for instance, Lawyer or Architect) employed by a ministry was to be used mainly for the purpose of liaison with the two ministries undertaking preliminary work on a matter and providing in-house support and second opinion where required, provided that his professional work and advice on major matters was to be subject to the guidance, clearance and approval of the ministries before such work or advice could be used as a basis for action by his ministry.
The “Explanatory notes” also emphasized that the performance of their service-wide constitutional/statutory duties did not imply that the Ministry of Justice and that of Works and Housing should control the vote needed to perform the function in respect of which their professional input was required.
Rather, the ministry which was utilizing the input of the two ministries controlled the vote for the relevant function.
(For example, the vote for building a government hospital was to be controlled by the Ministry of Health), while professionals or experts from the Ministry of Works and Housing undertook the execution of major aspects of the job.
However, the ministry controlling the vote should in relevant cases pay monies for jobs done only on the basis of certification by the two ministries as the case may be.
In addition, it was not part of the duty of the two ministries to award the relevant contracts.
Rather, it was the relevant Tenders Board of the ministry controlling the relevant vote which should have power to award the necessary contracts.
Clarification of intra-ministerial relationship is equally desirous with regards to the -mandatory three common management departments of Personnel Management; Planning, Research and Statistics; and Finance and Supplies.
Again, "Explanatory Notes for Guidance" under reference provides the clarifications on the functions and responsibilities of these- departments as follows: (a) Department of Personnel Management This department should carry out the following functions: 68 PSM 802 MODULE 4 (i) Establishment Matters (ii) Appointment, Promotion and Discipline of Staff (iii) Staff Training and Welfare (iv) Secretariat of the Ministry’s Personnel Management Board and its committees (v) Maintenance of Personnel Records; and (vi) Liaison with relevant bodies outside the ministry.
(b) Department of Planning, Research and Statistics This department was responsible for: (i) Development Plans (Rolling, Medium and Perspective) (ii) Monitoring and Evaluation of Plan Implementation (iii) Secretariat of the Tenders Boards (iv) Research into the sectors over which the Ministry has jurisdiction (v) Research into the internal organisation and operational modalities of the ministry (vi) Sorting the monitoring of Performance and Efficiency Targets for the various sub-divisions and staff of the ministry (vii) Constant collection and processing of data and statistics relating to the Ministry; and (viii) Management of the Ministry's records and information resources (Data Bank, Computer Services, Registry, Library etc).
(c) Department of Finance and Supplies This department should carry out the following functions: (i) Budgeting (Recurrent Expenditure, Capital Expenditures, Revenue) (ii) Financial Administration (iii) Accounts (iv) Procurement of Supplies (Stationery, Office Equipment, Materials) (v) Stores (vi) Management of transport facilities (vii) Maintenance of equipment (Furniture, Office spaces etc.
); and (viii) Liaison with relevant bodies outside the ministry.
We made a number of references to the concept of “Explanatory Notes for Guidance on Important Elements of the Civil Service Reform.” This document was issued by the Special Duties Office of the President.
The document contains solutions to observations on unclarified and problematic issues encountered during the implementation of the 1988 Civil Service Reforms.
As a means of ensuring implementation of the 69 PSM 802 REFORMS OF THE PUBLIC SERVICE provision of the reforms, the Special Duties Office of the president was charged with the responsibility of monitoring the implementation of the reforms all over the federation with a view to resolving any problem(s) encountered in the process.
The document under reference is a product of the responsibility assigned to the Special Duties Office of the President and so far, only two of such documents were released.
These were volumes I and II.
Four issues that caught our attention via the “Explanatory Notes” document will be discussed.
They are: further clarifications on staff Nomenclature; Issues of Acting Appointment that was earlier discontinued within the service; implementing the reforms in the parastatals and other government Agencies outside the civil services; and the establishment of an Efficiency section.
These will now be taken one after the other seriatim for explanation.
(i) Further Clarification on Staff Nomenclature As earlier stated, the reforms provided for three categories as cadres of staff in the service viz: Directorate, GL.
15-17, Officer cadre GL.
08-14 and Assistant cadre GL.
03 -07.
While the Assistant cadre officers possessed Qualifications other than a University degree, the officer L. Director cadres comprised of Officers that possessed university degree, and the Directorate cadre officers, in addition, possessed the relevant experience that had enable them to advance overtime from the ‘officer’ to the ‘directorate’ cadre.
Secondly, the Assistant cadre officers were sub-professionals while the officer and directorate cadre officers were full professionals and the Directors cadre officers in addition, assumed general management duties.
This, therefore, presupposes that for an officer in the Assistant cadre to crossover to the officer cadre, he must possess a university degree.
Similarly, for an officer to cross-over from the officer cadre to the Directorate cadre, he must not only possess the relevant experience overtime but should successfully attend a Senior or Advanced Management course.
Finally, certain situations made it imperative that the functional titles of Assistant Officer and Directorate be replaced with functionally specific officers such as Medical Technologists, Works Superintendents, Store keepers etc.
This was essentially designed to avoid possible confusion.
However, such officers retained their appropriate grade levels.
(ii) Issues of Acting Appointments It should be recalled that Acting Appointments had earlier been discontinued with service-wide.
The new dispensation acting on the experiences gained during the implementation of the 1988 civil service reforms re-introduced Acting Appointments.
This was, however, restricted to the leadership positions such as Director -Head of Department; Deputy Director- Head of Division; Assistant Director - 70 PSM 802 MODULE 4 Head of a Branch; and Chief X Officer-Head of a Section.
It further stipulated that only officers occupying immediate subordinate positions can perform in an acting capacity and such officers should normally earn their acting allowances.
(iii) Implementing the Civil Service Reforms in Parastatals and other Government Agencies Going by the constitutional definitions, Parastatals do not come within the ambit of the Civil Service.
But as we stated earlier on, there is normally an umbilical cord that links the parastatals to the Civil Service in that every Parastatal has a Ministry that supervises it.
On the other hand, each of these Parastatals had an enabling law that establishes it which thus, makes it either autonomous or semi- autonomous but operates as a public service organisation.
In the past therefore, most parastatals had derived the rules and regulations guiding their operations and management of personnel from what operates in their supervising ministries.
The point must be made that the parastatals are at liberty to choose which regulations (at least by tile provisions of the enabling laws establishing them) either from the civil service or outside it which would suit their purpose.
The ‘Explanatory Notes’ equally expressed that the Civil Service Reforms would not be an exception to the long time practice of the parastatals regarding operating rules and regulations in the civil service as they change from time to time.
Although the point still has to be made, that some of the outstanding practices that were newly introduced to the Civil Service by the 1988 Reforms such as professionalisation were already firmly in place in the parastatals.
(iv) Establishment of an Efficiency Section Attention is being drawn to the existence of this section in the Department of Planning, Research and Statistics, apparently due to its neglect during the early implementation of the 1988 Civil Service Reforms.
Where the consciousness of its existence manifested, people seemed to be at a loss as to what to do with that section.
The overall objectives of the section was to ensure a clear understanding of the objective of the ministry within which it was located and to ensure that these objectives were efficiently and effectively achieved.
“The Explanatory Notes” further outlined the functions of the efficiency section as follows: (i) seek the approval of the minister/commissioner with regards to the performance and targets set for the various sub-divisions and staff cadres in the ministry based on feedback received on operational methods of the ministry 71 PSM 802 REFORMS OF THE PUBLIC SERVICE (ii) keep records of targets that were met by staff and which had been acknowledged by their superior officers overtime (iii) monitor on a continuous basis the meeting of set targets and achievement of objectives by the subdivision and staff members of the ministry.
This should however come under the directives of the Director -General (iv) Report the findings of the monitoring activities to the Director- General for necessary action (v) Present a report annually via the Director-General to the Minister/ Commissioner; and (vi) Perform any other relevant duties that may be assigned to it by the Director- General from time to time.
Staffers of this section should, however, possess skills and experience in Operations Research and Organisational Methods.
They should equally be knowledgeable in the procedures and strategies of Management By Objectives (MBO).
Implementation of the 1988 Civil Service Reforms:An Assessment Policy enunciation and policy implementation are inextricably linked.
In fact, they are supposed to be sequential in a continuum such that one comes immediately after the other.
This, therefore, presupposes that once policies are enunciated, the next logical step is to implement them to the letter.
Experience has shown, however, that in Nigeria, as in most developing countries, it is one thing to enunciate beautiful policies and another thing to implement them.
Sometimes, policies are beautifully enunciated and articulated in policy documents, but when it comes to implementation, either they are muddled up along the line, haphazardly implemented, or not implemented at all.
A very good example is the situation with the noble ideals recommended by the Public Service Review Commission under the Chairmanship of Chief Jerome Udoji.
In fact, the recommendations were so beautifully articulated and most of them accepted by the government so much that Professors Ladipo Adamolekun and Alex Gboyega declared the Udoji Commission as “the greatest thing” that had ever happened to the Nigerian Public Service.
However, at the implementation stage, the then government (Gowon Administration) was quick at implementing the new salary structure and even went ahead to introduce and pay nine months arrears which were never recommended by the Udoji Commission ostensibly to improve its popularity with the public servants.
One of the consequences of such an action is the concept of “inflation” which has become a household word in Nigeria.
Another consequence is that those novel ideas that made the Commission the “greatest thing” that had ever happened to the Nigerian Public Service were relegated to 72 PSM 802 MODULE 4 the background.
While some of them were haphazardly implemented, most were never implemented.
Hence, there was an attendant derailment such that people never heard of such ideas thereafter.
If we may ask: - What has become of those modern management techniques of Management By Objectives (MBO), Programme Performance Budgeting System (PPBS), and Project Management (PM) on which the Udoji Commission hinged the attainment of a Result- oriented Public Service?
- What has become of the model for a systematic training activity and its attendant modalities introduced by the commission?
- What is the situation with the Open reporting System of appraising staff introduced as a comfortable alternative to the erstwhile confidential Reporting system?
The questions are inexhaustive.
Suffice it to say, as it has been argued in several quarters, that if the recommendations of the Udoji Commission were fully implemented, there wouldn't have been any need for ‘Dotun Philips’ Study Team and consequently Decree No.
43 of 1988.
The Babangida Administration took some bold steps at ensuring compliance in implementing the Civil Service Reforms nation-wide.
One of such steps was the promulgation of Decree No.
43 of 1988 and its amendment Decree No.
80 of 1993 on the Civil Service Re- organisation.
The implication of this is that the Reforms and their provisions constituted a law that MUST be obeyed by every government official both at the Federal, State, and Local levels.
Another bold step that was taken by that administration was the assembly of Federal Ministers and their Directors-General at the Administrative Staff College of Nigeria (ASCON) for a workshop on the Reforms which took place in October 1989.
Taking a cue from there, ASCON was thereafter to be fully engaged in mounting several similar workshops and seminars nation-wide both for the State Commissioners, Directors-General and Directors at federal and state levels.
The situation was such that there was hardly any state top functionary that had not been exposed to one or more of such workshops.
Even the local government top functionaries were not left-out.
Despite these, experience has shown that the implementation of Decree No.
43 of 1988, seven years after, progressed up to 75% only at the federal level.
While most state governments were still grappling with its implementation, in a few others, it was yet to take a firm root, for instance, the establishment of an Efficiency section in every Ministry in the Federation, was to our knowledge fully complied with in a few ministries at the federal level.
A few other lapses identified either with 73 PSM 802 REFORMS OF THE PUBLIC SERVICE the contents of the reform documents or their implementation in the service nation-wide will subsequently be analysed.
Most of the information being provided here, were gathered during the nation-wide seminars and workshops that lasted between 1989 and 1992 which brought us face-to-face with top civil servants from every nook and crannies of the country.
These lapses are as follows: 1.
It was very clear from the onset that the proposal of the ‘Dotun Philips’ Study Team’ that the lowest position in a ministry should be that of X Assistant III on Grade Level 04, laudable as it was, it seemed not practicable at the time because it carried a lot of implications.
First, such a position can only be occupied by a holder of a good West African School Certificate or General Certificate of Education.
A large number of the staffers of the service such as Artisans, Porters, Cleaners, Gatemen, Messengers etc.
who belonged to grade levels 01 -03 had no such qualification, and most of them who had either put in between 20 to 30 years or were between 40 and 50 years of age were not prepared to undertake any course leading to such a qualification.
In fact, rumours were rife at the time of impending mass retrenchment of these groups of officers as a result of non- possession of such a qualification that would advance them to the minimum position of X Assistant IlI on Grade Level 04.
If the government of the day ever contemplated such an action then, it later saw reasons and wisdom and consequently reneged.
Our position is that, aside from the fact that the number of affected officers was enormous, sufficient time had not been given to them to either prepare for the acquisition of such qualifications which could even last three years or to make an alternative arrangement towards leaving the service.
A gradual phasing out seemed to be the only option, provided a time-frame was given, meanwhile, such occupational groups as labourers, artisans, cleaners, porters etc.
should be retained.
Similarly, the vexed issue of the erstwhile Executive Officer cadre attracted a lot of attention.
Again, the ‘Dotun Philips’ Study Team, in its neat arrangement terminated the X Assistant cadre at Senior X Assistant on Grade Level 07 while the officer cadre took over from Grade Level 08.
The question then arose as to what would become of the erstwhile Executive Officers on between Grade Levels 08 -13.
An apparent answer that made the rounds at the initial stage of implementation of the reform was that they should either possess what it took to cross-over to the officer cadre which in this case is a university degree or be shown the way out of the service.
Again, the consequences of such an 74 PSM 802 MODULE 4 action, if it was ever contemplated, would have been disastrous, due to the enormity of the number of officers affected, and due to the fact that many of them had either put in so many years or, were affected by some other-primordial factors like age, family responsibility, etc.
They were therefore, not prepared to undertake any course leading to the acquisition of a university degree, which from all intents and purposes could be conservatively put at a period of not less than four years.
In fact, there were moves in some government quarters to arrange a crash - programme evening classes for this category of officers at the federal level in some universities.
Probably, the cost - implication of such a move in terms of physical financial cost, man-hour loss, opportunity cost etc.
may have instigated the abandonment of such a move.
Again, gradual phasing-out and providing enough time and opportunity for self- development seemed to be the only option.
2.
Abolition of the Post of Head of Civil Service The Decree abolished the post of Head of Civil Service.
This action seems not to have gone down well with the civil servants.
As argued by a good number of top civil servants from virtually all the states civil services in Nigeria, the Head of Civil Service performs specific functions which are highly essential for the morale of the civil service.
Some of the roles of that post are listed as: (i) serving as a vital link between the civil servants and the political heads (government) (ii) ensuring in its entirety and totality that the welfare of the civil servants is given top priority (iii) serving as the Chief Adviser to the government on issues pertaining to the machinery of government (iv) assisting in the grading and re-grading of posts in the civil service; and (v) providing general paternal care to the entire civil service.
The civil servants equally argued that it was not only vital but also a fact that every organisation must have a head for the purpose of effective management and "active supervision.” For instance, private sector organisations have Managing Directors as Heads, in the Police Force, the Inspector-General of Police (I.G) is the head; the Chief of Naval Staff is the head of the Navy, Chief of Air Staff is the head of the Air- Force and Chief of Army Staff is the head of the Army, etc.
Why, they queried, should the civil service with such a large number of employees not have a head?
75 PSM 802 REFORMS OF THE PUBLIC SERVICE In supporting the foregoing argument, it is my view that the management of a modern civil service with its attendant multifarious responsibilities and problems required the leadership and direction of a Head of Civil Service.
The government, we noted elsewhere, has become a big business, therefore, its ‘Machine’ - the Civil Service should have a leader like the Managing Director in big private companies whose prime responsibility will be to ensure the overall achievement of the corporate objectives of that organisation.
3.
Professionalising the Civil Service The views, of the subjects of our respondents on this subjects were that the service was already professionalised since a large number of its staffers were professionals.
That only a small component of the service that is the centrally deployed cadre officers comprising mainly of the erstwhile administrative and executive officers were not professionalised hence action was being concentrated on them.
This view is in line with that of Professor ‘Dotun Philips’, who identified it as one of the rationale for professionalising the service.
My view, however, is that concentrating on the component that had all the while been left out, no matter how small that component may be, would ensure total professionalisation of the service.
The service would not be called a professional service where some components of it were not professionalised.
Directly related to the foregoing was the issue of officers having an option to choose the ministry and/or one of the three common service departments they wished to make their career in.
This option was well intended, but evidence abounds of denial of such opportunity to a large number of officers particularly in the states.
Hence, most of them had no access to the “Option Form” and had to remain wherever the decree caught them with dire consequences to the service such as frustration and lack of-optimal utilisation leading to lowered productivity.
We must admit that at the early implementation stage, it came to the open at the federal level that there was significant demerit with freely giving the civil servants option to choose one of the three common service departments they wished to make their career in.
For instance, while most of them indicated their preference for the Department of Finance and Supplies, this had to be corrected because if it was allowed to stay, it would have resulted in over staffing the department and grossly under staffing the Department of Planning, Research and Statistics.
The attendant consequence, therefore, was that some officers were inevitably deployed to departments they never wanted but which the service thought would be appropriate for them based on their academic qualifications and experience.
The result of that experiment of 76 PSM 802 MODULE 4 allowing officers a free hand to choose where they wished to belong at the federal level may have informed whatever alternative methods that were adopted in the states in deploying officers equitably to those three common service departments.
4.
Dismantling of the Pool-System The raison d’etre for dismantling the pool-system, according to the authors of the reforms, were: (a) the need for the civil servants to make their career in the ministries of their choice, the bulk of which have already spent their entire career in their respective ministries; and (b) frequent movement of centrally-deployed officers had caused incalculable disruption to policy formulation and implementation.
The foregoing reasons appeared plausible and convincing.
However, the salutary effects of "pooling" on the service seemed to outweigh other effects for the following reasons: First, it narrowed down the tentacles of professionalism by limiting the scope of operation and exposure of the professionals.
In other words, the directive that civil servants should make their careers in whatever ministry the decree caught up with them was kicked against.
The argument here, which in our assessment seemed to be in place, was that a Personnel Manager or officer as a professional remains a personnel manager or other officer irrespective of the ministry in which he was located.
There should therefore be no harm in re- deploying a Personnel Officer from the Ministry of Works and Housing equally as a personnel officer.
This would further enrich the experiences of the personnel officer which would be invaluable to him as he ascend the ladder in the service and break the monotony which was being complained about.
5.
Politicisation of the Post of Director-General and Director: Prior to the 1988 Civil Service Reforms, the erstwhile Permanent Secretary now renamed Director-General, commanded the loyalty and respect of all the civil servants since he was the most senior career officer.
In addition, he was the administrative head and accounting officer of his ministry and his post seemed somehow permanent.
In the scheme of things as provided by the reforms, the powers of “Chief Executive and Accounting Officer” were vested in the Minister at the federal level, and the Commissioner at the state level.
The Director- General was then a political appointee.
He no longer enjoyed the security of tenure as enjoyed by the Permanent Secretary.
He was expected to leave office at the end of the tenure of the administration that appointed him, except if re-appointed by an incoming 77 PSM 802 REFORMS OF THE PUBLIC SERVICE administration.
One consequence of this to the service was that, there was little room for continuity of programmes, since both the Director - General and his minister/commissioner were to leave office with the administration that appointed them.
The argument that had severally been advanced regarding the appointment of Director-General was that he should be appointed from within the crop of Directors in each ministry to ensure both continuity and a measure of experience and expertise in the quality and quantum of advice he provided to his minister/commissioner.
The Reforms seemed to leave this appointment at the whims and caprices of the Federal or State Chief Executive by indicating that such appointment could be made from within or outside the service.
The quality of service in a state's ministry where the commissioner was a politician that was completely ignorant of the inner-workings of the government and his Director- General equally strange to the service as he had hitherto spent all his working life in a private sector organisation, was better imagined – “strange bedfellows” one could say.
Every ministry was supposed to have a maximum of eight departments and consequently eight directors.
Our proposal was that from among these eight directors, a suitable successor to the outgoing Director-General could be identified and appointed.
6.
The Audit Alarm System The Audit Alarm system remained controversial both in theory and practice.
In the past, irregularities discovered during the course of auditing were brought to the immediate attention of the Accountant- General.
But the reforms provided for the establishment and maintenance of an Internal Audit by the Accounting Officer of each Ministry/Extra-ministerial Department, and the internal auditor of each ministry was directly responsible to the Accounting Officer, who was a political head.
A number of questions arose from this arrangement: (a) where lies the checks and balances if the auditor should normally report to someone he had a duty to audit?
(b) is it possible for an auditor who was a staff of a ministry to effectively write an adverse report on his boss, who was responsible for completing his Annual Performance Evaluation Report Form?
These issues seemed to have incapacitated the Audit Alarm System resulting in an apparent reluctance to sound Audit Alarms in the Service.
Again, pooling these categories of officers appears to be a solution or an answer to the above questions.
Long stay in a ministry enhances corruption and gives room for manipulation.
But, where professionals 78 PSM 802 MODULE 4 like Accountants and Internal Auditors were pooled and made accountable only to the Accountant-General or Auditor-General as the case may be, they might not be exposed to unnecessary intimidations from political bosses.
The argument in favour of this arrangement was that they still remained professional accountants or professional auditors even when they were moved from one ministry to the other to perform their professional duties.
Again, the frequent movement would further enrich their experiences on the inner workings of the service.
7.
Concentration of Powers in the Minister/Commissioner As clearly stipulated in the Reforms, the Minister/Commissioner was the Chief Executive and Accounting Officer of the Ministry.
He was also in full control and responsible for men, material and money which were critical input in the management of the organisation.
The Reform went further to state that “the Minister or the Commissioner shall delegate a substantial part of administrative and financial function and authority to the Director-General who should be fully involved in the key decision- making process.
There shall be further delegation of powers and functions down the line in each Ministry.” This statement as contained in the reform document did not specify which substantial part of the Minister's or Commissioner's administrative and financial functions and authority should be delegated to the Director- General.
The implication of this was that some ministers or commissioners would not delegate any financial functions to their Directors-General based on flimsy excuses.
In fact, there were cases of sidelining of Directors-General by some Ministers/Commissioners particularly at the federal level during the initial stages of implementation of the reforms.
Such Ministers/Commissioners preferred dealing directly with the Directors.
Our proposal therefore was that the substantial part of administrative and financial functions to be delegated to the Director-General by the Minister/Commissioner should be reduced to specificities.
For instance, the exact amount of contract that could be awarded, the exact amount of money that could be authorised by the Director-General etc.
As we earlier posited, over-concentration of powers in one hand breeds among others, empire- building, corruption and flagrant abuses.
To check this, decentralisation of such powers seemed to be an easy way out.
8.
Structural Deficiencies The relocation of certain sections at the initial stage of implementation of the reforms drew some reactions from the civil servants.
For instance, the location of the Transport Section in the Finance and Supplies Department by the Decree raised much 'dust' as the Personnel Management Department laid claims to that responsibility.
The argument in favour of the Personnel Management Department was that, 79 PSM 802 REFORMS OF THE PUBLIC SERVICE though there was no such department prior to the promulgation of Decree No.
43 of 1988, those who performed the personnel functions also managed the transport facilities in the ministry.
By the creation of the Personnel Management Department, it sounded logical that the same people who now belong to the personnel management department should continue to perform the transport function based on their expertise and experience.
Similarly, the location of the Registry in the Department of Planning, Research and Statistics did not go down well with the officers of Personnel Management Department for the same reason that it was being relocated away from its traditional area.
More importantly, the Personnel Management Department was supposed to maintain Personnel Records which is a function that has a very close relationship with Registry functions.
Apparently, as a strategy towards ameliorating the various lapses identified with the Provision of Decree No.4 of 1988 and Decree No.
80 of 1993, the Civil Service Review Panel was set up by the Abacha Administration after the demise of the Babangida Administration.
3.1 Landmark Contributions The 1988 Civil Service Reforms popularly known as Dotun Philips’ Reforms represented a departure and currency in the packaging and management of public affairs just as its contents presented a radical departure from the usual trend of the previous reforms which focused attention mainly on review of salaries.
Attention was more on staffing, structuring prominent among which is professionalization of the service and later a reversal to the status quo.
The reforms of 1988 also attracted a novelty in the history of the public service reforms in Nigeria, where a law was promulgated to give support to the reform.
The law was referred to as Decree 43 of 1988 on the Civil Service Reorganisation.
4.0 CONCLUSION The 1988 Civil Service Reforms dealt with the following issues in their entirety: • professionalisation of the civil service • authority and responsibility • new role of and change of the nomenclature of Permanent Secretary to Director-General • staff training 80 PSM 802 MODULE 4 • performance evaluation • promotion scheme • inter-ministerial/departmental relationship • further clarification of staff nomenclature • issues of acting appointment • abolition of the post of head of service • dismantling of the Pool System • politicisation of the post of Director-General and Director establishment of an Efficiency Section • • implementation of the Civil Service Reforms in parastatals and other government agencies.
SELF-ASSSESSMENT EXERCISE Now that you have read the details of the 1988 Civil Service Reforms, analyse the salient issues involved in it.
ANSWER • professionalisation of the service • promulgation of a Decree on it • politicisation of Director-General and Director • abolition of the post of Head of Service • establishment of Efficiency Section • institutionalisation of Audit Team • minister now Accounting Officer • fusion of authority and responsibility.
5.0 SUMMARY The 1988 Civil Service Reform presented a radical departure from the trend of the previous reforms which focused attention mainly on review of salaries and wages.
Attention was now more on structuring and staffing, prominent among which is professionalisation of the service and the promulgation of Decree 43 to give a legal backing to the reforms i.e.
unlike the previous reforms in Nigeria.
6.0 TUTOR-MARKED ASSIGNMENT Examine in details the rationale and staffing proposals of 1988 Civil Service Reforms in Nigeria.
81 PSM 802 REFORMS OF THE PUBLIC SERVICE 7.0 REFERENCES/FURTHER READING Ayeni, J.
(2007).
Perspectives and Reflections on Nigerian Civil Service Reform.
Lagos: S & S Communications (Nig) Ltd. Maduabum, C. (2006) .Reforming Government Bureaucracies in Nigeria: The Journey So Far.
Topo-Badagry: ASCON.
82 PSM 802 MODULE 4 UNIT 4 REVIEW PANEL ON THE CIVIL SERVICE KNOWN AS AYIDA PANEL CONTENTS 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objectives 3.0 Main Content 3.1 Landmark Achievements and Contributions 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutor-Marked Assignment 7.0 References/Further Reading 1.0 INTRODUCTION In this unit, an attempt will be made to establish the background information on the Review Panel on the Civil Service popularly known as Ayida Panel.
Attempt will also be made to examine critically the deliberations and recommendations of the panel vis-a-vis those ones accepted or rejected by the dreaded regime of maximum ruler, the late General Sani Abacha under whose government the panel was set up.
2.0 OBJECTIVES At the end of this unit, you should be able to: • state why the panel was set up and explain why some of the recommendations were rejected and some approved • describe the difference and impact the panel made • describe the far-reaching effects and improvements of the panel.
3.0 MAIN CONTENT The dreaded regime of the maximum ruler in the person of the late General Sani Abacha in 1994 set up The Review Panel on the Civil Service Reforms known as Ayida Panel to correct whatever anomalies or loopholes identified while implementing Decree 43 of 1988 on the Civil Service Re-organisation.
The Panel which was formally inaugurated on 10th November, 1994 by the then Head of state, General Sani Abacha had the following Terms of Reference: (i) to examine and properly define the role of the Civil Service in the executive arm of government and evaluate how well this role has been performed in the past years and factors that have facilitated or inhibited effective performance 83 PSM 802 REFORMS OF THE PUBLIC SERVICE (ii) to re-examine the various provisions of the Civil Service (Re- organisation) Decree No.
43 of 1988 and make recommendations designed to ensure improved performance, efficiency and commitment in the service (iii) to identify the various factors that have led to low morale in the Civil Service and make recommendations to raise the morale of the staff and give them a sense of security (iv) to examine the problem of co-ordination and accountability in the Ministries and extra-ministerial Departments and recommend how co-ordination and accountability can be enhanced in the service (v) to examine the abolition of the post of Head of the Civil Service and the pooling system brought about by the reform since 1988, and to recommend whether it is necessary to restore them, in the case of the pooling system, to determine at what level of management it should be effected (vi) to examine the provisions of Decree No.
43 of 1988 and consider their relevance to the State and Local Government Civil Service (vii) to make any other recommendations which in the opinion of the panel, are relevant to its assignment.
In its Interim Report which was submitted on 19th December, 1995, the panel recommend amongst others that: (i) The Minister should be the Political Head of the Ministry and not the Accounting officer (ii) The title of Permanent Secretary as the Head of the Civil Servants in the Ministry should be restored (iii) The Permanent Secretary should be the Accounting Officer of the Ministry.
In this connection, there should be a clearly defined schedule of duties for all principal officers in the ministry (iv) The Permanent Secretary should be appointed by the President/Head of State (v) The Permanent Secretary should not be Deputy Minister (vi) The bloated Civil Service should be contained and rationalised (vii) Each Ministry should be organised according to its objectives, size and functions (viii) There should be only one Permanent Secretary in a Ministry (ix) The post of Head of the Civil Service should be re-established as an office under the President and should be provided for in the Constitution (x) The Head of Civil Service should be appointed by the President from among Permanent Secretaries or officers of equivalent rank (xi) the Office of the Secretary to the Government of the Federation should consist of the Cabinet Secretariat, Political Affairs, General Services, Special Services and Economic Affairs 84 PSM 802 MODULE 4 (xii) The Ecological Fund should be one of the responsibilities in the Economic Affairs Office (xiii) The Parastatals and Agencies in the Presidency whose function are more related to those of existing Ministries should be transferred to such Ministries (xiv) Professional pools should be created for officers on Grade Level 08 – 17 whose professional cadres commonly exist in most Ministries and Extra-Ministerial Departments (xv) The Personnel Management Boards of Ministries should continue to operate with modifications to be worked out in the Panel’s final report; (xvi) The compulsory retirement age in the Civil Service should be 60 years irrespective of the length of service (xvii) The Civil Service (Re-organisation) Decree No.
43 of 1988 and the Amendment Decree No.
80 of 1993 should be abrogated (xviii) Henceforth, the Management of the Civil Service should be guided by the Constitution, Civil Service Rules, Financial Regulations and Circulars (xix) Correspondence to the Ministry should be addressed to the Permanent Secretary.
A workshop which was convened at the instance of the Secretary to the Government of the Federation on the Civil Service Review Panel took place in Abuja on the 14th and 15th February, 1995.
The composition of the Workshop included: • The Secretary to the Government of the Federation • Members of the Civil Service Review Panel who attended as observers • A Representative of the Chairman, Federal Civil Service Commission • All Federal Directors-General • Secretaries to State Governments; and • Selected Resource Persons.
The overall objectives of the workshop as articulated in its communiqué was a “cross fertilization of ideas on the current developments in the Civil Service with a view to making recommendations to the Civil Service Review Panel.” The Workshop made far-reaching recommendations which among others included the following: (a) Staff training and development should be given emphasis and the importance it deserves.
The policy of reserving 10% of Personnel Emolument for training should be upheld and enforced 85 PSM 802 REFORMS OF THE PUBLIC SERVICE (b) The three Common Services Departments introduced in each Ministry by Decree No.
43 of 1988 should be reduced to two, namely, Finance and Administration Department and Planning Department.
In addition, the Ministry of Establishments and Management Services should study the operations of each Ministry and recommend the optimum number of departments for its operations (c) Pooling of officers in the service should be restricted to GL.
14 and above (d) The age of retirement should not be over 60 years irrespective of the length of service (e) The post of Head of Service should be restored and the functions separated from those of the Secretary to the Government of the Federation (f) The Minister/Commissioner/Chairman of Local Government should be the political head of the Ministry/Local Government whilst the Director-General/Secretary to the Local Government should be the Administrative Head and the Accounting Officer (g) The present title of Director-General should be changed to Permanent Secretary and be restricted to the Ministry.
The present title of “Secretary” in the Local Government should be retained.
The analysis of the situation regarding the assignment of the Review panel on the Civil Service reforms of 1988 is being adopted from the perspective of the strategy for carrying out the assignment.
First, the Panel was inaugurated in November, 1994.
Second, in his Budget Speech of January 1995, the Head of State announced the abrogation of Decree No.
43 of 1988 on the Civil Service Reforms in respect to the recommendations of the Review Panel as contained in the Interim Report.
Third, a workshop was convened at the instance of the Secretary to the Government of the Federation in February, 1995 on the subject of the Review Panel’s assignment.
Thereafter, the Review Panel continued sitting in order to accomplish its assignment.
Although it could be argued that the outlined events were supposed to enhance input to the Panel’s assignment, it is equally seen as distractive and capable of influencing the outcome of the Final Report.
For instance, the abrogation of Decree No.
43 of 1988 on the Civil Service Reforms midway into the Review Panel’s activities appears distractive in that it is envisaged that implementation of all facets of the Panel’s recommendations should come well after it had submitted its final Report and Government’s White Paper issued on same.
Many civil servants initially appeared confused as regards their modus operandi after the abrogation of the Decree.
This is because, the abrogation of the Decree made it illegal for serious references to be made to it, talk less of implementing its provisions.
Yet, the basic structures put in place by the 86 PSM 802 MODULE 4 Decree as well as the operations in the Ministry as provided for in the Decree document were still firmly in place.
3.1 Landmark Achievements Ayida Panel disagreed sharply with Decree No 43 of 1988 on the following issues: (a) Authority and Responsibility of the Minister Whereas the Decree provided that the Minister should combine the headship of the Ministry with the Accounting Officer, the Panel favours the Minister only as the Head of the Ministry while the Permanent Secretary should be the Accounting Officer.
(b) The Position of the Permanent Secretary/Director-General The Decree provided that the post of the Permanent Secretary, which is a career position, should be redesignated Director-General and become politicized by being designated a political appointment which must disengage with the government that appointed the-officer.
However, the Ayida Panel frowned at the arrangement and recommended that the Permanent Secretary retains his original title and powers as Permanent Secretary and the Accounting Officer, who should neither be appointed politically nor be expected to leave the service with any government regime.
(c) The Head of Service Whereas, the Decree abrogated the post of the Head of Civil Service and merged his duties with those of the Secretary to the Government, the Ayida panel recommended that the post be restored and separated from that of the Secretary to the Government.
(d) Structure of Ministries and Departments While the Decree recommended that the Ministries and Departments should be structured according to a uniform pattern and may have a maximum of eight departments and a minimum of two, the Panel advocated for a structure patterned to suit the functions and sizes of the Ministries/Departments and to be limited between two and six departments.
87 PSM 802 REFORMS OF THE PUBLIC SERVICE (e) Personnel Management The Decree favoured a decentralised Personnel Management function which should be left with the ministries, whereas the Panel prefers that Personnel functions should remain with the Civil Service Commission as before.
(f) The Pool System While the Decree disfavoured the pooling system as well as departmental transfers, the panel welcomed these as good enough for the Civil Service.
(g) The government that promulgated Decree No.
43 of 1988 regarded the Decree and its reforms as a great favour to the Civil Service and therefore wanted its full implementations, whereas Ayida Panel which saw the Decree as an unnecessary aberration recommended its total abrogation, (h) The 1988, Reforms recommended that the Civil Service Commission should play an appellate role with particular regards to cases pertaining to the appointments, promotion or disciplinary control of any person employed in the service of the Ministry.
However, the Panel kicked against this and asked that the commission should be allowed to exercise its original powers, including as an employer for certain cadres of staff for the Ministries and Departments.
4.0 CONCLUSION Ayida Panel recorded a landmark and remarkable achievements over what Decree 43 of 1988 originally packaged and fully established.
Being a retired Head of Service and Secretary to the Federal Military Government, Ayida was in a better position to correct the anomalies in Decree 43 of 1988, and thus, the Ayida Panel concluded the unfinished work which Decree 43 of 1988 left undone while it also corrected the glaring anomalies in the Decree.
He did perfectly well.
SELF-ASSSESSMENT EXERCISE Mention three areas in which the Ayida Panel made discernable contributions over the content of Decree 43 of 1988.
88 PSM 802 MODULE 4 ANSWER • authority and responsibility position of Head of Service • • position of Permanent Secretary • the Pool System.
5.0 SUMMARY The sum total of Ayida Panel’s achievements constituted a remarkable landmark over and above what Decree 43 of 1988 recorded.
6.0 TUTOR-MARKED ASSIGNMENT Compare and Contrast the success of Dotun Philips’ Review Panel and the Ayida Panel.
7.0 REFERENCES/FURTHER READING Adamolekun, L.& Gboyega, A.
(1979).
Leading Issues in the Nigerian Public Service.
University of Ife Press.
Ayeni, J.
(2007) .Perspectives and Reflections on Nigerian Civil Service Reforms.
Lagos: S & S Communications (Nig) Ltd. Maduabum, C. (2006).
Reforming Government Bureaucracies in Nigeria: The Journey So Far.
Topo-Badagry: ASCON.
89 PSM 802 REFORMS OF THE PUBLIC SERVICE UNIT 5 MILITARY STYLE OF REFORMS CONTENTS 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objectives 3.0 Main Content 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutor-Marked Assignment 7.0 References/Further Reading 1.0 INTRODUCTION An attempt is made in this unit to analyse the details of all reforms of the public service that took place under the military administration in Nigeria from 1966 to 1979 as the first phase and from 1984 to 1999 as the second phase.
The concern here is to prompt the strengths and weaknesses of each and every one of them within the period mentioned.
2.0 OBJECTIVES At the end of this unit, you should be able to: • describe the underpinning factors for and against each reform • clearly compare and contrast any two of them • identify the strengths, weaknesses, opportunities and threats in all the reforms.
3.0 MAIN CONTENT Before the appearance of the military on the political scene of Nigeria, the civil service in the country was ill-equipped to manage and properly administer the socio-economic development.
A number of problems account for this inadequacy.
Prominent among the problems is that the structure of the civil service inherited from the colonial administration had not been sufficiently adapted to the peculiar socio-economic circumstances of the country.
The existing organisational arrangements of the civil service were not sufficiently conducive to efficient performance there and then.
The situation probably informed the stance of Maduabum when he rightly posits that the executive capacity was lacking since there was dearth of adequately trained manpower.
Added to this according to him is the available evidence of poor attitude to work and unethical behaviours notably in the form of corrupt practices like embezzlement, fraud and straightforward theft.
Despite these, the civil service provided a formidable platform on which the military relied 90 PSM 802 MODULE 4 heavily for the administration of the country under the abnormal circumstances heralding its arrival on the scene of governance.
Furthermore, the marriage between the military and the civil service became inevitable consequent upon the military intervention in governance, and the traditional role of the civil service as the instrument of governance.
A marriage which must go through the ‘bumps and jolts’ which must ‘wobble and fumble’, but in which divorce is out of the question.
The ‘bumps and jolts’ and ‘wobble and fumble’ according to Maduabum are informed by the co-existence in ‘progress’ of apparently two strange bedfellows.
It is pertinent here to note that the military for a longer period in Nigeria constitutes the political class as the masters while at the same time, the bureaucratic class constitutes the junior partner class i.e.
the servant; none of the two groups can conveniently or independently exist without the other.
Together, they both constitute the government of the day in its wider sense.
It is perhaps within the purview of this relationship that Adebayo outlines the roles of the civil service when he admits that decisions are taken by Ministers (Commissioners) and that it is the duty of the civil servants to supply the Minister with the necessary information to make a right decision.
The civil servants must place before the minister (Commissioner) arguments on both sides of the case fully and fairly.
Whatever his own sympathies may be, he must put before his Minister (Commissioner) all the arguments which may be urged against the view held or taken in the office.
Once the decision is taken, the civil servant must carry out loyally the policy chosen even though he may have preferred a different one.
Reform under the Military Government of Gowon Between 1966 and 1975, the civil servants worked in a different and an unusual environment, the military situation.
It was one that they had never been accustomed to.
Even in the absence of direct administrative intimidation, the fear of military rule was in itself sufficiently psychologically intimidating for civil servants to want to conform.
Besides, the economy was relatively underdeveloped, so that civil servants hardly thought of any alternative to their work at that time.
Yet, the public servants in Nigeria at the time led what could be regarded as a moderately satisfactory life that the Bridges Committee in 1941 and Morgan Commission in 1964 had envisaged.
In addition, the military came into the political scene admitting humbly that they themselves were in an unusual terrain in which they thought they had the civil servants as confidants to give them the necessary advice and indeed do the work of governance for them.
The late Major Nzeogwu put in aptly 91 PSM 802 REFORMS OF THE PUBLIC SERVICE when he said that the military personnel were lucky that they had experts in the Civil Service “to do the job for us (the art of governance).
This was the environment in which the civil servants found themselves between 1966 and 1975 and in which they had to discharge their duties to the best of their ability.
The military were in politics and genuinely detested the politicians, preferring the civil servants instead.
And they were not in a hurry initially to appoint Commissioners.
The military were genuinely interested in the unity of the country and taking the country forward through development in order to obtain legitimacy and acceptance.
And the civil servants did not genuinely want the country to disintegrate.
So they accepted from the military and as well advised the military initially to keep away the politicians, so that they could offer direct advice to the military rulers and also get directly involved in policy formulation.
Like the colonial civil servants, the civil servants in the 1966-75 era violated gravely the bureaucratic principle of anonymity but not the principles of neutrality and impartiality.
Following this situation, the senior civil servants got more involved than it is traditionally the case in policy formulation.
They prepared the policy proposals, their implication and programmes of their ministries and took them to the Executive Council (EXCO) meetings.
They participated actively in EXCO meetings.
They presented and defended their ministries’ proposal and programmes at the EXCO meetings and publicly.
In this whole process, they lobbied during the preparation of the proposals, during and after EXCO meetings, so as to manipulate a few matters and bring political connotations to influence considerations and decision-making.
All this meant that the civil servants were involved in political activities and considerations beyond the conventional interaction of politics and administration.
Even after the Commissioners had been appointed, the civil servants were still neck deep in political matters to a worrying degree as elucidated in Adebayo’s statement that the involvement of the higher civil servants in policy formulation to an unprecedented level was not a sudden affair which started during the military regime.
A. Adebayo posits that civil servants’ deep involvement in policy formulation at the federal level was a hangover from their involvement in it in the same manner “which they had established in the civilian era.” There was no question of the involvement of the Federal Permanent Secretary in policy formulation.
Commenting further, Adebayo accuses Gowon of encouraging ….officials to attend meetings of the Federal Executive Council and of the Supreme Military Council and to speak their minds.
It was not uncommon for an official to get up and speak after his Commissioner had spoken, and to take an entirely different line from that of his Commissioner 92 PSM 802 MODULE 4 when the latter’s views were supposed to represent the official departmental stand.
What happened at the federal level was generally applicable at the state level during the Gowon administration, although to a lesser degree and it is reasonably true to say that the higher civil servants at the state level participated in policy formulation to an unprecedented degree.
There is, of course, no question about the unprecedented participation of the higher civil servants in policy formulation at the state level in the period under consideration, particularly with reference to 1st January 1966 – 1st May, 1967 when the military government refused to appoint Commissioners on the advice, according to P. C. Asiodu, of Permanent Secretaries.
Another seemingly more serious problem to the issue of the participation of civil servants in policy formulation beyond the traditional frontiers is what Asiodu called the false impression that was given to the effect that the senior civil servants were involved in formulating policies in secret.
This helped to aggravate annoyance against the participation of the higher civil servants in policy-making.
It was because of all the above that during the 1975 purge of the Nigerian Civil Service, the aim of the Mohammed/Obasanjo Regime to clip the wings of the Federal Senior Civil Servants and put them in their proper places, particularly regarding policy formulation, was extended with the same force to the State Civil Service.
Apart from the involvement of the civil servants, especially at the federal level in policy formulation to an unprecedented level which has been given due attention, the civil servants were equally involved in some other governmental activities and programmes during this period which marked the efficiency and effectiveness of the Nigerian Civil Service.
Just to mention a few; these included the civil servants’ impressive contribution to the Nigerian survival which was faced and overcome in the period 1966-70 as recorded by Asiodu.
The Nigerian economy according to him achieved a phenomenal growth in 1971, culminating in an annual growth rate of 10% at 1962/63 factor cost.
This was the period of the oil boom and general rise in production especially in the industrial sector which brought a lot of revenue to the country and which led to increase in GDP from about N4,928.
00 million in 1971 to about N14,411 billion in 1974/75.
What is equally worthy of mention are the government’s spectacular investments in projects, principal among which were inter and intra state roads in all parts of the country.
Similar increases were recorded in the volume of government-funded social services and in the magnitude of public expenditures.
The government with the active assistance of the civil service achieved the landmark of restructuring the Nigerian government through the creation of the twelve states structure in 1967.
93 PSM 802 REFORMS OF THE PUBLIC SERVICE Very worthy of mention also is the brief roll call of civil servants’ achievements during this period was the call by the different state governments in the country to the citizenry to help the government to help the people, because the government could not alone provide all the needs of the people.
The slogan was called self-help.
Communities were encouraged to engage in different self -help projects.
Arising from the actual contributions of civil servants to governmental process during the period under review, one can safely sum up the strengths of the Nigerian civil services as follows: (i) That they ensured the continuity of the machinery of government (ii) That they had a clear commitment to national unity and to national greatness and prosperity (iii) That they had self-confidence and were proud of their role in the society.
However, the limitations and weaknesses can also be listed: (i) They were unable to proffer solutions to fundamental issues on which opinion was divided among politicians and within society at large (ii) Whenever they were left to determine government policy, they tended to attend first to their members’ interests (iii) They were preoccupied with achieving, maintaining and asserting primary in policy formulation while paying inadequate attention to the strengthening of the civil service institution and to the execution of settled policies (iv) The persistence for the generalists-specialist conflict weakened the civil services and accounted partly for poor record of performance in policy formulation and execution (v) They failed to pay adequate attention to the improvement of the managerial and technical competence of their members.
There was an absence of a concept of civil or public service, a problem for which they (civil/public servants) were not solely responsible.
Udoji Public Service Review Commission of 1974 The Udoji Commission, officially called Public Service Review Commission, was set up on 13th September, 1972 following Adebo Commission Second Report of 1971.
94 PSM 802 MODULE 4 It had the following Terms of Reference: The Commission shall, having regard to the need to secure adequate development and optimum utilisation of manpower and to increase the efficiency and effectiveness of the public service in meeting the challenge of a development – oriented society: (a) examine the organisation, structure and management of the public services and recommend reform where suitable (b) investigate and evaluate the methods of recruitment and conditions of employment and the staff development programmes of the public services and recommend such changes as may be necessary (c) examine all legislations relating to persons as well as the various superannuation schemes in the public services and in the private sector and suggest such changes as may be appropriate with a view to facilitating mobility within the Public Services, and also between those services on the one hand and the private sector on the other, while at the same time providing for the retention in the public services of qualified and efficient personnel (d) undertake, with the aid of appropriate grading teams, the regrading of all posts in the public services, establish scales of salaries corresponding to such grades and as a result of job evaluation of posts, recommend salary scales to be applicable to each post in the services (e) enquire into and make recommendations on any other matters which in the opinion of the Commission, appear to be relevant to the foregoing and therefore ought, in the public interest, to be enquired into.
The terms of reference of the Commission conceptualised the “Public Services” to mean the Public Service of the Federation and the States, including local government service, teaching service, service in the universities, statutory corporations, state-owned companies, the Police and the Judiciary, with the only exception of the military.
The Commission used “Public Service” virtually all through in its report.
The Civil service was subsumed in the Public Service that was used by the Udoji Commission.
The Commission submitted its report in September 1974 and government’ views on the report were published in December, 1974 while General Yakubu Gowon Military Regime itself was overthrown in a palace coup of July 29, 1974 after which the Military Regime of Murtala/Obasanjo was installed.
95 PSM 802 REFORMS OF THE PUBLIC SERVICE Murtala/Obasanjo Reforms The Military Regime of Murtala/Obasanjo after the overthrowing of General Yakubu Gowon on 29th July, 1975 applied a dose of that inflicted an indelible mark on the Nigerian Public Service.
The regime itself left Nigerian Public Servants to wonder whether they were in an enviable public service in which the Weberian ideal of tenure of office used to be one of the enduring characteristics of enticements for civil servants.
Apart from the 1975 and 1984 major purges, there have been some other minor cleaning up of the civil services by the removal of what is usually described as undesirable staff – all actions of which “Dotun Philips has described as “arbitrary purges.” The 1975 purge which came in the wake of the demise of the Gowon Regime was meant to remove the so-called politically- infested civil servants (particularly the Permanent Secretaries) who participated in policy formulation by attending Executive Council (EXCO) meetings at federal and state levels during the Gowon Administration.
The civil servants were also accused of being responsible for the decision by the Gowon Regime not to hand over power in 1975 as originally promised.
Other reasons for the purge included inefficiency, ineffectiveness, and insensitivity that were leveled against the Nigerian civil service.
The devastating aspect of the 1975 purge was the removal of about 11,000 staff of the Nigerian Civil Service in one fell swoop, out of which about 411 were from the defunct Bendel State Civil Service.
It is perhaps not usually realised that the 1984 purge was more devastating.
Although the total figure of civil servants removed from service nation- wide cannot be easily ascertained, but about 6,471 were removed from the Bendel State Civil Service alone.
The total number of civil servants removed from the service nationwide can be better imagined.
Some of the people removed were retired; others had their appointments terminated while others were dismissed.
Some of the people were removed with immediate effect.
Some heard their names on television or radio.
There were others who learnt of their removal from service when they came to work.
The due process of query in which formal charges are made, opportunity for defence offered, the reply analysed, disciplinary committee trial as spelt out in the Civil Service rules were not followed.
In addition to the above carefree and brazen acts of government, the 1984 purge contained in this matter was not subject to redress.
This was stated in section 3(2) of Decree 17 of 1984 which empowered the purge.
It read as follows: 96 PSM 802 MODULE 4 No civil proceedings shall lie or be instituted in any court for or on account of or in respect of any act, matter or thing done or purported to be done by any person under this Decree and if any such proceedings have been or are instituted before, on or after the making of this decree the proceeding shall abide, be discharged and made void.
All this meant that the law of natural justice was thrown overboard and the Weberian principle of the security of tenure for bureaucrats was brazenly questioned and flouted.
It was not that the purges which questioned the Weberian principle of security of tenure were really a “strange phenomenon” or “that before 1975 the Weberian concepts had been fully applicable to the Nigerian Public Service or that the Weberian ideals (were) questioned for the first time in the Nigerian Public Administration since colonial days by the 1975 purge.
The situation really is that some of the Weberian codes had been questioned or violated right from colonial days of the Nigerian Civil Service.
For instance, the merit principle in appointment which was not operated with respect to Nigerians vis-à-vis the Europeans until the Nigerianisation policy.
It was a violation of the Weberian principle of meritocracy in appointment of bureaucrats per se.
Expected Impact of the Purges The 1975 purges, it was envisaged, would result in a more effective, efficient, neutral service, responsible, dedicated and polite, indeed, the service was purged of the characteristics which it had acquired during the Gowon Regime and it put back the civil servants in their proper place.
In this regard, it was announced that Permanent Secretaries would no longer attend Exco Meetings.
It was, however, a wrong announcement because they had attended Exco Meetings before Gowon took over power in order to supply information to the members to facilitate decision-making.
The announcement did not, in fact, stop the Permanent Secretaries from attending Exco meeting; it only restricted them to being in attendance by which it meant that they did not participate in deliberations but only supplied information as and when required.
The purges were also expected to act as deterrent to the new entrants into the service.
The 1984 purge was aimed, in addition, at reducing the number of public servants to a manageable number so as to reduce the expenditure on the civil servants.
Aftermath of the Purges The aftermath of the purges have been described as counter-productive in the sense that instead of the government’s intention of increasing 97 PSM 802 REFORMS OF THE PUBLIC SERVICE efficiency and effectiveness in the civil service, those who were removed or left in the process and the new entrants were all demoralised.
The purge affected the serving officers’ initiative, their innovative abilities, their loyalty and dedication to duties generally.
There is, therefore, great insecurity in the minds of civil servants.
The purges led to the exit of some of the most experienced civil servants from the service.
The purges also resulted in the removal of some very dedicated civil servants both old and young through victimisation.
Herein lay succession problem as was the case with the Nigerianisation of the Nigerian Civil Service in 1954.
When there is a vacuum, the service makes do with the available manpower who may not be generally well suited staff to fill the vacancies.
They are less experienced but to fill the vacuum the left-over staff are given accelerated movement in the form of acting appointments.
In spite of this, the service cannot be the same again for a very long time after.
Succession problem also led to internal conflict on the part of the staff who struggled to fill the vacuum to the disadvantage of the service.
Buhari/Idiagbon Reforms Before the overthrow of the Shagari Administration by the Buhari/Idiagbon Administration, it was generally believed that civil servants were involved in varying degrees of economic and political crimes.
On ascension to power by this regime, attention was turned to the civil service as an institution that needed to be reformed.
The strategy that quickly came to this administration according to Amdi was that: The civil service was larger than what the economy can cope with or maintain.
Apart from the problem of number, old age, fraud, indiscipline, ill-health, divided loyalty and declining productivity, there were other criteria considered.
The above statement served as an adequate notice to remind the service that the axe of retrenchment used by the Murtala/Obasanjo Regime nine years ago to send thousands of civil servants on forced retirements and unjust dismissals was once again around.
Consequently, the thought of uncertainty and insecurity started perturbing the service.
It is ironical and inconceivable to talk of enhanced productivity, effectiveness and efficiency in the service under such a tense atmosphere when many were not sure of their continued service.
How does one then mobilise the service to be as result-oriented as expected in view of the then atmosphere?
98 PSM 802 MODULE 4 The civil service at this period was characterised by what Amdi describes as follows: Indeed the civil servants between 1983 and 1985 were completely trapped as the momentum to initiate and manage ideas reached its lowest level.
People felt unsafe in the suspect that the invisible hands will descent and retire them.
If the relationship was based on spite, fear, suspicion and unpredictability of the next course of action, how does the military expect the service to perform?
To further increase the ruthlessness of this administration towards the service, Decree No.
17 – Public Officers (Special Provisions) Decree 1984 was promulgated to allow the removal of civil servants without the usual administrative proceedings involved in their removal.
Section 3 of the draconian decree categorically states that: No civil proceedings shall lie or be instituted in any court for or on account of or in respect of any act, matter or thing done or purported to be done by any person under this Decree, and if any such proceedings have been or are instituted before an or after the making of this decree, the proceedings shall abate, be discharged and made void.
The Decree as stated above simply means that once the civil servant is dismissed or retrenched under the said decree, he or she had no recourse but to accept the fact that his or her fate had come since the decree gives no room for any appeal to be instituted within the constitutionally provided mechanism in the civil service or in any court of law of the land.
It is worth mentioning here that the Babangida’s Administration did not abrogate the draconian decree, meaning therefore that his administration supports the provisions of the decree.
This, of course appears contrary to the human rights claims and posture of the administration.
99 PSM 802 REFORMS OF THE PUBLIC SERVICE Number of Retrenched Workers by December 31st 1984 in Nigeria during Buhari/Idiagbon Regime State Number of Workers Retrenched Federal Establishments 27,247 Anambra 1,642 Bauchi 433 Bendel 8,891 Benue 6,553 Borno 2,770 Cross River 503 Gongola 10,000 Imo 7,143 Kano N.A.
Kaduna 4,847 Kwara 6,003 Niger 2,598 Ogun 3,433 Ondo 3,215 Oyo 10,000 Plateau N.A.
Rivers 140 Sokoto 10,000 Abuja 275 Nigerian Union of Local 61,000 Govt.
Workers Total 166,701 Source: I.E.S.
Amdi: “The Nigerian Civil Service Under the Military Administration, 1987, p.19 A look at the retrenchment figures above during the Buhari/Idiagbon regime is terrifying for one not to doubt that such an exercise could be demoralizing and completely counterproductive.
It should be noted that the statistics for the states of Kano and Plateau were not available from the above source.
Babangida Reforms The emergence to power of Babangida’s Regime and in its apparent belief in the principles of fundamental human rights was clearly interpreted that the administration was not through questionable, probably in support of its immediate predecessor’s irrational and reckless policies, including the unnecessary purging of civil servants.
100 PSM 802 MODULE 4 The position of this administration was further made clearer when Babangida himself stated that: Under the previous administration (Buhari’s) there was accusation of systematic intimation and derogation.
The initial objectives were betrayed and fundamental changes do not appear on the horizon because of the present state of uncertainty, suppression and stagnation.
Buhari was too rigid and uncompromising in his attitude to issues of national significance.
Efforts to make him understand that a diverse polity like Nigeria requires recognition and appreciation in both cultural and individual perception only served to aggravate attitudes.
Based on this maiden statement of Babangida’s Regime, many people were convinced including those in the civil service that the administration will no doubt adhere to the fundamental principles of human rights including, of course, putting an end to the irrational exercises of purging the civil service.
The 1988 Civil Service Reforms of 1988 which is the product of Babangida Regime therefore provided, among other things, for the following: (i) Fusion of administrative and political leadership by making the Minister both the Chief Executive and Accounting Officer of the Ministry (ii) Abolition of the post of Permanent Secretary and replacing it with the political post of Director-General who is to be a Deputy to the Minister and also to serve and retire with the government that appoints him or her (iii) Autonomy from centralised control and checks by making each Ministry responsible for the appointment, discipline and promotion of its staff under general and uniform guidelines to be provided by the Civil Service Commission (iv) Professionalisation of the service in the sense that every officer whether specialist or generalist was to make his career entirely in one ministry or Department of his choice (v) Categorising the service into two cadres namely the officer cadre and the Assistant Cadre.
The details of the reforms were later espoused in a Decree titled Civil Service (Re-organisation) Decree No.
43 of 1988.
The reforms were made applicable to both the Federal and State Civil Services.
The Decree made elaborate and strong provisions which were in accord with 101 PSM 802 REFORMS OF THE PUBLIC SERVICE the Executive Presidential System of government and the need to put in place a strong, virile, responsible, responsive, dispassionate, professional and accountable civil service that would be able to cope with the test of time and meet the objectives and aspirations of government, promptly and with costs consistent with performance.
Some of the provisions of the 1988 Civil Service Reforms were: (a) The Minister as Chief Executive and Accounting Officer (b) Introduction of the nomenclature of Director-General in place of Permanent Secretary (c) Professionalization of the civil servants through: i. Departmentalization, and ii.
Continual training (d) Restructuring of the civil service (e) Targets and performance evaluation scheme (f) Institutional arrangements for personnel management (g) Financial checks and balances (h) The Civil Services Commission (i) The merging of the Ministry of Finance and National Planning and renaming them as the Ministry of Finance and Economic Planning i.e.
one Ministry (j) The transfer of the Budget Department in the Ministry of Finance to the Presidency (k) Arrangements for the implementation of the 1988 Civil Service Reforms.
The brief examinations of some of them are as follows: (a) The Minister as Chief Executive and Accounting Officer The reforms made the Minister/Commissioner the Chief Executive and Accounting Officer of the Ministry rather than the Permanent Secretary.
The Minister was given the general and overall responsibility for the effective and efficient formulation and execution of government policies and programmes and to make regulations for personnel administration in the ministry within the guidelines provided by the Civil Service Commission.
The criticism against the position of the Minister was that he was saddled with too much responsibility just as the Permanent Secretary was.
He could not have done better than the Permanent Secretary, more so as he combines his numerous administrative functions with his political responsibilities.
102 PSM 802 MODULE 4 (b) Director-General The Director-General replaced the Permanent Secretary in name as the second in command in the Ministry and Deputy Minister.
He stepped into the office of the Minister when the latter was absent.
The Udoji Commission had recommended that the nomenclature of Permanent Secretary be changed to Director-General, while the Dotun Philips’ Study Team recommended that it should be called Secretary-General but the Government rejected both recommendations.
The Director-General was expected to retire with the government that appointed him except the in-coming administration decided to re-appoint him.
If any serving civil servant rejected his appointment as Director-General he would have to report to the Civil Service Commission for re-deployment.
The position of the Director-General was like that of the Senior Management Group (SMG) in the civil service of United States of America.
It was both political and economic and meant to gear top people in government to action.
As a member of the Senior Management Group, you are hired because of your potentials and fired if your performance is discovered wanting.
In the Nigerian Civil Service, the position of Director-General was created presumably because of the widely accepted problems that the Permanent Secretary used to create for the minister because while the former was a career civil servant, the latter was a politician.
The latter accused the former often that he used to frustrate his efforts because he did not reason the same way with him.
Some knowledgeable ex-civil servants like Udoji had, in fact, criticised security of tenure for civil servants generally after grade level 14.
(c) Professionalisation of the Civil Service Professionalisation of the civil servants is in accord and consistent with the Weberian principle of technical competence of bureaucrats through expert and thorough training.
There were two attributes of professionalisation.
First, was that every officer would make his career in the Ministry of his choice and he would be made to concentrate on particular job uninterruptedly, so that, by so doing, he would acquire the necessary expertise and experience.
The Koshoni Task Force recommended and government accepted that administrative/pool officers should specialize in a particular area like personnel, planning and research, etc., and that they could be posted from the same area in one ministry to the same area in another ministry.
The second attribute of professionalisation was training of civil servants through in-service training, study leave with or without pay, in-house, part-time, evening, day release and weekend programmes.
These were pursued by the civil service.
103 PSM 802 REFORMS OF THE PUBLIC SERVICE (d) Restructuring of the Civil Service Each Ministry was restructured into the following three common/service departments: • Personnel Management • Finance and Supplies • Planning, Research and Statistics.
In addition, each ministry was to have not less than five “operations” departments, which would mean a maximum of eight departments’.
Unlike in the old dispensation in which policy formulation was the specific prerogative of the administrative class, following the 1988 Civil Service reforms, the operating departments could initiate, develop and, of course, execute policies.
The nomenclature of the majority of civil servants were changed.
Formerly these were, for example, Permanent Secretary, Deputy Permanent Secretary, secretary for, Principal Secretary, Deputy Secretary, Under Secretary, Principal Assistant Secretary, Director or Controller of Works Services, Deputy Director of Works, etc., depending on whether the officer was an administrator or a professional.
The new nomenclatures of the ministry following the 1988 Civil Service reforms were Minister, Director-General, Directors for Heads of Departments, Deputy Directors for Divisions, Assistant Directors for Branches and Chief Officers for Sections which were the lowest units in the new dispensation.
Only a few officials like Storekeepers, Drivers, etc.
were allowed to retain their existing status titles.
The streamlining of the nomenclatures was aimed at full integration of all civil servants the efforts started as far back as 1954 when Ministers were given fill autonomy over their Ministries and the departments under them in what was properly called integration of departments with Ministries.
(e) Annual Performance Evaluation Report Like the Udoji Commission Report, the 1988 Civil Service Reforms tried to place emphasis on concrete and measurable performance even in routine matters.
The reforms stated that after due consultations with the Director-General and Directors, the Minister would set targets to be achieved by civil servants in his ministry.
The annual report made on any officer must also be accessible to him.
104 PSM 802 MODULE 4 (f) Institutional Arrangements for Personnel Management The 1988 Civil Service Reforms provided that each Ministry should have a Personnel Management Board with two Committees – one for senior staff and the other for junior staff.
It is interesting to note that the reforms specifically provided that very senior officers should serve on the boards and committees.
This is in line with the Weberian code of appointments being done by higher officers in the bureaucratic hierarchy.
The boards and committees were expected to consider promotions every six months in order to motivate staff.
The civil service reforms provided that each ministry should recruit, promote and discipline its staff, executing these functions within the general guidelines provided by the Civil Service Commission, except that grade levels 07 – 10 officers were to be handled by the Commission, presumably because it is within that bracket that graduates are recruited into the civil service, and they form the bulk of officers recruited into the service and the threshold of management while the Civil Service Commission actually took charge of recruitment of this category of staff, their discipline was the responsibility of the individual ministries, at least in the first instance, before the CSC could be brought in.
With regards to promotions, as an example, the reforms provided the minimum number of years that civil servants should spend in post before being due for consideration for promotion.
They were as follows: Grade Level Minimum No.
of Years in Post 01-06 2 years 07-14 3 years 15-17 4 years In addition to the above, there were some other conditions like promotion examinations and interviews that certain grade levels of staff were expected to fulfill.
One major snag against the institutional arrangement for personnel management was the element of federal character i.e.
representation of the diverse peoples of the state, except in the case of the junior staff committee of the federal civil service at the state level.
There is no doubt that that element and the association of performance at interviews, training, good conduct, etc., with merit could hinder the Weberian principle of meritocracy of personnel management.
Also, in spite of the superintending role of the Civil Service Commission, the decentralisation of personnel functions in the civil service to the ministries was bound to affect methods, procedures and 105 PSM 802 REFORMS OF THE PUBLIC SERVICE standards in such areas as, for example, promotions and discipline in the different ministries.
(g) The Civil Service Commission (CSC) The arrangements for personnel management as discussed above affected the functions of the Civil Service Commission.
The functions of the CSC were thus reduced and modified, such that provision of guidelines for personnel management in the ministries, monitoring compliance with the guidelines, records keeping, recruitment and promotions of only grade levels 07-10 officers and serving as appellate body for aggrieved civil servants became the main functions of the CSC.
(h) Financial Checks and Balances There were five major financial arrangements or checks and balances in the 1988 Civil Service Reforms which were expected to ensure financial discipline and accountability of the ministry.
These were: first that the Minister would be called to account for his stewardship, especially financially, even after he would have left the office.
Second, the Director of Finance and Supplies Department was charged with the responsibility of ensuring proper records of revenue, expenditures and the stores of the Ministry under the overall responsibility of the minister as the Accounting Officer.
Thirdly, each ministry was required to set up an Internal Audit Unit which would be responsible to both the Minister and the Auditor-General.
The unit was expected to engage in pre- auditing exercise and to issue monthly reports.
There was also an Audit Alarm Committee comprising of the Auditor-General and a representative of the President or Governor as member, to investigate cases of audit queries which were overruled by the Minister.
Fourth, the Auditor-General has the power to surcharge any official, except the Minister, who failed to respond to audit query for any financial irregularity.
In the case of the Minister, the Auditor-General was to report to the President/Governor if he failed to respond to any audit query.
Fifth, the Chief Executive (Minister) was to give yearly report to the Public Accounts Committee (PAC).
Some weaknesses in the above arrangements were the fact that the Internal Auditor could not have been effective with his lowly status which was below that of a Director of a Department.
Second, the Director of Finance and Supplies could not have been very effective especially in a matter relating to the Minister of his person.
If he was so insistent on probity, the Minister could post him from the schedule against the provision of the reforms as was the case with some officers in some Federal Ministries/Departments.
The Director so posted or deployed was not in a position to resist the posting.
106 PSM 802 MODULE 4 In spite of the weaknesses, the financial checks and balances had the right motives.
In the final analysis, we need good men and women to make them work and this depends on the calibre of personnel recruiting into the civil service.
(i) Arrangement for the Implementation of the Reforms There were three bodies charged with the implementation of the 1988 Civil Service Reforms.
These were the Civil Service Commission (CSC) with the Management Services Division as one body, the Operations, Organisation and Management Research Branch or Planning, Research and Statistics Departments in each ministry where the former did not exist as the second body and thirdly, the implementation Task Force.
The CSC was the first body to be charged with the responsibility for the implementation of the reforms as enunciated in Decree No.
43 of 1988.
In February, 1988, the Implementation Task Force headed by Vice Admiral Koshoni was established by government with about six terms of reference, which included providing guidelines and/or monitoring of the implementation of the reforms.
It was the Koshoni Task Force that directed that the Management Services Division should be restructured and transferred to the CSC to assist the latter in the implementation exercise.
The Operation, Organisation and Management Research body was later charged with the responsibility of ensuring the implementation of the reforms in the Ministry.
In this structure, we had one ad-hoc body (the Task Force), which satisfied the argument for an ad-hoc body for the implementation of Civil Service Reforms.
The other two bodies, i.e.
the CSC and the Operations, Organisation and Research Branch could not be said to be standing bodies in the real sense of it.
They had their primary functions and sooner or later they would have been done with implementation assignment and lie ad-hoc bodies, the issue of implementation of the reforms would cease to exist.
107 PSM 802 REFORMS OF THE PUBLIC SERVICE Impact of the 1988 Civil Service Reforms on Career and Aspirations of Civil Service It seems that the 1988 Civil Service Reforms in Nigeria were designed to produce a real fundamental turn-around of the service and foster career and aspirations of the civil servants.
As pointed out above, this section is a summation and necessary elaboration of the points made in different sections of this chapter.
There is no doubt that the removal of the Accounting Officer function from career civil servants to the Minister as Chief Executive would have affected the aspirations of the civil servants.
It should have been their aspiration to be the Accounting Officers.
This is one of the reasons it is recommended that this function should be delegated to the Director-General who were largely from the civil service.
It is perhaps also relevant to point out that people should remember the transient nature of power.
The civil servants had enjoyed this opportunity of being Accounting Officers and abused it through intransigence, which is why it was taken from them.
If you were given power or function, use it, or act it out, well.
The professionalisation of civil servants through departmentalisation is an area which could have affected their career and aspirations.
However, we should remember, first, that only the administrative personnel, not the professional officers had been departmentalised.
It appears that it was a good arrangement to ask the civil servants to professionalize through departmentalisation, more so with the modification in it to the effect that they could move from one Ministry to the other doing the same job.
It was meant to enhance their second hand value and marketability when they eventually retire.
One is positively inclined to conclude that it was in the best interest of the civil servants to think of tomorrow and be known for a particular capability, skill and ability, which was the essence of professionalisation through departmentalisation.
After all, outside the civil service there is specialisation in all the areas – personnel, accounts, planning, research, statistics, etc; in which the civil servants were expected to specialise and professionalise.
What is then peculiar with the civil servants other than the fear of the unknown arising from the usually dreaded change?
There was, however, no issue at all with professionalisation through continual training.
The civil servants welcome it in order to facilitate their career and aspirations.
The restructuring of the civil service into a maximum of eight departments was designed to widen the career prospects and aspirations of the civil servants.
These departments were headed by Directors who were the highest career civil servants in the service.
Other civil servants looked up to them as their beacons.
Decree No.
43 of 1988 gave the Directors reasonable powers and resources to perform.
Perhaps that 108 PSM 802 MODULE 4 could have been sorted out with time.
Although the vertical restructuring of the ministries was not solely possible; provision was, however, made for Directors of Departments to work up directly to the minister and also to inform the Director-General of their communication within his department and the ministry.
This is a kind of recognition for the position of Director as a defacto second in command in the ministry.
As the highest career official in the ministry, the Director became the rallying point for other civil servants, more so as he was given power to conclude some matters.
The departments in the ministry were really somewhat expected to operate like mini-ministries because each of them had a structural and hierarchical base designed to facilitate matters and act as spurs to the civil servants.
As for Personnel Administration, movement up was expected to be faster because of the many promotion avenues for civil servants which were made available by the existence of different departments, divisions, etc.
Another source of positive aspiration for civil servants was the spelling out of the minimum residency in a post before being due for consideration for promotion.
It was a clear guideline for civil servants to determine their career prospects and aspirations and work hard towards them.
The only snag was the dilution of the merit principle but it may be pointed out that even the most advanced countries like the United States of America still define merit with some of our attributes and it has not been easy, not indeed possible, to quantify merit.
This is not to say that we are in the same stride with America in the advancement towards ideal merit, but that neither has got there.
Immediately after the 1988 Civil Service Reforms, there appeared to be a renewed vigor on the part of the civil service to achieve more.
There was some enthusiasm in the civil service, more so with many training programmes, within and outside the civil service, that were organized for the civil servants, Directors-General and Chief Executives.
Various categories of civil servants also had different approving financial powers.
But this enthusiasm gradually started to wane and the civil service became fractionalised, so to say, as far as the 1988 Civil Service Reforms were concerned.
One faction or some of the civil servants who were allegedly positioned in good areas liked the reforms, while the others did not like the reforms.
Issues that would have been identified and addressed with minor amendments, so that the reforms could become generally acceptable got magnified.
And the reforms were regarded as unworkable.
The 1988 Civil Service Reforms have now been abrogated.
The termination of the reforms was contained in the budget speech of the President, General Sani Abacha, in January, 1995.
A Committee headed by Mr. A.
A. Ayida was set up to reform the civil service.
A national 109 PSM 802 REFORMS OF THE PUBLIC SERVICE workshop of Federal Directors- General and the Secretaries to the State Governments on the 1988 Civil Service Reforms was also held at Abuja in February, 1995, the forum which appeared to have finally decided to nail the coffin of the reforms had facilitated its internment thereafter.
It is, however, necessary to remark here that the message in both Udoji Commission of 1974 and Dotun Philips Civil Service Reforms of 1988 was on professionalisation of the civil service.
But the approach in the two was somewhat different.
While the 1974 reforms brought insights from the private sector and added constant training as a way of professionalising the civil servants, the 1988 Civil Service Reforms took the option of limited departmentalisation and also constant training.
It is called “limited departmentalisation” because the departmentalisation issue in the 1988 Civil Service Reforms was reviewed, such that civil servants not in the hard core profession who were, in fact, the group concerned, could be transferred from one ministry to another with the approval of the Chief Executive.
Admittedly, the 1974 and the 1988 Civil Service Reforms had their strengths and weakness but is their abrogation the answer?
It is also discovered that in the whole development of the Nigerian civil service, some of the Weberian ideals had been respected but others were not and were even bastardized.
In an attempt to make the civil service achieve more in the interest of the society, there is no running away from the ideals.
They may not be respected all the time but their violation should be done procedurally and in good faith.
The review of the civil service every now and then is not in the best interest of the public.
Will there be any civil service reforms that will be acceptable to all and sundry within and outside the civil service?
Do the civil servants alone own the civil service?
The answers to all these questions and many others are yet to be provided.
4.0 CONCLUSION The sum total of the achievements and contributions of all reforms established by all military regimes in Nigeria did not appeal to the feelings and aspirations of the masses simply.
SELF-ASSSESSMENT EXERCISE Describe briefly the attributes of all reforms under the military regimes in Nigeria.
110 PSM 802 MODULE 4 ANSWER • dictatorial backed by decree • • hardly consider human feelings • military self-centered and myopic.
5.0 SUMMARY Most of the reforms of the public service carried out under military regime produced poor result because of their conception, packaging and execution.
6.0 TUTOR-MARKED ASSIGNMENT Attempt a reasoned recap of his reforms under military regimes and list four of their benefits.
7.0 REFERENCES/FURTHER READING Ayeni, J.
(2007).
Perspectives and Reflections on Nigerian Civil Service Reforms.
Lagos: S & S Communications (Nig) Ltd. Ayeni, J.
(2008).
Reforming Public Service in Nigeria: A Collective Responsibility.
Lagos: S & S Communications (Nig) Ltd. Maduabum, C. (2006).
Reforming Government Bureaucracies in Nigeria: The Journey So Far.
Topo-Badagry: ASCON.
Olaopa, T. (2009).
Innovation and Best Practices in Public Sector Reforms: Ideas, Strategies and Conditions.
Ibadan: University Press Plc.
Olaopa, T. (2010).
Public Service Reforms in Africa.
Ibadan: University Press Plc.
111 PSM 802 REFORMS OF THE PUBLIC SERVICE MODULE 5 OBASANJO REFORMS Unit 1 President Obasanjo Reforms Unit 2 Some Operational Institutions of Obasanjo’s Reforms Unit 3 Yar’Adua Reform Initiatives UNIT 1 PRESIDENT OBASANJO REFORMS CONTENTS 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objectives 3.0 Main Content 3.1 Critical Challenges 3.2 Obasanjo’s Reform Articulations 3.3 Reform Institutional Arrangements 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutor-Marked Assignment 7.0 References/Further Reading 1.0 INTRODUCTION In the unit, attempt is made to discuss the critical challenges facing the inaugurated Presidential System of Government headed by Chief Olusegun Obasanjo, a retired army General who was Military Head of State in Nigeria from 13th February, 1976 to 3th September, 1979.
Other issues discussed in this unit are critical challenges on ground before the inauguration of the regime, the institutional arrangement put in place by the regime and other political and socio-economic problem met on ground by the newly elected democracy in Nigeria.
2.0 OBJECTIVES At the end of this unit, you should be able to: • state the focus of the reform • identify the critical challenges of the reform • clarify the reform’s institutional arrangement • appraise the details of the Reform’s Articulation • list the achievements and contributions of the regime to reform development in Nigeria.
112 PSM 802 MODULE 5 3.0 MAIN CONTENT Following the re-establishment of democracy in Nigeria in May, 1999 after decades of military rule, President Olusegun Obasanjo, had to respond to a number of internal and external challenges which made reforms inevitable.
The political, social and economic environment needed to be altered considerably in order to inject some confidence in government by the citizens who had helplessly watched the declining fortunes of the nation over several decades.
There were challenges posed by the massive wave of globalisation that needed to be addressed.
Globally, the role of government had also changed dramatically.
Accordingly, a combination of the following internal challenges and external pressures made it inevitable for the new administration to effect changes in the machinery of governance: Internal Challenges The compelling internal challenges that reflected the socio-economic setting of the nation prior to reforms were the following: • infrastructural decay and near collapse • economic downturn • malfunctioning of public sector institutions • poor economic management • high unemployment • low investor confidence • widespread corruption • massive poverty • excruciating debt overhang.
Global Trends Significant changes had also occurred all over the world in terms of transition: • nations were moving from government to governance • businesses were moving from an industrial society to a society based on information technology • globalisation was shifting focus from national economy to world economy • short-term planning was yielding to long-term planning • centralisation was giving way to decentralisation • representative democracy had embraced participatory democracy • organisation had abandoned hierarchy for networks • product emphasis has shifted from quantity to quality.
113 PSM 802 REFORMS OF THE PUBLIC SERVICE Governance Trends The role of government has also changed considerably over the decades requiring the transformation of the public service along the pattern of change.
Consequently, government is: • becoming strong without necessarily being big • increasingly strategic without being pervasive • being challenged to be smaller on one hand but more efficient on the other hand, • tasked to mobilise scarce resources for accomplishing more with less • directing investments to critical areas offering completive edge • relied upon to provide service that is faster, more responsive and caring.
3.1 The Critical Challenges The reform of the public service was therefore predicated to address the following critical issues: • crisis of governance resulting from weakened capacity of the State to meaningfully respond to development challenges and improve the quality of life • the need to halt the erosion of public confidence in government and fulfill the heightened expectations of the citizenry in the delivery of democratic dividends • near collapse of virtually all public service institutions; hence the need for their repositioning as part of measures of modernising government machinery to achieve higher levels of efficiency and effectiveness • fiscal and budgetary pressures emanating from shrinking resource base to finance priority development programmes compelling the need to do more with less • new public management with emphasis on cost-effectiveness, innovation and service delivery • impact of globalisation and technological changes • emergence of civil societies exerting additional pressure on government to adhere to tenets of good governance • the changing role of the state globally from a sole provider of employment and services to a new role of creating the enabling environment for job and wealth creation • pressures arising from regional and global initiatives; and 114 PSM 802 MODULE 5 • pressures from international development partners for reforms as conditionality for winning their support and for accessing their grants.
3.2 Obasanjo Reform Articulations The President himself believed and held the opinion the no nation state has ever advanced beyond its public service; he was not in doubt that the reform of the public service was imperative in order to redirect the nation to the path of growth and development.
Indeed, various studies have associated economic growth, poverty reduction and overall government effectiveness with a merit-based, well-remunerated, high performance bureaucracy.
Arising from this and in order to set the tone for the change process in the Federal Public Service, President Obasanjo there and then approved the organisation of a 10-day Seminar for Federal Permanent Secretaries a week after his inauguration.
The Seminar was coordinated by Prof. Adebayo Adedeji and supported by distinguished public/civil servants and elder statesmen and women among whom were Chief Allison Ayida, Alhaji Liman Ciroma, Alhaji Adamu Fika, Mallam Adamu Ciroma, Madam Teju Alakija, Professor Grace Alele Williams, Chief S. B. Awoniyi and Mr. Jeremy Pope of Transparency International.
At the closing session of the Seminar, the President reiterated the need for Federal Permanent Secretaries to lead the change process in the public service so that the service could effectively support his administration in translating its ideals into action.
He emphasised that the civil service could no longer continue to conduct its business in the usual way it did in the past and that the top hierarchy of the civil service should be more accountable and transparent in its actions, in order to enthrone in the system a new culture of probity, accountability and transparency.
The seriousness of the new administration to overhaul the civil/public service was soon demonstrated after about 50% of Permanent Secretaries inherited from the previous administration were disengaged from the service while new ones were appointed.
The process of enthroning a new order in the public service was further consolidated with the organisation of several retreats was Ministers, Special Advisers and Permanent Secretaries between 1999 and 2001.
Probably the most noteworthy of these special retreats was the 4th Presidential Retreat held at the National Institute for Policy and Strategic Studies (NIPSS), Kuru, Jos from 23rd – 25th February 2001 under the “The New Orientation.” One major outcome of the retreat was the Kuru Declaration, a series of statements of commitments embodying a new national ideology and code of ethics for public officers.
115 PSM 802 REFORMS OF THE PUBLIC SERVICE Under the leadership of Mr. Abu Obe, as Head of the Civil Service of the federation, the civil service was given the opportunity to critically examine itself commencing with a series of two-week Orientation Workshops for Directorate Level Officers in the Federal Civil Service coordinated by Prof. Adebayo Adedeji.
Between 1999 and 2001, 20 editions of the workshop, attended by 1,902 officers, have taken place under the general theme: “Preparing the Nigerian Public Service for the 21st Century, beginning with the 4th Republic under Civil Administration.” The Harmonised Report of the 20 editions of the Workshop and the final Communiqué read to Mr. President by Dr. Goke Adegoroye (then, Director – Special Duties to the Secretary to the Government of the Federation), on behalf of the 1,902 participants identified, among others, the following issues which set the stage for a Nigerian Public Service Reform Strategy: (i) Massive expansion in the size of the Service which had risen 350% between 1960 and 1999 compared with a national population increase of 160% over the same period (ii) Decline in the institutional capacity, efficiency, effectiveness and commitment of the Service (iii) Renewed focus in ethical and moral issues, and in particular, addressing the popular perception that the Civil Service was corrupt (iv) Placing more emphasis on training and retraining of officers and increasing the annual budget on training and development (v) Reviewing Civil Service Rules and Regulations and ensuring their uniform application in the entire Public Service (vi) Restructuring and streamlining the Service (vii) Establishing a Public Service Capacity Assessment and Administrative Reform Council to lead the process of injecting freshness and dynamism into the Civil Service.
Indeed, the Communiqué recognised and commended the President that some of the above-mentioned issues were already being addressed.
For example, the erstwhile Civil Service Rules and Financial Regulations were reviewed and later issued as Public Service Rules and Financial Regulations to make them applicable within the entire public service.
Massive training of civil servants was undertaken while the morale of the service was boosted by clearing the backlog of delayed promotions.
A salary increase of between 250-350% was also granted to officers in the Public Service.
Steps were also being taken to deal with Civil Service restructuring and the declining capacity of the service as well as raising its moral tone by way of promoting ethical and integrity concerns.
116 PSM 802 MODULE 5 In 2001, at the 33rd Meeting of the Federal Executive Council (FEC), the Office of the Head of the Civil Service of the Federation (OHCSF), through the Management Services Officer, was mandated to design the strategy for far reaching reforms of the Civil Service.
Under the leadership of Alhaji Mahmud Yayale Ahmed, the new Head of the Civil Service of the Federation, a diagnostic study was undertaken which revealed the messy state of the civil service in the light of the following findings: • An aging workforce, with 60% of serving officers consisting of officers who were 40 years old and above • The preponderance of unskilled staff in the service in a highly demanding knowledge age with 70% of the entire workforce constituted by officers on Grade Levels 01 – 06 while only 1.7% of the workforce was made up of officers in the strategic grade of Directorate Cadre (GL.15 -17) • A prevalence of “ghost” workers, symptomatic of poor personnel records and payroll control systems • About 60% of Federal Government spending was deployed to servicing the Federal Bureaucracy (including the National Assembly) • Pervading low morale, especially at the higher levels of service, resulting from non-professional Human Resource Management Practice • A highly centralised, hierarchical and rule-driven system which stifled individual initiative and muffled corporate accountability • Ministries, Departments and Agencies (MDAs) were without Mission and Vision Statements, or clear corporate and individual schedules of duties • Public Institutions were under-resourced and therefore lacked the capacity to make optional use of technological changes to modernise • Working tools required to operate a modern management system for effective service delivery were grossly inadequate • Professionalism and espirit de corps had been significantly eroded • Policy making had degenerated to a routine response to addressing urgent problems rather than a structured initiative involving painstaking analysis, consultation and monitored control • There were serious capacity gaps at all levels due to prolonged absence of systematic training, need identification and serious commitment towards updating skills • The procurement system was fundamentally flawed as it was neither transparent to bidders nor to the public.
117 PSM 802 REFORMS OF THE PUBLIC SERVICE Profoundly, the foregoing inadequacies only confirmed the level of decadence of the service over the years in addition to reinforcing the changing public perception of the Public Service as being: (i) Lethargic and slow (ii) Insensitive and unreliable (iii) Unhelpful and wasteful (iv) Slow to change (v) Unresponsive and discourteous to the public (vi) Corrupt (vii) Over-bloated (viii) Insensitive (ix) Parochial and often ethnically-biased processes such as staff recruitment, performance assessment, promotion, contract award, etc.
Further work in the OHCSF led to the development of a Strategy Document for the Reform aimed at remedying this ugly situation.
However, it is pertinent to place on record here for providence and posterity that the regime’s reform articulation included, but not limited to, the following five steps: • Civil Service Reform strategy was initially articulated by the Office of the Head of the Civil Service of the Federation (OHCSF) in response to 2001 directive of the Federal Executive Council at its 33rd Meeting.
• The need for an institutional platform for driving Public Service Reform (PSR) was later recognized resulting in the approval by the President of the establishment of the Bureau of Public Service Reforms (BPSR) in the last quarter of year 2003.
• The BPSR became operational with the appointment of its pioneer Director-General in February 2004.
• The BPSR later produced A Vision to Action document to appropriately focus on the reform strategy.
• Initial location of the BPSR within the OHCSF however limited the scope of reform to the Civil Service.
In scope, the Public Service Reforms spearheaded by the Bureau of Public Service Reforms cover the following: • Budget and Financial Management - Procurement system review - Institutionalisation of fiscal responsibility 118 PSM 802 MODULE 5 - Accounting reforms • Accountability Issues - Installation of due process, transparency and accountability in government transactions - Establishment of Service Charters - Institutionalisation of compliance enforcement • Human Resources Management - Personnel records and payroll cleaning - Staff cadre reviews - Remodeling of recruitment and promotions procedures - Installation of a new Performance Management Scheme - Massive Capacity Development and Training • Operation and Systems - Organisational restructuring and right-sizing - Work process re-design - Information systems/technology applications • Value Reorientation and Ethics In specific terms, the reforms are driven in various cells carrying the primary mandate across the Public Service: • Budget Reforms at Budget Office • Public Procurement Reforms at BMPIU • Accounting and Audit Reforms at OAGF and OAuGF • Tax Reform at the Federal Inland Revenue Service • Information Technology and e-Government at NITDA • Ports and Customs Reforms at the Nigeria Customs Service • Anti Corruption at ICPC • Economic and Financial Crimes at EFCC • Judicial Reform at the Judiciary • Public Service Human Resource Management/Operations and Systems/Value Re-orientation and Ethics and the Bureau of Public Service Reforms (BPSR).
3.3 Reform Institutional Arrangements The Reforms Institutional Arrangements are structured specifically as follows: • National Council on Reforms, with the President as Chairman • Steering Committee on Reforms, chaired by the Chairperson of the Economic Team 119 PSM 802 REFORMS OF THE PUBLIC SERVICE • Public Service Reform Team under the Chairmanship of the Honourable Minister of Federal Capital Territory Administration (FCTA) • The Bureau of Public Service Reforms.
As for the realignment of Reform Implementation Arrangement, the primary reporting line of the Bureau of Public Service Reforms (BPSR) is to the Public Service Reform Team (PSRT), while it maintains a secondary reporting relationship with the Office of the Head of the Civil Service of the Federation (OHCSF), the Federal Civil Service Commission (FCSC) and the Office of the Secretary to the Government of the Federation (OSGF).
This strategic placement is informed by the need to take reforms beyond by the Civil Service which constitutes less than 20% of Public Service and also to connect the Political, Technocratic and Administrative leadership to enable the Bureau of Public Service Reforms (BPSR) to effectively serve as the Expert Secretaries of the reform programmes of government.
For effective implementation, the following accomplishments were put in place accordingly: • Restructuring of Pilot Ministries, Department and Agencies (MDAs) of Finance, Federal Capital Territory Administration (FCTA), State House, National Planning Commission and Ministry of Solid Minerals Development • Following Mr. President’s directive, 5 additional MDAs namely Federal Ministries of Transport, Health, Foreign Affairs, Internal Affairs and Education underwent restructuring and repositioning • Service-wide restructuring of MDAs and parastatals took place following the issuance of Generic Guidelines on Reform Implementation by BPSR • Review of Public Service Rules and Financial Regulations to enable them applicable public service-wide • Some of the key elements of the Review are as follows: - Removal of Non-Functional Grades of GLs 01-03 and GL11 - Removal of dichotomy between HND graduates and university graduates at entry point subject to the condition that the HND holder graduated with an Upper Credit - Inclusion of Economic and Financial Crimes Commission (EFCC) as one of the agencies to effect Disciplinary Actions - Removal of detailed listing of allowances in both documents and their consolidation as part and parcel of salaries - Review and consolidation of Foreign Service Allowances.
4.0 CONCLUSION 120 PSM 802 MODULE 5 This particular Reform succeeded in galvanising the entire public service in Nigeria.
The major achievements attributable to the regime is the establishment of the institution called Bureau of public Service Reforms (BPSR) to take charge of all matters relating to public reforms in Nigeria there and then.
SELF-ASSSESSMENT EXERCISE Briefly discuss the critical challenges on reform facing Obasanjo regime immediately after its inauguration.
ANSWER • crisis of government • the need to halt the erosion of public confidence in government • impact of globalisation and technological change the changing role of the state globally • • pressures from International Development Partners.
5.0 SUMMARY The newly elected democracy under Chief Olusegun Obasanjo faced a lot of problems and challenges which called for a total reform of the public service.
The need to live up to expectations informed his response and determination to tackle the problems with the belief that “a serious disease deserves a serious treatment” 6.0 TUTOR-MARKED ASSIGNMENT Discuss the major achievements and contributions of the Obasanjo regime to reform development in Nigeria.
7.0 REFERENCES/FURTHER READING Ayeni, J.
(2008).
Reforming Public Service in Nigeria: A Collective Responsibility.
Lagos: S & S Communications (Nig) Ltd. Maduabum, C. (2006).
Reforming Government Bureaucracies in Nigeria: The Journey So Far.
Topo-Badagry: ASCON, 121 PSM 802 REFORMS OF THE PUBLIC SERVICE Olaopa, T. (2009).
Innovation and Best Practices in Public Sector Reforms: Ideas, Strategies and Conditions.
Ibadan: University Press Plc.
122 PSM 802 MODULE 5 UNIT 2 SOME OPERATIONAL INSTITUTIONS OF OBASANJO’S REFORMS CONTENTS 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objectives 3.0 Main Content 3.1 Unique Features of Obasanjo’s Reforms 3.2 Overall Goal, Vision and Objective of Obasanjo Public Service Reform 3.3 National Economic Empowerment Development Strategies (NEEDS) 3.4 New Partnership for Africa’s Development (NEPAD) 3.5 Millennium Development Goals (MDGs) 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutor-Marked Assignment 7.0 References/Further Reading 1.0 INTRODUCTION This unit is primarily concerned with the unique features of Obasanjo’s Reforms.
Along the line, you need also to know the overall goal, vision and objective of Public Service Reform engendered by Obasanjo regime.
Furthermore, the salient focus of some institutions like NEEDS, NEPAD, MDGs etc will also be discussed extensively in this unit.
2.0 OBJECTIVES At the end of this unit, you should be able to: • describe some important operational institutions of Obasanjo Reforms • clearly identify the unique features of Obasanjo Reforms • identify the roles of NEEDS, NEPAD, MDGs, etc.
as some of the implementation strategies of Obasanjo Reforms.
• state the vantage position of Obasanjo Reform in the history of reform institutionalisation and management in Nigeria.
3.0 MAIN CONTENT The Obasanjo Administration that took over power after years of military rule was faced with the challenges of transforming a totalitarian 123 PSM 802 REFORMS OF THE PUBLIC SERVICE state to a democratic one, in which the relationship between the government and the citizen will be one of trust and partnership.
It also faced the challenge of economic development, which can be defined in terms of the strengthening of the economic substructure of the society through industrialisation and the diversification of the economy.
Moreover, this administration had to address the crisis in public management, which was a key aspect of the deterioration in the quality of governance in the country that prolonged military rule induced and sustained.
This crisis was characterised by: inefficiency in the delivery of social services; insensitivity to general welfare; indifference to the norms guiding the conduct of public officials; and rampant corruption.
These lapses, it should be noted, had further led to a situation defined by the weakening of public institutions, distrust of government by the citizens, collapse of infrastructure and a sense of despair among the people.
This necessitated the need for a social reconstruction.
The need for a social transformation even became more pressing in the light of the fact that the Obasanjo administration inherited an economy that had been stagnant and uncompetitive with an average GDP growth rate of 2.8% at the time the administration assumed power, which made the country one of the slowest growing economies in the world on a per capita basis.
Besides, the administration also had to address the issue of external and internal debts; poverty; stagnant manufacturing/industrial sector; insecurity of lives and properties; high unemployment rate; and the HIV / AIDS pandemic.
In the early days of his administration, President Olusegun Obasanjo initiated a reorientation programme involving retreats for Ministers, Members of Boards of Parastatals, their Chief Executives and Permanent Secretaries.
He also organised workshops for senior officers in the civil service.
The climax of this whole effort was the “Kuru Declaration”, a service charter of commitment to serve the public better and with utmost sense of social responsibility.
This declaration, made in 2001, is a statement of commitment and core elements of a vision for a greater Nigeria.
It embodies the vision of the Federal Government for Nigeria: namely, to build a truly great African democratic country, politically united, integrated and stable, economically prosperous, and socially organised, with equal opportunity for all, and responsibility from all, and to become a catalyst of the African Renaissance, by making adequate, all-embracing contributions to the development process, subregionally, regionally and globally.
It was a declaration made as a result of President Obasanjo's realisation that the government was not performing as it should.
124 PSM 802 MODULE 5 To address the perceived anomalies of the Federal Public Service, the Federal Executive Council (FEC) in its 33rd meeting acknowledged the depth of the management problems and structural limitations that the administrative system of the Public Service was putting on governance and as such saw the need to reform the service.
The FEC, at this meeting, mandated the Office of the Head of Service of the Federation (OHCSF), through the Management Service Office, to undertake a study and a strategic planning exercise evolve a strategy for far-reaching reforms in the public service.
3.1 Unique Features of Obasanjo Reforms Obasanjo Reform, unlike others before him, has the following features: (a) It is comprehensive in design Unlike most other past initiatives which either focused entirely on the civil service or a limited set of interventions to address some specific issues within the Public Service, the Obasanjo reform process is all - encompassing.
This is inevitable because of the peculiar challenges that the Obasanjo Administration had to address from inception including the burden of transiting from military rule to democratic governance, with the attendant heightened expectations of democratic dividends, pressures of growing the national economy, in the face of several years of virtual stagnation, pressures of exiting from excruciating debt overhang, to free resources for wealth creation, employment generation, infrastructural development and consolidation, growing massive poverty, among others.
Consequently, the reform of the Public Service became part of an overall comprehensive and strategic response of addressing the crises of governance and effectively responding to the challenges of development in an increasingly globalising world.
Accordingly, the reform has gone beyond the emphasis on balancing cost-consideration of the structural adjustment era to addressing emerging key issues like: - capacity building - planning, budgeting, and other financial accountability issues - performance improvement - human resources management - information systems - ethics and integrity - improving management systems and structures - compensation reconfiguration; incentives and pay - improving the work environment; and 125 PSM 802 REFORMS OF THE PUBLIC SERVICE - service delivery improvement.
126 PSM 802 MODULE 5 (b) It is home-grown yet endeared to international adoption The Nigeria Public Service Reform is entirely home- grown as it arose from Mr. President’s approval of the recommendations contained in the Communiqué of the Directorate Workshops, and the Federal Executive Council decision 2001 (33rd) Meeting.
Global good practices in reform articulation and implementation suggest that public service reform design should take account of the unique characteristics and dynamics of each country.
Accordingly, while not totally discountenancing global good practices, the Nigerian reform process did not copy country’s model but consolidating on the lessons of past reforms in order to “build a public service that works for the people” while development partners have reinforced the process technically, they have also respected the home-gown approach of the initiative by complementing it through collaboration and support rather than prescription, or the exertion of undue pressure through conditionalties.
Impressed by the home-grown nature of the reforms and its accomplishments some countries in the West African sub region namely Republic to Togo, Liberia and Ghana have solicited for Nigeria’s assistance in replicating in their respective countries the good practices inherent in the Nigerian process.
In 2005 for example, following request by the Presidents of Togo and Liberia to the President for assistance in putting together a “viable and sustainable reform Programme for their respective countries a Presidential Committee was constituted to visit the countries for exploratory talks, with the following as members: - Minister of State for Finance - Minister of State for Foreign Affairs - Minister of Cooperation and Integration in Africa - Economic Adviser to the President - Senior Special Assistant to the President on MDGS_ - Director –General (Nigeria Economic Society Group NESG) - Director -General Bureau of Public Service Reforms (BPSR) recently redesigned as Permanent Secretary (BPSR).
On 22nd June, 2005 the Head of the Civil Service of the Federation was invited by his counterpart in the Republic of Ghana, Dr. Alex Glover- Quartey, to deliver the Civil Service week and Africa Day of Administration’s Anniversary Lecture in order for Ghana to benefit from the home-grown nature of Nigeria’s reforms.
Indeed, Dr, Alex Glover- Quartey was the first international top government functionary, based on his high impression of the objectives and strategies of the Nigerian Public Service Reforms, as espoused during his visit to the Bureau of Public Service Reforms in April 2005, to have christened it “home- grown” reforms.
127 PSM 802 REFORMS OF THE PUBLIC SERVICE (c) It has solid political support to the highest authority Another unique feature of the process is that it is not only backed by political support but championed by the first highest authority in the country, the President.
This is perhaps the first time in Nigerian history that the chief executive of the nation has taken more than a passive interest in the reform process.
The President was supported in driving the process by the Economic Team, made up of influential and technocrat Ministers, Presidential Advisers and Head of Strategic Agencies.
Other key figures in the process include the Secretary to the Government of the Federation, Head of the Civil Service of the Federation, the President of the Senate, the Chief Justice of Nigeria and numerous other key functionaries at the executive, legislative and judicial arms of government.
(d) It is driven on the platform of an Independent Office As part of the innovation of the reforms, the Bureau of Public Service Reforms (BPSR) was created in 2004 by the President as an Independent Office to be Secretariat of all the multi-sectoral reforms of government in addition to serving, specifically as the engine room of public service reforms.
This is a department from the old order in which reform programmes were generally articulated by special panels or Presidential Committee which were not connected with existing institutions of government, saddled with the responsibility of implementing approved interventions to' correct the ills identified in the set-up.
Experience has shown globally that such arrangement does not produce the desired result because, often times, these institutions end up defending the status quo.
The changing trend globally is the creation of autonomous agencies with primary responsibility for coordination the reform process.
In adopting this trend in Nigeria, the creation of the Bureau of Public Service Reforms is complemented with a reform implementation arrangement which provides an avenue for multiple stakeholders and partners of effectively make their contributions in moving the process forward.
(e) It is mission and vision- driven Shortly after its creation, the BPRS formulated the following vision and mission statements to keep it under focus: Vision 128 PSM 802 MODULE 5 “Public Governance by a Public Service driven by Public Officers of impeccable character and integrity, custodians of national interest and values, experts in the business of Government and the management of resources and talents for efficient service delivery and accelerated national development to meet the challenges of a globalized world.” Mission “Facilitating reforms at all sectors of Governance and, in particular, serving as the effective Change Agent for reconstructing the Public service to work for the people in the best tradition of globally cherished Public Service values.” The vision and mission statements were later reformulated to a sharper and more easily recollected version as follows: Vision “An Integrity and Merit based Professional Public Service, driven by national interest and efficient management of resources and talents.” Mission “Facilitating Government Reforms and serving as Change Agent for the Nigerian Public Service to work for the people in the best tradition of globally cherished values.” 3.2 Overall Goal, Vision and Objective of Obasanjo Public Service Reform The goal of Public Service Reforms is to transform Nigeria's ailing Public Service into a knowledge-based, professional and accountable Public Service, render timely, diligent and effective services to the Nigerian people.
This is critical because a competent, efficient and loyal public service is a pre-condition of democratic governance and sustainable socio-economic development.
Through PSR, the machinery of State governance is modernised and reinforced in order to enhance the performance and effectiveness of the State.
Specifically, the vision as conceived by President Olusegun Obasanjo, is as follows: - A competent, professional, development-oriented, public- spirited and customer-friendly public service capable of responding effectively and speedily to the needs of the society 129 PSM 802 REFORMS OF THE PUBLIC SERVICE - A public service anchored on core values of the service such as political neutrality, impartiality, integrity, loyalty, transparency, professionalism and accountability - A public service that is guided by equity, where things are done in the right way based on extant rules and regulations, but with room for discretion, which should be exercised in the public interest - A public service that assures public servants of protection and job security in the faithful discharge of their duties; and - A competitive, well remunerated, innovative public service.
Consequently, the overall objective of PSR is to build a first class service whose performance is substantially enhanced, with added capacity for enforcing ethical standards and instilling a sense of core values arid principles for promoting good governance and sustainable democracy.
This is urgent in view of the possibilities that NEEDs offers us as a nation to make progress through an enlightened and modern public service which is sufficiently motivated to anchor the development process by performing the following roles among others: - guidance in policy making - assistance in policy planning - policy advice to ministers and other functionaries of government - building and communicating institutional memory to decision makers.
3.3 National Economic Empowerment Development Strategies (NEEDS) In June, 2003 following his re-election for another four- year tenure, President Olusegun Obasanjo declared a programme of wide-ranging reform, covering broad areas of economic, financial, governance and public service issues.
Accordingly, all the series of the administration’s multi-sectoral reforms were put together and translated into a coherent medium-term national development strategy called the National Economic Empowerment and Development Strategy (NEEDS).
It became apparent that an efficient and effective Public Service was required to achieve success in the four focus areas of NEEDS that were fundamental to the realisation of sustainable development namely: (i) wealth creation (ii) Employment generation 130 PSM 802 MODULE 5 (iii) poverty reduction and (value re-orientation and ethics, Public Service reform was incorporated as one the pillars of the strategy).
Consequently, NEEDS rests on four major planks namely: (i) Economic Management Reform, to foster macro-economic stability, through fiscal discipline, Public Resource Management/ Utilization, Financial Sector Reforms Banking, Insurance, etc), Tax Reforms, Customs Restructuring and Accelerated Privatisation and Liberalisation of the Economy; (ii) Governance Reform and Institution Strengthening; (iii) Public Service Reforms, with focus on efficiency, responsiveness and service delivery; and (iv) Transparency, Accountability and Anti-corruption Reforms, carried out through the work of the following: Independent Corrupt Practices and Other Related Offices Commission (ICPC), Economic and Financial Crimes Commission (EFCC), Extractive Industries Transparency Initiative (EITI).
NEEDS is an umbrella strategy which has incorporated the goals and targets of two of the key continental and global initiatives aimed at addressing the challenges of sustainable development within the African Continent namely: the New Partnership for Africa’s Development (NEPAD) and the Millennium Development Goals (MDGs).
NEEDS, with broad emphasis on economic growth, poverty reduction, human capital development, and national value reorientation, became the core of the implementation modality of what was evolving into a medium-term development strategy, with integrated policy and institutional reform components.
It had its benchmark aligned with fundamental objectives and principles of state policy in the 1999 Constitution, the Millennium Development Goals (MDGs) and the NEPAD strategic framework.
Also, embodied in NEEDS were the four key components of the FGN Reform Agenda.
These are: Macroeconomic stability as well as accelerated privatisation and liberalisation of the economy; Public Service Reforms (PSR), including reform of public expenditure, and budget; strengthening of basic service delivery through improved governance and institutional strengthening and transparency; accountability and fighting of corruption.
The civil service reform subcomponent of the strategy focused on: reprofessionalisation of the officers and technocrats with sufficient skills; evaluation and reporting of professional performance to make policy makers accountable; withdrawing the public service from 131 PSM 802 REFORMS OF THE PUBLIC SERVICE commercial activities and making it focus on its core competencies; modernisation of core operations and systems using lCT; reorientation of the public servants so that they can serve the public as clients under strong accountability and responsibility; monetisation of fringe benefits and reduction of waste and inefficiency; improved fiscal rules and budgetary planning and allocation; and putting in place organisational and personnel objectives with focus on result rather than on process and expenditure.
Others include: pay reforms, the putting in place of an Integrated Payroll and Personnel Information System, an IT-enabled facility, that enables a reliable and comprehensive database for the public service; the putting in place of a Public Expenditure Management Reform, a medium-term planning and expenditure framework informed by medium-term sector strategies; the introduction of SERVICOM, an initiative aimed at making Nigerians as service users demand quality services as a matter of right, and service providers to deliver on agreed standards under contractual obligations that are formalised in the SERVICOM Charter; Pension reform, with a new pension scheme which is contributory and fully funded by both the employer and the employee and based on individual accounts that are jointly managed by Pension Fund Administrators (PFAs); the introduction of the Independent Corrupt Practices and Other Related Offences Commission (ICPC) to tackle loopholes in the public service and expose and penalise corrupt officials and other citizens as well as the introduction of the Economic and Financial Crimes Commission (EFCC), an anti- corruption body that is meant to combat advance fees fraud in the body politic.
There was also the reform and strengthening of statistical system in the country.
It ought also to be mentioned that the Bureau of Public Service Reform (BPSR) was established in February 2004, and assigned the responsibility of driving the PSR of NEEDS.
In the final analysis, the Obasanjo Civil Service Renewal Programme is about the most comprehensive and far-reaching in the history of the civil service reforms in Nigeria.
It has as its primary aim the production of a truly professional and efficient Federal Civil Service.
This renewal programme, however, did not start in a vacuum.
Apart from being necessitated by certain domestic factors, the global environment at the time made it a must.
As such it has benefited from best practices and public service innovations in other African countries as well as other countries outside Africa.
For instance, in acknowledgement of the global context of the reform process, and the need to draw on the examples of best practices from other countries, a group tour on comparative systems was embarked upon by some staff of the Management Service Office (MSO) and other relevant departments/units in the office of the Head of 132 PSM 802 MODULE 5 Service of the Federation.
The group visited African countries like: Botswana, Ghana, Morocco, Uganda, South Africa and Zambia; as well as Brazil and the United States of America outside of Africa.
3.4 New Partnership for Africa’s Development (NEPAD) NEPAD is a continental initiative introduced to deal with the crisis of government in Africa which, over the years, has accentuated poverty in virtually every country within the continent.
It is a vision and plan to combat famine, disease, hunger, endemic poverty, corruption, incessant conflicts, under-development and acute income disparity as well as ensure economic renewal, accelerated and sustainable development.
A reformed public service is an essential element for the promotion of good governance and the realization of the following core aspirations NEPAD namely: - eradication of widespread and sever poverty - promotion of accelerated growth and sustainable development - halting of incessant conflict by strengthening mechanism of conflict prevention, management and resolution - acceleration of regional cooperation planning and implementation of cross country projects: - adoption and adherence to best practices in political and economic governance; and - strengthening Africa’s capacity in harnessing the gains of globalisation.
In this regard, the African Peer Review Mechanism (APRM) was instituted as a complementary initiative to ensure the realisation of the above-mentioned aspirations.
APRM is a self- monitoring union which has been instituted to measure the progress in the attainment of the objectives of NEPAD in relation to four priority areas, namely: (i) democracy and political governance (ii) economic governance and management (iii) corporate governance; and (iv) socio-economic development.
The Public Service is expected to play a crucial role in the fulfillment of the objectives of these four priority areas by providing guidance and support.
Charter for the Public Service Africa 133 PSM 802 REFORMS OF THE PUBLIC SERVICE Another major continental initiative impacting of the reform process is the Charter for the Public Service Africa.
The Charter was adopted on 5th February, 2001 on the occasion of the Third Pan African Conference of Public Service Ministers in Windhoek Namibia.
Nigeria was represented at the forum by the Head of the Civil Service of the Federation, Alhaji Mahmud Yayale Ahmed who also adopted the Charter on behalf of the country.
The Charter provides a framework to guide Public Services in respective African countries in taking appropriate legislative, regulatory, technical and practical measures aimed at improving the quality of services provided citizens besides defining the principles and other general governing rules of ensuring transparency, professionalism and ethical standards.
Once adopted, it serves as a concrete expression of the commitment of each country to abide by the principle and values enunciated in the Charter in addition to serving as a benchmark or reference for the development, strengthening and updating of national codes of conduct.
The specific principles that are outlined in the Charter are the following: (i) equality of treatment (ii) neutrality (iii) legality (iv) continuity (v) proximity and accessibility of services (vi) participation, consultation and mediation (vii) quality, effectiveness and efficiency (viii) evaluation of services (ix) transparency and information (x) speed and responsiveness (xi) reliability and confidentiality of information concerning citizens (xii) recruitment and promotion (xiii) mobility and redeployment (xiv) staff training and development (xv) motivation (xvi) remuneration (xvii) physical safety, working conditions and security of tenure (xviii) professionalism (xix) ethics) (xx) integrity and moral rectitude (xxi) conflict of interest, (xxii) declaration of assets, and (xxiii) political neutrality and duty of confidentiality.
Others are general provisions on purpose, scope, definitions and implementation modalities, 134 PSM 802 MODULE 5 NEPAD is the latest African recovery plan pushed by a select number of African countries and the G8 as a means of stimulating an ‘African renaissance.’ NEPAD’s strategic framework document arises from a mandate given to the five initiating Heads of State of Algeria, Egypt, Nigeria, Senegal and South Africa by the then Organisation of African Unity (OAU) to develop an integrated socio-economic development framework for Africa.
This framework document was formerly adopted at the 37th Summit of the OAU in July 2001 in Lusaka, Zambia.
‘NEPAD was founded out of the realisation that issues such as the escalating poverty level, underdevelopment, and the continued marginalisation of Africa needed a new radical intervention, spearheaded by African leaders, to develop a new vision that would generate Africa’s Renewal.
3.5 Millennium Development Goals The Millennium Development Goals otherwise known as MDGs is a global initiative committing member States to achieve the following targets by 2015: i) eradication of extreme hunger and poverty ii) achievement of universal primary education with emphasis on girl child education iii) promotion of gender equality including empowerment of women iv) reduction of child mortality and, in particular, reducing the mortality rate among children under five v) improvement in maternal health vi) combating (HIV/AIDS, malaria and other diseases, and vii) ensuring environmental sustainability and viii) development of global partnership for development.
The achievements of these targets are also predicated on a virile,accountable, professional and reform-minded public service.
4.0 CONCLUSION Obasanjo Reform initiative focused primarily on the imperative for benchmarking with the aim of identifying and implementing the best practices that are required to enhance the growth and development of good government which never happened in Nigeria before.
All around the world, governments crave for the best practices as a means of responding to the demands of citizens for good governance in a fast globalising society.
135 PSM 802 REFORMS OF THE PUBLIC SERVICE Obasanjo Reform, unlike never before in Nigeria, succeeded in identifying, studying and adapting those good practices to rectify identified lapses in the public service in Nigeria.
SELF-ASSSESSMENT EXERCISE Now that you have read the details of Obasanjo Reforms, identify four unique features of the reform.
ANSWER • it is comprehensive in design • it is home-grown yet endeared to international adoption • it has solid political support up to the highest authority • it is mission and vision –oriented.
5.0 SUMMARY The Obasanjo Regime which took off in May, 1999 faced the challenge of economic development, which can be defined in terms of the strengthening of the economic sub-structure of the society through industrialisation and the diversification of the economy.
Furthermore, the need for a radical social transformation became more pressing in the light of the fact that the Obasanjo administration inherited an economy that had been stagnant and uncompetitive with an average GDP growth rate of 2.8% at the time the regime assumed power.
6.0 TUTOR-MARKED ASSIGNMENT Identify the major areas of success of Obasanjo’s Public Service Reforms between 1999 and 2007 in Nigeria.
7.0 REFERENCES/FURTHER READING Ayeni, J.
(2008).
Reforming Public Service in Nigeria: A Collective Responsibility.
Lagos: S & S Communications (Nig) Ltd. Olaopa, T. (2009).
Innovation and Best Practices in Public Sector Reforms: Ideas, Strategies and Conditions.
Ibadan: University Press Plc.
Olaopa,T.
(2010).
Public Service Reforms in Africa, Ibadan: University Press Plc.
136 PSM 802 MODULE 5 Ripley, R. B.
& Franklin, G. A.
(1982).Bureaucracy and Policy Implementation.
Illinois: The Dorsey Press.
137 PSM 802 REFORMS OF THE PUBLIC SERVICE UNIT 3 YAR’ADUA REFORM INITIATIVES CONTENTS 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objectives 3.0 Main Content 3.1 Critical Place of Yar’adua Public Service Reform 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutor-Marked Assignment 7.0 References/Further Reading 1.0 INTRODUCTION In this unit, we shall discuss briefly the reform initiatives of the Umaru Yar’adua Adminstration which took over from Obasanjo Regime in 2009.
Other peripheral issues like NEEDS, 7-Point Agenda etc.
will also be discussed in details.
2.0 OBJECTIVES At the end of this unit, you should be able to: • identify the major plank of Yar’adua Reform Initiatives explain the issues involved in Public Service Reform under the • Yar’adua Regime • state the similarity of target with Obasanjo Reform describe the different and new dimension being introduced by the • Yar’adua Regime 3.0 MAIN CONTENT The Public Service Reform efforts of the Yar’adua Regime are solidly built on the foundations laid by the Obasanjo administration.
Right from its inception, the administration committed itself to the development of Nigeria with the articulation of the 7-point agenda and Vision 20:2020.
The 7-point agenda, which is “an articulation of Policy Priorities that will strengthen the reforms and build the economy; so that the gains of the reforms are felt widely by citizens across the country” has such items as: Power and Energy, Food Security and Agriculture, Wealth Creation and Employment, Mass Transportation, Land Reforms, Security plus Qualitative and Functional Education.
Vision 20:2020, on its part, is a long-term planned framework for the economic transformation of the country, through the promotion of enterprise and 138 PSM 802 MODULE 5 the installation of a “productivity paradigm in the national economy.” Thus, while NEEDS 2 serves as the framework for driving the development process, the 7-point agenda sets the sectional priorities for implementing the Vision 20:2020 with human capital development as a critical plank.
There is a recognition by the Yar’Adua administration that the achievement of the visions and targets encapsulated in the 7-point agenda, and Vision 20:2020, if it is to translate into rapid and sustainable development, requires a civil service that is professional, efficient, effective and accountable in the execution of government policies and programmes.
The administration is therefore committed to the goal of rebuilding, and transforming the Nigerian Civil Service to a world-class civil service that is guided by principles such as: professionalism, accountability, client orientation, and innovativeness, among others; and such values as: discipline, integrity, transparency and loyalty.
Without doubt, these principles and values are vital to the achievement of the goals of rebuilding and revitalising the Nigerian Civil Service.
3.1 Critical Place of Yar’adua Public Service Reform The critical place of the Public Service Reform (PSR) in the pursuit of Nigeria's development goal is underscored in the 7-point agenda.
Among the strategic objectives ofthe agenda is the achievement of quality public service delivery through accelerated implementation of, among others, an e-government project and civil service reforms.
It is in this regard that the National Strategy for Public Service Reforms (NSPSP) was considered a priority by the Yar' Adua administration.
This strategy, which was developed by the BPSR and the Inter- Ministerial Team (MIT) of Senior Public Officials with the technical assistance of DFID, has four pillars which are: - Pillar One: Creating an enabling governance and institutional environment - Pillar Two: Creating an enabling socioeconomic environment.
- Pillar Three: Public financial management reform.
- Pillar Four: Civil Service Administration Reform.
There are significant linkages within and across these pillars, however, even though implementation responsibility is with different MDAs.
The NSPSR also has five targeted results.
These are: 139 PSM 802 REFORMS OF THE PUBLIC SERVICE i) effective governance of the Civil Service as an institution ii) organisational efficiency and effectiveness iii) result-oriented human resource management iv) professional ethical and accountable workforce with a changed work culture v) improved competence of civil servants.
It is expected that the achievement of these will produce a civil service that is “strong, efficient and effective,” in implementing the programmes and policies of government.
To further consolidate the gains of reforms in Nigeria, two crucial issues require urgent attention by the Yar' Adua administration.
There is, first, the need to streamline the roles of key institutions responsible for governance in the civil service, namely, the Federal Civil Service Commission (FCSC), Office of the Head of Civil Service of the Federation (OHCSF), and Office of Secretary to the Government of the Federation (OSGF).
This step is necessary so as to ensure productive and system-enhancing inter- and intra-institutional linkages between them particularly with regard to the management of government's human resources.
There is need to clarify the roles of each ofthe three offices and the linkages between them.
To us, it seems better to restrict the FCSC to its constitutional responsibilities of appointment of persons to offices in the Federal Civil Service and dismissing and exercising disciplinary control over them.
FCSC's HR function should be distributed between the OHCSF and the MDAs.
The beauty of this arrangement is that it will allow for a better placement of responsibility for the quality of FCS workforce.
The second issue, which is more crucial, is the role of permanent secretaries in the Nigerian Civil Service.
The need to address this is as a result of the realization that an apolitical public service able to provide frank and fearless advice, employment decisions based on merit rather than patronage, high standard of ethical conduct, accountability for the use of public money and strong professionalism with permanent secretaries as champions is the key to achieving the overall mission of building a public service that works for the people.
The permanent secretary is both an accounting officer and a policy adviser, As an accounting officer, s/he is responsible for the efficient, effective, transparent, competitive and cost-effective use of financial resources.
S/he has responsibility for setting up appropriate systems of procurement, financial management, risk and change management and internal control.
As a policy adviser, s/he ensures, through the minister, 140 PSM 802 MODULE 5 that necessary resources - human, financial, and material - for policy implementation are available.
S/he is expected to sufficiently understand the political context and the preferences of government as expressed by the minister, to be able to oversee the definition of the high level of objectives of policy while ensuring that they are translated into practical implementation strategies.
4.0 CONCLUSION Yar’Adua himself believed that Nigerians have reached a national consensus in four areas namely: to deepen democracy and the rule of law, build an economy driven by the private sector, display zero tolerance for corruption in all its forms, and finally restructure and staff the government, purposely to ensure efficiency and good governance.
These objectives are the major planks of the Yar’Adua Regime.
SELF-ASSSESSMENT EXERCISE Now that you have read the vision and mission of the Yar’Adua Public Service Reform Initiatives, mention Four (4) pillars developed by the Bureau of Public Service Reforms (BPSR) with the technical assistance of Department for International Development (DFID) from Britain.
ANSWER • Pillar One – Creating an enabling governance and institutional environment • Pillar Two – Creating an enabling socio-economic environment • Pillar Three – Public Financial Management Reform • Pillar Four – Civil Service Administration Reform 5.0 SUMMARY The public service reform efforts of the Yar’Adua administration are built on the solid foundations laid by the Obasanjo Regime.
The Yar’Adua Regime was handicapped by the ill-health of Mr. President himself, but the subsequent regime which took over from him and headed by his former deputy tried desperately to take off from where the Yar’Adua Regime stopped.
6.0 TUTOR-MARKED ASSIGNMENT Discuss the major problems faced by the Yar’Adua Regime in implementing his public service reform initiatives.
141 PSM 802 REFORMS OF THE PUBLIC SERVICE 7.0 REFERENCES/FURTHER READING Ayeni, J.
(2008).
Reforming Public Service in Nigeria: A Collective Responsibility.
Lagos: S & S Communications (Nig) Ltd. Olaopa, T. (2009).
Innovation and Best Practices in Public Sector Reforms: Ideas, Strategies and Conditions.
Ibadan: University Press Plc.
Olaopa,T.
(2010).
Public Service Reforms in Africa, Ibadan: University Press Plc.
142
