 NATIONAL OPEN UNIVERSITY OF NIGERIA SCHOOL OF MANAGEMENT SCIENCES COURSE CODE: PSM 803 COURSE TITLE: ECOLOGY OF PUBLIC ADMINISTRATION 1  NNAATTIIOONNAALL OOPPEENN UUNNIIVVEERRSSIITTYY OOFF NNIIGGEERRIIAA SSCCHHOOOOLL OF BUSINESS MANAGEMENT 1144//1166 AAhhmmaadduu Bello Way, Victoria Island Lagos Course Code: PSM 803 Course Title: EECCOOLLOOGGYY OOFF PPUUBBLLIICC AADDMMIINNIISSTTRRAATTIIOONN Course Developer/Writer: Mrs. Ibeme, Nwamaka P. School of Management Sciences National Open University of Nigeria Victoria Island Lagos.
Course Editor: Prof. C. P. Maduabum SScchhooooll ooff MMaannaaggeemmeenntt SScciieenncceess National Open University of Nigeria Victoria Island Lagos.
Programme Leader: Dr. OKEKE, C.I School of Management Sciences National Open University of Nigeria Victoria Island Lagos.
Course Coordiantor: Mrs Ibeme, Nwamaka P. School of Management Sciences National Open University of Nigeria Lagos.
2  National Open University of Nigeria Headquarters, National Open University of Nigeria, 14-16, Ahmadu Bello Way, Victoria Island, Lagos.
Abuja Annex Office 245 Samuel AdesujoAdemulegun Street, Central Business District, Opposite Arewa Suites, Abuja.
E-mail: centralinfo@nou.edu.ng URL: www.nou.edu.ng © National Open University of Nigeria, 2012 First Printed 2012 ISBN: 978-058… All Rights Reserved Printed by Espee Printing and Advertising for National Open University of Nigeria.
3  PSM 803: ECOLOGY OF PUBLIC ADMINISTRATION.
TABLE OF CONTENTS MODULE 1 INTRODUCTION TO PUBLIC ADMINISTRATION Unit 1 Concept of Public Administration Unit 2 Evolution of Public Administration Unit 3 Ecology of Public Administration MODULE 2 PUBLIC ADMINISTRATION AND POLITICS Unit 1 Relationship between Public Administration and Politics Unit 2 Politics As an Activity Unit 3 Public Policy Making Process Unit 4 Political System Process and Forms of Government Unit 5 Public and Private Administration: Differences and Similarities MODULE 3 DEVELOPMENT OF PUBLIC ADMINISTRATION IN NIGERIA Unit 1 Concept of Indirect Rule Unit 2 Nigerian Public Administration from Colonial Government Unit 3 Development Administration and Administration of Development Unit 4 Concept of Federalism MODULE 4 COMPARATIVE PUBLIC ADMINISTRATION Unit 1 Intergovernmental Relations 4 Unit 2 Development of British Administration MODULE 5 PUBLIC SECTOR ADMINISTRATION IN NIGERIA Unit 1 Public Sector Administration Unit 2 Values and Ethics of Public Administration Unit 3 Principles of Separation of Powers Unit 4 Concept of Bureaucracy Unit 5 Criticisms of Weber’s Model of Bureaucracy MODULE 1 INTRODUCTION TO PUBLIC ADMINISTRATION Unit 1 CONCEPT OF PUBLIC ADMINISTRATION 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objectives 3.0 Main contents 3.1 Conceptual Clarifications 3.2 Scope of Public Administration 3.3 Functions of Public Administration 5 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutor Marked Assignments 7.0 References/Further Reading UNIT 2: EVOLUTION OF PUBLIC ADMINISTRATION IN NIGERIA 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objectives 3.0 Main Contents 3.1 Evolution of Public Administration in Nigeria 3.2 Factors that Influence Public Administration in Nigeria 3.3 Public Administration As A Discipline 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutor Marked Assignment 7.0 Reference/Further Readings 6  UNIT 3: ECOLOGY OF PUBLIC ADMINISTRATION 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objectives 3.0 Main Content 3.1 Ecology of Public Administration 3.2 Environmental Factors that Influence Public Administration in Nigeria 3.3 Impact of Environmental Factors on Public Administration: Nigerian Experience 3.4 Ecology of Developed and Developing nations 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutor Marked Assignments 7.0 References/Further Reading 7 Unit 1 CONCEPT OF PUBLIC ADMINISTRATION 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objectives 3.0 Main contents 3.1 Conceptual Clarification 3.2 Scope of Public Administration 3.3 Functions of Public Administration 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutor Marked Assignment 7.0 References/Further Reading 1.0 Introduction Before delving into the concept of Public Administration, it is pertinent to understand the meaning of the word ‘administration’.
Administration has a universal application and is present in every human endeavour be it social, cultural, religious group, private or public.
Administration is what is done in an organization.
The essence of any organization is to focus its aspirations into productive relationship in a way that will bring out concise responsibility, co- ordination and control.
It has a synergic relationship which can be likened to human body where every part performs its function in relation with other parts.
Having given this background description of the word ‘administration’, we can go ahead to discuss the concept of public administration.
You will also learn the scope and functions of public administration in this unit.
8 2.0 Objectives At the end of this you should be able to do the following: • discuss eruditely the concept of public administration • know the scope and functions of public administration 3.0 Main Contents 3.1 Conceptual Clarification It is generally observed that administration is present in all human organization irrespective of its nature.
It therefore becomes imperative to attempt a definition of the term ‘administration’ before delving into public administration.
Many authorities have tried to define the term ‘administration’ but there is no generally accepted definition yet of that term.
According to Simon (1970:3), administration refers to the activities of groups cooperating to accomplish goals.
MacRae and Pitt (1980), sees it as the co-ordination of men and materials within organization for the accomplishment of identified purposes.
Administration also connotes such activities as implementation of organizational decisions and goals as well as the systematic study of these activities.
Omotayo et al (1987), posit that administration is the organization and management of men and material resources to achieve the goals of collectivity of people.
This collectivity may be social, business religious or public.
Having understood what administration means, we can conveniently conclude that public administration is that administration which is practiced in the public sector.
It is the means, arrangements, actions and processes by which the policies, programmes, purposes and goals of government are realized, Adebayo (1981), Omotayo et al (1987) and Maduabum (2008).
9 Woodrow Wilson (1887:197) sees Public Administration as the most visible side of government.
Ezeani (2006:3) posits that it is the management of government activities.
According to him it refers both to the activities of bureaucrats concerned with the management or administration of government organizations and the study of these activities.
It is the machinery for implementing government policies to ensure stability and continuity at all times irrespective of any government in power even during period of crises.
Public Administration is, generally believed to be, a study that deals with the science of getting things done in the most efficient way in the public sector.
Adebayo (1992:4) sees Public Administration as a governmental administration that operates in the particular sphere of government as its machinery for implementing governmental policies.
He believes that its study must therefore lead to the most efficient way of organizing the executive branch of the government, its functions and its procedures.
From his assertion, we can deduce that Public Administration is basically concerned with the study of how a country’s administration is organized as well as how it functions.
Basu (2003:3) observes that Public Administration is the management of governmental affairs at the three tiers of government – national, state and local.
Akpan (1982) contends that Public Administration is the organ that carries out the programmes and manifestos of politicians in power.
He sees Public Administration as the servant of politics.
He went further to say that Public Administration covers every area and activity related to public policy.
Accordingly it includes the formal processes and operations through which the legislature exercises its power.
The functions of the courts in the administration of justice and the work of the military agencies all form part of the Public Administration.
According to Balogun (1987:11), Public administration is the fusion of human and material resources in order to achieve the objectives of public policy.
One cardinal issue here which attention must be paid is the issue of policy implementation.
This is a very focal point in the study of public administration.
10 Public Administration can also be viewed as a body of knowledge which is directed towards the understanding of administration of the government business.
Olodejeet.
al (2007) opines that Public Administration is the study of the development and maintenance of policy by members of governments, public agencies and public sector employees and the practice of implementing the authoritative decisions they have made.
Public Administration concerns itself more with how politicians in government and non-elected public sector employees devise policy, sustain the machinery of government and ensure policies are put into practice.
Nnoli (2000:45), describes Public Administration as follows: “Public Administration is the machinery as well as the integral process through which the government performs its functions.
It is a network of human relationships and associated activities extending from the government to the lowest paid and powerless individual charged with keeping in daily touch with all resources, natural and human, and all the aspects of life of the society with which government is concerned.
It is a system of roles and role relationships which defines in a clear and practicable terms as possible and in as much detail as possible the intentions and programmes of government; the means available internally and externally to accomplish them; where, when and how they are to be accomplished; who is to benefit from them, and, finally, it is a system that causes these intentions and programmes to be realized in real life.
It is a pattern of routinized activities, involving decision making, planning, advising, co-ordination, negotiation, conciliation, arbitration, command and data gathering, through which the government carries out its responsibilities.” 11 3.2 Scope of Public Administration The scope of Public Administration in the present dispensation is many and continuous.
The activities of governmentcover all aspects of human life.
Public administration now covers every activities that government is involved in be it welfare services, regulatory, entertainment, security, foreign affairs etc.
The responsibility of government for social and economic development is enormous.
It is quite impossible for the political class to carry on these activities alone because they may not have the relevant professional expertise, time and energy to perform them satisfactorily.
This is where the Public Administration comes in with greater concentration to the service content of administration.
The scope of Public Administration can also be considered by looking at the functions of an administrator which is represented by the acronym POSDCORB which means: Planning, Organizing, Staffing, Directing, Coordinating, Reporting and Budgeting.
3.3 Functions of Public Administrator Some authors believe that Nigerian Public Administrators credited themselves before and shortly after independence.
In those days, they were instrument of development insome regions of Nigeria.
They achieved some land mark developments some of which are still in existence.
But after independent these roles were vitiated by political instability and military regimes.The Public Administration as practiced in Nigeria is still foot dragging when compared with their counterparts in the developed countries.
What then are the roles expected of a public administrator?
The roles of public administrator include; (cid:1) Public Administrator is involved in planning, organizing, staffing, directing, coordinating, reporting and budgeting (POSDCORB).
(cid:1) Public Administrator serves as a pivot of national development.
(cid:1) They compliment the efforts of the private sector management.
(cid:1) They oversee the implementation of the policy as laid down by the political class.
(cid:1) They modify economic, political and social structures of the country.
(cid:1) Play vital roles in assisting the politicians in developmental roles.
12 (cid:1) Aid the politician in decision making.
(cid:1) They plan the work to be done as well as oversee its execution.
(cid:1) They formulate objectives and goals to be pursued.
(cid:1) Assist the other organs of government in day to day execution of their duties.
(cid:1) They provide leadership, direct and supervise employees in public organization.
(cid:1) They communicates and disseminates information to all those concerned.
(cid:1) They also appraise job performance.
4.0 Conclusion In this unit we examined the various definitions, scope as well as functions of Public Administration.
The concept of Public Administration deals with the effective and efficient management of human and material resources for the maximum attainment of public goals.
5.0 Summary The concept, scope and the functions of the subject were highlighted in this unit.
You learnt that Public Administration is the action part of government.You also learnt how to effectively combine both human and materials resources in order provide goods and services for the common good.You are, therefore, expected to answer the questions that follow this unit diligently to test your knowledge of the contents of the unit.
In the next unit, we 6.0 Tutor Marked Assignment 1.
What is Public Administration?
2.
Public Administration is the action part of government.
Discuss.
7.0 References/Further Reading Adebayo, A.
(1981), Principles and Practice of Public Administration in Nigeria, Ibadan, Spectrum Books Limited.
13 Ademolakun, L. (1983), Public Administration: A Nigerian and Comparative Perspectives.
Lagos: Longman Nigerian Ltd. Akpan, N. U.
(1982), Public Administration in Nigeria.
Lagos: Longman Nigeria Ltd. Okigbo, A.C. &Nsiegbunam, C. (2000), Modern Public Administration: Principles and Practice.
Enugu: Best Publishers.
Ezeani, E. O.
(2006), Fundamentals of Public Administration.
Enugu:SnaapPress Limited.
Maduabum, C.P.
(2006).
Reforming Government Bureaucracies in Nigeria: The Journey So Far.
Badagry: ASCON Press.
Maduabum, C.P.
(2008).
The Mechanics of Public Administration in Nigeria.
Lagos: Concept Publications Limited.
Unit 2: EVOLUTION OF PUBLIC ADMINISTRATION IN NIGERIA 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objectives 3.0 MAIN CONTENTS 3.1 Evolution of Public Administration in Nigeria 3.2 Factors that Influence Public Administration in Nigeria 3.3 Public Administration as a discipline 3.4 Characteristics of Public Administration 3.5 Why you should Study Public Administration 14  4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutor Marked Assignment 7.0 Reference/Further Reading 1.0 INTRODUCTION In the last unit, you leant that public administration is that part of administration which is practiced in the public sector.
You were told that it is the action part of the government and the medium for the implementation of government policies.
The art of administration connotes the direction, co-ordination and control of man, material and resources to achieve some purposes or objectives.
An administrator is one who exercises that art.
There are administrators in all human activities.
Public Administration is that type of administration that is carried out in any affair that concerns the government.
It has a universal application irrespective of the system of government practiced by the country.
It is the type of administration that is practiced in all levels of government be it in the central, intermediate or local levels.
In this unit, we shall be looking at the evolution of Public Administration and the factors that influenced the growth of public administration in Nigeria.
We will also discuss Public Administration as a discipline.
You are expected to study this unit very well because a proper understanding of the unit will give you a proper footing and a sound foundation to grasp the rudiments of public sector administration.
So give this unit your unalloyed attention.
15  2.0 OBJECTIVES At the end of this unit, you will be able to do the following: • Trace the evolution of Public Administration in Nigeria, • Explain the influence of colonial masters as well as other influenceson the practice of Public Administration in Nigerian, • Compare the modern public administration with the colonial administration in Nigeria.
3.0 MAIN CONTENT 3.1 EVOLUTION OF PUBLIC ADMINISTRATION IN NIGERIA Maduabum (2006:16), posit that the present day public administration has its origin in the amalgamation of the colony and protectorates of the northern and southern Nigeria to form the colony and protectorate of Nigeria in 1914.
He equally informed that the Nigeria’s colonial experience also laid the foundation for economic and political underdevelopment of the country, (Maduabum, 2008:291).
Before then, the natives formed clusters which were administered on the basis of village or nomadic communities.
Gladden (1972:1) wrote that some form of administration had existed ever since there had been government.
In such communities, people of the same or mixed kindred found themselves living within common or defined geographical boundaries and interact as individuals or groups for their collective well being.
They had rule and regulations guiding them and established control measures with the arm of authority vested on their traditional rulers.
This was collaborated by Muwanga (1978:1) who traced the evolution of administration back to pre-government period.
According to him, ‘since man began to live in groups, even as a hunter, he had to subject himself to some form of administration or another’.
Such were the system of administration and social control in many parts of Nigeria until the advent of the British who colonized them.
16 The emergence of the colonial masters brought a different dimension to the native administration.
The British rule was fashioned to suit the colonial masters at the expense of the native dwellers.
Okigbo (1986) as quoted in Maduabum (ibid) rightly observed that the colonial public service were created and fashioned to suit the peculiar circumstances of ruling the people who were held in contempt by the ruling power, and considered valuable only for what they have to contribute to the metropolitan country.
To ensure a smooth administration of the natives, the colonial masters created two forces: a military force to intimidate their subjects and hold them in perpetual fear; and a small cadre of dedicated loyal servants to maintain law and order and instill that fear in the people.
The whites dominated the upper and middle positions in the administration, leaving the menial jobs in the lowest reaches for the natives irrespective of their educational qualifications and skills.
According to Maduabum (2006:17) the people were rendered completely passive and highly de-motivated.
This informs the non-challant and indifferent attitude to work by the Nigerian public servants as they regard the job as that of the ‘white-man’ who took all the benefits that accrued from the collective efforts of both of them.
However, the public service had undergone series of changes and reforms but it is yet to divorce itself of the class structure and the colonial mentality which it inherited from the colonial masters.
This mentality has continued to be the bane of the public service in Nigeria.
In the words of Maduabum (ibid), ‘the structural deformities and contradictions inherited in 1960 have continued to militate directly or indirectly against possibilities for growth, stability and development.
Political initiatives and regime initiatives have had to contend with structurally determined and conditioned crises and contradictions while making it possible for new problems to emerge and fetter.’ In effect, the post colonial alignment and realignment of class forces in Nigeria have operated within the overall deformities and distortions introduced and nurtured by the colonial state and the colonial elite.
17 3.2 Factors That Influence Public Administration In Nigeria As we mentioned earlier, Public Administration is influenced by the factors that operate within the environment.
Some of the factors that affect Public Administration in Nigeria includes; Colonialism, political, socio-cultural, economic, legal etcetral.
1.
Influence of Colonialism Prior to the advent of the British rule, there was in existence some form of fragmented administration in the colonies before the amalgamation of the Northern and Southern Protectorates of the country in 1914.
The salient features of the evolution of the Nigeria Public Administration as listed by Maduabum (2006:14) are enumerated below: a.
From 1866 to 1874 the central administration for Lagos, Gold Coast, Gambia and Sierra Leone was transferred to Freetown, Sierra Leone.
b.
From 1874 to 1886, Lagos and Colony was administered from gold Coast.
c. In 1886 Moloney was appointed Governor of Lagos.
d. In 1889, the Niger Coast Protectorate was merged with the territories of the Royal Niger Company.
e. On 1st January, 1990, the protectorate of Southern Nigeria was created along with that of Northern Nigeria.
f. In 1906, Lagos Colony was merged with Southern Nigeria.
g. In 1914, Lagos Colony plus Southern Protectorate were merged with Northern Protectorate to form an amalgamated territory called Nigeria.
Thereafter, a Governor General named Sir Fredrick Lugard was appointed for the amalgamated colony.
He was assisted by exclusively appointed all European Executive Council members.
Nigeria inherited a rigid centralized administrative structure that was designed to serve the interest of the colonial masters.
It was tailored to guarantee law and order, and to collect taxes and fines.
Theirs was mainly materialistic acquisition and not development administration or assimilation as was done by their francophone counterparts.
Adamolekun (2000:33) rightly puts it thus, ‘British colonial rule was an administocracy, a dictatorship, and an authoritarian system of government’.
18 In the area of personnel, the upper and middle levels were pre-dominantly occupied by the ‘whites’ while the natives were confines to the menial jobs irrespective of their educational background or skills.
The people were highly demoralized and this made many of them to leave the public service.
Those that remained were very passive and alienated with their jobs which they see as ‘the white man’s job’.
This is partly attributed to the fact that the whites took all the benefits that accrued from the job even when they did not work for it, leaving the natives who are the rightful owners as servants and onlookers.
This trend continued even after independence.
More so that even today, many Nigerians still regard the Public Service as ‘white man’s job’.
This is a significant legacy left for Nigerians by their colonial masters.
The foregoing has a lot of implications on the development of Public Administration in Nigeria, some of which are as follows; a.
Native administration system contrasted sharply with the imposed indirect rule system and complex structure of governance.
b.
The creation of a weak, repressive, and non-hegemonic state were strategy by the colonial rulers to further defraud the natives.
c. The Public sector was imposed on the people for the maintenance of law and order.
Rules and regulations were to be observed.
This was quite novel to the people who were used to their local ways and cultural values.
The Public Administration in Nigeria became obsessed with these rules and ensured its compliance but failed to take into consideration the fact that the rules were only to be used as guide to an end.
d. The development of indigenous elites and their marginalization in the internal production and exchange system had a negative impact on the psyche of the indigenous elites and the society in general.
e. The hierarchical organization of offices in terms of control and supervision contrasts with the predominantly form of traditional authority and its power structure.
f. The looting of the resources of Nigeria, discouragement of relevant and comprehensive education, the failure to create useful and democratic institutions, and the failure to build infrastructure that would facilitate mobility and contract amongst people were a huge set back to the development of Nigeria.
19 g. In area of personnel, the ‘whites’ were the sole occupants of the upper and the middle echelon of the public administration, leaving the menial and lower cadre for the natives irrespective of their academic qualifications and skills.
This had a negative influence on the psyche of the natives who felt marginalized and highly demotivated.
As a result, majority of the people regard the Public Service as a ‘white man’s job’.
2.
Influence of the ‘Nigerianization’ Policy Before the First World War, the colonialists avoided appointing Nigerians to positions of authority based on racial discrimination but by the end of the First World War, the structure of administration had been sufficiently established.
The Second World War gave a great boost to the ‘Nigerianization’ of the Public service.
During this period, Nigerians agitated for more appointments in the senior cadres which were hitherto denied them.
As a way of compensating Nigerians for supporting Britain in their war campaign, the Foot Commission of Inquiry was established in 1948, to ascertain the possibility of indigenizing or ‘Nigrianizing’ the civil service.
The report of this commission paved way for the ‘indigenization’ or rather ‘Nigerianization’ of the public service.
This policy later spread to the Eastern and Western regions of the country.
The Northern regions were later to tow the same part.
The later introduced nepotism and ethnicity into their administrative system.
Nigeria gained her independence in 1960 and by 1961, the Public service of Nigeria had been fully Nigerianized.
3.
The Political Influence The political environment consists of the attitudes and actions of political and government leaders and legislators, which affect all kinds of organizations and individuals.
The policies the political class made affect virtually every aspect of life so do the implementation of such policies by the Public Administrators.
Nigeria gained independence from British colonial rule in First October, 1960 and since then she had experienced both democratic and military administrations.
Twenty two years out of the Fifty 20 years of independence have been under democratic government, while the rest had been under the military administration.
Nigeria operates a federal system of government with three tiers system of governance; federal government, the State and the Local governments.
The Act of governance is as stipulated in the Constitution of the Federal Republic of Nigeria.
4.
Economic Influence Public Administration of a country is influenced by the Economic policies of the government in power for instance the privatization and commercialization policy of the Federal government which has influenced the prices of goods and weakened the purchasing power of the currency.
Nigeria operates a mixed economy whereby government invests in certain enterprises owned by the state such as PHCN, Nigerian Ports Authority (NPA), Defence etc.
These are known as Statutory Corporations or Parastatals.
The workers who work in these corporations are known as public servants.
The corporations are managed like private organizations except that the management and board members are appointed by the government.
5.
Socio-Cultural Influence The socio-cultural environment also influences the practice of Public Administration in Nigeria.
By socio-cultural environment we mean the desires, expectations, attitudes, degrees of intelligence and education, beliefs and customs of the people in a given group or society.
3.3 PUBLIC ADMINISTRATION AS AN ACADEMIC DISCIPLINE Public Administration as a course of study emerged as a result of the deficiencies observed byWoodrow Wilson (1887) in the aparatus for performing the numerous tasks of government.
Woodrow highlighted the importance of studying the administrative institution of government.
He opined that the task of public administration was ‘to straighten the paths of government, to 21 make its business less un-business like, to strengthen and purify its organizations, and to crown its duties with dutifulness’.
Other scholars developed interest in the study of public administration and their writings further awakened general interest in the subject.
However, despite the huge awareness generated by these scholars, the subject lacks a universally accepted definition.
While some argue that it should be treated as a separate subject that should stand on its own, other insist that it should be treated as a branch of political science.
Public administration can be viewed as those activities involved in carrying out the programmes and policies of government irrespective of the system of the government in power.
Whether monarchical, totalitarian, socialist, parliamentary or congressional, presidential, all countries of the world require a machinery to put into effect the policies of the government at all levels, that machinery is Public Administration.
As a discipline or body of knowledge, Public Administration is geared towards the understanding of governmental administration.
It is concerned towards the accomplishment of government businesses.
As an academic discipline, it is mostly interested in the structures, finances, materials and personnel and how it can be more proactive.
However, there have been confusions and debates as to the real status of Public Administration.
While some state that it should be regarded as part of Political Science, some say should stand alone.
There are some that say it is a science; some opined that it is an art.
Yet some classify it as both a science and an art.
Let us examine the subject under these three perspectives.
Public Administration As A Science Some scholars and practitioners of Public Administration are of the opinion that Public Administration should be regarded as a science.
These group contends along with Dahl 22 (1978:127) that public administration has a universal validity independent not only of moral and political ends, but of the frequently nonconformist personality of the individual and the social and cultural setting too.
Other supporters of public administration as a science argues that public administration is a body of knowledge, which involves systematic thinking and research.
The human activities in organizations are guarded by principles and theories for the purpose of teaching and impacting sound knowledge to the practitioners.
This group attributes public administration as a body of knowledge, whose main concern is to study and learn the purposes of government for the purpose of teaching and assisting practitioners through scientific enquiry on solution to challenges encountered by public administrators.
Other notable scholars like Willoughby, Taylor, Fayol, Gullick and Urwik etc also defended the scientific side of public administration by their principles of administration.
Pfiffner agrees that specialists in Public Administration have achieved a considerable degree of uniformity in the manner of approach to the solution of problems which is characteristics of science.
From the foregoing, Public Administration is a science since it has a well systematized body of knowledge.
It is an applied science because it utilizes the basic principles of sciences.
It is equally a social science since it deals with human beings.
However, we have to note that Public Administration is not a pure science like physics, chemistry and biology which is subjected to a laboratory scientific experiment.
Public Administration as an Art Many schools of thought which sees the action part of the administration recognizes public administration as an art.
Webster Dictionary defines art as ‘skill acquired by experience, study or observation, the conscious use of such skill’.
Art is an acquired skill used in doing things.
According to Okigbo et al (2000:32) those who posit that Public Administration is an art has the following arguments to buttress their assertion: a.
That public administration deals with human behavior which can not lend itself to the uniformity of nature, nor can it be easily analyzed in the way that physical objects can.
23 b.
The administrative behavior is not always completely rational.
c. That no concept of Public Administration can be studied as an absolute constant, that is, something not affected by circumstances of time place and environmental factors d. That since the various factors that influence the application of the policy cannot be measured, Public Administration as a subject becomes inconcrete and flexible.
e. That laws also lack universality e.g administration policy changes from country to country due to differences in political system in various countries.
f. That most principles of Public Administration enunciated by eminent scholars like Willoughby has received serious challenges by Public Administrators who criticized the principles as being logically inconsistent (for instance, principles of centralization and decentralization).
3.4 Characteristics of Public Administration There are certain characteristics which Public Administration possesses.
This is not restricted to any environment.
It is to be found in Public Administration anywhere in the world.
Some of these characteristics are listed below: a.
It is an administration that is found in governmental organizations.
b.
It implements government policies.
c. It is involved in policy formulation and evaluation.
d. Public Administration is an action part of any government in power.
e. It is found in all levels of government.
f. It exists in all tiers of government – federal, state and local government.
g. It is bureaucratic in nature.
h. It is involved in POSDCORB – planning, organizing, staffing, directing, coordinating, reporting and budgeting in achieving its objectives.
i.
It concerns itself with ‘what’ government does and ‘how’.
j.
It is found in all organs of government – executive, legislature and the judiciary.
24  3.5 Why you should Study Public Administration Some of the reasons why you should study Public Administration are listed below: a.
It will enlighten you to what government does, or expected to do thereby arming you with a parameter to assess the performing government and the non performers.
b.
You will understand the policy needs, its analysis, formulation, implementation and evaluation.
c. It will exposes you to understand the constrains of government in executing certain policies and why some policies succeed and why others policies fail.
d. You will understand who the public administrator is and the role they play in the society.
e. You will understand the minds and doings of government as to budgetary allocations; “who gets what and why”.
f. You will understand clearly how and why you as a Public Administrator should be more proactive, effective and efficient.
g. You will get to know the relevance of Public administration in the society in general.
h. You will get to know the government parastatals, ministries, departments, their functions, their characteristics.
Setbacks to the Study of Public Administration There are some challenges and constraints confronting Public Administration in Nigeria and some other developing countries.
These challenges may not be present in the developed countries as they might have outgrown them in terms of development and advanced technology.
Some of these constraints are discussed below: a.
Lack of knowledge as to the real status of Public Administration.
25 b.
The scope of Public Administration is wide.
c. Inaccessibility of the practicing public administrators by the public administration students.
d. Dearth of books and professors on the subject.
e. Poor funding for research on the subject.
f. Few Universities offering the course.
g. Difficult to have access to official documents but we hope this will cease with the passage of FoI into law.
4.0 Conclusion We can authoritatively say that Public Administration has emerged and has come to stay as a discipline.
Unlike before, the course is now being studied in several universities all over the country.
The profession is practiced in all governmental institutions in the three tiers of government and their parastatals.
We noted also that the issue of separating public administration as an art or a science poses some difficulties as we have observed in our discussions above.
Public Administration has traces of Science and Art fused together.
Still it will be quite wrong to view the science element of Public Administration as pure science.
5.0 Summary It is hoped that our discussion above has thrown more light into the debate as to whether public administration should be regarded as an art or a science or as both.
These discussions have lessened the fatigue and the confusion shrouded in the search for the real identity of public administration.
It has equally contributed to a better understanding of the subject matter, their roles and expectations in piloting the business of government for the overall development of the nation.
In the unit you will study the ecology of public administration.
26 6.0 Tutor Marked Assignment 1.
Write briefly on the following i. colonialism, ii.
socio-cultural influence, iii.
economic influence, 2.
Give five reasons why you should study public administration.
3.
What are the factors militating against the study of public administration 7.0 Reference/Further Reading Adebayo A.
(1992), Principles and Practice of Public Administration in Nigeria, Ibadan, Spectrum Books Ltd. Ademolekun, L. (1986), Public Administration: A Nigerian and Comparative Experience.
Lagos, Longman Nigeria Limited.
Akpan, N.U.
(1982), Public Administration in Nigeria, Ikeja: Longman The Encyclopedia Britannica, (1977), Vol.
2, London: Encyclopedia Britannica Inc. Wilson, W. (1887), “The Study of Public Administration”, Political Science Quarterly Vol.
2, June.
Also vol.
56, December, 1941.
Maduabum, C.P.
(2008), 27  UNIT 3 ECOLOGY OF PUBLIC ADMINISTRATION 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objectives 3.0 MAIN CONTNETS 3.1 Ecology and Public Administration 3.2 Ecology of Developed and Developing Nations 3.3 Impact of Environmental Factors - Nigerian Experience 3.3.1 Social Factor 3.3.2 Human Relations Factor 3.3.3 Language 3.3.4 Educational System 3.3.5 Time and Number 3.3.6 Climatic Conditions 3.3.6 Copy-Catism 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutor Marked Assignment 7.0 Reference/Further Reading 28 1.0 Introduction Y ou are welcome to the study of the Ecology of Public Administration.
In this unit which is basically ecology and its influence in Public Administration, we shall make concerted effort to explain in details the relevance of ecology to the study of Public Administration, Though it can be argued that ecology will fit in better in such fields as Biology but the study will throw more light and bring to the fore how ecology is just not an interactions between individuals and their environment, but also as interactions between entire populations and the universe.
When ecology is applied to Public Administration, it refers to the origin, importance and impact of Public Administration to Nigerian environment.
It means the influences of all natural, historical, political, economic, socio- cultural, religious factors and other significant national experiences that in one way or the other influenced the growth and development of Public Administration in Nigeria.
The study will also discern how environment ultimately affect the life history characteristics of the citizens within a community or the entire nation.
You will find this course very interesting and exciting especially if you will take time to study and understand this unit.
2.0 OBJECTIVES At the end of this unit, you are expected to: • Know the meaning of Ecology as it relates to Public Administration, • Describe ecology in relation to the basic types of interactions found between individuals in ecological communities and how these interactions may influence a community over time.
• Know the difference between the ecology of developed and developing nations.
29 • Understand what competition for scarce resources is in ecological terms, and how it influences both communities and evolutionary pathways.
30 MAIN CONTENT: 3.1 ECOLOGY OF PUBLIC ADMINISTRATION Biological Sciences definition of ecology is in relation of interactions between living organisms and their natural habitat or environment.
The Oxford dictionary definition of ecology sees it as that branch of science that studies the distribution and abundance of living organisms, and the interactions between organisms and their environment.The general definition of ecology is the relationship thatexists between plant and living organisms to each other and to their environment.Human ecology examines humans and their interactions with their natural environments.
Ecology provides greater insight into the evolutionary histories of species and provides contemporary examples of factors that influence historical evolutionary events.
When applied to Public Administration, itmeans an umbrella term for a variety of projects that involve the origin, importance and impact of Public Administration to the environment in which it operates.
In effect, it means the influence of all natural, historical, political, economic, socio-cultural, religious factors and other major national experiences that influenced the growth and development of Public Administration of any nation.
It studies the relationship between the society and its natural environment.
It is concerned with the study of how different policies in different parts of the world are parts of the global structure through which one polity exploits or complements the other.
This is necessary since the world is gradually becoming a global village.
Political ecology is actually more in tune with the interactions of the society and states, rather than the populations and species, as well as politics as it relates to environmental issues.
30 As a concept, ecology of public administration entails the interactions between public administration as an organization and its environment.
Ecology of Public Administration in this context is mostly concerned with how the differences in social, cultural and environmental factor coupled with historical experiences affect the way in which public administration is conducted and also how administrative actions affect the society in which it plays a part.
There is a general consensus that the very nature, purpose, activities, structure and behavior of public administration is determined or modified by the social, cultural, economic, political, legal, historical and technological factors in the environment.
Ecology of public administration further means how Public Administration relates with itself internally as well as how it relates with its external environment in terms of politics, social, culture, economy,and technology, legal and so on.
The first principle of ecology is that each living organism has an on-going and continued relationship with other elements that make up their environment.
It should be noted that Public Administration has no universal application rather it has to be analysed within the ecological attributes of each administrative system in which it operates.
In order words, Public Administration does not exist in vacuum but rather exists within a socio-cultural and political environment.Its activities are deeply embedded in that environment.
MacRae and Pitt (1980:16) state that ‘the cultural norms and values of society limit the activities of public officials, and the methods which they can adopt to pursue their goals’.
In effect, though the formal structure of Public Administration of different countries may be the same but their informal and behavioural patterns possess considerable diversities that are conditioned by its environment.
Richardson and Baldwin (1976:24) collaborates that Public Administratorperceives the problems to be resolved, the alternative possibilities 31 within which choices can be made, the resources to be employed, the support and oppositions to policies and programmes, the client to be served or regulated, the market forces which establishes the cost of goods and services, interest groups that are concerned about what the Public Administrator does, the private and public institutions all form the environment of public administration.
It is within this environment that the consequences of public administration are to be judged ‘right’ or ‘wrong’ … (Ezeani, 2006:52).
In view of this, public administrators should ensure that environmental factors are taken into account when making decisions and ‘that environmental transformations which are occurring by themselves may be modified’ (Riggs, 1980:108).
The environment is constantly changing and exerting influences of various types on the organization.
Some of these influences are beneficial while some are detrimental.
It is the duty of the senior administrators to take advantage of the beneficial factors while counteracting the harmful ones, all aimed for the good of the society.
3.2 ECOLOGY OF DEVELOPED AND DEVELOPING COUNTRIES Administration of development means the process of administering or guiding the process of development in a country.
Development as a concept has experienced methodological and conceptual shift over the years.
Ecology of developed and developing countries is very unique in the sense that while the developed nations practice those administrative systems that suit its socio-cultural environment, the developing nation in turn is very comfortable with imitating these foreign models or systems without taking into consideration its socio-cultural environment.
This brings us to the theory of administrative imitation which is an attempt to explain the persistence of the legacy of the past colonial masters to the development of the administration of the colonized countries.
What is involved 32 here is not absolute imitation, which would in any case be unrealistic, but an attitude in the sphere of social psychology which will help to throw more light into the mindset of the operators.
Most of the developed nations have experienced colonization.
Most of them have what is regarded as dual administration.
There are elements of traditional and modern administration taking place in one society.Riggs et al (1964) investigated the impact of ecological factors in the environment, cultural and historical experiences of societies on the need and effectiveness of administrative systems in the management of development programmes.
Riggs and his colleagues opined that administrative systems can be better understood if the surrounding conditions, influences and forces that come into their shaping and modifications are identified and classified in relation to their relative importance and influence.
They went further to classify societies into three groups: a. Refracted societies - Developed or modern societies b. Prismatic societies - Transitional societies (Developing) c. Fused societies - Traditional societies This classification made it easier to differentiate between developed and developing nations, that is, refracted and prismatic societies.
Riggs model was that of administration in transition which he refers to as the SALA model.
According to him, developed society belongs to the refractive portion; the developing countries come into the prismatic category having the combination of elements of tradition and modernity.
Although, they are moving towards the refractive end, they are yet to completely disengage themselves from the traditional fused society.The traditional society, on the other hand, belongs to the fused portion.
He posited that at the traditional society, powers are usually fused, for instance, the Chiefs, Obis, Obas, Emirs exert so much power or influence over their subjects.
33 Characteristics of prismatic society are as follows: a.
A high degree of heterogeneity - Here, there is a mixture of traditional and modern society.
There is co-existence of a modern city with its sophistication of intellectual class, modern gadgets of administration etc and local villages run by rural leaders whose roles and mode of administration may be quite local or traditional in character.
b.
High degree of formalism - There is a discrepancy between what isprescribed and what is being practiced.
Here, the laws in the Constitution is one thing and the actual behavior of the people is another.
This explains the situation in the public sector and indeed the country in general.
c. Over lapping - Here there is co-existence of formally differentiated structure and undifferentiated structures.In this situation, new norms or values that are appropriate to the differentiated structures are paid lip service while the older values of an undifferentiated society still retains its stronghold.
In prismatic societies there are; Nepotism and favouritism: This is regarded as the influence of family, God fatherismetc on the office holder.
Ploy Communism: 34 Here the public office holder apply rules to suit his personal interest or to benefit his constituency and not for the universal interest.
Ploy normalism and lack of consensus: In this situation, there are so many norms operating in a particular system and there is lack of rational relationship between ends and means.
Power distribution does not necessarily lie with the formal authority.
It is pertinent to point out that Nigeria Public Administration system is better described in terms of the ‘Sala Model’.
Other scholars in ecology school of thought explain the features of administration in the developing countries as follows that: a.
The basic pattern of administration is highly imitative rather than indigenous.
b.
There is wide spread discrepancy between form and norm.
c. Bureaucracy in developing countries does not enjoy operational autonomy.
d. Bureaucracy is deficient in skilled manpower which is necessary for developing projects.
There is need for adaptation which can involve imitation but not absolute imitation which is really unrealistic.
Imitation itself makes for balance but the disadvantages are nevertheless considerable.
For instance, imitation prevents distinctive evolution of the social psychological features of each community and apes that of another country.
3.3 Impact of Environmental Factors on Public Administration in Nigeria There are some environmental factors that impede the development of public administration.
These factors are not peculiar to Nigeria environment alone as 35 there are also found in other developing countries.
Some of these are discussed below: 3.2.1 Social Factor One problem that is so deeply rooted in the Nigerian Public Administrative system that has refused to go is nepotism.
In this situation, the loyalty to family, friends, local, state, and ethnic groups take precedence over loyalty to the nation.
This makes supervision and control difficult to implement.
It breeds corruption and mediocrity as merit is not the yardstick for appointment to public office or the award of contracts.
The Public Sector is also viewed as a faceless entity or as ‘national cake’ which should be sliced and eaten by those who are fortunate to get close to it.
The bigger your slice, the smarter you are viewed by the society.
The same society regards those who have been to the corridors of power but have nothing to show for it as very foolish.
They are scorned and despised even by their own families.
The result is looting of the public treasury by public officers, politicians, the military et cetera.
This have impoverished the country and made the Transparency International to rate Nigeria as one of the most corrupt nations in the world despite the acclaimed fight against corruption in Nigeria.
3.2.2 Human Relations Factor There is lack of cooperation and team spirit in the public sector.
Undue animosity, jealousy and bickering are strife in the system.
The superiors in most cases are very reluctant to delegate responsibilities and authority to their subordinates.
The subordinates, on the other hand, are often reluctant to accept responsibilities from their superiors.
The decision-making is usually concentrated at the topmost levels with the resultant inefficient use of the talents of both the superiors and the subordinates.
Mduabum (2008:295) contends that this unco-operative attitude snowballs into an aggression which is misplaced and transferred to the unfortunate public thereby resulting in 36 poor public relations with its attendant consequences of inefficiency, ineffectiveness, poor performance and poor service delivery.
3.2.3 Language Nigeria is a populous country with over 400 different languages.
There is no indigenous acceptable lingua franca for the nation with the result that most people are conducting their business in different languages.
This has adverse effect on productivity as well as on government business because, in most cases, it is hard to communicate or execute instructioneffectively.
3.2.4 The Educational System The educational system handed over to the nation by the colonial masters was superficial.
It was not really meant to educate the indigenes rather to serve the purpose of interpreting their language to the natives, hence the emphasis on reading and writing as against science and technology.
This state of affairs also was responsible for the emphasis on paper qualifications rather than acquisition of skills.
The paper qualification is tailored towards acquisition of ‘white collar’ jobs which is evident in the majority of the nation’s elites opting for generalists as against specialists professions.
3.2.5 Time and Number Nigerian Public Servants are noted for lack of time consciousness.
They have this mindset that their job is a ‘white man’s’ own where one is prone to stroll in and out as one wishes.
There is total disrespect of time which they nicknamed ‘African-time’.
There is lack of result-oriented attitude to their duties.
Our government is very good in shunning out good policies or projects but find it difficult to define how or when these projects will be completed.
They are always not serious in tagging time to each project and follow it up with strict compliance.
To be result-oriented, according to Maduabum (ibid), the organs of government should also be time-oriented and number-oriented.
37 3.2.6 Climatic Condition Nigeria is situated in the tropics with hot and harsh climate which is not conducive for high productivity in the work place.
This is a natural phenomenon which can be resolved by making sure that the offices are highly ventilated or furnished with good air conditioners.
This of course will suffice if there is uninterrupted power supply in the country.
Added to the above is, as posited by Maduabum (ibid), to cope with it by establishing a positive relationship between climatic and working conditions, especially in terms of hours of work, rest periods, and recreational facilities.
3.2.7 Copy-Catism Nigerian administrative system relies much on the styles borrowed from the European system of administration as against the African system or styles.
And because these foreign administrative systems have different cultural background which does not conform to our cultural values, there is bound to be conflicts in most of the policy issues raised by the government and this will, without doubt, be counterproductive in the public sector.
4.0 Conclusion Public Administrators operate in a complex environment.
They affect, and to some extent, influence the environment in which they operate.
In playing advisory roles to the political class and also in policy implementation they must consider the internal and external environment.
Many governments are making serious efforts to establish an environment that is beneficial to the society.
Nigerian government is towing similar line.
38 5.0 SUMMARY From the discussion on the ecology of public administration we have seen the influence of environmental factors as it impacts on the practice of public administration in Nigeria.
Ecology in Public Administration context is concerned with the differences in social, cultural and environmental factors and how environmental factors and historical experiences affect the way in which administration is conducted.
It also deals with how administrative actions affect the society in which it plays a part.
We also observed that development strategies and approaches must take into cognizance the very nature of the society involved, drawing at the same time from its human and material resources to achieve social change in the society.
Ecology of developed and developing countries and their impact on Public Administration is an interesting reading.
We noted three categories of societies; refracted, prismatic and fused societies.
Riggs model which he refers as SALA was also examined.
This model helps to differentiate between developed and developing societies and their characteristics.
Finally, we opined that Nigeria Public Administration is better understood from Rigg’s et al SALA model.
6.0 TUTOR MARKED ASSIGNMENT 1.
What is ecology of public administration?
2.
Why is ecology important to a Public Administrator?
3.
According to Riggs, societies are classified into three groups.
Mention and discuss these groups.
4.
Differentiate between refracted societies and prismatic societies.
5.
Mention and discuss 3 environmental factors that influenced Public Administration in Nigeria.
39 7.0 References/Further Reading Ezeani, E.O.
(2006).
Fundamentals of Public Administration.
Enugu.
Snaap Press Ltd. Madaubm, C. (2008).
The Mechanics of Public Administration in Nigeria.
Lagos.
Concept Publications Ltd. Maduabum, C. (2006).
Reforming Government Bureaucracies in Nigeira.
Lagos.
ASCON Printing Press, Topo-Badagry.
Okoye, J.C. (1997).
Modern Management Techniques and Development Administration.
Onitsha.
Abbot Communication and Prints Ltd. Okoye, O. M. (2002).
Development Administration: Theories And Applications in Nigeria.
Onitsha.
Abbot Books Ltd. Olojede I., Fajonyomi B.
(2007).
Essentials of Public Administration.
Segeprints@yahoo.com.
Riggs, F.W.
(1964).
Administration in Developing Countries.
Boston: Houghton Muffin.
MODULE 2 PUBLIC ADMINISTRATION AND POLITICS Unit 1 Relationship between Public Administration and Politics Unit 2 Politics as an Activity Unit 3 PublicPolicy Making Process Unit 4 Political System Process and Forms of Government Unit 5 Public and Private Administration: Differences and Similarities 40 UNIT 1 RELATIONSHIP BETWEEN PUBLIC ADMINISTRATION AND POLITICS CONTENTS 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objectives 3.0 Main Contents 3.1 Relationship between Public Administration and Politics 3.2 Dichotomy between Public Administration and Politics 3.3 Challenges to Politics and Administration Dichotomy 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutor Marked Assignment 7.0 Reference/Further Reading 8.0 1.0 Introduction Y ou are welcome to this unit which is meant to explore the relationship between Politics and Public Administration.
The debate on the relationship of these two has been going on and on and has always compelled scholars on this subject toproffer some explanations on the topic in a bid to clear all the grey areas contained therein.
Among the debaters’ are the groups who posit that politics and administration are two distinct spheres and with different functions performed by them.
The others contend that there is no distinction or dichotomy between the two groups.
According to Adamolekun (1986:13), this group opined that there is no rigid distinction between the two groups.
41 Among the two groups, one is vested with the responsibility of policy formulation while the other is noted with the responsibility of policy implementation.
This unit will highlight the symbiotic relationship between the two and the importance of their working harmoniously for the common good.
This unit is very interesting and you will benefit very well if you will pay close attention to all the issues discussed therein.
2.0 Objectives At the end of this unit, you are expected to have a good knowledge of the topics discussed herein as well as be able to do the following: (cid:1) Discuss in detail the relationship between politics and public administration.
(cid:1) Differentiate between the administrators and politicians.
(cid:1) be able to discuss in detailed the functions of the two to the society.
(cid:1) Advise on the importance of a harmonious relationship between administration and politics.
3.0 MAIN CONTENT 3.1 RELATIONSHIP BETWEEN POLITICS AND PUBLIC ADMINISTRATION The relationship between politics and public administration has always been a case for debate especially at the formative years of public administration.
In those days, public administration had a confused status.
Some argued that it should not stand alone but should be lumped together with political science.
Even in the Political Science department, it was treated with scorn.
Some were of the view that it should be grouped with Management Science but there also 42 it could not find its bearing as it was swallowed up by many management courses.
Finally, it found its bearing when it was accepted as Public Administration and to stand on its own and treated as such.
The relationship between politics and public administration can be viewed from two sides of a coin.
There are some contenders who feel that there is no distinctive relationships between Politics and Public Administration as both are inter-connected.
They argue that the name public administration itself embraces both politics and administration.
Administrators sometimes make political decisions in the course of executing their duties.
For instance when the politicians formulates policies, the administrators while implementing these policies has to weigh and consider conflicting demands and interests and tries to balance and synthesize them all for the growth and development of the polity.
The other school of thought that sees politics and public administration as different, contend that in all democracies, the politicians who are the executives are vested with the authority of policy formulation.
They set the broad lines of the policies to be pursued while the public administrators merely implements these policies and disposes current governmental businesses as directed by the political class who are their boss.
They execute routine tasks and assignments to achieve the goals and objectives of the government in power, while the politicians apart from formulating policies dictate the pace of governance.
3.2 Dichotomy Between Politics And Public Administration The pioneer scholars and writers on Public Administration notably Woodrow Wilson (1887) stressed that administration lies outside the proper sphere of politics and that administrative question are quite different from political questions.
He further maintained that though politicians set the task to be performed by the administrators, they should not usurp its offices.
This assertion was corroborated by John Pfiffner (1935) as he maintained that 43 politics must be controlled and confined to its proper domain which is determination, crystallization and declaration of the will of the state while Administration should confine itself with the role of seeing to the implementation of this will once it has been clearly defined by the political class.
In other words, politicians should stick to their role of policy determination and stop meddling in the affairs of the administrators as they apply their technical expertise in executing these political wills of the executives.
Frank Goodnow (1914), also corroborated their assertion and made a clear distinction between politics and administration.
His was the classification of politics as the ‘expression of the will of the state’ and administration as ‘the execution of that will’.
It is interesting to note that one of their contemporaries, Willoughby (1920), did not dwell in trying to separate the two but went further to state that administration is the ‘fourth arm’ of government along with the legislature, the executive and the judiciary (Adebayo, 1992:68).
Dichotomy between Public Administration and Politics and the status of Public Administration may be viewed by the classical model theory as postulated by Taylor (1911).
Taylor laid emphasis on the efficiency and productivity in organizations which can be achieved by applying scientific method to guide division of labour, to assign each worker to a specific task which will be accompanied by a good reward for accomplishment, thereby increasing productivity and efficiency.
This Scientific method believes that there is one best way to achieve a set objective.
They also opined that once this objective is defined, the management (administrators) should be given full responsibility and autonomy to achieve the objective in the most efficient way by applying the scientific method to the stated objective or problem.
The study of politics and public administration has shown that their roles are complementary in nature.
Whereas politics refers to the process by which 44 policies of the state or organizations are chosen and allocated, administration deals with the process by which these policies are implemented and executed.
In other words, politics are more concerned with what available resources, right and duties are allocated and to whom and when, administration deals with how wealth, resources, rights and duties are distributed to those concerned.
Most of the functions of politicians and administrators are clearly discernable while some are difficult to distinguish.
For instance, the creation of more local government areas is political while its implementation is administrative.
The chairman of a local government area may be a politician but is not divorced from the administration of the local government.
The Legislatures also exhibit administrative behavior.
Politics and administration are attributes of both the legislature and the executive branch of the government.
In the earlier phase, public administration and politics are regarded as the same study but later on distinction between them began to emerge.
While no clear cut formular may be possible in certain areas, it will suffice to assign politics and politicians to the role of defining the broad objectives of administration and manipulation of political power while administration and administrators be confined to the roles of provision of data, suggestions and criticisms for the formulation of policies and the execution or implementation of the policy once it is made.
3.3 Challenges to Politics and Administration dichotomy Political neutrality of the public administrator stipulates that the public administrators must be politically neutral.
They should put their politicking in their pockets and not meddle with the affairs of the politicians.
In other words, they should not play partisan politics but instead are expected to show allegiance to any political party in power.
However, the major challenge to issue of dichotomy of politics and administration as well as political neutrality came to the fore as a result of the following factors: 45 a.
There is no clear cut distinction between politics and administration in some instances.
An example is the usurpation of policy making power by the administrators.
According to Wu (1978:341), this may be due to increased need for efficiency or increase in the complexity of their duties or professionalization and specialization of the specialists; administrators have increasingly gained political power.
b.
Added to the above is the demand by the political class, social critics and the society in general to make public administration more responsive.
This means that the public administrators should showactive participation and be more responsive to the needs, yearnings and aspirations of the general public.
When they do this they have added to social equity to the classical objective of the political class.
A potential commitment to social equity means their meddling in politics and policy making and this inevitably means that they are not politically neutral.
c. The Public Administrators these days are keenly involved in both the policy-making and policy implementation of the people directly involved.
The administrators play an active role in policy making.
According to Appleby (1949), there is no such thing as policy making being separate from policy execution.
He opines that public administration is policy making and is part of political process.
Richard (1975:648) shares the same view on this.
According to him, Administrators are involved in every step of the political process from the technical readjustments of previously enacted policies, to the creation and implementation process for a completely new and innovative approach to an immediate problem.
In the same vein Gross (1964), punctured Goodnow’s assertion of policy and administration dichotomy and argued that policy making and its execution are inseparably intertwined.
He argues that purposes are given meaning and content by the people who cooperate in carrying them out.
Purposes, he says, emanate from an entire organization in interactions with its environment.
46 Chapman (1959:275) summarized it thus, that ‘policy’ is nothing more than the political activity of the civil servant.
From the foregoing, we can deduce that it is becoming increasingly difficult to separatepolicy-making by political actors from policy implementations by the administrators.
4.0 Conclusion There are two contending groups to note here; one group argues that there are dichotomy between the politicians and the administrators while the other group is insisting that there is no such dichotomy.
The true position, as obtains in most developing countries, is close interaction between politics and administration rather than dichotomy.
This is evidenced by the following reasons: (cid:1) Senior public administrators, by virtue of their functions as advisers to the politicians on policy matters, are often involved in policy making.
(cid:1) Public servants are sometimes prejudiced and their personal opinions do affect their official assignments.
(cid:1) Politicians sometimes delegate their duties to senior public administrators especially on matters with policy implications.
(cid:1) Even policy implementation itself has policy implications.
5.0 Summary In this unit we examined the relationship between Public Administration and politics.
The challenges they face were also discussed.
It is hoped that you have acquired a lot of knowledge regarding this topic that will enable you discuss it intelligently at any level.
In the next unit we will be discussing about politics as an activity.
47 6.0 Tutor Marked Assignment 1.
It is said that Politics and Administration are two sides of the same coin.
Discuss.
2.
In your own assessment suggest the ideal status of Politics and Public Administration in the society.
Support your claim with necessary data.
3.
Mention your duties to the political class as a Public Administrator.
7.0 References/Further Reading Adebayo, A.
(1992), Principles and Practices of Public Administration in Nigeria.
Ibadan: Spectrum Books Limited.
Ademolakun, L. (1986), Politics and Administration in Nigeria, Ibadan: Spectrum Books Limited.
Appleby, P.H.
(1949), Policy and Administration, Alabama: University of Alabama.
Goodnow, F. J.
(1914), Politics and Administration, New York, Macmillian.
Gross, B.
A.
(1964), The Managing of Organisations, Glencoe.
Pfiffner, J. M. (1935), Public Administration, New York, The Ronald Press Company.
Richardson, I. I. and Baldwin, S. (1976), Public Administration, Columbus: Charles Merrill.
Wilson G. (1887), ‘The Study of Administration’ Political Science Quarterly, vol.2, June.
48 Willoughby, W. F. (1920), The government of Modern States, New York, Appleton-century Crots Inc. U nit 2 POLITICS AS AN ACTIVITY Contents 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objectives 3.0 MAIN CONTENT 3.1 Nature of Politics 3.2 Politics as an Activity 3.3 Political and Social Change 3.4 Changes that may occur in the Society 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutor Marked Assignment 7.0 References and Further Readings 1.0 Introduction In this unit, we will be looking at the nature of politics, politics as an activity as well as the social change that goes on in the political domain.
We will examine forms of political and social changes that occur in governance such as revolutionary change, change due to act of terrorism, change due to coup d’etat.
We will also look at World economic change.
This unit is very interesting as it will expose you to the happenings in the political arena.
You should study it very well and answer the questions that follow.
You will benefit a lot from this unit if you study it dilligently.
49 2.0 Objectives At the end of this unit, you are expected to do the following: (cid:1) Define politics (cid:1) Explain the various activities that goes on in the political field (cid:1) Understand form of political and social changes that operates in politics (cid:1) Understand changes due to act of terrorism or due to coup d’etat (cid:1) Define and discuss Revolutionary change as well as (cid:1) Be able to write or discuss intelligently on changes in the global economy (cid:1) Be able to advise on the ideal social state for the society 3.0 MAIN CONTENT 3.1 THE NATURE OF POLITICS There are many dimensions to the definition of the word politics.
Many have this impression that there is no universally acceptable definition about politics.
Some contend that man is a political animal and so everything man does has some tints of politics about it.Wherever man is, whatever he does, whether in a village meeting, church, market, government or family, he is engaged in one form of politics or the other.There are some who see it as a dirty game played by crooked minded individuals.
There are yet others who see politics as allocation of power and responsibility,Easton (1963).
Harold (1936), describes politics as ‘who gets what, when and how’.
Aristotle contends that politics is a controlled and coordinated activity without destroying other things.
Politics is quitecomplex with many definition each correct in its sense.
Still we have to approach the subject from a common definition and operate from there.
Politics has been defined by the Oxford Advanced Learner’s Dictionary as the activities that are involved in getting and using power in public life, and being able to influence decisions that affect a country or a society, example party politics or local politics.
50 3.2 POLITICS AS AN ACTIVITY Politics as an activity is taken to mean the actions or inactions of those groups of people vested with the authority and the responsibility of making policy decisions.
Political activities are contained in the decisions and policies of the government in power.
Policy, according to Flippo (1966:52), refers to general guides, rules and procedures that govern behavior of any organized system.
Ezeani, (2003:155) sees it as ‘a purposive programme of action articulated and followed by management to achieve specific goals of an organization’.
It is also a systematic government plan aimed at introducing changes in government activity.
Politics is not confined to a place, it takes place everywhere but we are concerned with politics as played in the governmental sphere.
There are three levels of playing ground for politics namely: a.
State which is taken to mean a country b. Intra-state which means within a country c. Inter-state which means international STATE POLITICS Political activity is first played out in the state or in the country.
This involves all the political decisions, activities or behavior of a state within its geo-political domain.
INTRA-STATE POLITICS This means all the political activities within or among all the various units or groups within the state.
INTER-STATE POLITICS Inter-State politics is played in the international level.
It is politics between one country and the other.
There are bodies which regulate the activities of politics as played in the international level.
Examples of such bodies are Organisation of African Unity (OAU), the United Nations (UN) etc.
51 3.3 POLITICAL AND SOCIAL CHANGE Social change refers to an alteration in the social order of a society.
The alteration may be as a result of social progress or social retrogression or social cultural revolution.
It may equally refer to a paradigm-shift in the socio-economic structure for instance a shift away from an autocratic to a democratic style of governance.
It may also refer to social revolution such as communist revolution China or the recently Egyptian revolution or to other civil rights revolutions such as the famous Aba riot or Women’s Suffrage or Civil Rights Movement.
Change is inevitable in any human endeavour.
One of the great Greek philosophers’ Heraclitus once posit that “on those stepping into rivers staying the same other and other water flow” in other words ‘for the river to remain the river, change must constantly be taking place’.
This is true of every living organization, which, in order to remain alive, must constantly be changing.
When we talk of political change, we refer to changes that occur in political and social environment within the political system.
This may be peaceful or violent and bloody.
Political and social changes are issues that evolve from time to time in the contemporary world.
The change may be driven by forces such as cultural, economic, technological, religious or scientific breakthrough.
Social and political institutions dictate the pace for individual and group behaviour and they are meant to provide the resources individuals and groups need to survive.
The life styles of people are largely determined by the social structures in which they find themselves.
Social justice is, therefore a matter of ensuring that these structures satisfy the basic needs of the people.
When this is not done, what we have is conflicts, disorder, anarchy, violent demonstrations which may, in worst scenario, be bloody.
Globally, there is greater agitation for change arising out of people’s desires and higher insistence on freedom and an improved standard of living.
Let us examine some of the social and political changes as well as other related changes that are peculiar to politics.
52 3.4 CHANGES THAT MAY OCCUR IN THE SOCIETY 1.
Social Justice This is a situation where the Institutions and the Structures put in place are satisfactory and also satisfy the basic needs of the people.
In some places, Institutions or Structures may be saturated with corruption, political exclusion, unequal access to resources, and exploitation.
The political system may be characterized by ‘win-win’ setting or the ‘winner takes it all’ scenario.
In other words, it creates the system of winners and losers in which people are trapped or caged in a particular social situation.
In this situation, there is poverty, and denial of basic human rights.
The people’s basic needs or vital human interest go unmet and they are excluded from making their contributions on the subjects that concerns them.
There is high level of discrimination, inadequate employment opportunities, lack of education, lack of decent accommodation for the teeming population, poor sanitation, lack of security, no electricity, scarcity of food et cetera.
This depicts a faulty system which will in turn, stunt economic growth and development.
The structures in the above mentioned society is weak and the processes obtained therein will not be effective in dealing with the injustice and inequality that may result from the faulty system.
When this happens, the result is conflict arising out of unmet basic social needs.
This conflict may most likely continue and escalate until changes are made to correct the wrong in the social structure.
If the conflict continues unchecked, it may lead to violence.
There are other changes that may occur in the political system.
Some of these may be violent and while others may be non-violent.
All these are discussed below: 2.
Non-Violent Change This type of change is characterized by peaceful resolution and transformation devoid of violence.
It may take the form of reforms and democratization and respect to the rule of law and general discipline of the people.
This type of change does not stop at reorganizing the administrative system or parameter for resource allocation but should include broad participation of the stakeholders to nation building and governance.
53 Non-violent change encourages democratic development, peaceful dispute resolution, respect to the rule of law, freedom of expression, increased political participation et cetera.
In this system, there is also freedom of association of other groups to any political party of their choice.
The government tries to develop a workable political structure where other multiple social groups can participate to their satisfaction.
This type of state reform will not give room for any violence and will prevent form of conflict from arising.
It will also accelerate nation building and economic development and growth.
It will strengthen civil society which is made up of business organization, human right activities, schools, churches, social clubs, women groups, the citizens and so on.
In non-violent change situation, conflict is prevented by removing its underlying causes and creating the conditions under which it need not occur.
Injustice is addressed before it provokes conflict.
Also addressing persistent social problems such as poverty, environmental degradation and destructive injustice will greatly strengthen community and civil society.
Strong civil society can promote dialogue and reconciliation as well as foster good governance and build peace.
A good example of avoiding violence situation is by transforming the structures that govern social and political relations and make power and resources accessible to the people.
This sort of change involves policy or institutional adjustment as well as the creation of new institution, t meet basic political and socioeconomic needs of the people.
3.
Violent Change The violent change is characterized by forceful measures to effect a change.
Violent change may be bloody or bloodless.
It may be aimed at overthrowing a government or abolition of a policy or reform.
It is affected through the use of force, threat, revolution, assassination, terror et cetera.
Examples of violent change in the society include but not limited to the following: a.
Mass uprising, b.
Revolution, c. Coup d’etat.
54 In some instances the violent change may occur when all efforts for peaceful and non- violent change has failed.
Violent change usually occurs in the following situations: i.
The disadvantaged or marginalized or frustrated group can mobilize people with similar ideology to forcefully agitate for a change in leadership.
ii.
When the incumbent government refuses to allow a peaceful change or a reform that meets the needs of the people, the people will revolt.
iii.
When the people are discount or frustrated with the existing political, economic or social arrangement in the society.
iv.
Where the incumbent government refuse to accede to popular demands of the people for fear of losing grip on power.
4.0 Conclusion One of the foremost philosophers in history, Aristotle observed that man is a ‘political animal’.
This means that man cannot provide for all his needs working in isolation.
Politics is played in all spheres of life be it in the home, market, church, school, private of public organizations etc.
Whatever one does in life has some elements of politics embedded in it.
Politics takes place whenever there is a struggle over the distribution of scarce resources by policy makers in any group.
But our concern here is politics as played in the state or political society, meaning people bound by law within a definite society.
We observed that Positive social and political changes are a necessary tool for transition to peace and will also address the injustice that brought the conflict in the first place.
55 5.0 Summary We discussed nature of politics and its impact on the society.
Wealso looked at the relationships between the rulers and those who are called upon to obey.
The various conflicts that occur in the society and what causes them as well as how such conflicts can be avoided or managed featured in this unit.
The role of the Public Administrator in all this is a vital tool for continuity in governance.
In the next unit we are going to look at the Public Policy Making Process which is a necessary ingredient between Public Administration and Politics.
6.0 Tutor Marked Assignment 1.
What is politics?
2.
What is the relationship between Politics and Public Administration?
3.
What are the Political changes that may occur in the society and why do they occur?
7.0 Reference/Further Reading Appadorarai, A.
(1975), Substance of Politics, Delhi: Oxford University Press.
Easton, D. (1968), “Political Science” in International Encyclopedia of the Social Science vol.
12 New York: Crowell Collier and Maconillan Inc. Hyneman, C.S.
(1959), The Study of Politics, Urban III: University of Illinois Press.
Nnoli, O.
(1986), Introduction to Politics, Enugu: Fourth Dimension Publishers.
56 Unit 3 Public Policy Making Process 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objective 3.0 Main Content 3.1 Definition of Public policy 3.2 Types of Public policy 3.3 Reasons for the study of Public policy 3.4 Policy Making Process 3.5 Ecological Impact on Policy Making and Implementation 3.6 Major Actors in Policy Formulation and Implementation 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutor Marked Assignment 7.0 Reference/Further Readings 1.0 Introduction You are welcome to this particular unit which deals with public policy making.
In this unit, we are going to examine the meaning and nature of public policy.
We will examine in detail the processes by which public policy are made or what we call the policy cycle.
We will also examine the relevance of public policy making in public administration.
As a public sector manager, you will benefit immensely if you understand this unit very well.
It is an interesting topic and we have tried to simplify and make it an interesting reading.
So give this unit your maximum attention.
57 2.0 Objective At the end of this unit, you will be able to do the following.
• Explain the concept of public policy • Define and explain fully the public policy process • Understand the environmental impact on public policy making.
• Understand the actors in public policy process.
• Understand fully the policy cycle stages 3.0 Main content 3.1 Definition of Public Policy There are various angles and controversies surrounding the definitions of public Policy and up till now there is no consensus to the Define.
Let us examine some of these definitions.
Nwiza (1997) defines Public Policy as pronouncement of government intention(s) by people in position of public trust demanding government actions or in actions and having impact either negative or positive on the majority of the members of a given society.
This definition is flawed in that were declaration of intentions, wishes or principles, or expression of desires cannot be regarded as public policy.
Maduabum (2008) posit that public policy is an aggregation of peoples hopes, aspirations and intentions embodied in official documents such as legislative enactments, white papers, estimates, government circulars, conclusions of the council of the council of ministers (executive councils) development or rolling plans, etc, or otherwise enunciated and enacted as the current stand on certain issues.
Accordingly, it is a deliberate and binding action by the authoritative organs of the state designed to influence the behavior of the society.
It is not a haphazardons action but rather a systematic method of society fundamental national problems.
The systematic approach is vital so that the numerous public problems will be prioritized against the available resources.
As well as harmonize the various sectoral aspects of the total policy.
Asliford, (1981) Ezeani, (2005:289) take it to mean a pattern of purposive action by which political institutions shape society.
This involves varieties of efforts to tackle identified societal problems.
It has direct relationship with politics.
Public policies are shaped by the manner in which power is organized within the government.
It is a guide to government actions since those 58 values which set priorities and roles within the government and societies are encompassed in it.
It is a road map for politicians to follow in the examination of their political agenda.
It equally gives the public, who are the beneficiaries of these policies, an idea of what to expect from the government.
In some instances, government’s inaction can also be as a result of its policy too.
According to Dye (1981:8).
Public Policy is “whatever government chooses to do or not to do”.
It has to be borne in mind that policy does not mean the same thing as decision.
Policy has a longer time frame and wider in scope than decision.
It is policy that provides the framework for day-to-day decisions that are needed for the attainment of the organizational goals.
Public policy is a written statement of government’s action or inaction in a given political environment.
It can equally be called a guiding practices or actions in a particular activity or a problem areas (Ezeani,2006:290).
Public Policy is an attempt by the government in power to address a public issue.
The government which may be local, state or federal develops this policy within the context of the laws, regulations, decisions and actions of the government.
The distinctive features of the Public Policy according to Maduabum (2003:36) are: I.
Public Policy is not a random or a chance behavior but rather a purposive or goal- oriented action; II.
Public Policy consists of courses or patterns of action by governmental officials; III.
Public Policy is what government actually do, not what they intend to do, or say they are going to do; IV.
Public Policy involver some form of overt government action to affect a particular problem; V. Public Policy involves also a decision by government officials not to take action, to do nothing, on some matter on which governmental/ involvement is sought; and VI.
Public Policy is based on Law and is authoritative.
This means that if has legal qualities that distinguished it from the policies of the private organization.
It is pertinent to note that policies remain ‘ideas’ unless subjected to thorough analysis to ensure that they address the goals for which they are being formulated.
59  3.2 Types of Public Policy There are various terminologies which you will see in the study of public policy.
These include: Policy demand, Policy decisions, Policy statements, policy outputs and Policy outcome.
Let us examine these definitions.
1.
Policy demands.
These are agitations emanating from the public or individual or groups to the government or its representative demanding for action or in action on certain issues.
2.
Policy Decisions—these are decisions which government or its representatives have made that given direction to its public actions or in actions.
3.
Policy Statements --- these are formal expressions or articulations of public policy.
Examples are legislative statute, presidential orders, decrees, administration rules.
4.
Policy Outputs--- these are those things that are actually done as a result of policy decisions or statements.
It is pertinent to note that sometimes policy outputs many differ from initial policy statements.
5.
Policy Outcomes--- these are the consequences that results from government’s actions or in actions.
Example is the consequences (intended or unitended) of the removal of fuel subsidy.
3.3 Reasons for the study of Public Policy The study of Public Policy is very crucial to public sector managers because public policy is one subject that affects the lies and well being of the people and the knowledge of it will adequately equip than P.Seet.angers with clearer understanding of the reasons for some, if not all, of governments thought process and its actions or inactions.
This will help p.singrs to proffer intelligent advice to the government.
A part from this, there is also three reasons for studying public policy.
They include: a) Professional Reasons b) Scientific reasons and c) Political reasons.
60 a.
Professional reasons: The study of public policy will enhance your knowledge of the causes and effects of the public policy.
This will in turn help you to give a professional advice on public policy issues.
b.
Scientific reasons: Then can study public policy so as to acquire greater knowledge on the origin, the processes of its development or analysis and its benefits to the society in general.
This will increase the public of the workings of the government.
c. Political reasons: We can also study public policy for political reasons.
For instance, to check the activities of the government and ensure that they adopt the right policies that will yield the desired goals and objectives.
This will help to correct the excesses of the government.
3.4 Policy Making Process Public policy making process involves what we call ‘policy cycle’.
The policy cycle is made up of policy initiation, policy formulation, policy implementation, policy monitoring and evaluation, and policy reformulation.
The policy cycle Policy Initiation Policy Formulation Policy Reformulation Policy Implementation Policy Monitoring and Evaluation 61  Before we go further to discuss the stage of this cycle, we to understand what public making is all about, what exactly is public policy making?
Public policy making according to maduabum (2008), is an actively which provides the necessary framework for major decision that lead to concrete actions aimed at solving specific problems or improving an existing situation.
In the political sphere, policy making serve as the instrument for authoritative allocation of resources and values to various sectors and activities towards achieving specific socio-political and economic objectives of the government.
Having understood the meaning of public policy making, we can now go ahead to explain the stages of the policy making cycle.
a) Policy Initiation: This involves intensive research effort geared towards the collection and generation of relevant information, ideals, and facts and figures to appraise a proposed policy in terms of its chances of success or otherwise.
At this initial stage, a group of experts from multi- disciplinary sector or ‘think-tank’ may be utilized.
Other groups who may e used to initiate policies are politicians, legislative class, judiciary, community, professional bodies, pressure groups, or other interact groups.
This stage will also revel the popularity or otherwise of the policy, the anticipated problems, the benefits, the cost implication etc.
the cost-benefit analysis if thoroughly done at this stage will facilitate the policy formulation and passage into law.
It will also greatly enhance the success of the policy.
In Nigeria, policy initiation is undertaken by government and the politicians.
Sometimes the interest groups gets involved but government’s reaction towards society’s popular demand are still weak.
This is not so in the developed countries where lots of think-tank’, data and information are readily available for the government to articulate any proposed policy.
62 b) Policy Formulation: These are a thin line between policy initiation and policy formulation.
In policy formulation, all the major and vital features of the policy such as unambiguous definition, policy statement and content, policy objectives, plans, programmers, projects and key activities policy priorities and its strategies, the resources available, implementation agencies and their roles, enabling environment for successful implementation are brought to the drawing table and initially reviewed at this stage.
A good policy formulation is sine qua non to sustainability and positive impact of the policy to the society.
In other to achieve this following stage should be taken in the formulation stage: i.
Identification of the problem ii.
Unambiguous definition of the policy issue, iii.
Identification of the source of data.
iv.
Collection of data and data analysis.
v. Formulation of all the policy options.
vi.
Organization and institutional framework for policy formulation (e.g.
relevant civil servant departments).
vii.
Collection and Analysis of data is done after adequate consultation with the target groups and political leaders.
viii.
Draft content of policy proposal (involving the primary/ secondary data) as well as stakeholders input, and availability of human and material resources.
The public servants acts as chief advisers in the public policy process but the responsibility for policy formulation and the policy itself rests with the politicians or the political decision makers.
c) Policy Implementation This is a very critical stage to the success of any policy process.
It is made up of the following: identification of policy plans, programmers, projects and activities, explicit, definition of the roles of implementing agencies, detailed strategies and linkages as well as coordinating mechanisms, resources (human and materials) acquisition and utilization.
For an effective and efficient policy implementation to take place, sound and proper managerial capabilities in terms of resource mobilization, and rationalization, budgeting, cost- benefit analysis, proper activity scheduling, supervision, problem solving and sound 63 decision making technique is required policy performance standards and targets should be set and met.
The principal implementing agency or machinery for policy implementation is the public service.
Sometimes, government may use committees or task force or commission for the implementation of its policy.
Nigeria governments have many good policies but have the problem of implementation.
This is as a result of indiscipline and corruption.
The public service which in the major of organ for policy implementation has been accused as being inefficient and ineffective to respond adequately and promptly to government needs.
There are some other factors which have been identified for poor policy implementation in Nigeria there are: financial misappropriation, lack of political will on the part of the government in terms of financial allocation and prompt release of same, as well as lack of commitment and discipline by the implementing agencies, undue rivalry, diversion of resources, poor definition of policy or overlapping roles of the implementing agencies.
To avoid these problems the under listed conditions should be adhered to: I.
Policy objectives should be explicit and unambiguous II.
Principal factors and linkage must be identified.
III.
Implementing agencies should be forfeited with adequate and capable staff.
IV.
The implementing agencies should be given the necessary incentives and independence.
V. Supportive roles and procedures for proper accountability, and transparency should be provided.
VI.
Adequate financial resources should be provided.
VII.
The stakeholders must be consulted from time to time.
d) Policy Monitoring and Evaluation This stage involves proper and continues observation of all the activities and output of the policy, especially the planned activities, programmers undertaken at various stages of the implementation.
It is at this stage that problems are identified and necessary corrections, adjustments are effected so as to ensure the success of the policy objective.
The major concern at this stage is to ensure that the implementation is in compliance with the policy specifications, strategies in terms of timing, resources rationalization, adherence to 64 planning etc.
The evaluation of the policy access the successful implementation on the basis of efficiency and effectiveness, responsiveness as well as the impact and innovation of the policy.
This may be called appraised.
The distinguishing factor between monitoring and evaluation is that while monitoring is a feed- forward mechanism, evaluation is a feed- back mechanism.
Monitoring provides information about the activity as it progresses with a view to identifying derivations (if any) and effecting necessary corrections before they get out of hand.
While evaluation provide information about a finished project.
This can be regarded as a postmortem activity which will be utilized as a guide to future plans on similar event or activity.
e) Policy Reformation The data gathered at the policy evaluation stage will dictate the possibility or otherwise of policy reformation.
3.5 Ecological Impact on Policy Making and Implementation The environment where a policy is formulated and implemented exercises a lot of influence on the making and successful implementation of that policy.
Constraints of the policy makers also come from the environment.
These constraints can be political, economical or social issues.
a.
Social Ecology This includes such factors as: (1) level of literacy If level of literacy is low, ignorance will be on the high side.
this will also reduce peoples participation in policy making thereby firing the policy makers, and policy implementers the opportunity their selfish interest.
(2) Ethnicity Nigeria is a heterogeneous country with many cultural differences which influence the life styles and values of the people.
Each of their tribes tries to protect the interest of their people.
65 Often times this is done at the expense of others with the result that most policies in Nigeria are crippled became of ethnic sentiments or interest.
(3) Religion Nigeria is a ‘secular society’ but finds it hard to make a unified policy that can accommodate every member of the society.
Sharia practices and policies are offensive to other religious practices.
(4) Dichotomy between the haves and the have-nots There is a sharp distinction between the rich, who are in the minority, and the poor.
The former uses their position to influence the policy in their favour.
b.
Political Ecology The political environment involves such factor as: i.
Leadership styles The type of leadership in the society freats affects the type of policy that emerges.
The leadership style may be (a) autocratic (b) democratic or (c) laissez – faire ii.
Political system The political system in any society plays is major impact on the nation policy.
The political system may be capitalist, socialist, democratic, military etc.
Some policies may help to stabilize the country or state while others may lead to instability of the government.
c. Economical Ecology These are policies which indicate the rates of society economic development on the policy.
They are: (cid:1) Technological development (cid:1) Information technology (cid:1) Tax policy (cid:1) Employment opportunity 66 (cid:1) Gender equality (cid:1) Education policy Other major constraints to policy success especially in Nigeria are; (cid:1) Political instability (cid:1) Unstable government policy (cid:1) Planning without adequate fact (cid:1) Selfish interest (cid:1) Military intervention in government (cid:1) Lack of accountability (cid:1) Lack of patriotism (cid:1) Lack of Evaluation of policy impact (cid:1) Lack of investigative media (cid:1) Lack of proper implementation (cid:1) Lack of political agenda (cid:1) Non adherence to party’s manifesto.
3.6 Major Actors in Policy Formulation and Implementation.
Policy process has two crucial levels; a. the strategic level and the operational level.
Policy making in done at the strategic level while that its implementation is done at the operational level.
The strategic level, especially in government, is made up of the political class while the operational level has the civil servant, which is the bureaucrats, as its members.
Let us examine the major actors in policy formulation and implementation.
67  3.6.1 Major Actors in Policy Formulation and Implementation a.
The legislature This is the major players in policy making process.
This is because they represent various constituencies whose problem they bring to the house and sponsor for the passage of such bills into law.
They also have the power to ensure that the policies are implemented.
They do this by setting up monitoring committees.
b.
The Executive The President and his chief aids are another vital source of public policy.
The executive lays down policy guidelines and the types of policies to be pursued.
The success of the government depends on a good and viable policy agenda set out by the executive and his term.
c. The Bureaucrats These are the career civil servants.
In most cases they initiate policies using their expertise, the information and data gathered as well as their awarneen of societal needs and demands of various agencies.
They have been classified as partners with the politicians in the collaborative effort of policy – making but they should not arrogate to themselves the position of policy makers.
Their position is important, no doubt, but should be restricted to collecting, collating, analyzing data or advising on policy options or alternative courses of action.
But the actual choice of which policy to adopt rests with the political class.
d. Interest Groups These groups play important role in policy formulation.
They send their proposals to the legislature and also lobby to influence some policy proposals to suit their interest.
The success of these groups of people depends on their financial capabilities resources both human and material at their disposal, the skill and influence of their leadership.
They equally influence policy implementation by show of support and active participation as well as monitoring the 68 performance of those policies that affect them by making sure that such policies are properly implemented to meet their specific goals.
The cooperation of the interest group is crucial to the suven of policy implementation.
Any protest from them will bring adverse effect on the policy.
e. The courts Court through the exercise of their statutory powers can influence the formulation and interpretation of public power to review the constitutionality of certain decisions and actions of the legislative and executive arm of the government and declares them null and void if such actions ultra vires the constitution when this happens, the rhust of the policy is usually affected.
An example of such action is the 1981 Revenue Allocation Act controversy (Ade molekun 1983:147).
The important lesson here is that the courts can prohibit, facilitate or nullify the formulation or the implementation of public policy through their decision.
4.0 Conclusion This unit examines public policy.
Policy is a vital tool of governance and the extent to which any nation can progress in the governance of its people is contingent on the ability of its citizens to accept and support policies.
The environments within which policies are formulated and implemented have a lot of influence in shaping the policy.
The same environment places limits and constraints on the actions of the policy makers.
5.0 Summary The unit dealt with the meaning and stages of the policy making process.
These stages are policy identification and formulation, implementation, monitoring and evaluation as well as policy reformulation.
These stages are also known as the policy cycle.
The symbiotic relationships between all the phases of the cycle were examined.
We also examined the environmental effects of the policy making and its implementation.
We also examined the key players in policy formulation and implementation and the effect of their actions in shaping and executing the policy process in the society.
69 We hope you have learnt the necessary feature of the policy making and implementation.
In the next unit, we will discuss the political system process and forms of government.
6.0 Tutor-marked Assignment 1.
What is Public Policy 2.
Discuses the policy cycle 3.
What is the importance of ecology in the formulation and implementation of public policy?
4.
List the key players in policy making and Implementation and discuses their roles.
7.0 References/Further Readings Ashford, D. (1981).
Policy and Politics in Britain, as quoted in Maduabum, C. Ed.
(2003).courtemporacy issues in public Administrative ASCON, Badagry Anderson, J.A.
(1975), Public Policy Making: London: Thomas Nelson and Sons Ltd. Dye, T. (1997), Understanding Public Policy.
New jersey: prentive Hall.
Ezeani E.O (2006), Fundamentals of Public Administration, Enugu: ZikChuksPiblishers Maduabum, C.P.
(2008), The Mechanics of Public Administration in Nigeria, Lagos: Concept Publications Limited.
Maduabrum, C. (2003), ‘Policy Making in Nigeria: Implementation Strategies’; Contemporary Issues on Public Policy Analysis in Nigeria, Lagos: ASCON press Nwizu, C. (1997), Organization, Basic Concepts, Enugu: John Jacob Classic Publishers 70 Olanigan, S.A. (2003), “Public policy – making process in Developing countries” in contemporary issues on public policy Analysis in Nigeria Lagos, ASCON press.
Okoye, J.C, Chuckwaemeka E.E.O., Anazodo R.O (2004), politics and Government: Introduction and Elements, Enugu: HRV Konsult Unit 4 Political System Process and Forms of Government 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objective 3.0 Main content 3.1The political process 3.2 Forms of Government 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutor Marked Assignment 7.0 References/Further Readings 1.0 Introduction According to Segun and Bayo (1987), Political process is the framework of accepted political institutions and processes through which conflicts flowing from a diversity of social groups in society are reconciled.
The essence of politics lies in reconciling political conflicts.
A good example is what obtains in the policy making cycle where demand is made to the government 71 and other formal institutions of the political system who in turn generates output in form of policy decision.
The output in turn produces a feedback on the impact of the policy in form of either complaints or commendation and support.
The process or the cycle never stops as long as the political system is in place.
In addition to the above we will be studying the various forms of government.
There are no uniform forms of government in the world.
Form of government vary from one country to the other but in some instances they overlap thereby making it difficult to pin down the government of a to state to a particular form.
It is important to note that all government has certain common characteristics such as arms of government; sovereignty etc.
and you are going to see the distinguishing and common characteristics of the different forms of government in this unit.
2.0 Objectives At the end of this unit, you should be able to understand and do the following • explain the political process • explain the various forms of government • distinguish the forms of government 3.0 Main Content 3.1 The political process Political process is the inter connectivity of the citizens as shown or expressed in political party activities, pressure groups activities or during elections.
It is also those activities shown during the formulation, implementation and interpretation of government policy political parties in this context are association of groups of people who share similar political together to pursue political power and control of government business.
According to Segun et al, (1987: 145).
A political party is an organized group of persons who share similar political view and who act deliberately in concert to gain control of the decision making machmery of government that creates public policy.
Political is the sole aim of parties and politics thrive best on conflict.
Because of the ever present factor of conflict in human perception and relationship, politics and political parties have continued to play a very important 72 role in the society.
There are some political parties whose sole aim is power seeking.
Their target is to create confusion in the polity and dictate the pace for their selfish gains.
Political parties are different from interest groups or pressure groups.
The distinguishing factor between the former and the others lies in the means it employs, the manner of seeking power and the structure.
Pressure or interest groups more often than not concerns themselves with what government does and sometimes tries to influences government actions to be in conformity with their own interests.
Some political parties may be capitalist, welfares or socialist.
While some may be authoritarian especially if there is a powerful leader who dictates the pace in that party.
Advantages of political parties Political parties play some vital roles in the political process.
Some of their functions are: 1.
They nominate candidates for elections.
2.
They articulate and present people’s ideas thereby serving as a means for public opinion.
3.
They provide political leadership, recruitment and training of their members for a greater responsibility of conducting government business.
4.
They awaken political consciousness in the people regarding the affairs of their country and beyond.
5.
They form a common base for representation of diverse interest groups in the society.
6.
Political parties sometimes plays a vital role of national or ethnic unity 7.
Political parties organize government.
For instances the party in power sees to the governance of the state while the opposition party, criticizes their affairs, thus providing checks and balance that guides against misruce by the ruling party 8.
Political party provides constancy and also an effective means of changing government 9.
They serve as a link between government and the people.
73 10.
It is not all about politics in political parties; it is also a means for socialization and relaxation.
11.
They are also employers of labour.
Disadvantages of Political Parties (1) They create enemity between people or communities.
(2) Some parties pursue their selfish interest instead of national interest (3) Some political parties are sectional or tribalistic thereby fostering political instability (4) There is god fathenism majority of whom oppress the followers with tyranny The above disadvantage notwithstanding, political parties is still the most vital organ in political process.
3.2 Forms of Government Maduabum (2008) posits that government is an instrument of a state by which its existence is maintained, its functions carried out and its policies and objectives realized.
The state, on the other hand, comprises the entire community of the people including the government and the governed.
The state has a permanent status which survives every government as government is transitional.
Another vital feature of both state and government are the people whom without whom the state and the government cannot exist.
There are other factors as the territory and the sovereignty of the state.
The type of government adopted by a state serves as an identity mark for such state.
There is no uniform type of government in the universe rather the type of government adopted by any state will be used to distinguish the state from others.
A government may be unitary or federal, socialist or capitalist communistic oligarchy democratic or aristocratic.
There are some factors which determine the type of government a state will adopt.
Such factors include the following: 74 1.
The history of the people will contribute to shape the form of their government.
For instance a review of the history of Nigeria from the has shown that the amalgamation of the diverse cultural groups into one national government will be best governed under a federal form of government.
2.
The economy plays a vital role in shape the forms of government.
Such factors as the distribution of wealth, mineral, natural and human resources as well as technological advancement play a leading role in the society.
These factors determine the authoritative allocation of values and who allocates these values and how.
3.
Territory The Geographical characteristic of a country plays an important role in the form of government of that country.
smaller country are more adoptable to unitary form of government while large sized country are more suited to federal form of government.
4.
Social structure plays an important role in determining who assumes power.
It also helps in shaping peoples idea about the best form of government to adopt for the state.
5.
Level of literacy orientation this refers to the ability of the people towards happenings in the society.
Their ability to decipher the good, the bad and the ufuly as well as their knowledge of the forms of government will equip them adequately to the best form of government to adopt.
There are many form of government such as; 1) Socialist as practiced in USSR and Eastern Europe.
Their main concern is the equitable distribution of power.
2) Communist as practiced in China.
Communists are authoritarian and thrives best in absolute control of power and self – perpetuation.
3) Capitalist government is characterized by private ownership of goods and properties and other factors of power of production.
There is a chose link between capitalism and democracy as the former provides enabling environment for the basic democratic ideas of 75 equality for all, freedom of political association, expression, freedom of worship, Capitalism is practical mainly in the western world and their former colonies especially in African.
4) Fascist government: according to abenstein (1973) facist government is noted for distrust of reason, denial of basic human equality, code of behavior based on lies and violence, government by elite, totalitarianism, racism and imperialism and opposition to international law and order.
Examples of the countries that practiced or that are still practicing fascist government are Italy, Japan, Argentina and Germany.
5) Democratic government: democracy means government by many as opposed to oligarchy.
It is government of the people, by the people and for the people.
Many states are adopting democrat as their form of government though many of them are far from practicing true democracy.
Some of the countries adopt representative government which is rule by a few or self – interested oligarchy.
Examples of the countries that practice real democracy are England, Switzerland and parts of Greece.
Others are practicing debasement of ideal democratic tenets.
6) Oligarchy: this is government by a minority of the society.
It is made up of the people whose sole aim is acquisition and monopoly of power.
They are authoritarian and totalitarian in governance as evidenced in one party system of government.
Examples of such one party oligarchy are Soviet Union, China, East Germany, and Cuba etc.
Other type of government includes Aristocracy, presidential or monarchical, monolithic or pluralistic.
Some states combine two or more of these types of government in their state.
For instance in united state of America and Nigeria we find capitalist, democratic and federal system of government all existing in one state.
4.0 Conclusion The form of government adopted by a state forms the identity of that state.
This form of government determines the statrility or instability in the policy, welfare of the people, their rights, and relationship of the people as well as internal and external status of the state.
76 Capitalist which many see as better than other forms of government may infect favour only the elitist groups who control socio – economic and political power in society.Some forms of government promote a sense of pride and belongingness while some breeds hostility and disintegration.The form of government may boost or mar the imagine of the county both internally and in the international sphere.
The best form of government is therefore one that promotes both socio – economic and political progress.
5.0 Summary In this unit, we looked at the political process as a veritable tool for the reconciliation of political conflicts.
We also discussed political parties, their advantages and disadvantages.
We went further and attempted a definition of government and discussed the various forms of government and their distinguishing features.In the next unit we will study the public sector and the private sector Administration with particular reference to their similarities and differences.
6.0 Tutor Marked Assessment 1.
Distinguish between politics and political parties.
2.
What do you understand by the term ‘political process?
3.
List four forms of government and discuss the features of each.
4.
What are the disadvantages and disadvantages of political parties 7.0 References/ further readings Duvener, M. (1954), political parties in Western Democracies, New York, John Wiley and Sons Inc. Easton, D, (1957), “An Approach to the Analysis of Political Systems” World Politics, Vol.9 Ebenstein W., (1973), today’s Isms, New Jersey, Englewood Cliffs, and Prentice – Hall Inc. Maduabum, C. (2008), the mechanics of Public Administration in Nigeria, Lagos, concept Publications Limited 77 Segun, O. and Bayo, A.
(1987), Elements of Government; An introductory College Text on Political Science, Lagos, Friends Foundation Publishers Limited.
Unit5 Private and Public Sector Administration: differences and Similarities 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objectives 3.0 Main Content 3.1 Meaning of Administration 3.2 Meaning of Private Administration 3.3 Meaning of Public Administration 3.4 Comparison of Public and Private Organisation 3.5 Features of Public Organization 3.6 Differences between Public and Private Administration 3.7 Similarities between Public and Private Administration 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutor Marked/Assignment 7.0 References/Further Reading.
78 1.0 INTRODUCTION This unit treats Public and Private Administration with emphasis on their differences and similarities.
To help us understand this unit better we will examine public and private organizations, their settings, features, goals etc.
It is when we have understood this background information about these organizations that we will be in a better position to appreciate their administration and performance.You are enjoined to read this unit very well as this will help you understand the topic better.
2.0 OBJECTIVES At the end of this unit, you should be able to: (cid:1) Discuss the public and private administration.
(cid:1) Distinguish between public and private administration.
(cid:1) Tell the similarities between public and private administration.
3.0 MAIN CONTENT 3.1 Meaning of Administration We will begin this unit by tracing the meaning of administration.
Administration is simply defined as the organization and direction of human and material resources in order to achieve specific set goals and objectives.
The rudiment of administration is the coordination, evaluation and the monitoring of organization’s activities and programmes.
Administration exists in both public and private organizations set up for specific achievements.
It may be in school, church/mosque, company, ministries, extra- ministries, parastatals, local governments, corporations etc.
Once it involves the organization of human and material resources, then administration must exists in all these spheres of endeavours.
According to Simeon, et al, when two men corporate to roll a stone, neither could have moved alone, then the rudiments of administration have appeared.
Administration is also, the capacity of coordinating many and other conflicting social energies in single organisms.
79 3.2 Meaning of Private Administration Private administration or organization can be defined as all activities that are concerned with profit making by minimizing cost of productions and maximizing profit.
Sometimes, it may perform dual roles, that is, profit orientation and services rendering e.g communication industries.
Private administration is concerned with the activities of private organizations and institutions that are not owned jointly or principally by the government.
Whatever management decision or policy implemented in private organizations belong in the realm of private organization or administration.
Private administration recruits their personnel in a private manner.
Their training and development can be internal or external depending on the organizations and the nature of services rendered.
3.3 Meaning of Public Administration Public administration has no generally accepted definition.
The scope of the subject is so great and so debatable that it is easier to explain than define.
But for the purpose of this study we posit that Public administration is a field of study (a discipline) and an occupation.
From the academic perspective, public administration can be viewed as "A program that prepares individuals to serve as managers in the executive arm of local, state, and federal government and that focuses on the systematic study of executive organization and management.
This includes instruction in the roles, development, and principles of public administration.
Public administration studies the implementation of government policies and prepares civil servants for this work.As a "field of inquiry with a diverse scope" its fundamental goal is to advance management and policies so that government can function effectively and efficiently.
Public administration is concerned with the organization of government policies and programmes as well as the behavior of government officialsin the execution of these policies.
Public administrators are regarded as public servants working in public organisations and parastatals at all levels of government.
Public administration could be regarded as both an art and science of managing government affairs, enforcing laws and fulfilling public policies.
It is an art because it concerns the practical management of men and materials for public interest.
It is a science in so far as it concerns the 80 knowledge of the ways and methods for efficient fulfillment of public policy.
It could however not be regarded as pure science as its activities could not be subjected to practical laboratory tests as in physics, chemistry and biology.
3.4 Comparison of Public and Private Organization Public Administration could be seen as a decision making venture.
It’s the formulation and implementation of the governmental goals, objectives, aims, targets and aspiration.
Public administration is also, the planning, assessment, appraising performance by government executive and supervisors.
It is therefore action part of the government.
Public administration can at times be referred to as public management or the two worlds used interchangeably with other concepts like government administration and public sector administration.
It is concerned with how a country’s administration is organized and how it functions.
In Nigeria, there are three levels of public administration, which are: i.
Federal Government Administration ii.
State government Administration iii.
Local Government Administration 3.5 Features of Public Organization The features and processes of administration are much the same for every organization.
The features of public organization assist the organization effectiveness towards the realization of its goals and objectives so do that of the private organization.
These features are as follows: 1.
It acts as a vital link between the government and the people.
Information is passed from the government to the government.
In this way, public administration helps in linking the two segments.
2.
Public administration allows public servants for continuity, in the policies of successive governments despite political instability that has characterized the governments of African states.
81 3.
Public Servants/Administrators should not take part in partisan politics, so as not to endanger the party in government that comes to power.
On the other hand, the political party that comes to power could victimize the public servants, if only they are involved in politics.
4.
The appointment, discipline, dismissal and promotion of civil/public servants rest with a separate body called the public service commission.
5.
Public/Civil Servants must be impartial.
This means that public administrators must not be influenced by party feelings, thus, and to ensure t his, they have been tarred from participating in politics.
This does not mean however that, they cannot vote in elections.
For instance, if a public/civil servant intends to take part in politics by standing for election, he has to resign from service before contesting for any political post.
6.
The principle of Anonymity.
The detailed work of the administration is done by the public/civil servants.
They do not receive any blame or credit while discharging their duties.
It is however, the ministers of various ministries that do receive the credit or blame.
Thus, while the minster defends him against any mistake, he does not mention the name of any public/civil servant.
7.
Neutrality of Public Administration.
In all the policies of government, they must be seen protecting the image of the governments, without antagonizing the activities of the governments and their organs.
8.
Organizational Structure.
All public organizations or administration must possess internal structure that may be hierarchical structure also contains chain of command, unity of control, etc.
for the smooth running of the organization.
9.
Public organization provides essentially services to the people although; it may be engaged in profit orientation, as established in the government public corporations and parastatals.
10.
Public organization or administration is established through the Act of Parliament, with constitutional provision of their services to the three tiers of government.
82 It should be noted that all these features and characteristics of public administration can be applied to private administration.
But the principal aim and objective of establishing private organizations is profit maximization alsothere are no central bodies for recruitment of their staff.
3.6 Differences between Public and Private Administration As earlier stated in the meaning of Public and Private Administration, there exist some differences in the two organizations in their sorting, formation and structures.
1.
The size of public organizations is usually larger than those of private organizations.
Many private organizations structures do not extend beyond their locality.
2.
Public organizations are being financed from various taxes or owned by the tax payers.
But the private organization is owned by private individuals.
3.
Recruitment in the public services is based on geographical spread (federal character) those of the private sector, are mostly on merit irrespective of applicant’s state of origin.
4.
Personnel procurement in the public sector is done by a centralized body, civil service commission, or by ministries acting on their behalf and according to the guideline formulated by it.
While in the private sector, individual organization is responsible for the living of its staff.
5.
Public administration is service oriented and capital intensive while private organization is a profit-making entity.
The private enterprise is essentially business oriented and profit maximization is their priority.
6.
Public administration performs numerous activities e.g.
external defence (military services), police affairs, currency, maintenance of law and order, whereas the private organizations have limited activities e.g.
engineering, industry, production, communication, textiles, commerce and banking etc.
7.
Shareholders control the private sectorsorganizations, while the government controls that of public sectors.
83 8.
The public organization is opened to more criticism (either constructive or otherwise) while this is not so in private organisaations.
9.
The private enterprises are engaged mostly in providing basic consumer goods needed by the populace especially manufacturing goods while public organizations are engaged in regulating the activities of the manufacturing industries, through the federal and state ministries of trade and industries or their agencies.
10.
The clientage of public organization is very large, and those enjoying the services are numerous e.g.
road, electricity, water, drainage etc.
whereas, the clientage in the private organization is not.
11.
Accountability is not strictly adhered to in public organization while reverse is the case in private organization.
3.7 Similarities between Public and Private Organizations or Administration.
There exist some similarities or comparisons between public and private organizations or administration in term of conditions of service and other operations of these organizations.
1.
Both organizations are guided by government’s circular, gazette, bulletins, constitution etc.
and not necessary control.
But the government regulations enable both organizations to have a healthy environment.
2.
Both organizations have conditions of service in terms of employment, recruitment, promotion, salary, discipline, pension and other welfare incentives offered by these organizations to their employees, individual and collectively.
3.
Both organizations or establishments provides some essentials services like banking services, petroleum and oil supplies, telephone services and educational services.
4.
Both organizations provide satisfaction to the public in respect to their various activities; programmes and products.
5.
Both organizations source for personnel in the labour market, that is, there is always qualification before recruitment into these organizations.
84 6.
Both organizations are always established based on certain goals, aspirations, objectives and aims.
That is, no organization can be established without solid reasons and things to achieve, either for profit, services, or both.
7.
Both organization, have the ability to establish management-labour relations and settlement of conflict that may arise in the course of such relationship.
8.
Both organizations source their capital, money or fund used in establishing these organizations from the people or public (either internally or externally).
9.
Both organizations have internal structure of organization, that is, there is always hierarchical mode of operation, chain of command, division of labour, professionalism etc.
These are so because different people perform different works.
4.0 CONCLUSION From the discussion above, on the comparison of public and private organization, we can say that administration which is the organization and direction of human and material resources exist in both public and private organizations.
Public administration as carried out in government owned organizations within the three levels of government (federal, state and local) and with the intension to provide efficient services and not for profit making, that private administration is carried out in private or jointly owned organizations with the intentions to provide essential services and are profit-oriented.
However, both organizations have conditions of services for their personnel in common market.
They both have similar internal structure of organization; satisfy the public with various services, activities, programmes and products, guided by government circular, constitutions, source for capital or fund from the people etc.
5.0 SUMMARY We have learnt in this unit that Public administration is administration as it is practiced in the three tiers of government and its agencies while private administration is that which is practiced in the private sector either by an individual or jointly owned businesses ventures.
We also examined their distinguishing factors as well as those factors they had in common.
Their formation, objectives, goals and settings are features that should be borne in mind.
Also it should 85 be borne in mind that where one is service oriented the other is profit oriented and both of them are guided by these goals.
In Module 3, we shall be looking at the development of Public Administration in Nigeria.
6.0 TUTOR-MARKED ASSIGNMENT 1.
Distinguish between Public and Private Administration.
2.
What are the features of Public Administration?
3.
What are the weaknesses of Public Administration in Nigeria?
4.
What advantages does Private Administration have over Public Administration in terms of efficiency and effectiveness?
5.
As a Public Administrator what will you introduce into Public Sector Administration to make it more efficient?
7.0 REFERENCES/FURTHER READING 1.
Adamolekun, L.(1983), Public Administration: A Nigerian and Comparative Perspective.
New York: Longman Inc. 2.
Adamolekun, L. (1985), Nigerian Public Administration 1960 – 1980: Perspectives and Prospects.
Ibadan: Heinemann.
3.
Adebayo, A.
(1992), Principles and Practice of Public Administration in Nigeria.
Ibadan: Spectrum Books Ltd. 4.
Ezeani,E.O (2006), Fundamental of Public Administration.
Enugu: Ziks-Chuks Publishers.
5.
Hughes, O. E. (1998), Public Administration and Administration: An Introduction.
London: Macmillan Press Ltd. 86  MODULE 3 DEVELOPMENT OF PUBLIC ADMINISTRATION IN NIGERIA Unit 1 Concept of Indirect Rule Unit 2 Nigeria Public Administration from Colonia Era Unit 3 Concept of Development Administration and Administration of development Unit 4 Concept of Federalism Unit 1 Concept of Indirect Rule Contents 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objectives 3.0 Main content 3.1 The Indirect Rule Process 3.2 The Indirect Rule in Northern Nigeria 3.3 The Indirect Rule in Western Nigeria 3.4 The Indirect Rule in Eastern Nigeria 3.5 Disadvantages of Indirect Rule in Nigeria 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutor Marked Assignment 7.0 References/Further Reading 1.0 Introduction Indirect rule system in Nigeria is synonymous with British colonial masters.
It is their coinage for the type of administration they employed to facilitate their agenda in their colonies.
He went further to define it as a British system of ruling her colonies with the use of local chiefs and other 87 appointed intermediaries.
The colonial masters used traditional laws and customs as the bases and guide for administration.
The local chiefs and these appointed intermediaries were used as a means for the maintenance of laws and order while the British officials merely undertook supervisory roles.
In this unit we will examine the process of indirect rule as was practiced in the Northern, Western and the Eastern Nigeria during the colonial rule.
The defects of indirect rule will also be treated.
It is imperative you pay attention to this unit as it is very informative and will help you to understand the genesis of some of the problems in the Nigeria Public Service.
2.0 Objectives At the end of this unit, you are expected to: (cid:1) Understand the process of indirect rule as was practiced in the three geo-political system in Nigeria, their success and failures as well as its merits and demerits and to whom; (cid:1) Know the reason behind the introduction of indirect rule by the colonial masters; (cid:1) Know the beneficiaries of the indirect rule administration 3.0 Main content 3.1 The Indirect Rule Process (adapted from Maduabum, 2008:80-88) Lord Lugard, who was the first Governor General of the amalgamated territory of Nigeria in 1914,is widely regarded as the ‘Father of Indirect Rule in Nigeria’.
He was the High Commissioner of the Protectorate of Northern Nigeria in 1906 and used this system as a convenient means of administering the territory.
Since the system worked well for him in the Northern Nigeria, he merely extended it to the Southern Protectorate after the amalgamation.
He employed this system to assist the colonial government in maintaining law and order, which is very vital for progress and development, though one will ask, whose development?
The upper 88 echelon of the colonial administration was dominated by the Europeans.
Thus all powers (executive, legislative and judicial), were concentrated in the hands of the appointed colonial officials to run the affairs of the colony.
Because of language barriers and other factors which made it difficult for the colonial masters to deal with the natives easily, they co-opted the traditional rulers and other appointed officials in the administration of the country.
3.1.1 Essential Features of Indirect Rule (cid:1) Indirect rule used the existing traditional rules.
(cid:1) It recognized the status of traditional rules.
(cid:1) Traditional rulers served as the pivot of indirect rule.
(cid:1) Traditional laws and customs were used in the administration.
(cid:1) The indirect rule system was supervised by british officials.
(cid:1) British official did not exert their influence directly on the people but through the local chiefs.
(cid:1) The system was meant to assist in development of the traditional political institutions for effective administration.
(cid:1) The system did not disrupt the existing traditional system of administration and political order.
(cid:1) It was not an expensive system of administration.
3.1.2 Reasons for the introduction of the Indirect Rule System a.
Lack of Personnel There was dearth of Colonial personnel to assist Lord Lugard in the administration of the colony as only few Europeans were prepared to venture into West Africa.
This was due to its poor climate and the presence of insects like mosquitoes and tsetse flies which the whites regard as deadly.
b.
Inadequate Fund: The colonial masters were not willing to spend their money on their colony.
Instead they were sending the resources back to their country at the expense of the people.
They 89 natives were also tasked heavily to sustain the colonial administration and paid meager wages that could barely sustain them.
Britain’s reluctance to get deeply involved heavily in any financial responsibilities of its colonies necessitated the introduction of the indirect rule by Lord Lugard which he saw as not exerting a heavy financial burden on his country.
c. Success in Other Countries: The system worked well in other countries such as India and Uganda and so Lord Lugard thought it wise to use the system also in Nigeria.
d. Traditional Rulers: The involvement of the traditional rulers in the art of government may have been informed bythe belief of Lord Lugardthat any system of government that isolates the people being governed will not succeed.
e. Inexpensive: The system of indirect rule was adopted in Nigeria because, economically, it was less expensive.
The colonial masters were not prepared to incur high cost of maintaining the colonial personnel to run their colony.
f. Favourable Political Climate: the political atmosphere in Northern Nigeria at the period was favourable for the introduction of the system.
The method of traditional administration at the time was very difficult for Britain to dismantle.
The emirs were highly respected by their people and the British did not want to attract the hatred of the people of Northern Nigeria by destroying the premier position occupied by the emirs.
g. Beneficial Effects: Lugard introduced the system with the hope that it would be beneficial to both Europeans and Africans.
For instance, by using traditional rulers, Lugard viewed it as a way of providing employment for them.
h. Language Difficulties: The system of indirect rule was adopted in Nigeria by Lord Lugard in order to reduce the problems posed by language.
The people of Nigeria at that time did neither speak nor 90 understand English language, therefore, going through traditional rulers to govern the people proved more convenient for them as the whites themselves were not willing to learn the local languages too.
i.
Vast Area Involved: There were vast areas to be administered and the colonialists were quite reluctant to penetrate the hinterland due to poor transport and communication system.
This hindered their ability to have direct contact with the people and so indirect rule provided a convenient alternative.
3.2 The Indirect Rule System in Northern Nigeria Lord Lugard became the High Commissioner of Northern Nigeria in 1990.
He introducedthe indirect rule system by dividing the northern territory into provinces.
Each province was headed by a resident who reported to the High Commissioner.
The Resident entrusted day-to- day activities to traditional rulers or paramount chief who were assisted by councilors.
The provinces were also divided into administrative division headed by district officers who reported to the British Resident.
The indirect rule system worked well in Northern Nigeria due to the highly developed traditional system of administration of the area Why Indirect Rule succeeded in Northern Nigeria (a) The Use of Traditional Administration: The use of the existing traditional system of administration led to a huge success of indirect rule in the North.
This is because the Emirs had their subjects perfectly under control.
Besides, there was a neatly structured administrative set-up that enhanced the achievement of the colonialist administration’s goals.
(b) The Autocratic Nature of Emirs: The emirs were very influential and had unlimited powers, to the extent that they could sentence to death any of their subjects who disobeyed them.
They were therefore highly respected and obeyed.
These rare qualities helped the system of indirect rule to fully 91 succeed when it was introduced, since it was a continuation of the emir’s administration which accorded with the system the colonialist would have adopted in their quest to maintain “law and order” and at the same time collect taxes and other exploitative tendencies.
(c) Religion: Islam was the dominant religion the people of Northern Nigeria practiced.
By its nature, Islam is a conservative religion and as such, this helped greatly to make the people of the area more obedient.
This again was what the colonialists cherished most from the colonized territory.
(d) The Submissiveness of the People: This attribute made the people of Northern Nigeria to accept indirect rule whole- heartedly without question.
(e) Low Level of Education: When the system was established in Northern Nigeria, majority of the people were not fully exposed to Western education and were therefore ill-equipped to challenge the authorities or question their motives.
(f) Centrality of the Administration: The centralized administration which had an emir at the head surrounded with many powerful officials, contributed to the efficient running of the government.
That system was fashionable for administration of the colonies hence the British found it convenient to adopt.
(g) Well-Organized System of Taxation: Huge sums of money was generated from this system of taxation which was used in the running of the government of the area since the British government was not ready to involve itself in any heavy financial responsibility.
(h) Non-Interference with the Existing Traditions: Indirect rule succeeded in Northern Nigeria because it did not tamper with the existing religion, culture and customs of the people.
(i) Absence of Many Whites: Absence of many Europeans (whites) made it possible for the system to be introduced and it thrived without attracting criticisms.
92  (j) Military Threat: Many emirs of Northern Nigeria accepted the indirect rule system because of fear of British military reprisal if it was rejected.
3.3 Indirect Rule System in Western Nigeria The Obas were used in the indirect rule in the Western Nigeria as was the case with the Emirs in the North.
The system was not as successful in the West as it was in North.
Why the poor rate of Success in the West (a) The Limited Power of Obas: One of the reasons why the system was not a total success in the West was because the obas, unlike the emirs, had questionable and limited powers and were unable to command as much respect as their counterparts in the Northern Region.
(b) Education: Education played a significant role in the low success rate of the indirect rule system in Western Nigeria.
At the time the system was introduced, there had grown a significant crop of the Yoruba educated elite who could question the rationale for system.
These people started kicking against the system because, in their view, whether direct or indirect, colonialism was highly immoral.
(c) Lack of Submissiveness by the People: Another reason the system partially succeeded in the West was because the subjects were not as generally submissive as their counterparts in the North.
This made them not to accept indirect rule blindly.
93 (d) Religion: A large population of the Yoruba’s were Christians and Christianity is not as conservative as Islam.
Christians therefore questioned the morality for the introduction of indirect rule.
(e) Absence of Highly Centralized Administration: Unlike the Hausa/Fulani’s, the Yoruba’s did not have a highly centralized system of administration.
This factor could not enhance the success of indirect rule in the West.
(f) Absence of a Well-Organized Taxation System: This made it difficult to raise money for the administration to thrive, since the British government was not ready to undertake heavy financial responsibilities in its colonies.
A new system of taxation imposed on the people caused riots in most parts of Yoruba land such as Abeokuta, Ikire, Iseyin, etc.
(g) Disregard of Treaty: The influential class of the Western-educated elite in Egbaland viewed Lugard’s action of bringing Abeokuta under the protectorate’s government in 1914 and the extension of indirect rule to Egbaland as a serious disregard of the 1893 Treaty which was signed by the British Government.
The treaty granted a quasi-independent status to Abeokuta and the violation of this treaty by Lugard through the system of indirect rule sparked off violent protests.
(h) Subordination of Ibadan to Oyo: The British mistake of trying to make Ibadan, which had been recognized as a Yoruba state in the 1890s, subordinate to Oyo, was also a contributing factor to the failure of the system of indirect rule in the Western Region.
(i) Alienation of the Educated Elite: The educated elite in the Western Region criticized and rejected the indirect rule system mainly because they were not allowed to take part in the administration.
The entire assignment was given to traditional rulers.
The educated elite were sharply alienated, disregarded and, above all, frustrated.
94 3.4 The Indirect rule in Eastern Nigeria The practice failed completely in the Eastern Nigeria due largely to the absence of a centralized traditional system of administration.
The Igbos had no recognized traditional leadership as was the case in the Northern and the Western parts of Nigeria.
This made Lord Lugard appoint traditional rulers and imposed them on the people.
He called these rulers ‘warrant chiefs’.
Most of these appointed chiefs were of lower class status and the people refused to recognize or accord them any respect.
Aba women’s Riot in 1929 was fuelled by the imposition of the warrant chief and the taxation burden on the people.
Reasons for the Failure of Indirect rule in the Eastern Nigeria a.
There was absence of Traditional Rulers.
b.
The colonial masters appointment Warrant Chiefs who were not recognized nor respected by the people.
c. The Igbos favoured highly centralized system of administration which did not accommodate central decision-making body.
d. The Igbo society were in units which was too small for carrying out functions as was the case in the Northern traditional system.
e. The Igbos lacked a Well-organized system of administration and this adversely affected the realization of adequate fund for the indirect rule system in the area.
f. The Igbos are not submissive as their counterpart in the Northern Nigeria and this contributed to the high rate of failure of the Indirect Rule in the region.
g. Religion played a significant role for the failure of the indirect rule in the eastern region.
The easterners were mainly Christians and Christianity is not a conservative religion.
h. The Igbos viewed the system as major conflict to their traditional system.
i.
Unlike in the North the Easterners had more educated elites who were alienated from the colonial administration.
This alienation made them criticize and reject the system and the people followed suit.
95 3.5 Disadvantages of Indirect Rule The disadvantages of indirect rule are as follows: 1) It brought divisions between the traditional rulers who were regarded as British puppets and the educated elites who were alienated thereby creating the policy of ‘divide and rule’.
2) The traditional ruler became corrupt under this system and enriched themselves at the expense of the people.
3) The system encouraged tribalism.
4) The system lacked universal applicability.
5) There were no clear definitions to the limit of the functions and activities of the different local authorities and some of them abused their power.
6) The people were denied democratic system of checks and balances that were in existence prior to the advent of the colonial masters.
7) The system encouraged concentration of power in the hands of the few thereby marginalizing majorities of the people.
8) Concentration of so much power on the traditional rulers led to serious abuse of power.
9) The people were denied the power to appoint or depose their leaders.
10) The Traditional rulers were very autocratic as a result of the power invested in them by the system.
4.0 Conclusion The indirect rule was employed by the colonial masters mainly to serve their convenience in the administration of their colony.
They had no alternative to the system as any other system would have been very expensive for them and they had no intention of incurring any extra cost in their colonial administration.
Also the advantages of the system to them far outweighed its disadvantages since it placed no financial burden on them.
It equally served their purpose of colonization very well.
But this is quite the opposite for the natives who felt marginalized and used.
Their resources were also carted away and use to develop the colonial masters country at the expense of the people.
This notwithstanding, the system recorded some degrees of success in some regions while it failed abysmally in other parts of the country.
96  5.0 Summary This unit has discussed the indirect rule system which was a form of administration put in place by the colonial masters to govern the territory in West Africa.
We discussed the system as was practiced in the three geo-political regions such as the Northern, Western and Eastern parts of Nigeria.
We noted that while the system worked very well in some parts of the country the same could not be said of other parts of the country.
We therefore traced the reason for the success and failures in these parts of the country.
We equally examined the demerits of indirect rule system in Nigeria.
We trust that you have learnt a lot in this unit and this knowledge will guide your understanding of the next unit which is the Nigerian public administration from the colonial rule.
6.0 Tutor Major Assignment 1.
What is Indirect Rule?
Discuss its tenets.
2.
Describe the operations of indirect rule system in the Eastern, Western and Northern Nigeria.
3.
Trace the reasons for the success and failure of this system in the three geo- political regions in Nigeria.
4.
Indirect Rule is widely believed to be very convenient to the colonial masters.
State your reasons for or against this assertion.
7.0 Reference/Further Readings Crowder, M. (1978), The Story of Nigeria.
London: Faber and Faber.
Maduabum, C. (2008), the mechanics of Public Administration in Nigeria, Lagos: Concept Publications Limited.
97 Okoye, J.C, Chukwuemeka, E.E.O, Anazodo R.O.
(2004), Politics and Government: Introduction and Elements.
Enugu: HRV Konsult Computer Syste Unit 2 Nigerian Public Sector Administration from Colonial Era 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objectives 3.0 Main Content:Nigerian Public Administration from Colonial Era 3.1 Traditional Administration 3.2 Colonial Administration 3.3 Parliamentary Rule 3.4 Military Rule 3.5 Presidential System 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutor Marked Assignment 7.0 Reference/Further Readings 1.0 Intorduction This unit is all embracing as it touches on all aspect of Nigerian administration from the traditional, colonial to Nigeria’s attempts at self rule.
Since independence, Nigeria has witnessed many forms of administration ranging from the parliamentary to the military and the current presidential system of administration.
We shall discuss these forms of administration and its impact on the lives of the Nigerian people in particular and the development of the country as a whole.
You will learn a lot from this unit as it has been packaged in a most informative way.
2.0 Objectives At the end of this unit, you are expected to know the following and be able to discuss them effectively.
98 • Traditional administration and the factors that contributed to forming the basic foundation of the Nigerian state; • Colonial administration, and the legacies it left behind which added coloration to Nigeria’s administration both on the political and bureaucratic planes; • Parliamentary administration, which became experimental in Nigeria’s attempt at self-governance; • Military administration which is the longest period in the country’s administration and which has contributed most to either the development or underdevelopment (or both) of Nigeria; and • Presidential system of government which is the second experiment at democratic governance in Nigeria.
3.1 Traditional Administration Nigeria is a populous country with many different cultural and religious backgrounds.
It has three major ethnic groups in the Hausa, Igbo, and Yoruba.
These groups existed in form of empires and they all had their system of administration before the advent of the colonial masters.
Igbo was republican in the cultural, traditional, tribal and political organization of its people.
Every clan in Igbo land had its own representatives rather than a village head that could be called a king, queen or a district monarch.
Organisations such as the age grade, the nzes or ichies, the ozos, etc, were formed for the purpose of ensuring the smooth administration of the Igbo kingdom.
They made use of oracles to instill discipline to their people.
One suchoraclesthat attained adequate prominence in their historywas the Arochukwu Oracle.
The Yoruba kingdoms, had the obas and other lower cadre assistants in the administration of their land.
The ogbonis serve in the following areas: the king-makers, ceremonial activits and in the courts as adjudicators of cases and one of the general means of restoring sanity to the kingdom.
They pay homage instead of taxes and this was regarded as part of the cultural heritage of Yoruba kingdoms.
The Hausa/Fulani empires had a much more accomplished political administration of the pre- colonial era.
99 They had a system of taxation which served as a major source of income for the administration at the time and which the British colonial masters adopted to their advantage.
Unlike the Igbos, they had Monarchy system which was successive and hereditary.
The emirs were supported by a hierarchy of administrators such as the galadima, madawaki and kuwa as minister for war, general administration and water respectively.
The traditional administration mechanism in Nigeriabefore the arrival of the colonial masters was relatively beautiful.
Though this administrative system cannot be said to be perfect but it served their purpose.
According to Maduabum (2008), if not for their economic and selfish interest, British incursion into the territories’ administration was unnecessary.
This was why they could not dismantle the structure it met on the ground due to its adequacy but instead, introduced indirect rule.
3.2 Colonial Administration Lagos was colonized in 1860 with Megregor as head of the administration.Lord FriedrickLugard who later took over from him in 1906, introduced the system of indirect rule to the Northern Nigeria.
Traditional institutions existed in Muslim-dominated areas of the North and Islam, which is a dominant religion in the North, demands total submission of the subjects to their rulers and the colonialists capitalized on this and other related factors such as well-laid structure of administration, to make use of traditional rulers for the implementation of British rule.
The British also used the native authority system in which local rules were confirmed and given staff of authority.
These people were graded and assigned duties.
Some of the existing laws were either condemned or modified to suit the colonial masters.
Native courts were also introduced to try localoffenders.
They built local prisons, introduced local government authorities, and recruited police personnel to enforce law and order.
Administration was set up at ward and village levels.
The British colonial master were not prepared to spend British money to administer Nigeria, hence native revenue and tax system were introduced.
However, the people resisted, especially in the South-West and South-East through riots and protests (Aba riots) at the harsh and exploitative administration of the colonial masters.
100 It should be noted that the indirect rule system was successful in Northern Nigeria, partially successful in the South-West but failed woefully in the South-East.
Lord Lugard left Nigeria in 1922 and was replaced with Sir High Clifford as governor, under whose administration a Legislative Council was set up with three Nigerians as members.
The inclusion of Nigerians into the administration did not accord them equal status with the whites thus they were marginalized and discriminated upon.
This made the natives to resort to enlightenment campaigns.Political parties and media houses were establishedfor these purposes.
Also during the Second World War in 1939-1945, Africans were made to fight for their colonial master with the promise that independence would be granted to all their colonies.
Consequently, the blacks fought side by side with their colonial masters; thus, white superiority was demystified, and this eventually culminated in the agitation for self-rule in Nigeria.
Political activities were intensified until Anthony Enahoro moved a motion for Nigeria‘s independence in the legislative chamber in 1956.
Consequently, Nigeria was granted her political independence on October 1, 1960 thus bringing the colonial rule to an end.
Some of the certain activities which contributed immensely to forcing the British to reluctantly grant Nigeria independence in 1960 were: (a) Formation of political parties and associations.
The nationalists formed the earliest political parties.
These included: Nigerian national democratic party (NNDP), by Herbert Macaulay; national council of Nigeria and the Cameroons (later citizens) NCNC, led by NnamdiAzikiwe; national youth movement (NYM), led by Ernest Ikoli; action group (AG) led by obafemiAwolowo and Northern people’s congress (NPC), led by Ahmadu Bello.
(b) Organization of strikes and boycotts as powerful instruments to back up their demands; (c) Organization of labour unions and meetings that put pressure on the colonial employers and government; (d) Setting up of newspapers such as the Lagos Daily News and the West African Pilot to champion the demand for independence; 101 (e) Writing of petitions to the secretary of state for the colonies in London.
A good example is that which was sent to him in March, 1920 by the delegates to the National Congress of British West Africa; (f) Taking active part in constitutional conferences; (g) Tabling and voting in favour of motions/policies favorable to the attainment of self-rule in parliament; (h) Sending of delegates to the British government in London and to the colonial government in Nigeria to press forward their demands; (i) Organization of rallies, symposia and lectures to educate the people (j) The use of other propaganda machinery such as the activities of the West African Students’ Union (WASU) in London to present their position on the need for independence in Nigeria.
(oyeneye, onyenwenu and olosunde, 2001:140).
Though the British succeeded in merging the diverse entity called Nigeria into one country, they failed abysmally in resolving the problems attendant on that unification due to lack of interest at the welfare of the natives.
This is why the country has been enmeshed in one crisis/conflict or the other till date.
Notable examples were thirty months of civil war, military coups and attendant massacre of innocent citizens, etc.
in fact, the general instability of the country are well as the most recent crisis in the Niger Delta area of the country are all traceable to the weak administrative structure foisted on Nigeria by the British.
The issue of marginalization arising from the dominance of certain parts of the country on others has become an unending phenomenon in Nigeria all as a result of the problems created by this weak administrative structure.
There are some legacies left behind by the colonial administration which has been the bane of Nigeria’s Public Service administration.
These are adapted from Maduabum 2006 and listed below: (1) The discriminatory practices against Nigerians which were introduced by the British, particularly in employment and advancement to responsible position in civil service.
This imbued the Nigerian with the spirit of alienation which made him to see the civil service job as exclusive to the colonial government.
The situation is that, up till date, the average 102 Nigerian has distanced himself from part-ownership of the civil service; rather, he sees it as belonging to the government of the day.
(2) The dichotomy between the senior and junior staff, which existed even after the departure of the Europeans, patterned the nonchalant attitude of the public servant.
This is because; immense benefits and privileges existed only at the senior level occupied exclusively by the “whites.” The Nigerian senior public servants inherited this discriminatory practice of the former European senior public servants.
As a result, they turned themselves into virtually ‘white men’ and never took cognizance of the peculiar environment and cultural values of their country.
Thus emerged what Augustus Adebayo (1981:47) described as “black man in a white man’s skin.” The consequence is that junior public servants do not believe that they are parts of the service.
(3) The merger of departments then headed by the erstwhile professionals as directors into ministries and the generalist administrators banqueting of the enviable position of Permanent Secretary and Accounting Officer of the ministry, subordinated the professionals to the generalist administrators and the categories of Nigerian public servants.
The conflict arising there from contributes to instability of the service.
3.3 Parliamentary Rule The Parliamentary system in Nigeria had the Queen of England who was constitutional monarch between October 1960 and 1963 as the Head of State.
Executive authority was vested in her.
She was also part of the Central and Regional Legislatures.
But the power, however, was exercised by the elected Ministers, who were collectively responsible to the Legislature.
The central parliament was made up of the Queen, the Upper house and the Lower house.
The upper house comprised 44 members while the lower house had 305 members.
The constitution empowered the governor-general to appoint any member of the House of Representatives that had majority support as Prime minister, while the prime minister in turn, and appointed the minister.
Each region had a house of assembly and a house of chiefs.
The regional executive was composed of the premier and some other 103 ministers who were collectively responsible to the regional legislature but do not interfere with the power of the central authority.
The constitution prescribed two legislative lists – the exclusive and concurrent lists.
The federal government legislated on the exclusive list while both the federal and regional governments legislated on the concurrent list.
In the event of a conflict between a federal law and a regional law, the federal law prevailed.
The republican constitution came up on October 1, 1963.
It was a constitution that swept away the last vestiges of colonial rule.
The Queen was no longer the head of state.
New provisions were injected into the 1963 constitution.
For example, no amendment to the constitution could be passed until 2/3 majority of each regional legislature assented to it.
Under the republican constitution, the president became the head of state and commander-in- chief of the armed forces.
Dr. NnamdiAzikiwe was so appointed.
He was to be in office for five years except in the event of death or resignation of appointment.
The constitution provided for the establishment of a national police force for the country and also for local The parliamentary system of government was less expensive to operate but certain factors led to the collapse of this system of government in Nigeria.
These included: (1) Weak political structure foisted on the country by the British which led to ethnic imbalance, particularly between the North and South.
(2) Several constitutions were fashioned out in the bid to govern Nigerian, but none of these had been able to really unite the various peoples of Nigeria.
(3) Political parties were often based on ethnic consideration.
(4) It was impossible to conduct free and fair election in Nigerian (5) Census was used as a toll for political competition by politicians.
Thus, the exercise was always attended by malpractices and discrepancies.
(6) There was a competition between the various ethnic groups for wealth and power.
(7) The military had also been politicized and divided along ethnic lines.
104 What must, however, be acknowledged during this era was the relative low level of corruption probably because the country was not as rich then as it is today.
They also demonstrated a higher level of responsibility, patriotism, and selflessness than was seen in later years.
The immediate factors responsible for the collapse of the already weak and unstable political order during the last days of the parliamentary system of government were the federal elections of 1964, and the Western regional election of 1965.
The elections were so violent that their aftermath was political instability.
As a result, many Nigerians believed that the military was the only institution in the country that could stop the political chaos and restore political order, security and stability as well as public confidence in the government.
3.4 Military Rule Nigeria had its first military coup d’etat in January 15, 1966 thus ushering in Major General J.T.U.
Aguiyi-Ironsias the first military head of state of Nigeria.
The attempt by Ironsi administration to make the country a unitary state (Decree no.
34 of 1966) brought public critisims.
The implications of introducing unitary system of government included the abolition of regions, and the unification of the different public services under a single public service commission.
This sparked off anti-government demonstrations, and riots broke out in several cities in the North on May 26, 1966.
Several people were killed and many lives were lost.
The result of all these was the second coup d’etat on July 29, 1966, which claimed the lives of General Aguiyi-Ironsi and the then governor of Western Region, Col. AdekunleFajuyi, who had been playing host to him, as well as other military officers, particularly of the Igbo extraction.
Lt. Col.
The Igbos seceded under Major OdumegwuOjukwu and took the name Biafra.
Yakubu Gowon became the new head of state of Nigeria.
During his regime which lasted from July 29, 1966 to July 29, 1975, he prosecuted the civil war which was a consequence of the coup and killings that accompanied it from July 1967 to January 15, 1970.
Military regimes lasted for some period after Gowon administration.
These are as follows: (a) Murtala Mohammed, July, 1975-February 1976; 105 (b) Obsanjo/Yar’Adua, February 1976 – October 1, 1979; (c) Buhari/Idiagbon, December 31, 1983 – August 27, 1985 (d) Ibrahim Babangida, December 31, 1983 – August 17, 1993; (e) SaniAbacha, December 17, 1993 – June 8, 1998; and (f) AbdusalaamAbubakar, June 8, 1998 – May 29, 1999.
From the fore going it will be observed the military ruled the Nigerian nation for over 28 years in her 51 years of independence.
You will also observe that the ex-military men are still active members of the political class in Nigerian.
Achievements and Failures of Military Rule in Nigeria According to Maduabum, 2008, the military, as a professional body, was trained to defend the sovereignty of the country from external aggression and not to govern a society.
Nevertheless, their regimes recorded various degrees of success as listed hereunder.
(a) They restored unity to Nigeria during the civil war though at a huge cost.
(b) The creation of, firstly, 12 states, later 19, then 30, and eventually the present 36 states and a federal Capital Territory, out of the former four regions that made up the country was done by the Military.
(c) The military improved the use of annual budgeting as a management tool to ensure that planned actions aimed at attaining set objectives were met.
(d) The military utilized the bureaucratic process very well.
They treated matters with utmost urgency.
This infused the sense of urgency into those who worked with them such as civil servants.
(e) The military removed the clumsy way of doing things which was characteristic of the then civilian administration.
It introduced urgency, speed, and precision in the conduct of government business.
This was effective as tasks were accomplished ahead of schedule.
(f) They maintained the smartness associated with soldiers which in turn rubbed off on the civil servants.
106 (g) The military exhibited a great deal of development consciousness.
Since it was not involved in partisan politics, it went ahead with speed to carry out development projects, it avoided the manipulations associated with such projects that sometimes made them impossible to complete.
(h) The creation of states under the military also ensured infrastructural development close to the people such as roads, expressways, and health centres.
(i) The establishment of several state and federal universities to cater for the educational needs of the nation as well as training institution such as the Administrative Staff college of Nigeria (ASCON).
(j) The creation of many agencies like the national youth service corp. (NYSC) scheme, Agency for Mass Mobilization, Social and Economic Reformation (MAMSER); Directorate of food, Roads and Rural Infrastructure (DFRRI), federal road safety commission (FRSC), nation drug law enforcement agency (NDLEA), etc.
and many agricultural programmers to enhance food security.
Although some of these programmers eventually went into extinction due to bad management, nevertheless their conceptualization was in good faith aimed at improving the Nigerian society.
The demerits of military regimes in Nigeria included: (1) Entrenchment of corruption in the nation’s body polity which is still hindering many aspects of developmental efforts to date.
(2) The military at state levels imposed decision on the executive council.
The result was ill- digested policies and frustration amongst the civil servants whose duties it was to probe into excesses in policy formulation, implementation and evaluation.
(3) The military sometimes never considered merit as a factor in appointing permanent secretaries.
Appointment of in experienced people to such positions discouraged co- operation among civil servants.
(4) The military authorities arrogated much power to themselves.
They believed that they had answers to all the country’s problems.
(5) Some of their civil service reforms were too harsh.
An example was the mass retrenchment exercise carried out by the Murtala Mohammed/Obasanjo regime which led to the removal of thousands of civil servants.
Rather than restore confidence in the civil 107 service, it made workers less secure in terms of tenure, which the civil servants left the service or were thrown out without replacement; hence the civil service declined tremendously in terms of dedication to duty and moral values.
Some other merits and demerits of the Military Administration are tabulated below: Table 1: Merits and Demerits of Military Administration S/N MERITS DEMERITS 1.
The Military kept the country united Inexperience 2.
Reformed the Local Government Corruption 3.
Created more states Violation of fundamental human rights 4.
Some economic improvement Indiscipline 5.
Improvement in educational facilities Intolerance 6.
Improvement in agriculture Reckless spending 7.
Some progress in area of foreign policy Favouritism 8.
Inability to conduct reliable census 3.5 Presidential System of Administration This is a system of government based on the principles of separation of powers.
The system gives each branch of government some roles.
For example, the National Assembly enacts laws, but the president has overriding veto powers.
The Supreme Court can declare unconstitutional, laws passed by the National Assembly and signed by the President.
The President appoints the Justices of the Supreme Court with the approval of the Senate.
The responsibility of amending the constitution rests with the legislature (National Assembly).
The President has no formal authority over constitutional amendments.
All such amendments must be proposed and ratified accordingly.
The main characteristics of the presidential system of government are, among others: 108 (1) The Head of State is the Chief Executive, (2) Supremacy of constitution, (3) Separation of power, (4) Political accountability, (5) Checks and balances as a way of safeguarding against abuses or excesses of one arm of government over the other; and (6) The office of Head of Service is separated from that of Secretary to the Federal Government.
Listed below are some of the successes and failures of Presidential System of Government in Nigeria.
Table 2: SUCCESS AND FAILURES OF PRESIDENTIAL ADMINISTRATION IN NIGERIA S/NO Successes Failure a.
Accountability with due process institutions like ICPC and Insecurity characterized by EFCC political assassinations b.
Deregulation of Key Sectors of the Economy like Failed promises and non- Telecommunication (GSM) and private Universities implementation of party manifestoes c. Women Empowerment.
More women are involved in the Manipulation of electoral process of governance process through rigging d. Priority given to issues concerning the environment like Disrespect to court orders that the setting up of OMPADEC do not favour the party in power e. Economic empowerment via poverty alleviation measures Political rascality exhibited by like NEPAD,NEEDS,AND MDGs politicians is looting the state treasury.
f. More foreign investment because the country is well Failure in stabilizing the price accepted by the international community as witnessed by regime in the downstream oil recent debt relief sector of the economy g. Consolidation in the banking sector to take care of Incessant rivalries among distress cases in the industry political functionaries like Mr. 109 President and Vice President as well as Governors and their Deputies.
4.0 Conclusion Nigerian Public Administration has come a long way from the tradition system of administration to the modern day Nigeria.
Various administrations have metamorphosed and the nation has tried its hands on each of them.
Some achieved some degrees of development while some did not.
However, the nation is still developing and looks up to the administrators to help sanitize the system.
5.0 Summary The unit treated the entirety of the Nigerian Public Administration from various stages ranging from the traditional to the presidential system of administration.
We examined the administration under colonial as well as when we have gained independence to the present dispensation.
We studied the achievements and challenges of public administration under each regime.
6.0 Tutor Marked Assignment 1.
Under which administration has public administration recorded most of its achievements in Nigeria?
Support your answer with credible data.
7.0 References/Further Reading Abia, V.E.B.
(2003).
Understanding Nigerian Government and Politics.Lagos; Concept Publication.
Faseke, M. (2004).
Civil service in Nigeria: a Historical Perspective Lagos: Tidings Publications.
110 Maduabum, C.P.
(2006) Reforming Government Bureaucracies in Nigeria: the Journey so Far.
Badagry: ASCON press.
Maduabum, C.P.
(2008).
The Mechanics of Public Administration in Nigeria.
Lagos: Concept Publications Ltd. Olusanya, G. O.
(1975).
The Evolution of the Nigerian Civil Service from 1861 to 1960: the problem of Nigerianization.
Lagos: University of Lagos Press.
Unit 3 Concept of Development Administration and Administration of Developments 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objectives 3.0 Main Content 3.1 Development Administration 3.2 Administration of Development 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutor Marked Assignment 7.0 Reference/Further Readings 1.0 Introduction In this unit we will discuss the concepts of Development Administration andAdministration of Developments.
The topic recognizes the importance of environment in the practice of public administration.
It also refutes the assumption that there is a single principle of public administration especially since there has not been any empirical research to back this assumption.
We shall be discussing this unit from the aspect of a comparative study on public administration.
111 2.0 Objective At the end of this unit, you are expected to do the following • understand the full meaning of development administration • understand the full import of administration of development • know what role public administration plays in the administration of development.
3.0 Main Content 3.1 Development Administration To fully appreciate the concept of development administration, it is necessary to understand the meaning of development.
Olugbemi (1987:431) defines development as the progressive creation, proliferation, and enhancement of the conditions of the good life of the citizens within the boundaries of a nation.
This definition can be assessed in terms of the following parameters: (1) The enhanced capacity of citizens to meet their vital daily commitments while allowing them a comfortable margin to save for the rainy day; (2) The reduction, if not elimination, of inequality, unemployment, poverty, disease and ignorance; (3) The diffusion of influence and the guarantee of basic freedoms, including the freedom to participate meaningfully in the political process; and (4) The assurance of a stable and peaceful political order essential for sustained productive activities and a guarantee of the safety of lives and property.
These parameters rhythms very significantly with the development objectives of Nigeria which were declared in 1970, and aimed at achieving the following: (a) A united strong and self-reliant nation; (b) A just and egalitarian society; (c) A great and dynamic economy; (d) A land of full and bright opportunities for all citizens; and (e) A free and democratic society.
112 From the foregoing, we can deduce that development can be seen as being much more than economic growth.
Maduabum (2008), posits that it is the creation, the sustenance and the maximization of opportunities – including economic opportunities –requisite for the attainment of full and satisfying life for every citizen.
It is similarly not a piece meal or a once-and-for-all process; rather, it is a continuous and cumulative conscious endeavor which should result in some attainment of any combination of the conditions earlier listed.
Furthermore, the pursuit of development is not, and should not be, the responsibility of government alone.
The fact that governments, especially in the developing countries, had assumed the role of prime movers of development is attributable to the manifest incapacities of these societies and peoples.
Other definitions of development administration are as follows: (1) The process of guiding an organization towards the achievement of progressive political, economic and social objectives that are authoritatively determined in one manner or another (Edward Weldnes, 1970) (2) That aspect of public administration in which the focus of attention is on organizing and administering public agencies in such a way as to stimulate and facilitate defined programmers of socio-economic progress (George Gant, 1975); (3) Organized efforts to carry out programmers or projects thought by those involved as achieving development objective (Fred Riggs, 1973).
Swerdlow (1975) added a different dimension to his definition, according to him, poor countries have special characteristics which tend to create a different role for government.
These characteristics and their expanded and emphasized role of government particularly as it affects economic growth, tend to make the operation of public administration significantly different.
When such difference exists, public administration can be fully called development administration.
These various definitions of development administration by various authors indicate similarities, though with minor variations.
Most of the definitions agree that development administration is organized to implement government projects or programmers towards reviewing developmental objectives.
The question that arises is, how then does this differ from traditional administration, given the fact that public administration is equally geared towards implementation of 113 development goals?
Some of the conceived ideas that development administration is change- oriented, action-oriented, which is geared towards creativity, innovation and so forth, could be tailored toward public administration in accordance with the submission of the authors earlier cited.
It is on this basis that the tag ‘Development Administration’ was adopted.
If traditional public administration is directed towards all these, will it qualify to automatically be development goals of a nation which are effectively achieved through the canopy of traditional public administration, will it qualify to be called development administration or what?
Other observations that could be made include lack of specific models, paradigms or a theoretical framework that could make development administration a discipline distinct from public administration.
This may have led scholars like Adamolekun (1983:22-23) to posit that development administration ideals as it is, do not contribute anything new to the study of public administration.
The position that should be underscored, however, is the implicit assumption that development administration applies to Third World countries.
Two schools of thought on the issue of development administration emerged: the first is Ecology of Public Administration that is concerned with the following questions: (a) How do differences in social, cultural and environmental factors, coupled with historical experiences, affect the way administration is conducted?
(b) How, in turn, does administrative action affect the society in which it plays a part?
(c) How does the environment affect administration and how does administration affect the environment?
In his book titled Administration in Development Countries: the Theory of Prismatic Society, Fred Riggs seems to have provided answers to these questions in that here, he differentiates between what he called “refracted, prismatic and fused societies”.
Prismatic refers to societies undergoing transition; fused societies are traditional, whereas refracted societies refer to developed or modern societies.
According to Riggs, prismatic societies have the following features: (1) High degree of heterogeneity.
These societies have traditional and modern features at the same time.
114 (2) High degree of formalism.
There is a discrepancy between what is prescribed and what is being practiced.
(3) Overlapping.
The co-existence of formally differentiated structures and undifferentiated ones.
Riggs also identified the following functions of bureaucracies in the prismatic societies: (a) Nepotism (b) Poly-communalism: Public officers apply rules to serve their communities.
(c) Collects a high degree of the influence of interest or ethnic groups with the most dominant impressing its views on the entire societies.
(d) Bazaar, Canteen Model of the Economy: the price-tag on any commodity depends on who the customer is.
(e) Poly-Normalism: there are so many norms clashing with each other, no standard norms.
(f) Authority does not lie in formal authority structures.
(g) Policy is based on expediency not on rationality.
He concluded by saying that the Weberian ideal model of bureaucracy cannot work in this type of environment because of its nature.
The second school of thought is known as the Development Administration School.
This school is concerned with finding appropriate ways of administration in a development situation.
The fundamental issue of this school is whether the classical model of bureaucracy is the most appropriate for developing countries.
This school consequently made the following observations on bureaucracies in Third World countries: (a) Administration in this part of the world is basically initiative.
There is the tendency to introduce the Western model of administration.
(b) Bureaucracies in this part of the world lack the skilled manpower necessary for implementing development programmers.
(c) Administration in this part of the world is not oriented towards production.
There is a wide discrepancy between form and reality.
115 In light of the foregoing, this school recommends improving public administration structures through reforms, and training, and injecting new administration technologies.
Unlike the ecological school, this school of though believes there is room for improvement.
Their ideas led to the setting up of school of administration in Third World countries.
Development administration has been criticized on the following grounds: (1) Bureaucracy is by nature conservative and static and therefore, can hardly innovate.
Development entails innovation.
(2) The issue of development in any society calls for participation by a wide range of people.
It is impossible to involve a wide range of people in bureaucracies.
Bureaucracy, by its nature, is not in a position to mobilize the people for purpose of development.
(3) The development administration approach to development tends to mask the real issue which is fundamentally the kind of development strategy adopted by the government.
Development administration is aimed at evolving appropriate ways and means of conducting administration in a government of an underdeveloped or developing country.
3.2 Administration of Development Administration of development refers to the instrument of national development.
In other words, the central task of administration of development is how to organize various development tasks of government and establish the organizations necessary for such tasks in order to achieve the intended development objectives of government.
For purposes of comparison, Maduabum (2001:85) posit that development administration has two components: (1) The administration of development which, according to him, entails the administration of development programmers.
This also includes the methods and techniques adopted by 116 government and its agencies in implementing policies enunciated for meeting development targets; and (2) The developments of administration which entail improving the administrative machinery to enable it cope with developmental efforts and demands.
He thereafter summarizes the concept of development administration to mean the adjustment of the bureaucracy to the vastly increased number, variety and complexity of governmental functions required to respond to public demands.
In the developed economies, the need for development plans has been emphasized in order to give greater focus to the goals and programmers of these nations.
It is seen as a tool for modernization.
A vital point to note is that development administration and administration of development are interwoven concepts.
In recognition of this, Esman and Montgomery (1969) insist that development administration has a twin focus: (1) To develop administrative institutions and capabilities which would improve the managing of change processes; and (2) To administer, shape and implement development programmers in all sectors of public policy.
4.0 Conclusion From the discussion above we have learnt that development administration is aimed at evolving appropriate ways of conducting administration in an environment of underdevelopment.
The crux of development administration is that the classical public administration model is far from being adequate to sustain the process of administering development programmers.
This assumption emanates from the fact that the bureaucracy of the developing world lacks organizational capabilities and there is a severe shortage of resources required to cope with the developmental challenges facing the developing world.
In order to cope with the task of national development, development administration has sought for improved ways of performance through the restructuring of the bureaucracy.
117 5.0 Summary In this unit we learnt the meaning of development, development administration and administration of development.
We also talked about the features of each.
It was also noted that development administration is associated with the underdeveloped or developing nations.
We believe you have learnt a lot in this unit.
In the next unit we will discuss the concept of federalism.
6.0 Tutor Marked Assignment 1.
What is development administration?
2.
What do you understand by the term administration of development?
3.
What are the features of prismatic society as propounded by Riggs?
4.
What are the functions of bureaucracies in the prismatic societies?
7.0 References/Further Readings Adamolekun, L. (1983).
Public Administration: A Nigerian and Comparative Pespective.
Lagos: Longman.
Maduabum, C.P.
(2001).CapacityBuilding and Utilization in Nigeria.
Lagos:TeitlordsPubishers Ltd. Maduabum, C.P.
(2008).
The Mechanics of Public Administration in Nigeria.
Lagos: Concept Publications Ltd. Riggs, F.W.
(1973).
Prismatic Society Revisited.
Morristown: General Learning Press.
118 Unit 4 The Concept of Federalism 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objective 3.0 Main Content 3.1 Concept of Federalism 3.2 Types of Federalism 3.3 Features of Federalism 3.4 Merits of Federalism 3.5 Demerits of Federalism 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutor Marked Assignment 7.0 References/Further Reading 1.0 Introduction Federation implies the existence in one country of more than onelevel of government, each with different expenditure responsibilitiesand revenue generating powers.
Federalism is functional arrangement between the states or between communities living and working together nationally while preserving a reasonable measure of separate identity.
It could also be viewed as a phenomenon of limited union directed at the production of limited unity.
Federalism, as a modern form of government, was developed in the united states of America (USA) and later adopted by other countries like brazil, Nigeria, Mexico, Switzerland, Canada, India, etc.
other nations in East Africa, the Caribbean Islands, etc.
attempted federalism but failed.
In this unit, we will discuss the concept of federalism, features of federalism, and merits and demerits of federalism.This is to help us understand better the system of government in Nigeria.
You will benefit a lot from this unit if you study it deligently.
119  2.0 Objective In this unit you will learn the following: • The meaning of federalism • What constitutes a federal state?
• Characteristics of federalism • The Pros and Cons of Federalism 3.0 Main Content 3.1 The Concept of Federalism According to Maduabum (2008), federalism is a political concept in which a group of member is bound together by covenant with a governing representative head.
Federalism is also seen as a system of the government in which sovereignty is constitutionally divided between a central governing authority and constituent political units (like states or provinces).
In Federalism, the power to govern is shared between national and provincial or state governments, creating what is often called a federation.
Proponents of federalism are called federalists.
In the Nigeria context, this consists of a Federal government, 36 states, Federal Capital Territory and 774 Local Governments.
The federal government has certain express power which isstipulated in the constitution, including the right to levy taxes, declare war, and regulate interstate and foreign commerce.
There is also what we call the ‘Necessary and Proper Clause’ which gives the federal government the implied power to pass any law “necessary and proper” for the execution of its express powers.
Power that the constitution does not delegate to the federal government or forbid to the states-the reserved powers-are reserved to the people or the state.
Some authors see federalism as a form of governmental and institutional structure put in placefor the purpose of maintaining unity while also preserving diversity.
According to Wheare (1964:28), federalism is the method of dividing powers so that the regional governments are each 120 within a sphere, co-ordinate and independent.
He goes further to explain the federal principle as “a principle and practice whose ultimate test is how the federal system operates A federal society usually becomes one with many ethnic groups of different historical, cultural, and linguistic backgrounds but each of these ethnic groups occupies a marked and distinctive geographical location from the others.
In this setting, Federalismbecomes the compromising unity in diversity.
Livingston (1956:310) stresses the need for a common political tradition if federalism is to survive.
From his viewpoint on the developmental approach to federalism, Eleazu (1971:2) identifies three perspectives, namely: a social fact, he sees federalism as bringing people together, because socio-cultural conditions make the unitary system unacceptable.
The legal basis emanates from the need to draw up a constitution whereby the basis of agreement is formalized.
The political leaders formalize the agreed relations between the federating units as well as specify the process of adjusting and accommodating differences.
3.2 Types of Federalism • Centripetal federalism- This is when pre-existing political units came together for whichever purpose they claim necessary.
• Centrifugal federalism- This is when pre-existing political units sub-divide to accommodate differences of whatever nature that have become one seen as un- reducible to a common denomination.
• Fiscal federalism – federalism involving the transfer of funds between different levels of government.
• Formal federalism (or ‘constitutional federalism’) – the delineation of powers is specified in a written constitution.
• Executive federalism (also known as ‘administrative federalism’).
121 One of the cardinal elements of federalism is the participation of the federating state in the decision-making process at the centre.
According to Sclle, (1996:22): there is true federalism only if associated collectivities participate through their representatives to the constitution of the federal organs and to the elaboration of their decisions.
Power sharing must be emphasized as another important element of federalism.
Ideally, both the central and the federating state/units are to exercise independent spheres of authority.
Federalism is only to combine the unity amongst the federating units in matters of national concern with autonomy in matters of state concern.
The states are independent entities possessing original and inherent power.
3.3 Features of Federalism a.
In a federal state, the national government is fully sovereign.
b.
The people create both the national and state governments, delegate power to both, and restrict both through a written constitution of the state.
c. The national or federal government acts directly on the people.
For example, it can tax or draft the people as appropriate.
To some extent, the state and the local governments also acts directly on the people within their areas of jurisdiction.
For example, they collect revenue and provide certain social amenities; but whatever their actions are on the people, they must be in line with the guidelines of the federal government.
d. In a federal system, each tier of government is limited to its sphere of authority and within that sphere it is autonomous and independent: neither may arrogate to itself power assigned to the other.
e. Federal system of government seeks to unite several component units that desire some degree of unity without sacrificing their own identity or autonomy in local affairs.
f. In a federal arrangement, states/federating units can take their own politicizes independent of that of the national government, especially their decision on taxing and spending 122 and their own economic and social regulations.
The right to make policies is only guaranteed by the federal constitution.
g. In the federal state, both the national and state governments work as partners in progress.
The federal government may delegates some function to the state governments while the later may do the same to the local governments.
In the final analysis, what seems to be federalism, which involves co-operation between federal and state officials, is actually decentralization of functions.
Whereas policies affecting the generality of the people are made at the national level, the state and local governments play administrative roles in the implementation of such policies at both the state and local government levels.
3.4 Merits of Federalsism a.
The major factor that favours the formation of a federal state is sufficient socio-political and ideological commitment to the primary concept or value of federation itself which must be present at formation.
b.
The heterogeneous nature of people living together is one of the main factors that favour the formation of federal states.
The progressive existence of these heterogeneous people makes for corporation of government for mutual benefits and advantages.
c. Linguistic, economic and geographical factors dictated the need for the adoption of a federal system in Nigeria in order to minimize conflict and to provide unity in diversity as embodied in the concept of federalism.
d. Another factor in favour of federalism is that it is a weapon for fighting against a common enemy with a common force.
This is what the independent American colonies did to gain independence from the British and it became natural that they should form themselves into a single federal union.
123 e. Federalism also provides a means of combining local autonomy on matters primarily of local concern with national unity in matters of general interest.
f. It also balances powers at the centre and federating states, thereby allowing for the maintenance of self-identities of the federating states with some level of autonomy.
g. The clear division of powers between the states and the central government helps in keeping the central government under check so that it does not become power drunk.
h. Distribution of national wealth across the board within a federation is another factor that favours the formation of federal states.
i.
Fear of insecurity of wars with other nations or internal wronging favours the formation of federal states.
3.5 Demerits of Federalism The disadvantages of federalism are as follows: a.
There is imbalance in power distribution amongst the central and federating governmental units.
A good example is Nigeria where power imbalance makes the federal government to retain most of this oil revenue and remit paltry sums as allocations to the oil-producing states.
This is why, in Nigeria, the South-south governments are agitating that they should control their natural resources and pay taxes to the central government, in consonance with the principle of federalism.
It should be borne in mind that the concept of federalism is against the power inbalance.
b.
Bad government may also disfavor the formation of federal states, as is the case in Nigeria where we now have a proliferation of states due to bad governance that does not cater for the well-being of all the groups.
This is usually characterized by injustice, marginalization and unfair treatment.
124 c. Complexities within the central government.
Complexities bring inefficiency and absence of responsibility.
It results to conflicts of jurisdiction.
Most federal system like Nigeria and America have written constitutions, which are known to be rigid with the attendant difficult amendment procedures and this therefore, does not favour the formation of federal states.
e. Duplication of government machinery.
The three level of government (federal state and local) engage in the same business (though on different scales) and there is a problem in a distorted federal system like the unitary system of government once practiced in Nigeria where the central government physically controlled the machinery of government in the states.
f. There may be lopsidedness or structural defects in government, where a particular region dominates the others in either population (that is, political power), or the bureaucratic power (public service), disfavors federalism.
g. Restructuring by devolution of power to units and the right of the federating units to secede is against federalism.
For instance, Article 39 of the 1994 Ethiopian Constitution gives any of the ethnic groups forming the federation of the Republic of Ethiopia the right to secede.
4.0 Conclusion The important point to learn from all these is that federalism is the co-existence of the different ethnic, tribal or nation groups that are in geographical proximity to one another but are compelled by nature to engage in social and commercial interactions.
The basic idea is to provide cohesion for peaceful and progressive co-existence of heterogeneous peoples for mutual benefit and advantage.
Federalism provide linkage of individuals, groups and politics, in lasting but limited unions, in such a way as to provide for the energetic pursuit of common goals while at the same time,maintaining the respective integrities of all parties.
It is a political synergy and the juxtaposition of mostly two levels of power, the central and the federating states/units.
5.0 Summary In this unit we have learnt federalism and federating states.
We also looked at the features of federalism as well as the factors that favours federalism and those that do not.
We believe that 125 the knowledge you have acquired in this unit will enhance you understanding of the happenings in the federal system of government in Nigeria.
6.0 Tutor Marked Assignment 1.
What do you understand by the term federalism?
2.
What are the major characteristics of federalism?
3.
Is Nigeria practicing true federalism?
Support your argument with facts.
4.
If you were to advice a heterogeneous nation to adopt federalism, what factors will you present to the people to enable them adopt this system?
7.0 Reference/Further Readings Eleazu, U.O.
(1977).
Federalism and Nation Building: The Nigerian Experience 1954 – 1964.
Great Britain: Arthur Stockwell Ltd. Livingston, W.A.
(1956).
Federalism and Constitutional Change.
Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Maduabum, C.P.
(2008).
The Mechanics of Public Administration.
Lagos: Concept Publications Ltd. Sclle, G. (1996).
inEyando, S. (Jr.) “Constitution and Federalism: Proceedings of the Conference on Constitution, Federalism”, Op.
cit.
Wheare, K.C.(1964).
Federal Government (4thed.)
New York: Oxford University Press.
126 Module 4 COMPARATIVE PUBLIC ADMINISTRATION Unit 1 Intergovernmental Relations Unit 2 Development of British Administration Unit 1 Intergovernmental Relations 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objective 3.0 Main Content 3.1 Inter Governmental Relations 3.2 Constitutional Provision of IGR 3.3 Inter Governmental Relations in Practice 3.4 Problems of Inter Governmental Relations 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutor Marked Assignment 7.0 References/Further Reading 1.0 Introduction Maduabum, (2008:304), defines Inter Governmental Relation (IGR) as the patterns of interaction among various levels of government in a federal system.
These patterns of relationship may be vertical or horizontal.
He went further to say that it inspires a high level of co-ordination among the various tiers of government in their efforts towards the implementation of the nation’s policies and programmes.
According toAdamolekun (1988:61), 127 these can be complex and could take the following dimensions- federal-state; federal-state- local; federal-local; state-local; interstates; and inter-local governments.
We are going to examine the inter-governmental relationships between the three tiers of government in Nigeria and the part it plays towards the intra and external administration of the tiers of government.This will be discussed in three stages, namely: constitutional provisions, practice of intergovernmental relations since 1999 and problems associated with the practice.
You are expected to read this unit very carefully as a good understanding of this topic will help you greatly as a public sector administrator.
2.0 Objective At the end of this unit, you are expected to know the following: • interdependence of government • the relationship between the tiers of government • the merits or demerits of intergovernmental relations 3.0 Main Content 3.1 Inter Governmental Relations IGR Nigeria’s biggest problem to achieving nationhood and full national development is how to integrate the various ethnic groups in the country.
Nigeria adopted federalism as the most suitable form of government because of the diverse ethnic nature of the country.
It is believed that this will enhance governmental responsibilities among the three levels of government i.e., federal state and local governments comprising 36 states and a federal capital territory (FCT) as well as 774 local government areas excluding the federal government itself.
128 What is intergovernmental relation?
According to Maduabum (2008), Inter Governmental Relation refers to the patterns of interaction among various levels of government in a federal system.
These relationships inspire a high level of co-ordination among the various tiers in their efforts towards the implementation of the nation’s policies and programmers.
Babangida government promulgated decree no.
89 of 1992 which established the National Council on Intergovernmental Relations.
Adamolekun (1988:61), opines that these relations may be between the federal and state; federal, state and local; federal and local; state and local.
It may be interstates as well as inter-local governments.
William Anderson and Deal Wright were among the pioneer writers of Inter Governmental Relations (IGR).
They laid emphasis on interactions among human who they see as very vital for the relationships between governments.
They however noted that finance is the most critical element of these interactions.
Wright (1979), as stated in Maduabum (2008), identifies the five distinctive features of IGR in a federal system as follows: (a) IGR encompasses all the transformations and composites of relations among the units of government in a federal system; (b) IGR comprises, the activities and attributes of persons occupying positions in all the units under consideration- state, local, political, administrative, judicial, legislative or executive branches of government; (c) IGR includes concerted and regularized actions of officials as well as new status and landmarks of court decisions, etc; (d) Politics, economics and administration combine to put finance as the nerve centre of IGR; and (e) Whereas some federal system excludes references to local governments, IGR encompasses all relationship between governments, including local governments.
Inter governmental relation of any country is usually expressed in the constitution of the country and this gives it the legal statues.
The mechanism of intergovernmental relation in Nigeria’s context is constitutionally facilitated.
129 The provisions of the Constitution of the Federal Republic of Nigeria 1999, schedules 1-4 clearly stated the type of relationship that will exit between the three tiers of government.
Maduabum (ibid), posit that understanding, interpreting and applying these constitutional provisions by government operatives are the major determinants of intergovernmental relations under Nigeria.
3.2 Constitutional Provisions for IGR Section 2(2) of the Constitution of the Federal Republic of Nigeria, 1999, clearly states that, “Nigeria shall be a Federation consisting of States and a Federal Capital Territory”.
There are thirty-six states and a Federal Capital Territory, at Abuja, as contained in Section 3(1) of the constitution.
These states are named in the first column of part 1 of the First Schedule of the constitution.
Their areas of occupation and location are shown in the second column of the First Schedule (Section 3(2), and Section 7(1) of the Constitution respectively, under the caption, the Constitutional Provision for Local Government System, which is the third tier of government in Nigeria.
This is stated thus: The system of local government by a democratically elected local government council is, under this constitution, guaranteed and, accordingly, the government of every state shall, subject to section 8 of this constitution, ensure their existence under a law which provides for the establishment, structure, composition, finance and functions of such councils.
130 Levels of Government The Federal Government The Federal government is regarded as the parent of both the state and local governments.
Though the state government has its own powers derived constitutionally but the Federal Government shelters the other levels of government.
The Federal government assists the state and the local government in the following areas.
(cid:2) Allocation of funds.
(cid:2) Constitutional supremacy; (cid:2) State and local governments as the overall constituency of the President; (cid:2) Developmental projects equitably distributed across the country; (cid:2) Assent or guarantee of foreign loans for special projects on behalf of states or local governments; (cid:2) Exclusive powers to create states and local governments in accordance with the provisions of the constitution; (cid:2) Acting as conciliation in national disputes or conflicts.
(Section 4, Second Schedule of the constitution).
State Governments Press and Verburg (1979:86) as cited in Maduabum (2008),states that state governments are seen as “big government”.
By this, they mean that where a state governor is from the ruling party at the federal level, he will engage in activities that will “sell or deliver the entire state to the party in power”.
The state government has concurrent legislative responsibility in areas like education policy, transportation policy, etc.
Some of these policies equally receive the attention of the federal government at the federal level.
Whereas each state has power to enunciate policies under the concurrent list, the federal government can equally legislate on some matters.
It has been argued that this is a duplication of legislative efforts.
But, from the practice of democracy, it could be deduced that, where 131 there is conflict, the law of the federal government overrides that of the state.
This is a very important aspect of intergovernmental relations, within the context of democracy (Section 8).
Local governments Local governments are developed to act as a “grass roots” administrative system, thereby bringing government nearer to the people.
Its mode of operation is constitutionally derived.
The local government has a constitutionally elected chairman with councilors representing various wards in the community.
The councilors speak for the people they are representing as it were, and inform the local government councils about the needs of the people prior to consideration of projects to be undertaken.
This system is referred to as “consultation”.
It is very appropriate because the will of the people has to be unmistakably represented.
By so doing, the people’s yearnings and aspirations will be fulfilled.
The local government is also involved in the policy formulation process since the will of the people at the local government level is equally important in good governance (4th Schedule (7)).
3.3 Inter Governmental Relations in Practice A. Allocation of Jurisdictional Powers This is one of the most vital aspect of IGRin the Nigerian constitution.
The extent of federal, state and local levels of government authority and influence are contained in the constitution.
Allocation of functional jurisdictional powers is the main thrust.
This is detailed at the federal- state, federal-state-local and state-local levels.
As for the federal-state intergovernmental level, three main approaches are possible.
1. anexclusive federal list with residual powers vested in states.
2. an exclusive list for the state legislature 132 3. an exclusive and a concurrent list, consisting of subjects upon which both the federal and state governments have authority to make laws.
All issues that are not covered by both the exclusive and concurrent legislative lists are regarded as ‘residual’ subjects and left under the jurisdiction of state governments.
The constitutionhas both an exclusive legislative list for the federal government and a concurrent legislative list for both the federal and state governments.
These lists are in the second schedule of the constitution.
In this situation of a dual list, federal legislative actions on subjects contained in the concurrent list take precedence over the legislative action of any state government.
In the areas of allocation of jurisdictional powers, the 1999 constitution contrasts with the 1979 constitution in that it categorically spells out under the Fourth schedule, the functions of local governments.
These functions oblige local governments’ interactions with both the federal and state governments, with particular emphasis on state-local interaction.
The federal, state, or local governments are at liberty to seek judicial interpretation of the sovereign constitution if either party is dissatisfied on any issue.
The judiciary or a court of competent jurisdiction interprets laws that may have far-reaching effects on various levels of government.
This presupposes that each level of government is interdependent.
It should be noted that the courts in themselves do not have the powers to arraign offenders before them but such offenders have to be properly arraigned for trial by person(s) or corporate bodies that have the locus standi to constitute a lawsuit.
B. Intergovernmental Fiscal Relations Finance is one of the most critical issues of policy regarding IGR in any administrations.
This has become a major object of IGR in terms of how best to administer national revenue to satisfy each level of government.
The 1999 constitution gives the national and state assemblies the responsibility for revenue allocations.
It also states thatlocal governments should be accepted as having a right to a 133 statutory share of national financial resources.
Some other provisions on revenue allocation in the 1999 constitution relate to the sharing of national financial resources among the three levels of government, e.g.
section 162(3).
In addition, section 162(7) provides that the National Assembly would determine the proportion of each state’s total revenue to be paid to local government councils.
Also, section 162(6) of the 1999 constitution states, that “each state shall maintain a special account to be called state local government joint account, into which shall be paid all allocations to the local government councils of the state from the Federation Account and from the government of the state”.
However, with the passing into law of the NDDC Bill, the federal government extends certain benefits to resource endowed states for developmental purposes.
The allocation of funds in this direction is done by the federal government based on constitutional provisions (Section 4, Second Schedule on the Exclusive List), through relevant government agencies.
The federal government also assists states in form of grants-in-aid, subject to approval by the National Assembly as stipulated in the 1999 constitution (section 164(1).
The grants-in-aid enable the states to carry out government programmers that would accelerate the realization of the peoples’ aspirations.
The purpose of grants-in-aid is to utilize fiscal leverage to “induce” or “assist” states and local governments to carry out certain programmes which centre on efforts to: (1) Bring about institutional reforms where the institution is resistant to change and thereby capable of underrating the intent of the programmme; (2) Provide the conditions for state or local governments to undertake general governmental functions of benefit to the public.
(3) Provide the conditions for state or local government to serve a particular constituency, e.g.
the poor, the unemployed, etc.
These grants are under the supervision of a designated federal agency and are based on a specific formula for the allocation of funds.
It should be noted that, if any of the above criteria is not met, the funds may not be forthcoming and where the programme has been approved and is in operation, the federal government may withdraw funding in whole or in 134 part in the event of any violation of federal laws or any failure to conform to federal government’s requirements or standards.
3.4 Problems of IGR In spite of the numerous contributions of IGR to the country’s development, its efforts to maximize the benefits for its establishment have been hampered.
This situation is due to a number of factors, among which are: (a) Finance This is the most critical factor hampering IGR in every federal administration system in the world.
The central problem is how best to administer federal funds to the satisfaction of each level of government due largely to the size of government in comparison to its lean financial resources.
(b) The inability of the National Assembly to effectively allocation public revenue among states and the local government councils.
(c) Lack of appropriate means of ensuring that the state/local government joint accounts function in the interest of the local government councils.
(d) Due to a large number of separate administrative systems, there are jurisdictional conflicts and overlapping of functions leading to duplication of efforts, Other problems include: - the roles of the different levels of government were not clearly defined in some areas.
- agriculture and education are two subjects that involve the three tiers but the constitution is not clear on what exactly is expected of each level of government.
- in the provisions of the Fourth Schedule of the Constitution, the local government council are expected to participate in the governance of a state with respect to education, agriculture and health, yet, state governments unilaterally determine the terms of participation without any consultation with local government councils.
- there is absence of any administrative mechanism for the management of IGR.
135 - both the state and local government councils accuse the federal government of reducing and even sitting on funds meant for programmes in the state and local government councils, whose disbursement is usually at the discretion of the Federal Government.
- many state and local government legislative bodies are unable to accurately project incoming revenues, since everything depends on whether or not the federal government is able to approve grant application.
- the public officials and recipients of government services are uncertain of the scope and level of services to be provided for on incoming fiscal year as they have to wait until the grant application is approved.
This is partly the reason for so many cases of uncompleted projects.
These problems can only be ameliorated if the constitution would address them adequately.
For instance, the present federal structure comprising 36 states, the FCT and 774 local governments should be considered enough to satisfy the yearnings of the various ethnic groups in the country.
This is because, the creation of most of the states was politically motivated without due regard to other important parameters such as economic viability and population.
On the creation of local governments, a national agency should be given the mandate and empowered to monitor IGR.
In addition, due to the technical and procedural complexities of the constitution, a specialized agency such as the National Advisory Council on IGR (NACIGR) could be made to handle the joint functions of states and local governments, i.e,.how states and local governmentsshare responsibilities.
4.0 Conclusion The importance of IGR in administration is enormous as each arm of government needs the other to function fully.
A clear-cut separation of powers in a democratic system of government is a herculean task as there are some overlaps in functions and each arm needs the other to succeed.
But corruption which has become endemic in Nigeria hinders success operation of IGR.
This manifests in the Revenue Sharing Formula and in its implementation.
136 However, some national agencies and councils such as National Economic Council which is a mechanism for intergovernmental co-ordination in respect of economic matters, the Public Complaints Commission whose aim is to assists the citizens in seeking redress for whatever grievance they might have against any individual or corporate entity, as well as National Youth Service Corps which has the primary goal for national integration and others have all been put in place for the purpose of intergovernmental relations.
5.0 Summary In this unit we discussed inter governmental relations among the three tiers of government in Nigeria.
We examined the roles of the federal government as a father figure to both the state and the local government administration.
We looked at the constitutional provision of inter governmental relations.
We also examined inter governmental relation as it is practiced in Nigeria.
Finally, we examined the problems encountered in the practice of IGR in Nigeria.
It is hoped that you have learnt a lot in this unit and are now in a better position to appreciate the happenings in the three tiers of government in Nigeria.
In the next unit, we will study the development of British administration.
6.0 Tutor Marked Assignment 1.
What is Inter Governmental Relation IGR?
2.
List the functions of the Federal government to the state and local governments?
3.
List and explain the functions of the local government?
4.
List and explain fully six problems of intergovernmental relations.
137  7.0 Reference/Further Reading Adamolekun, L. (1988).
Politics and Administration in Nigeria.Ikeja: Perfect Printers Limited.
Federal Republic of Nigeria (1975).Main Report of the Public Service Review Commission.
Lagos: Government Press.
Federal Republic of Nigeria (1999).Constitution of the Federal Republic of Nigeria, 1999.
Abuja: Government Press.
Maduabum, C.P.
(2008).
The Mechanics of Public Administration in Nigeria.
Lagos: Concept Publications Limited.
Press, C. and Verburg, K. (1979).State and Community Governments in the Federal System.
New York: John Wiley and Sons.
Wright, V. (1979).The Government and Politics of France.
London: Hutchison and Company Limited Unit 2 BRITISH ADMINISTRATION 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objective 3.0 Main Content 3.1 Public Administration System in Britain 3.2 Arms of Government in Britain 3.3 Level of Government in Britain 3.4 Bureaucratic System in British Civil Service 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 138 6.0 Tutor Marked Assignment 7.0 References/Further Reading 1.0 Introduction Great Britain is reputed as one of the world’s oldest democracies.
It is situated in Western Europe.
It is a major global economic power.
Its economy are generate through manufacturing, foreign trade and a wide range of international business and commercial activities, such as banking and insurance.
The Gross National Product (GNP) of Britain indicates that it ranks among the top seven industrialized countries in the world.
In this unit, we are going to examine the public administration system in Britain and see what makes the country so successful.
2.0 Objective At the end of this unit you are expected to know the following: • the cultural and political system of Britain.
• their parliamentary system • their legislative system • British monarchy • British government and the various arms contained therein • their levels of government 139 3.0 Main Content 3.1 Public Administration System in Britain Great Britain is made up of the natives of the British Isles – English, Welsh, and Irish – each of which has tried to preserve its culture.
After the Second World War, there was an influx of people, especially Blacks and East Indians, from various parts of the former British-empire into England’s largest cities.
This resulted in a mixed societywhich the English discriminated upon thus resulting in racial conflict.
The British political system is not contained in a constitution but, rather, on some basic ideas that are universally accepted (unwritten constitution).
Also the British political system uses the term “parliamentary government” but this is not reflected in practice as stated in theory.
Theoretically, the term ‘parliamentary government’implys that parliament is the chief power in the state.
But although supreme in theory, the parliament is dominated by the cabinet which gets formal only when the parliament is created.
Britain also uses the bicameral legislative system quite different from the type in other countries.
Here, the upper chamber otherwise known as the House of Lords currently is regarded as an aristocratic second chamber.
There is also the system of monarchy which is still in place and the Crown plays significant roles in the administrative system of Britain.
According to Pride (1975:17), “the Queen reigns but does not rule”.
All aspects of government are carried out in the name of the queen.
The Crown signifies the sum total of governmental powers (legislative, executive, and judicial aspects) in the United Kingdom.
Maduabum, (2008:236) opines that the Queen is the titular head, and forms a part of each of the three branches of government.
This merits her acronym‘the Queen-in-Parliament’.
She can summon parliament, prorogue it at the end of each session and also dissolve it, thus provoking a general election.
The Queen can veto any bill and preclude such from becoming an act of parliament.
She is also called‘Queen-in-Council’, although she does not perform any executive functions except on the 140 advice of, or via a minister who is responsible to the parliament.
The Queen presides over meetings of the Privy Council to which all cabinet ministers belong.
She plays a vital role in the appointment of ministers since she must approve such appointments.
The appointed ministers in return must ensure that she is informed of all major matters arising in the context of their ministries, so that she can see the basis upon which ministerial policy is being developed.
In the event of any government proposal not being acceptable to her, the Queen would forewarn against the implementation of such.
Thus, she cannot be held responsible for the unpopularity or unsuccessful implementation of any policy.
As the custodian of justice, justice, and state prosecutions are conducted in The Queen’s name.
She appoints judges and exercises the prerogative of mercy – the right to pardon, either freely or conditionally, a convicted person, although this prerogative must be exercised on the advice of the Home Secretary.
Britain operates a central role of the electoral system.
It democratizes the parliamentary regime by enabling three electorates to choose the government.
Secondly, the electoral system fosters political responsibility by avoiding electoral or parliamentary alliances and bargaining between groups.
This means that in the British policy, the people are the real source of political power.
Cabinet, despite its vast powers, remains an essentially democratic organ because it derives its authority from the people.
3.2 Arms of Government in Britain 1.
The Cabinet The Cabinet is the executive arm of government and occupies a prominent position in the British administrative system.
According to Mathoit (1958:67) as cited in Maduabum (2008:237), “The Cabinet government developed out of the practice whereby the king used to surround himself with a group of advisers chosen from certain offices under the crown and the Privy Council.
These people are personal and trusted advisers to the king.
They form a committee of state or 141 cabinet and pays allegiance to the king and the later confides in them in matters of great importance to the state.
The modern British cabinet consists of the leaders of the party in power.
It includes the heads of some important departments such as the Lord Chancellor, Chancellor of the Exchequer, the President of the Board of Trade, the first Lord of the Admiralty, the Ministers of Defence, Education, Labour, Agriculture and health, and the Secretaries of State for Foreign, home Affairs, the Colonies, Commonwealth Relations, etc.
The functions of the cabinet are: a. the determination of the policy to be submitted to parliament; and b. the supreme control of the executive in accordance with the co-ordination of the work of the departments of the state.
The cabinet is under the Prime Minister who, is the acknowledged leader of the party which was elected directly by the electorate through a general election to form government.
2.
The Prime minister The Prime minister is the acknowledged leader of the party elected directly through a general election to form a government.
His power varies according to his personality and the extent to which his party supports him.
Maduabum ibid opines that he is the chief adviser to the monarch and can control the composition of the cabinet because of his power to ask for the resignation of his colleagues.
He can resign himself, or ask for cabinet dissolution.
He presides over cabinet meetings where his influence is always dominant; resolves intra-cabinet differences; and exercises his authority as the leader of the party in such a way that the unity of his government is not jeopardized.
He controls the civil service via the instrumentality of the treasury as the Lord Treasury.
Appointments of permanent heads and financial officers of government departments require his approval.
In short, his powers are so extensive that it cuts across all spheres of government both within Britain and the entire Commonwealth.
142 3.
The Parliament This is the legislative arm of government.
The British parliament is bi-cameral in nature comprising two legislative chambers- the House of Lords (senior chamber) and the House of Commons (lower chamber).
The House of Commons is more powerful, having established its claim over finance and being representative of the electorate of Great Britain and Northern Ireland.
Members of the lower house are usually elected directly through general elections, unlike those of the higher chamber who are elected through the Electoral College.
Theoretically, parliament is believed to be supreme as its supremacy cuts across every aspect of government.
It is said thatparliament can legislate on any matter which it pleases; that an Act of Parliament cannot be overruled or repealed except by Parliament itself, and that the power held by the Prime Minister or any other person is delegated to him by the Parliament.
Nonetheless, under modern conditions, the supremacy of the Parliament is not factual as it is constantly being manipulated and stage-managed by the executive or cabinet, especially the Prime Minister.
Functions of the parliament a. bills originate in parliament b. legislation of bills are undertaken here c. they submit the bills to the Crown for assent d. they approves financial estimates and budgets of government e. policies and programmers of government are normally scrutinized on the floor of parliament.
4.
Judiciary In practice, there is no real separation of powers in Britain still the judiciary enjoys a considerable level of independence necessary to safeguard the rights of the citizens.
In Britain, Judges are appointed by the Queen on the advice of the Prime Minister and Lord Chancellor.
The highest officers, once appointed, cannot be removed from office unless by reason of misconduct and an address presented by both legislative houses to the Queen.
Also the independence of the judges are assured as their salaries are paid directly from the Consolidated Fund.
The judges are 143 not required to give opinions on political issues.
The British judiciary comprises a network of courts, which exists for the settlement of disputes.
3.3 Levels of Government Britainis a unitary state which means the supremacy of a legislative authority by one central power.
It has another level of authority called the local authority created by statute (i.e, the Local Government Acts of 1888, 1894 and 1971).
These local authorities are independent and run their own affairs and are responsible to their own electorates.
However, the central government has come to assume and exercise control over them due to financial assistance it gives them.
The result is a closer co-ordination and greater uniformity.
The local authorities had a variety of function relating to the administration of justice and carried out a wide range of duties entrusted to them by the Crown or Parliament.
The Local Government Act of 1933 is still in force and it recognized six levels of elected local authority, which have continued with some modifications.
These are: County Borough Councils, County Councils, and Parishes.
Thediagram below expresses the level of Local Authority in Britain.
Central Government County Borough Councils County Councils Borough Councils Urban District Rural District Councils Parish Councils Parish Meetings 144 (Adapted from Maduabum, (2008)).
County Councils were under Chairmen, Borough Councils under Mayors, and County Borough, Councils under the Lord Mayor.
There were some modifications in 1974 which changed County Borough Councils to Metropolitan County Councils and these were further sub-divided into Metropolitan District Councils and subsequently Parish Councils.
Though these authorities are independent, still they can only operate within the framework of the law and the central government exercises control over them through judicial, financial, legislative and administrative means.
3.4 The BritishPublic Service The Public Service in Britain is the administrative arm of its government.
It comprises all the organs of government and sees to the implementation of its laws.
Britain’s civil service can be regarded as a child of necessity.
It came into existence as a result of the malfunctions in the political sphere of their administration.
The system had lots of arbitrariness.
The ‘spoils system’ was the order of the day.
Remuneration was not regular, promotion was not based on merit, and there were no career security and so on.
This period was marked with series of agitations for reforms.
The result was series of commissions and the recommendations of these commissions introduced enormous changes in the Civil Service.
For example, the British Civil Service was initially structured into the following classes: (1) The Administrative class, ranging from Assistant Principals (lowest grade), to the permanent heads of departments at the top of the hierarchy.
Its functions covered key government functions and membership was restricted to graduates from Oxford University and offspring’s of royal families.
(2) The Executive class, which ranged from Executive Officers to Chief Executive Officers with membership not confined to any social class, the bulk of recruits were those with GCE A ‘Level and were responsible for putting into effect government policy decisions.
(3) The Clerical class, comprising the broad mass of subordinate office workers in the government departments.
(4) The Manipulative class, which included all labour workers, etc.
145 However, one of the commissions recommended the abolition of this structural system and the establishment of a corporate body to be responsible for the recruitment of civil servants.
To this end, a Civil Service Commission was established which prescribes the method of recruitment, conducts the various examinations and issues requisite certificates for appointment into the service.
The present British Civil Service comprises only one class, the level of entry to it being determined by the entrant’s qualification and experience, with the possibility of promotion from any level in the class to the topmost rungs of the service.
One striking feature of British Civil Service is that the British civil servant is an administrator of high quality with unquestionable integrity and outstanding efficiency.
Their status has qualities of permanence, impartiality and anonymity.
They play major role in policy making.
4.0 Conclusion The British administrative system, with all its peculiarities is regarded as both simple and effective.
Although some changes many have been introduced, the British administrative system still remains an interesting system.
5.0 Summary In this unit, we have learnt about the British political and administrative system.
We examined their arms of government, the level of their government as well as their civil service and its bureaucracy.
We believe you have learnt substantially from this unit and will be able to compare their civil service with that of Nigeria.
146 6.0 Tutor Marked Assignment 1.
Trace the British Monarch system and the role it plays in the administration of the country.
2.
Compare and contrast Britain’s civil service and Nigeria’s civil service.
7.0 Reference/Further Reading Maduabum, C.P.
(2008).
The Mechanics of Public Administration.
Lagos: Concept Publications Limited.
Omolayo, S. and Arowolaju, B.
(1987).
Elements of Government: An Introductory College Text on Political Science.
Lagos: Friends Foundation publishers limited.
MODULE 5 OPERATIONS OF PUBLIC SECTOR ADMINISTRATION IN NIGERIA Unit 1 Public Sector Administration Unit 2 Values and Ethics of Public Administration Unit 3 Principles of Separation of Powers Unit 4 Concept of Bureaucracy Unit 5 Criticisms of Weber 147  Unit 1 Public Sector Administration 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objective 3.0 Main Content 3.1 Centralization and Decentralization 3.2 The Public Sector 3.3 Characteristics of the Public Service 3.4 Structure of the Public Service 3.5 Functions of the PublicService 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutor Marked Assignment 7.0 References/Further Reading 1.0 Introduction To benefit from the effective performance of governmental functions, government administration is organized and structured into departments, ministries, commissions, public corporations and local government authorities with duly delegated powers to enable them perform in their allotted areas of responsibility.
For the understanding of the working of these administrative agencies, we shall examine each in some detail.
But before then it is important to note that in whatever way governmental administration may be structured, two principles often play a very big role.
These principles are: 1.
The need to centralize and 2.
The need to decentralize We shall discuss these as well as the civil service structure and functions of the civil service.
148 2.0 At the end of this unit you are expected to know the following: • the organization, the structure and functions of public sector administration, • centralization and decentralization of the civil service • characteristics of the civil service • problems of the civil service 3.0 Main Content 3.1 Centralization and Decentralization The principles of Centralization and Decentralization apply not only to central governmental administration but also to the organization and inner workings of government agencies such as ministries, departments, commissions, public corporation and local government authorities.
The term centralization is used to describe a system of governmental administration in which functions are concentrated in a single central authority.
This may be due to the desire for uniformity and standardization or because such centralized functions or powers are regarded as belonging in the area of high policy matters or critical decision.
Other reasons include the following: (a) The size of the country: the need for centralization would be more pressing in a small- sized country; (b) Homogeneity of population characteristics: the more homogeneous the population of a country is, the more suited it is to centralized administration; (c) A belief in the efficacy of law: this is a belief the law takes care of everything and that once the law is passed at the centre it will be enforced and obeyed throughout the length and breadth of the country; (d) Increasing government expenditure; 149 (e) Efficient modern communication media which has tended to render distance irrelevant to effective co-ordination of the work of administrators; and (f) The nature of the political structure: the unitary structure of the British political system and others, e.g.
France, comes readily to mind here as a thriving milieu for centralized governmental administration.
Advantages of Centralization A centralized administration has the following advantages over a decentralized one.
1.
It ensure standardization and uniformity in administration because it is almost always easier to make a single solution and apply it wholesale rather than make a variety of solutions and apply them piecemeal.
Uniformity is also fostered by the absence in a centralized system of blocking strategies often employed by local units in a decentralized system.
2.
It facilitates the full use of the greater knowledge and capacity that are almost bound to be at the command of a central authority compared with subordinate authorities.
3.
Centralization fosters stronger government and more effective governmental administration.
4.
It is also more economical in human and material resources utilization.
3.1.2 DECENTRALIZATION Decentralization refers to a system of administration in which powers are not concentrated in a single central authority or agency of government.
Decentralization could be territorial or functional.
Territorial decentralization refers to the devolution of powers by the central government upon the authorities of local areas.
Another name for territorial decentralization is regionalism, that is, a geographical concentration of decision-making and executive powers on either bureaucratically controlled outposts of the central government or on democratically 150 elected bodies covering large regional areas.
Territorial decentralization is practiced in both unitary and federal states but it is more inherent in the latter.
In a federal government structure, such problems of decentralization as definition of areas of authorities, amount of decision-making authority to be delegated and the machinery for the co- ordination of the various authorities, are less acute than in unitary states.
This is because in federal states, boundaries of the jurisdictional competence of both the central and unit authorities are clearly determined by the constitution unlike in unitary states where all powers and the manner of their devolution emanate from the central government.
Functional decentralization, on the other hand, describes a situation where administrative functions of a non-territorial kind are entrusted to certain extra governmental bodies or to the agency of various statutory authorities.
Advantages of Decentralization Decentralization has political, functional, operational and technical advantages.
Let us examine these advantages.
1.
Politically, it creates a corporate sense of responsibility by satisfying the demands for greater and wider participation in the decision-making process which cannot be afforded by centralization; 2.
It is a training in self-government; it gives the administration of real powers to those who feel most directly the consequences of those powers; and it is capable of quickening the pace of socio-political and economic advancement of a nation.
3.
Functionally, decentralization is reputed for its operational and technical efficiency.
4.
Operationally, it ensures that available resources are used for the purpose of achieving set goals and objectives and with a sense of concern for the type of environment.
151 5.
Technically, it enables government administration to meet local demands and demands made by the people generally with the most adequate machinery, thus ensuring better utilization of manpower and material resources.
Disadvantages This will be better understood by checking how really efficient decentralization is or how much of decentralization is likely to be useful?
However, too much decentralization is likely to weaken the central administration, thus jeopardizing general efficiency and effectiveness off government actions.
3.2 The Public Sector The Public Sector is the term used to describe the departments of the state which are saddled with the responsibilities and functions of implementing the policies and programmers of the government.
It is an extension of the executive arm of the government, whose personnel perform purely administrative and executive duties.
The personnel called Civil Servants are responsible to the Chief Executive of the state through the various departmental heads.
These departmental heads vary in nomenclature from place to place.
In some, they are called Ministers or Commissioners and in others, Secretaries.
The term public service is used to mean the entirety of governmental administration, including the civil service, the armed forces and the corporation.
The service is essentially responsible for the formulation and implementation of policies and for providing direction to the government.
It is believed that the success or failure of a government may to a large extent depend on the caliber of its public Service.
152 3.3 Characteristics of the Public Service The characteristics of the Public service are as follow: 1.
Permanence Public service is a permanent institution that ensures continuity of its essential services to the people.
There is security of appointment because regardless of changes in formation and composition of the government the public service is expected to remain, while the employees should not work under the constant fear of being removed, except if and when found guilty of offences against the ethics of their profession.
This assists the administrators in the fulfillment of government policies and decisions as they could rely on the wealth of experience acquired over time on the job.
The permanence of the civil service promotes societal welfare and stability.
2.
Anonymity Civil Servants are not held responsible on matters affecting the Ministry in relation to the performance of their functions.
Though policies may be formulated by the civil servants, commendation or condemnation for such policies is heaped on the Minister.
It is the Minister or ministerial heads that are held responsible by the Chief Executive of government for the activities of the ministries or departments under them.
3.
Political Neutrality Civil servants are generally expected to remain loyal and dedicated to the government of the day.
They are not expected to be partisan but to perform their functions without showing sympathy for any political party or group.
The essence of neutrality consists in the need to retain public confidence in governmental administration.
It is also to forestall political victimization of identified political opponents and the use of undue advantages by their political friends.
A civil servant who wants to vie for any political office or play partisan politics is expected to resign his office before do so.
However, this practice of political neutrality by civil servants varies from country to country.
The tradition is particularly British and most British 153 colonies including Nigeria patterned their civil service practice and system on it.
France allows top civil servants to perform such roles as Councilors and Mayors, and they can even run elections and come back to their civil service posts after political life, even though the practice is that most never come back.
4.
Impartiality The civil service is financed from public fund.
The civil Service is therefore expected to serve all governments, people and parties in accordance with the same standards with no special identification with, or bias for, any group.
It is only an impartial civil service that can be seen as the symbol of administrative unity.
3.4 The Structure of the Public Sector The public service is structured into: (a) The administrative, executive, and the clerical class and (b) The professional class.
1.
Administrative Class This is the highest policy making class.
It is to formulate policies and to advise the political heads of the service.
It is also to organize and co-ordinate the activities of the Service.
The class is responsible for collating and disseminating reports from other classes, on which the political head depends for the day-to-day administration.
Recruitment into the class is through either a special examination or interview or both conducted by the public service commission.
Qualifications include good university degrees and a reasonable length of service within the executive class.
The class is composed of permanent, Deputy and Assistant Permanent Secretaries and other Principle Officers down to the Assistant Secretaries who constitute the lowest rung of the class.
154 Affecting the efficiency of the administrative class are: (a) Assignments of poor and inadequate intellectual quality, e.g.
a graduate of Public Administration assigned to issuing of allocation papers for toiletries; (b) General lack of experience and basic skills; (c) Frequent transfers.
2.
Executive Class The Executive class is responsible for the implementation or execution of policies and decisions as presented by the administrative class and approved by the political heads.
It is the class that deals with the day-to-day conduct of administration involving supply and petty accounting duties, internal organization, supervision and control of work of the clerical staff.
Problems of the Executive Class One of the greatest problems of the Executive Class is that of lack of recognition within the system.
Many personnel within the class are a lot more experienced and demonstrates greater expertise in specialized fields that officers of the administrative class.
But the tendency is to regard them as of inferior intelligence and education and, therefore, undeserving of promotion to higher responsibility.
3.
Clerical Class This class can be divided into two sub-classes viz: (a) The General Clerical Class made up of the clerical grade and (b) The Clerical Assistant class.
Entry qualification into the clerical class is a minimum of school Certificate, Ordinary level Certificate of Education or Secondary School class four (S.75) for the clerical Assistant grade or by promotion from clerical grades.
They are responsible for the 155 keeping of records, movement of files, payment of claims, and preparation of vouchers.
They include typists and lower categories of personal secretaries who help all other classes of the service in the performance of their duties.
Problem with the clerical class The major problem with the clerical class work is by the nature of their duties.
• they have little supervisory responsibilities • they have no responsibility of complete jobs, • no serious attention is given to career development for them • Clerical officers perform routine fragmented functions which are devoid of serious grooming for higher administrative responsibility, and their career expectation is thus drastically limited, • they are discriminated upon, • because of low formal education, some officers rarely go beyond their class throughout their service life.
This can really be demoralizing and counter- productive.
Professional Class This cadre is made up of people with specialized training and skill.
They have professional qualifications to do some specialized or technical duties within the system.
They give advice on technical or specialized matters both at the formulation and implementation stages of government policies and programmers.
3.5 Functions of the Public Service The civil servants perform the same general functions as all public administrators so the functions discussed below are also the functions of public administrators generally.
156 These functions include Policy Formulation, Administrative Legislation,Execution of policies, Administrative Adjudication, Regulatory functions, Service and Supportive Functions and Management Functions.
a.
Policy Formulation Public administrators are involved in policy formulation.
They give advice on policy matters as well as set down on paper policy alternatives for presentation to the policy makers who then decide on which alternative to adopt as government policy.
b.
Administrative Legislation Administrative agencies, including the civil service, public corporations and local governments produce large quantities of rules, regulations and bye-laws under powers granted to them by the legislature.
c. Execution of Policies One of the most important functions of administrative agencies is the execution of policies in an efficient manner to ensure the achievement of governmental objectives and goals.
This is why it is generally believed that they are the bedrock of the executive arm of government.
d. Administrative Adjudication Administrative agencies perform a great deal of business which is judicial in character.
They listen to complaints by private persons against certain administrative action or complaints by one civil servant against another and ensure settlement.
More often than 157 not, civil servants conduct and decide cases between one private person and another.
Example is Ombudsman.
e. Regulatory Functions Administrative agencies regulate the operations and activities of private individuals and organizations to ensure that they do not engage in forbidden practices.
This involves law enforcement agencies.
f. Service and Supportive Functions The Public Service and the other administrative agencies act as channels for the provision of social services to the people.
Government is assessed on this premise.
The administrative agencies perform other supportive functions to the government by gathering and supplying important information required for policy making.
Management Functions The public service like all administrations performs certain functions which an administrative agency must perform to carry out its operations with maximum efficiency and economy.
These functions are called management functions.
Luther Gulick gave it an acronym “POSDCORB” which stands for planning, organizing, staffing, directing, co- coordinating reporting and budgeting.
4.0 CONCLUSION The discussion above cut across the whole public service which is inclusive of the civil service.
The centralization and decentralization of government and government agencies were discussed with emphases on its usefulness or otherwise.
For effective performance, the government agencies are usually organized into divisions, each specializing in a properly defined area of activity.
Divisions vary in number, functions and nomenclature from ministry to ministry, depending on the 158 responsibilities of each ministry.
This is crucial in every ministry because of its significant functions which include: establishment and structure, overall management and day-to- day administration.
Each division is headed by a senior officer who coordinates all the activities of the officers and branches and sections of the division.
Usually, each of the branches or sections is headed by a sectional head who supervises the work of his subordinates and reports on the general activities of the section to the divisional head.
5.0 Summary In this unit we studied the Public Sector, its structures and internal administration.
We also examined the functions of the public or civil servants as well as the problems they encounter in the performance of their duties.
We believe that you have understood the workings in the public service.
In the next unit, we will examine the value and ethics of public administration.
6.0 Tutor Marked Assignment 1.
Write short note on decentralization of government.
2.
What are the merits and demerits of centralization?
3.
Distinguish between public service and civil service.
4.
What do you understand by the term political neutrality?
5.
There are some contentions that public administrators are policy formulators.
Do you subscribe to this assertion?
Give reasons for your answer.
159 7.0 References/Further Reading Adebayo, A.
(1968).
“Introduction: The Evolution, Organisation and Structure of the Nigerian Civil Service,” in Nigerian Administration and its Political Setting.ed.
London: Hutchinson Educational Ltd. Omolayo, S. and Arowolaju B.
(1987).
Elements of Government: An Introductory College Text on Political Science.
Lagos: Friends Foundation Publishers Limited.
Unit 2 Values and Ethics of Public Administration 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objective 3.0 Main Content 3.1 Concept of Ethics and Values 3.2 Functions of Ethics Principles 3.3 Ethics in Nigeria’s Public Sector 3.4 Institutions in-charge of Ethics in Nigeria 3.5 Reasons for inefficiency in the System 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutor Marked Assignment 7.0 References/Further Reading 1.0 Introduction In this unit, we shall be discussing values and ethics of Public Administration.
Ethics is bothered about the conduct of man, his happiness, pleasure, what he considers to be good or bad conduct, and conditions under which these values may be impeded or realized.
Ethics is all about moral 160 principles and values.
It emphasizes discipline, dealing with good and evil as well as moral duty, moral principles or practice which guide the behavior of man.
Every entity or organization all over the world, whether religious, private or public organization, has its own acceptable ways of behavior, norms, interest or values which it expects its members to imbibe.
So also it is with Public Sector Administration in Nigeria.
As we progress in this unit, we shall examine the ways of determining and guaranteeing an adoption of the right behavior that is desired of the various actors in the conduct of government business in Nigeria.
2.0 Objectives At the end of this unit, you are expected to: • know all about ethics, • learn about moral values, • know ethical principles in the Public Sector Administration in Nigeria, • and be able to assess whether Public and Civil Servants are applying ethical principles in the conduct of their business and why, and • be able to correct the wrongs in the system as an informed Public Administrator.
3.0 Main Content 3.1 Concept of Ethics and Values Ethics concepts or explanations are proffered regarding what affects or guides the moral conduct of man.
Maduabum (2008) posit thatevery organization has its norms, values, interests and acceptable ways of behavior and at the same time, employees of the same organization individually or collectively have their own peculiar behavior acquired prior to joining the organization.
The employees’ behavior reflects and protects their interests, which may be at variance with the organizational interests.
Therefore for an organization to continue to survive and grow there must be that congruence between the organization’s interest and those of its employees.
This will forestall conflicts, lack of productivity, disenchantment and even industrial actions.
This informs the emphasis on ethic and code of conduct.
An organization that does not enforce its ethics and code of conduct of its employees will collapse.
What then is ethics?
161  Omoregbe (1993:3-4), states that ethics “can be defined as the branch of Philosophy which deals with the morality of human actions, or a branch of Philosophy which studies the norms of human behavior… (or) the systematic study of the fundamental principles of the moral law; or as the normative science of human conduct.” Okafor and Eloagu, (2002:85) defines ethics as follows:”Ethics” means discipline dealing with good and evil and with moral duty, moral principles or practice”.
Values, on the other hand, are abstract ideas or principles which help to decide what to do because they define what is important in our dealings with other people and things.
What we ‘value’ will be very important in deciding how we live our lives, and what methods we well choose to attain our goals (Murray, 1997:44).
The vital points in these definitions are moral values or principles and all these though not the same are all geared towards public morality.
3.2 Functions ethics’ principles (1) They set down specific values which are important to an individual, such as ‘honesty’, fairness, integrity, reliability, selflessness; (2) Principles provide general guidance which assists a person to make decisions; (3) They invite other people to trust that the person can be relied on to observe the ethical standard for judgment so that everyone can make judgment about the ethics of the person.
Nigerians accepts ‘high’ standards of ethics from the civil servants and public officials, including the judiciary and elected representatives, who undertake the tasks of government and public management on its behalf.
Ethics problems are generally concerned with choosing between “right” and “wrong” when we are required to decide what we ought to do in a ‘particular’ situation.
In private life, we generally approve of promise keeping, selflessness, responsibility, reliability, hard work, commitment, courage, honesty, frankness, and above all, trustworthiness.
162 Ethics involvesobligation, duty and conflict of interests, responsibility, integrity, fairness, and trust.
On the other hand, special words used to show disapproval of many kinds of ‘unethical’ conduct or behavior are: lying, selfness, cheating, dishonesty, unreliability, abuse of position, abuse of trust, etc.
Accroding to Whitton (2001:13), the key ethics ideas in civil service rules are that civil servants and public officials, including judges, ministers and politicians should do the following: (1) Occupy a position of trust, on behalf of the whole community; (2) Exercise power assigned by a lawful authority, or law; (3) Are expected to use that power for a propose as expressed in law; (4) Are expected to act competently (that is with relevant skill) and responsibly (that is, with due consideration of the consequences of their actions).
(5) Are expected to be accountable for their actions to a manager, the head of their organization, and perhaps ultimately to an external authority; (6) Are expected to recognize that this accountability includes being required to give reasons for decisions they make; (7) Are expected to act in the public interest – that is, for the overall good of the community as a whole; (8) Are expected to be personally disinterested – that is, to exclude conflicts between their personal interests or advantage and the public interest, so that their advice, decisions and actions should be, and appear to be, unaffected by any private interest or personal advantage; and (9) Are expected to comply with a civil service code of ethics which will emphasize the values of responsibility, legitimacy, fairness, efficiency and effectiveness, diligence, accountability, and integrity.
163 3.3 Code of Ethics in the Nigerian Public Service Code of ethics implies a framework within which staff can be expected to work.
Maduabum (2008) posits that a code of ethics is an important management tool which can positively shape the culture of an organization.
He went further to say thatit is used to help prevent corruption in the society by specifying punitive measures for corrupt officials.
It helps staff in the conduct of their day-to-day activities.
It must also include clearly stated example of conduct and relationships that are relevant to the particular function of the organization.
A code of ethics should function as a positive guide to decision-making and it must provide specific, concrete examples to illustrate the ethical problem that might arise in an organization and strategies for dealing with them.
Areas specific concern or ethical risk to the organization such as bribery, theft, abuse of public office, etc, should be carefully considered and included in the code.
Since no two organizations are the same, the code of ethics should reflect the peculiarity in the organization if such a code should be relevant.
We shall concern ourselves with the code of ethics or conduct for public servants in Nigeria.
The 1999 constitution stipulates the following as the code of conduct for public officers: (1) A public officer shall not put himself in a position where his personal interest conflicts with his duties and responsibilities.
(2) Without prejudice to the generality of the foregoing paragraph, a public office shall not: (a) Receive or he paid the emolument of any public office at the same time as he receives or is paid the emoluments of any other public office; or (b) Except where he is not employed on full-time basis, engage or participate in the management or running of any private business, profession or trade; but nothing in this sub-paragraph shall prevent a public officer from engaging in farming.
(3) The President, Vice-President, Governor, Deputy Governor, Ministers of the Government of the Federation and Commissioners of the Government of the States, members of the National Assembly and of the Houses of Assembly of the States and such other public officers or Persons as the National Assembly may by law prescribe, shall not maintain or operate a bank account in any country outside Nigeria.
164 (4) (1) a public officer shall not, after his retirement from public service and while receiving pension from public funds, accept more than one remunerative position as chairman, director or employee of: (a) A company owned or controlled by the government; and (b) Any public authority.
(2) A retired public servant shall not receive any other remuneration from public funds in addition to his pension and the emolument of such one remunerative position.
(5) (1) retired public officers who have held offices to which this paragraph applies are prohibited from service or employment in foreign companies or foreign enterprises.
(2) This paragraph applies to the office of President, Vice-President, Chief Justice of Nigeria, Governor and Deputy Governor of a State.
(6)(1) A public officer shall not ask for or accept property or benefits of any kind for himself or any other person on account of anything done or omitted to be done by him in the discharge of his duties.
(2) For the purpose of sub-paragraph (1) of this paragraph, the receipt by a public officer of any gifts or benefits from commercial firms, business enterprises or persons who have contracts with the government shall be presumed to have been received in contravention of the said sub- paragraph unless the contrary is proved.
(3) a public officer shall only accept personal gifts or benefit from relatives or personal friends to such extent and on such occasions as are recognized by custom, provided that any gift or donation to a public officer on any public ceremonial occasion shall be treated as a gift to the appropriate institution represented by the public officer, and accordingly, the mere acceptance or receipt of any such gift shall not be treated as contravention of this provision.
(7) the President or Vice-President, Governor or Deputy Governor, minister of the government of the federation or commissioner of the government of a state, or any other public officer who holds the of a permanent secretary or head of any public corporation, university, or other parastatal organization, shall not accept: (a) A loan, except from government or its agencies such as, a bank building society, mortgage institution or other financial institutions recognized law; and (b) Any benefit of whatever nature from any company, contractor, or businessman, or the nominee or agent of such a person.
Provided that the head of a public corporation or of a 165 university or other parastatal organization may, subject to the rules and regulations of the body, accept a loan from such a body.
(8) No person shall offer a public officer any property, gift or benefit of any kind as an inducement or bribe for the granting of any favour or the discharge in his favour, of the public officer’s duties.
(9) a public officer shall not do, or direct to be done, in abuse of his office, any arbitrary act prejudicial to rights of any other person, knowing that such act is unlawful, or contrary to any government policy.
(10) A public officer shall not be a member of, belong to, or take part in any society, the membership of which is incompatible with the functions or dignity of his officer.
(11) (1) subject to the provisions of the constitution, “every public officer shall, within three months after the coming into force of the code of conduct or immediately after taking office and thereafter: (a) at the end of every four years; and (b)at the end of his term of office, submit to the code of conduct Bureau a written declaration of all his properties, assets, and liabilities and those of his unmarried children under the age of eighteen.
(2) any statement in such declaration that is found to be false by any authority or person authorized in that behalf to verify it, shall be deemed to be a breach of the code.
(3) any property or assets acquired by a public officer after any declaration required under the constitution and which is not fairly attributable to income, gift, or loan approved by the code unless the contrary is proved.
(12) any allegation that a public officer has committed a breach of, or has not complied with the provisions of this code shall be made to the code of conduct Bureau.
(13) a public officer who does act in a manner prohibited by this code through a nominee, trustee, or other agent, shall be deemed ipso facto to have committed a breach of this code.
3.4 Institutional In-charge of Ethics in Nigeria Public Service The following organs are charged with the responsibilities of enforcing ethical principles in Nigeria Public Service organizations.
166 (a) Code of Conduct Bureau: – its functions are fully explained in the Third Schedule, Part 1, of the constitution of the Federal Republic of Nigeria, 1999.
(b) Code of Conduct Tribunal: - its functions are equally explained in Part 1 of the Fifth Schedule of the same constitution.
(c) Anti-Corruption Law which was passed as an Act of the National Assembly, 2000 and known as accountability and Transparency Act, 2000.
(a) Code of Conduct Bureau In accordance with the provisions of the Third Schedule, Part 1, of the Constitution of the Federal Republic of Nigeria, 1999, this body was set up to, among others: (1) receive from every public officer, written declaration of all his properties, assets, and liabilities and those of his unmarried children under the age of eighteen immediately after taking office and therefore, at the end of every four (4) years, and at the end of his terms of office; (2) examine the declaration in accordance with the requirements of the code of conduct or any law; (3) retain custody of such declarations and make them available for inspection by any citizen of Nigeria on such terms and conditions as the National Assembly may prescribe; (4) Ensure compliance with, and, where appropriate, enforce the provisions of the code of conduct or any law relating thereto; and (5) Receive complaints about non-compliance with breach of the provisions of the code of conduct or any law in relation thereto, investigate the complaint and, where appropriate, refer such matter to the code of conduct Tribunal.
(b) Code of Conduct Tribunal: this was established by the same Constitution as contained in Part 1 of the Fifth Schedule, to (1) Impose on officers found guilty of contravening provisions of the code of conduct Bureau such punishment as: (cid:2) Vacation of office or seat in any legislative house, as the case may be; (cid:2) Disqualification from membership of a legislative house and from holding any public office for a period not exceeding ten years; and 167 (cid:2) Seizure and forfeiture to the state of any property acquired in abuse of office, or corruption.
(2) Where the conduct is a criminal offence, the above sanctions will merely be in addition to the penalties that may be imposed by any law.
(3) Where the Tribunal gives a decision as to whether or not a person is guilty of a contravention of any of the provisions of the code, “an appeal shall lie as of right from such a decision or from any punishment imposed on such person to the Court of Appeal at the instance of any party to the proceeding”.
3.5 Reasons for the Inefficiency in the System a.
Corruption and abuse of office by political office holders.
b.
Public offices are the shopping floors of government business.
c. Non compliance with due process 4.0 Conclusion Code of ethics as we have seen from all the discussions above is a framework within which individuals are expected to conform to in their place of work or association.It is a vital management tool which can positively shape the culture of an organization if adhered to.
It is a useful instrument for the prevention of corruption in the society by specifying punitive measures for corrupt officials.
It helps staff in the conduct of their day-to-day activities.
It include clearly stated example of conduct and relationships that are relevant to the particular function of the organization.
A code of ethics function as a positive guide to decision-making and provides specific, concrete examples to illustrate the ethical problem that might arise in an organization and strategies for dealing with them.
It is indeed an inevitable instrument for the success of any organization or society.
5.0 Summary We have discussed ethics and values in Public Administration extensively in this unit.
168 We brought the code of conduct in the public service in Nigeria as specified in the constitution of the Federal Republic of Nigeria.
We also noted the failures in the public service and why they occur.
The agencies that are in-charge of the code of conduct as well as their duties were discussed too.
We hope you have learnt a lot in this unit and we believe also that you will put this knowledge into positive use to remedy the wrongs in the public sector administration in Nigeria.
In the next unit we will be discussing the principles of the separation of powers.
6.0 Tutor Marked Assignment 1.
Write short notes on the following: a.
Ethics b.
Code of conduct c. Values 2.
What are the reasons for inefficiency in public service in Nigeria?
3.
As a Public Administrator, how do you hope to correct the inefficiency in the system?
7.0 References Federal republic of Nigeria (1999).Constitution of the federal Republic of Nigeria (1999).
Abuja: Government Press.
Maduabum, C.P.
(2008).
Mechanics of Public Administration in Nigeria.
Lagos: Concept Publications Ltd. Murray, D. (1997).
Ethics in Organizations.
London: Kogan Page.
169  Ogbinaka, K. (2010).
A Window into Philosophy.
Lagos: Joja Educational Research and Publishers Ltd. Okafor, A. O.
And U. O. Eloagu, (2002).“National Ethics and Good Government”.
Lecture Modules for the intensive Training Programmer for federal Civil Servants.
Abuja: Samfort Associates.
Omoregbe, J.I.
(1993).
Ethics: A systematic and Historical Study.
Lagos: Joja Educational Research& Publishers Ltd. Unit 3 PRINCIPLES OF SEPARATION OF POWER 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objective 3.0 Main Content 3.1 Concept of Separation of Power 3.2 Separation of Power in the Presidential System of Government 3.3 Checks and Balances in the Presidential System of Government 3.4 Importance of the Doctrine of Separation of Powers 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutor Marked Assignment 7.0 References/Further Reading 170 1.0 Introduction The Principle of Separation of Power is a very important topic in public administration.
It is all about the political class, their powers and limitations.
The Public administrators must have a good knowledge of this political class who are the administrators of the nation.
Nigeria practices Presidential system of government which is modeled after the United States system.
As is the practice in US, Nigeria has three arms of government known as the executive, the legislature and the judiciary.
Most of our discussions in this unit will be tailored after the US presidential system of government since it is the model which our country has adopted.
The principle of “separation of powers” proposes that it is essential for the enthronement and maintenance of political and civil liberty that the government be divided into three distinct braches viz: the legislative, the executive and the judicial branches.
Each of these branches must conform to the exercise of its own functions and not be allowed to encroach upon the functions of the other arms.
This is the full meaning of the principle of the separation of power.
The functionality of this principle is the main focus of this unit.
It will be beneficial to you to pay great attention to this unit so as to have a firm knowledge of this important topic.
2.0 Objective At the end of this unit, you are expected to know the following: • the full meaning of ethics and ethical principles • code of conduct and its bureau as well as the functions of each • the inefficiency in the public sector and why they occur • be able to correct the ills in the public sector administration 171 3.0 Main Content 3.1 Concept of Separation of Powers According to Segun et al (1987), government in the olden days was one integral process without any clear cut power or division of labour.A single institution would make rule, try offenders and administer punishment.
This was the practice in traditional African fused societies where role differentiation was minimal or nonexistent.
Thereafter, some writers like Jean bodin (1530:96), pointed out that some separation of powers was essential between the legislator and the judge if justice is not to be mingled with “the prerogative of mercy” and if litigants are not to be “crushed by the authority of the sovereign”.
However, credit for the modern theory of separation of power should be given to Montesquieu who wrote extensively on this subject in his book “Esprit des Lois” (the spirit of the laws- published in 1748).
The book was based on his thesis which he did on a study of the British constitution; he divides the basic powers of government into the legislative, the executive and the judiciary.
In his view, these powers should be kept sharply separate and co-ordinate to safeguard the liberty of the individual.
According to him, a concentration of both the legislative and executive power of government in the same body of persons would result into tyranny since if the same body of persons makes repressive laws they would enforce them in like manner.
He argues further that the life and liberty of the citizens would be jeopardized should legislative and judicial power be combined in the same hands.
And in like manner, the executive and the judiciary should not also be combined in order to preserve the impartiality and neutrality of the judges.
The vital points made by all the proponents of the doctrine of separation of powers are as follows: (a) To prevent and outlaw absolute and fascist rule in the political system; (b) To entrench and demonstrate true democracy or representative government; 172 (c) To keep each organ within its bound of authority without unnecessary interference from any other organ which could delay or disturb its functions; (d) To ensure the supremacy and respect of the will of the people as expressed in a free and fair election; (e) To entrench and safeguard the liberty and freedom of citizens.
The influence of the concept “separation of powers” has spread to most modern political states though there is no uniformity in its practice it all depends on the country involved.
It has been modified in various ways by different states to suit peculiarities and desires of the state or nation.
There is no political system in the world that separates the functions and structures of government into rigid compartments as advocated by the principle of separation of power.
What obtains, in actual fact, is varying degrees of fusion and fission of powers.
3.2 Separation of Powers in Presidential System of Government We will discuss its application in the presidential system of US government where Nigeria Presidential system adopted most of its practices.
Segunet el (ibid), opines that the structural-functional relationship among the three branches of the American government shows the real practice of separation of powers which clearly emphasizes the independence and inter-relationships among the three branches.
The powers conveyed on any branch will receive constitutional backing for it to be effective.
In the US constitution of 1789, Article 1 section 1 says: “All legislative powers herein granted shall be vested in a congress of the United States, which shall consist of a senate and house of representative”.
Article 11 section 1 say: “The executive power shall be vested in a president of the united states of America.
He shall hold his office during the term of four years, and, together with the Vice-president, chose for the same term”.
Article 111, section1 say: “the judicial power 173 of the United States shall be vested in one supreme court, and in such inferior courts as the congress may from time to time ordain and establish”.
These constitutional fiats clearly the separateness of all three organs of government in the U.S. presidential system of government, so as to ensure the independence of the executive, for example, the president is elected separately in a presidential election for a fixed term of office of four years.
He does not need a majority of party members in the congress to rule or form his government.
The president cannot initiate bills but can only recommend to congress that such laws be made but will not influence the congress to accept his recommendations; neither can he enforce party discipline to get any bills passed.
The president appoints the heads of important department who are mainly responsible to him only.
He and his cabinet cannot sit in the congress.
A vote of no confidence from the congress cannot remove the president and his cabinet either individually or collectively.
The independence of the congress and the executive is further strenghtened by the fact that all members of the house of representatives (the lower house) and one-third of the members of the senate (the upper house) are directly elected every two years independently of indirect presidential election which hold every four years.
In addition, all bills originate from either the lower house or the upper house of the congress.
The Supreme Court is independent of both the congress and the president.
It can annul any of the executive and legislative acts found to invalidate the provisions of the constitution.
Separation is also evident in the fact that term of office of judges is made independent of the executive and cabinet member cannot be appointed a judge.
The three organs of government in the U.S are functionally structured as depicted in the diagram below: LEGISLATURE EXECUTIVE JUDICIARY (Congress) (President) (Supreme Court) LAW LAW MAKING ENFORCEMENT INTERPRETATION OF LAWS 174 In practice, their functions are not all that smooth sailing as stated in the diagram above.
There are limitations on the practice of the doctrine which we will discuss later in this unit.
3.3 Checks and Balance in the Presidential System of Government The essence of the Separation of Power is to act as a check-and –balance on one another.
In the US, the congress, for example, checks misgovernment by the executive in a number of ways such as: (a) Refusal to vote funds without which the executive cannot implement its programmes.
Many of the president’s policies, especially in the area of foreign affairs, are facing this hurdle; (b) Impeachment of the president (the chief executive).
For instance, the impeachment of president Nix-on by the U.S. congress.
Also similar experience was witnessed in Nigeria’s between 1979 and 1983 where a number of state chief executives were removed from office through impeachment.
(c) Supervision of government activities: it is a common occurrence for government officials, especially heads of departments, ministers or secretaries to be summoned before the legislature under investigation of particular government activities: and (d) The power to refuse presidential recommendations.
The executive, on the other hand, balances these congressional checks mainly through the exercise of the presidential veto on congressional bills, though the legislature can nullify a presidential veto if such a bill is passed again by a two-third majority of members of both chambers of legislation.
Through the veto the president, to a large extent, checks bad legislation on the part of the congress.
In the U.S. the president has a special veto power called ‘pocket veto’ which if exercised, will permanently killed a bill?
This type of veto may be exercised during the period when congress adjourns at the end of session.
It is the most effective form of veto since the adjournment of congress renders the bill obsolete without presidential assent.
The U.S. judiciary also exercises a check on the possible abuse of power by both the congress and Executive.
They do this through the exercise of “judicial Review”.
Here, the U.S. Supreme Court or the highest court in any presidential system has the mandate to declare any bill or executive action 175 unconstitutional.
In 1981, Nigeria’s Supreme Court annulled the revenue allocation bill which had the presidential assent.
Both the Executive and the Legislature also exercises this weapon on the Judiciary.
The U.S. congress, for example, sets up court, draws up rules for court procedure and controls all salaries while the president appoints judges, though he cannot dismiss or interfere with their salaries.
The president can also alter the court’s decision if he exercises his prerogative of mercy power.
3.4 Importance of the Doctrine of Separation of Powers The doctrine of the separation of powers has provided the yardstick for judging and explaining the functionality of the three arms of government with particular emphasis on the decision-making in government.
It is a very useful instrument in check-mating concentration of too much power in any particular arm of government.
It is a good political application in the economic principle of division of labour.
It calls for specialization and efficiency and this will enhance responsibility and accountability.
It enhances political stability and harmony in government.
The importance of this doctrine is inexhaustible and so should not be taken as limited to the ones listed above.
4.0 Conclusion The doctrine of separation of power is an appropriate device for ensuring political stability.
A country that adopts this system and imbibes in its tenets will experience political stability, harmony, peaceful co-existence, development and so on.
However, the doctrine is still faced with the problemsas it is sometimes quite difficult to maintain total separation of powers in practice.
It should be noted that some separation is necessary for the maintenance of liberty and some union of powers in necessary for harmony in government, while both are essential 176 for efficiency and effectiveness.
Absolute separation as advocated by Montesquieu will paralyse or retard government business.
5.0 Summary In this unit we discussed extensively on the principles of separation of powers in the three arms of government.
We discussed the doctrine as postulated by Montesquieu in his thesis.
We also discussed the U.S model of the doctrine as their presidential system is what Nigeria is practicing.
We also noted the resemblance of our system and theirs.
We discuss also the importance of this doctrine.
It is believed that you have learnt a lot in this unit and will be able to compare effortlessly Nigeria’s separation of power in government with that of U.S.
In the next unit, we will be discussing Bureaucracy and its applicability in the public sector in Nigeria.
6.0 Tutor Marked Assignment 1.
Write short note on the principles of separation of power.
2.
Compare and contrast the practice of the principle of separation of power in the U.S and Nigeria.
7.0 References/Further Reading Maduabum, C.P.
(2008).
The Mechanics of Public Administration.
Lagos: Concept Publications Limited.
Montesquieu de Baron (1687-1755).
‘Espirit des Lois Book IX (Spirit of the Laws) 177 Omolayo, S. and Arowolaju, B.
(1987).
Elements of Government: An Introductory College Text on Political Science.
Lagos: Friends Foundation publishers limited.
Unit 4 Concept of Bureaucracy 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objective 3.0 Main Content 3.1 Concept of Bureaucracy 3.2 Characteristics of Bureaucracy 3.3 Principles of Bureaucracy 3.4 Advantages of Bureaucracy 3.5 Disadvantages of Bureaucracy 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutor Marked Assignment 7.0 References/Further Reading 1.0 Introduction The word bureaucracy is derived from two words; “bureau” and “kratos”, the former meaning “office” while the later which is a derivate from the Greek suffix “kretia or kratos” means power or rule.
Therefore, bureaucracy is generally taken to refer to the power of the office in dealing with the preparation and dispatch of written documents as well as electronic ones.
178 Theconcept of bureaucracy is credited to Max Weber, a German Sociologist, who posits that bureaucratic organization is the most rational known means of carrying out imperative control over human beings.
He recognized other leadership styles in humans but opines bureaucratic leadership was indispensable for the mass administration required in a modern society (Albers, 1974:25).
The bureaucratic structure goes hand in hand with the concentration of the material means of management in the hands of the master.
In this unit we are going to examine Weber’s concept of bureaucracy as well as the attributes of bureaucratic structure.Its usefulness and discomfort in the Public sector administration will be examined.
The unit is very interesting as it will help your understanding of the happenings in the public sector administration.
2.0 Objectives At the end of this unit you are expected to know the following: • features of bureaucracy • importance of bureaucracy • demerits and merits of bureaucracy 3.0 Main Content 3.1 Concept of Bureaucracy McFarland, (1979:297–300) defines Bureaucracy as a system of organization and management in which roles, tasks and relationships among people and positions are clearly defined, carefully prescribed and controlled in accordance with formal authority.
Can you think of organizations without structure, without stability, and without order?
The outcome of such an organization is outright chaos and confusion.
In a bid to overcome what otherwise would be utter confusion; man has created bureaucracy to give organizations structure, stability and order.
179 Urwick (1967:9) emphasized that the bureaucratic form of organization is unavoidable if systems of human collaboration are developed beyond a certain size usually large or complex organisations.
Bureaucracy are vital part of modern government business or other complex organizations.. 3.2 Characteristics of Bureaucracy The classical view definition of organization describes the perfect or ideal bureaucracy but in practice, organizations often only partially meet those characteristics.
According toAkpala, (1990:85) the characteristic of bureaucratic organization are as follows; (a) A hierarchy of authority and levels of organization (b) Specialization of tasks, duties and responsibilities (c) Positions designed as “offices” (d) Planned succession to office (e) Impersonality of officials (f) A system of rules and standard of discipline and control (g) Protection of individuals against arbitrary dismissal This is further broken down into five sub-headings as listed hereunder: 1.
Hierarchy 2.
Professional qualities 3.
Career Aspects 4.
Rules, regulation and procedure 5.
Legal authority and power 1.
Hierarchy In a large or complex organization, bureaucracy creates a hierarchy or structure which is matched with the goal or objective of the organization.
These structure or hierarchy is further divided into sub units and the tasks or work activities to accomplish these objectives are broken down, typically by specialization, to the smallest possible unit and assigned to specific positions.
Power and authority are assigned beginning from the top to the subordinates.
There is clearly 180 defined division of work, competence, authority, responsibility and other job related components.
An official is accountable to his superior for his job and his subordinates’ job while all are accountable to the highest official at the top of the pyramidal hierarchy.
There is what can be termed chain of command in a bureaucratic organisation.
2 Professional Qualities Bureaucracy has numerous professional qualities such as free selection of specialists, specialized training and so on.
There is an impersonal relationship in the execution of official duties.
There is a free contractual relationship between the official and the organization.
An individual has a great deal of personal freedom particularly in area not directly related to the work, but he is subject to authority and control in the area of his official duties.
He must live within the broader regulation of the organization and must not damage the organization in his contact with society.
Pay is by fixed salary and is determined by the demands of the job, not the person’s abilities.
3.
Career Aspects Bureaucracy deals with career job in the public or civil service with tenure and pension rights.
Promotion is based on seniority and achievement which is decided by judgment of superiors.
Dismissals are only for objective cause and this has to follow due process as stipulated in the condition of service.
Bureaucracy maximizes job security.
4.
Rules, Regulations and Procedures In a bureaucracy, there are rules, regulations and procedures which must be rigidly adhered to.
Large use is made of records and files.
There is rationality, routine objectivity and consistency in a bureaucratic organization.
5.
Legal Authorities and Power In a bureaucratic organisation, authority and power rest in the position occupied and not on the holder of that position.
An individual holds an office and the power he exercises are 181 legitimatized in the position and is based on his technical ability.This is not so with the political class as he or she may hold power through election, appropriation or succession.
3.3 Principles of Bureaucracy A bureaucratic organization is governed by the following principles: 1) official business is a continuous process 2) official business is conducted with strict accordance to the following rules: a. the duty of each official to do certain types of work is delimited in terms of impersonal criteria.
b. the official is given the authority necessary to carry out his assigned functions.
c. the means of coercion at his disposal are strictly limited and conditions of their use strictly defined.
3) every official’s responsibilities and authority are part of vertical hierarchy of authority, with respective rights of supervision and appeal.
4) officials do not own the resources necessary for the performance of their assigned functions but are accountable for their use of these resources.
5) official and private business and income are strictly separated.
6) offices cannot be appropriated by their incumbents.
7) official business is conducted on the basis of written documents.
182  3.4 Advantages of Bureaucracy There are many advantages of bureaucracy in organizations.
Some of them are as follows: (1) Specialization (2) Structure (3) Predictability and Stability (4) Rationality, (5) Partial Democracy.
Let us examine each of these functions.
1.
Specialization Bureaucracy enhances specialization in those areas where one is very competent.
This makes it possible to achieve the large increases in productivity that can come from specialization.
Also the person holding each position is competent to handle the details of that position.
Bureaucracy permits specialization at all levels of the organization.
2.
Structure Bureaucracy advocates structure in the work place where job or duties are specified fo all to follow.
The duties of each position are described.
Structure helps in dividing activities into departments, divisions, units, and defining relationship between the heads and members that make up the units.
It is a means of allowing for the limitations of an individual in that it limits the scope of one’s work to the span of his competence.
Structure makes span of control possible.
3.
Predictability and Stability The rules, regulations, structure, professional aspect and other elements of bureaucracy enable it to provide predictability and stability to an organization.
Bureaucracy provides 183 much of the stability and security we know in life.
Bureaucracy produces certainty.
It brings some kind of order into an organization.
4.
Rationality A rational organization is one free from personal caprice and favoritism.
It is led by those best qualified in terms of their ability to do the work.
Power in a rational organization is legal power.
The uniqueness of a rational organization is that in it the consideration is simply who can do the work best, based on impersonal rational grounds.
Therefore, bureaucracy brings rationality to an organization.
In a bureaucracy, judgments are made according to objective and generally agreed upon criteria and not by caprice, whim or patronage.
5.
Democracy Bureaucracy contributes to democracy by its emphasis on technical competence as the sole basis for gaining and holding a job.
Patronage, favouritism, tradition, and other arbitrary bases have no effect since it is one’s ability that counts for everything.
Because the opportunity to train, apply and be selected for a job is open to every citizen, a significant degree of democracy is achieved.
3.5 Disadvantages of Bureaucracy According to Thompson (1961:152-171)dysfunction has been described as bureau pathology; a disease of bureaucracy.
It is a major disadvantage of bureaucracy.
Below are some of the dysfunctions or disadvantages of bureaucracy: (1) Rigidity (2) Impersonality (3) Displacement of objectives (4) Limitation of Categorization (5) Cost of controls 184 (6) Self-perpetuating and empire building (7) Anxiety.
Let us examine each of these dysfunctions.
1.
Rigidity Bureaucracy is rigid, static and inflexible.
It is non-adaptive and is in conflict with the basic adaptability laws of nature.
It preaches strict adherence to regulations and it produces timidity and conservatism.
It does not encourage the ability to use self judgment or initiative as this is inhibited by rules and regulations.
Innovation and major changes cannot be introduced into the organization and if such an organization could exist, it would, of course, quickly become obsolete.
2.
Impersonality Bureaucracy emphasizes order, predictability, and rationality and as a result has been labeled a sterile machine model organization.
A bureaucracy subordinates the individual to the organization.
There is lack of personal involvement in bureaucratic organization.
The result is that loss of enthusiasms may occur and hence productivity may be at the minimum acceptable level.
3.
Displacement of objectives A rational, complex organization has a hierarchy of objectives organized as means and end chains.
The major objective of the organization is the higher objective in the hierarchy followed by the subunit objectives and individual objectives.
But this is usually displaced when the individual tries to pursue his personal or subunit objectives which he views as the ultimate ends in themselves thereby discarding his 185 ultimate rational organizational reason for existence which is to contribute to overall objectives of the organization.
4.
Limitations of Categorization Bureaucracy insists on strict categorization or compartmentalization of activities and persons.
A person works only within his department, with one boss and on one budget.
Even where it is possible to merge duties or unit, bureaucracy discourages this.
This encourages waste of manpower and resources as most often jobs and personnel are duplicated in offices.
5.
Self-Perpetuation and Empire Building Bureaucracy is averse to innovation and bureaucrats tend to stick to old technology.
He discourages new technology or ideas especially if it emanates from his subordinates who may be more knowledgeable than him.
A fully established bureaucracy is hard to destroy even if it has outlived its usefulness.
A bureaucrat often builds an empire around him and feels that everything must revolve around him.
Changes or ideas must come from him or his superiors.
He surrounds himself with loads of staff even when it is not necessary.
He thinks that holding an office gives him personal ownership of it and its privileges.
Prestige and pay are often determined by the number of one’s subordinates.
Bureaucrats can use their expertise to maintain or increase their power.
First they can keep their knowledge and intentions secret, thereby often confounding potential critics.
Secondly, their intimate understanding of the operations of a complex organization makes it very difficult to replace them.
In fact they see themselves as being indispensable in the organization and hence self-perpetuating themselves and their tendencies.
6.
Cost of Controls 186 Red-tapism is the rule of the game in a bureaucratic organization.
It is shrouded in too much rules, regulations and countless procedures and numerous number of staff.
Some writers argue that the cost of maintaining bureaucracy is dysfunctional.
Some career specialists spend full time formulating, implementing, interpreting and enforcing bureaucratic procedures.
Sometimes these are excessive.
7.
Anxiety Some authors are of the opinion that bureaucracy stifles liberty.
Added to this is that bureaucratic spirit corrupts character and engenders moral poverty.
The subordinates are looked down upon and discriminated upon even when they are more knowledgeable than their superiors.
This has made the lower cadre personnel,especially in the developing countries like Nigeria, feel alienated from the organization.There is also buck-passing.
4.0 Conclusion Bureaucracy as put forward by Max Weber is the main focus of this unit.
The civil service is often regarded as the Weberian civil service because of his bureaucratic theory.
Weber described the ideal type bureaucratic organization which he considers to be more rational and efficient form of organization.
He sees it as part of legal domination.
According to Weber, whenever decision is adopted to individual case bureaucracy loses its efficiency.
He went further to enumerate the attributes of bureaucracy to include impersonality, concentration of the means of administration, etc.
We also observed that bureaucratic officials are personally free, their appointment are done on the basis of conduct and their technical qualifications, they are responsible for the impartial execution of assigned tasks, their work is full-time occupation and are rewarded by salary, they also have career advancement.
187  5.0 Summary In this unit, we examined the Weberian bureaucracy, its characteristics, principles as well as its usefulness or otherwise in the public or civil service.
We noted that bureaucracy lays emphasis on the organization rather than on the individual performing the tasks thus leading to the treatment of individual human beings as impersonal objects.
This and many more has attracted a lot of criticisms to bureaucracy as we will see in the next unit which is on the criticisms of Weber’s Model of Bureaucracy.
6.0 Tutor Marked Assignment 1.
What are the vital parts of a bureaucratic organization.
2.
Do you think that bureaucracy provides some advantages?
3.
What are the dysfunctions of bureaucracy?
7.0 References/Further Reading Adebayo, Augustine (1981) Principles and practice of public Administration, New York: John Wiley and Sons Ltd. Akpala, A.
(1990) Management: An Introduction and the Nigerian Perspective.
Enugu: UNN, Enugu campus press.
Hicks, Herbert G. and Gullet C.R.
(1987).
Management, 4th Ed.
Singapore: McGraw-Hill Inc. 188 McFarland, D. (1979), Management Fundamentals and Practice, 5th Ed.
New York: Macmillian Publishing Co. Inc. Norbert, M. I.
(1999), Management and Organization Theory and Practice, Enugu: Vougasen Ltd. Woodrow, W. (1887), The Study of Administration.
Political Science Quarterly, Vol.
2.
No.
2.The Academy of Political Science.
Urwick, Lentil F. (1967).
“Organisation and Theory about the Nature of Man”.Academy of management Journal.March.
Unit 5 Criticisms of Weber’s Model of Bureaucracy 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objective 3.0 Main Content 3.1 Criticism of Bureaucracy 3.2 Weakness of Bureaucracy 3.3 Objective view of bureaucracy 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutor Marked Assignment 7.0 References/Further Reading 189  1.0 Introduction Bureaucracy has been regarded by many authors as mechanisms that rationalize authority and decision-making in society.
Yet subsequent theories have questioned the rationality of bureaucracy.
In this unit, we will examineWeber’s bureaucracy and its influence on the Public Administration.
This will take us to the criticisms and objective views of bureaucracy in its entirety.
2.0 Objectives At the end of this unit you will be able to: • knowthe criticisms leveled against the bureaucratic model in organization.
• buttress your arguments for or against bureaucracy in organization.
• tell if bureaucracy can also work effectively in a private organization and why.
Main Content 3.1 Criticisms of Bureaucracy Thompson, (2005) opines that Weber’s bureaucracy consists of the traditional way of thinking in public administration that relied on the same “ingredients” to reform public administration based on the science of administration.
190  Weber defines bureaucracy as “the means of carrying community action over into rationally ordered social action….
An instrument for socializing relations of power, bureaucracy has been and is a power instrument of the first order.” Some scholars (Friedrich, 1940; Finer, 1941; Simon, 1947; Shafritz and Hyde, 1997; and Marshall in Ventriss, 2000) argue that public administration is a field of control; control of public administrations, control of people, control of inputs, and control of outputs.
All these kinds of controls seek to achieve one main goal which is to meet the people’s needs and expectations in an efficient way.
According to Weber (1946), bureaucracy “is, from a purely technical point of view, capable of attaining the highest degree of efficiency and is in this sense formally that most rational known means of carrying out imperative control over human beings”.
Weber believes that the evolution of societies is facilitated by three types of authority that he identifies as traditional, charismatic and legal-rational authority (Fry, 1989).
It is the legal- rational type of authority that constitutes the basis of Weber’s concept of bureaucracy and the foundation of modern civilization as it is premised on “a belief in the legitimacy of the pattern of normative rules and rights of those elevated to authority under such rules to issue commands” (Stillman, 2000, 51).
Since Weber argues that bureaucracy grown because of society’s needs of provision of education, health, social services, collecting taxes, and others, and therefore work has to be divided and specialized to achieve the thing desired by the society.
In this vein, Stillman (2000) quotes Weber stating that “the proper soil for bureaucratization of administration has always been the development of administrative tasks” (stillman, 2000, 52).
Key features of the ideal type of bureaucracy that Weber presents are division of labor, hierarchal order, written documents, well-trained staff and experts, full working capacity of the officials, and application of impersonal rules (Hummel, 1998, 307).
191 However, these ingredients of bureaucracy may not, always, help organizations to reach its ideal work or the most efficient performance.
Michel Crozier (1964) argues that some of the bureaucratic characteristics including the impersonal rules, hierarchy, and centralization of decision-making might lead to the inability of the organization to correct or change its behavior by learning from its previous mistakes while serving the society.
In fact, work within bureaucracy has to be divided rationally into units that can be undertaken by individuals or groups of individuals in a diligent manner.
The hierarchical order is necessary for separating superiors from subordinates whereas impersonal rules are meant to ensure that bureaucrats are confined to prescribed patterns of conduct or performance imposed by legal rules.
The rules are meant to facilitate a systematic control of subordinates by their superior, “thus limiting the opportunities for arbitrariness and personal favoritism” (stillman, 2000:52).
The operations of bureaucracy “exclude irrational feelings and sentiments in favor of the detached, professional expert” (Fry, 1998:33).
Therefore, one may deduce from the foregoing that Weber believes that organizational goals can be attained if there is a science of administration which separates facts from values.
Moreover, Weber believes that bureaucracy is the most rational and efficient organizational from devised by man.
Weber’s bureaucracy “is rational in that it involves control based on knowledge, it has clearly defined spheres of competence, it operates according to intellectually analyzable rules, and it has calculability in its operations” (Fry, 1998:32).
In the same vein, Weber’s “bureaucracy is efficient because of its precision, speed, consistency, availability of records, continuity, possibility of secrecy, unity, rigorous coordination.
And minimization of interpersonal friction, personal costs, and material costs” (Fry, 1998:32).
Domination is what Weber’s concept of bureaucracy is all about according to Brian R. Fry (1998) in Mastering Public Administration.
It is a domination that “is exerted through administration” and “that legal domination requires bureaucracy for its exercise” (Fry, 1998: 15).
192 Bureaucracy, states Fry, is Weber’s tool to express the most efficient and rational form of organization.
Experience tends universally to show that the purely bureaucratic type of administrative organization that is, the monocratic variety of bureaucracy is, from a purely technical point of view, capable of attaining the highest degree efficiency and is in this sense formally the most rational known means of carrying out imperative control over human beings.
It is superior to any other form of precision, in stability, in the stringency of its discipline, and its reliability… it is the scope of its operations, and is formally capable of application to all kinds of administrative tasks (Weber, 1947:337) Rational decision-making is the underlying root to the success of bureaucracy.
The ideal-type of bureaucracy, according to Weber, possesses rationally discussible grounds for every administrative act.
People are constantly supervised, analyzed, tested, and reprimanded for not following the norms.
People sense that bureaucracy gets involved in every domain in their life and imposes its rational restrictions and sometimes the irrational ones.
Robert Merton (1952) criticizes Weber’s bureaucracy by observing that the bureaucratic features, which Weber believes in enhancing rationality and efficiency, is associated with irrationality inefficiency.
It focuses on four main irrational limitation that bureaucracy has in term of its ideal type, its negligence of informal organization, and its dehumanization as well as its relationship with democracy.
In particular, Weber’s bureaucracy does not consider the important role of the informal relationships that exist in any human organizations.
Criticism of Bureaucracy can be summed up in the following ways: As Max Weber himself noted, real bureaucracy will be less optimal and effective than his ideal type model.
Let us revisit each of Weber’s seven principles.
• Competences can be unclear and used contrary to the spirit of the law; sometimes a decision itself may be considered more important than its effect; 193 • Nepotism, corruption, political infighting and other degenerations can counter the rule of impersonality and can create a recruitment and promotion system not based on meritocracy but on oligarchy; Even a non-degenerated bureaucracy can be affected by common problems: • Overspecialization, making individual officials not aware of larger consequences of their actions.
• Rigidity and inertia of procedures: makes decision- making slow or even impossible when facing some unusual case, and similarly delays change, evolution and adaptation of old procedures to new circumstances; • A phenomenon of going thinking – zealotry, loyalty and lack of critical thinking regarding the organization which is perfect and always correct by definition, making the organization unable to change and realize its own mistakes and limitations; • Disregard for dissenting opinions, even when such view suit the available data better than the opinion of the majority; • as bureaucracy creates more and more rules and procedures, their complexity rises and coordination diminishes, facilitating creation of contradictory and recursive rules, as described by the saying “the bureaucracy is expanding to meet the needs of the expanding bureaucracy” 3.2 Weaknesses of bureaucracy 1.
It is an iron Cage of Control 2.
Red Tape from all the rules and sign offs 3.
Hard to change this form 4.
Divisions of labor compartmentalize attention and response.
5.
Hierarchy must go up and down chains of command to get things done.
6.
It results in certain irrationalities.
194 3.3 Objective view on Bureaucracy Government or society will not survive without bureaucracy because the government will not be able to carry out the programmatic promises of its elected leaders.
Bureaucracy means large-scale, formal, and complex, task specialized, and goal oriented organizations.
Government is characterized by values and ethics and it is not totally incompatible with bureaucracy.
The bureaucracy, on one hand, supports values and, on the other hand, has some conflicting characteristics such as hierarchy and discipline and supervision which conflict with equality and liberty.
The traditional view is that bureaucrats who are members of professions are especially adept at evading external control because of special expertise and ties to professional group outside government.
However, bureaucratic professionals often have no monopoly of skills or information, hold no homogenous values, and are subject to numerous checks.
On the positive side, professionalism promotes bureaucratic responsibility and accountability through professional norms, as well as democratic decision rules, and provides “as Rosetta Stone for deciphering and responding to various elements of public interest” (Kearney &Sinha, 1988,571- 579).
Moreover, we have to remember that some scholars in field, including (Rohr, 1985), argue that bureaucrats have the legitimacy to rule based on the following rational justifications: 1.
They are competent, well-educated and trained and they do know things.
2.
They have long-term tenure which enables them to be experts in the details of the public issues in contrast to the politicians who have a fixed period.
3.
Bureaucrats are from people and they enjoy the values and they have the good will to serve people and society.
195 4.0 Conclusion Among the criticisms leveled against Weber is that bureaucracy limits individual freedom and makes it difficult if not impossible for individuals to understand their activities in relation to the organization as a whole.
There are also major differences between the administrative tradition and what obtains in the modern society and due to the irreconcilable differences between the administrative traditions that were presented by the founding fathers and the impossibility of managing a modern society without bureaucracy, it is not surprising that scholars within the field of public administration have so far failed to come up with an adequate theoretical base to explain the relationship between bureaucracy and representative government (Warner, 2001).
It is apparent that there is a need to restructure or readjust the bureaucracy to adapt to new and complex problem in the modern world.
5.0 Summary In this unit we looked at the criticisms leveled against Weber’s bureaucracy.
We saw the rationality and the irrationality of Weber’s bureaucracy as well as the objective view on bureaucracy.
6.0 Tutor Marked Assignment 1.
List five criticisms of bureaucracy.
2.
In your own words state the reasons for these criticisms.
3.
Are Weber’s critics justified?
State your reasons for or against.
196  7.0 References/Further Reading Blau, P. M. And Meyer, M.W.
(1987),Bureaucracy InModern Society.
New York, NY: Random House.
Bodley, J. H. (2002).
The Power Of Scale: A Global History Approach.
M.E.
Sharpe Crozier, Michel.
(1964).
TheBureaucratic Phenomenon.
Chicago: University Of Chicago Press.
Finer, H. (1941).Administrative Responsibility In Democratic Government.
Public Administration Review, Vol.
1:335-350.
Kearney, Richard &Sinha, Chandan.
(1988).
Professionalism And Bureaucratic Responsiveness: Conflict Or Compatibility?
Public Administration Review, January-February 1988:571-579 Hummel, R. (2007).
The Bureaucratic Experience: The Post-Modern Challenge.
The 5th Edition.Library Of Congress Cataloging-In-Publication Data Lane, Frederick.
(1999).
Current Issues In Public Administration.
Bedford St. Martin’s, Sixth Edition, Boston: 103 Mcswite, O.C.
(1997).
Legitimacy InPublic Administration, A Discourse Analysis.
Sage Publications, Inc. Merton, Robert, (1952).
Bureaucratic Structure And Personality In Reader In Bureaucracy.
New York: Free Press Rhienstein, Max, (1954).
Max Weber On Law In Economy And Society.
New York: Simon AndShuster 197 Rohr, J.A.
(1985).
Professionalism, Legitimacy And The Constitution.
Public Administration Quarterly, 8(4), 401-418.
ShafritzJ.
&Hyde A.C (1997) Classics Of Public Administration.
Orlando: Harcourt Brace College Publishers.
Simon H. (1946).
Administrative Behavior.New York, NY: Free Press.
Weber, M. (1946).Bureaucracy.Oxford Press Wilson, J. Q.
(1989).
Bureaucracy: What Government Agencies Do And Why They Do It.
Basic Books 198
