 NATIONAL OPEN UNIVERSITY OF NIGERIA SCHOOL OF MANAGEMENT SCIENCES COURSE CODE: PSM 813 COURSE TITLE: PERSONNEL MANAGEMENT IN GOVERNMENT  COURSE GUIDE PSM 813 PERSONNEL MANAGEMENT IN GOVERNMENT Course Team Prof. Chuks P. Maduabum (Course Writer/Developer) – NOUN Prof. B.C.
Nwankwo (Course Editor) – NOUN Dr. Ayodele .O.
Fagbemi (Programme Leader) - NOUN Mrs. P.N.
Ibeme (Course Coordinator) - NOUN NATIONAL OPEN UNIVERSITY OF NIGERIA None PSM 813 COURSE GUIDE National Open University of Nigeria Headquarters 14/16 Ahmadu Bello Way Victoria Island, Lagos Abuja Office 5 Dar es Salaam Street Off Aminu Kano Crescent Wuse II, Abuja e-mail: centralinfo@nou.edu.ng URL: www.nou.edu.ng Published by: National Open University of Nigeria Printed 2013 ISBN: 978-058-975-9 All Rights Reserved ii  PSM 813 COURSE GUIDE CONTENTS PAGE Introduction ………………………………………………….. iv What You will Learn in this Course ………………………… iv Course Aims ………………………………………………… iv Course Objectives …………………………………………… v Working through this Course ……………………………….. vi Course Materials …………………………………………….. vi Study Units ………………………………………………….. vi Textbooks and References ………………………………….. viii Assignment File ……………………………………………… viii Tutor-Marked Assignment …………………………………… viii Final Examination and Grading ……………………………… ix Facilitators/Tutors and Tutorials …………………………….. ix Summary ……………………………………………………… ix iii  PSM 813 COURSE GUIDE INTRODUCTION Personnel Management in Government is a one-semester course for students offering Masters Degree in Public Sector Management.
It is a 2 credit unit course consisting of 14 units.
Each unit is supposed to be covered in two hours.
It is also a core course in the optional area of Public Personnel Management.
The course consists of three modules and 14 units.
The modules are: Institutional Framework for Managing Personnel; Training and Development and Personnel Disengagement.
Personnel Management in Government, as a course combines theory and practice although it slants more towards practice.
It exposes you to how government employees are managed, particularly in Nigeria.
It, in addition, addresses how the operators within and outside government should conduct themselves while discharging their duties.
In the course therefore you will discover the adoption of both theory and practice.
This course guide tells you briefly what the course is about, what course material you will be using and how you can work your way through this material.
It also highlights issues of timing for going through these units, and explains the activities and Tutor-Marked Assignment.
WHAT YOU WILL LEARN IN THIS COURSE The overall aim of this course on Personnel Management in government is to expose you to the nitty gritty of managing staff in government establishments and stimulate your interest in government operations.
It is also to make you appreciate all that culminate in government decisions and inputs toward the delivery of goods and services to the citizens.
You will therefore learn the ideas behind various components and organs of staff management, what they are really created to do and how they are structured to do it, what type of personnel handle activities in such organs, what their sources of finance are, what type of expenditure they engage in and what development they undertake.
COURSE AIMS The aim of this course as pointed out earlier, is to expose the students of public sector management to the concepts, structure, context and content of Personnel Management in government.
It is to make you appreciate iv  PSM 813 COURSE GUIDE scope of government, the way they operate and what they are capable of doing in this direction.
This will be achieved by aiming to: • Introduce you to the basic concepts and principles of personnel management • Compare the structures and functions of different organs that handle personnel functions in the public service.
• Give an insight into the nitty gritty of operations of government in staff management • Assess the patterns of behavior of operators in managing staff • Appraise the changes that had taken place over time in this operative mechanism.
COURSE OBJECTIVES To achieve the aims set out above, the course sets overall objectives.
In addition, each unit also has specific objectives.
The unit objectives are always included at the beginning of a unit.
You are advised to refer to them as you study each unit both at the beginning and at the end to ensure that you check your progress and that you have done what is required of you by the unit.
Below are wider objectives of the course as a whole.
By meeting these objectives, you should achieve the aims of the course as a whole.
On successful completion of the course, you should be able to: • Identify and explain the main concepts associated with personnel management in government.
• Situate the government organs for managing personnel with its contextual limits • Appreciate the functions of personnel management in government and how it is conducted.
• Describe and compare the structure and functions of the different organs and how these structures are conditioned by the overall system of the public service.
• Identify and discuss each of the personnel functions and its operations in the public service.
• Discuss the relationship between formulation of personnel policies and their implementation in government and their unique functions.
• Read a set of articles and apply these to the concepts and issues covered in the preceding units of the course.
v  PSM 813 COURSE GUIDE WORKING THROUGH THIS COURSE To complete this course, you are required to read the study units and recommended text books and explore more current materials on the Internet.
You may also need to visit the organs of governments around you to observe practically some of the things conveyed in this course; for example, labour-management relations in government establishments.
You could also have a chat with government staff on a wide array of issues including the problems they face.
Note also that government is a living subject and there are developments daily about the organisation especially in your country, so, you are advised to keep abreast of these in the newspapers and magazines and even the radio and the television sets.
In this course, each unit consists of exercises or activities to test your understanding from time to time.
At a point in your course, you are required to submit assignments for assessment purposes.
At the end of the course is a final examination.
Below, you will find listed all the components of the course, what you have to do and how you should allocate time to each unit in order to complete the course successfully on time.
COURSE MATERIALS Major component of the course are: 1.
Course Guide 2.
Study Units 3.
References/Further Reading 4.
Self-Assessment Exercises and Tutor-Marked Assignments Everything is contained in each unit except the textbooks which you may have to acquire.
You are advised to source current materials on the Net and avail yourself of newspapers and magazines and other publications on government.
You may contact your tutor where you run into problems about recommended text books.
STUDY UNITS There are fourteen units in this course as follows: Module 1 Institutional Framework for Managing Personnel Unit 1 Institutional Framework for Managing Personnel vi  PSM 813 COURSE GUIDE Unit 2 Formulation and Implementation of Personnel Policies in the Civil Service Unit 3 Manpower Planning and Budgeting Unit 4 Personnel Procurement Module 2 Training and Development Unit 1 Training and Development Unit 2 Performance Appraisal Unit 3 Promotion and Discipline Unit 4 Wage/Salary Administration Unit 5 Employee Welfare Services Unit 6 Industrial Relations Module 3 Personnel Disengagement Unit 1 Personnel Records Unit 2 Pension Administration Unit 3 Preparation for Retirement Unit 4 Reforming Personnel Management Organs in the Public Service As pointed out earlier, the units are classified into modules and each module is representing a homogenous body of issues on personnel management in government.
Module one addresses is institutional framework and personnel engagement.
Module two is about maintenance of personnel in the public service.
Module three explains the procedures, requirement, and benefits in personnel disengagement as well as reforms in personnel management in the public service.
You must read each unit carefully.
The basic knowledge on the topic is conveyed here.
An update of the knowledge is in reference to materials of currency.
Supplementary reading is advised.
As you work through each unit, the core of the unit is at the 3.0 Level.
The conclusion (4.0) helps to round up what has been said so far while “summary” (5.0) gives a brief summary of the major issues discussed.
This is meant to assist you to remember the key issues and simplify the discussions at the end.
At the end of some issues discussed at the 3.0 level in the unit, you will come across self-assessment exercises.
These are meant to provide simple questions to enable you comprehend or remind yourself of the things discussed before the Activity.
Answers are directly provided in most cases.
vii  PSM 813 COURSE GUIDE Do not consult the answers until you have attempted the questions.
You may sometimes observe that the answers provided give you more insight than may have been originally conveyed, (especially with the tutor- marked question.
This is part of the characteristics of an essay question).
TEXTBOOKS AND REFERENCES There is no compulsory textbook for this course.
However, as you go through the course, you will observe that some textbooks are recommended often.
This shows that such books are crucial to a number of units.
Please try and consult them.
Moreover, each unit has its own assigned texts and documents.
You should also lay hands on these for further understanding.
ASSIGNMENT FILE The major assignment required of you is a Tutor-Marked Assignment (TMA) which you are expected to complete at the end of each unit and mail to your tutor.
TUTOR-MARKED ASSIGNMENT (TMA) Each unit in this course has a TMA attached to it.
You can only do this assignment after covering the materials and exercises in each unit.
Normally, the TMAs are kept in a separate file.
Your tutor will mark and comment on them.
Pay attention to such feedback from your tutor and use it to improve your other assignments.
You can write the assignment by using materials from your study units and from textbooks or other sources.
It is however preferable that as a graduate student, you should demonstrate evidence of wide reading, especially from texts and other sources; something to show that you have researched more widely.
But do remember that copying from any source without acknowledgement is plagiarism and that is not acceptable.
You make references properly when you refer to other people’s work.
The assignments are, in most cases, essay questions.
Examples from your own experience or environment will be useful when you answer such questions.
This allows you the opportunity to apply theory to real life situations.
viii  PSM 813 COURSE GUIDE FINAL EXAMINATION AND GRADING Your assessment for this course is made up of two components: 1.
Tutor-Marked Assignment 2.
Final Examination.
3.
The TMAs will account for 30% while the examination will account for 70%; both will together make up 100%.
FACILITATORS/TUTORS AND TUTORIALS These are 14 hours of tutorials in this course.
The dates, times and location of the tutorials will be provided.
As soon as you are allocated a tutorial group, the names and phone numbers of your tutor will be provided.
It is your tutor’s responsibility to supervise you closely in order to ensure your steady progress and resolve whatever difficulties you may encounter.
He will give the assignment mark then and provide you with feedback on them for correction purposes.
SUMMARY PSM 813: Personnel Management in Government is a course that is designed to expose you to the process and procedures involved in managing staff in government establishments and agencies.
As a core course for those specialising in Personnel Management, the mastery of the course will enable you build the needed confidence in the entire programme.
Please enjoy your programme.
We wish you every success in this endeavour.
ix  MAIN COURSE CONTENTS PAGE Module 1 Institutional Framework For Managing Personnel ………………………… 1 Unit 1 Institutional Framework for Managing Personnel ……………………………………… 1 Unit 2 Formulation and Implementation of Personnel Policies in the Civil Service ………………….
9 Unit 3 Manpower Planning and Budgeting ………….
19 Unit 4 Personnel Procurement ……………………….
28 Module 2 Training and Development ………………… 40 Unit 1 Training and Development …………………… 40 Unit 2 Performance Appraisal ……………………….. 49 Unit 3 Promotion and Discipline …………………….
60 Unit 4 Wage/Salary Administration ………………… 73 Unit 5 Employee Welfare Services ……………….. 82 Unit 6 Industrial Relations ………………………….. 90 Module 3 Personnel Disengagement ………………….
97 Unit 1 Personnel Records ………………………….. 97 Unit 2 Pension Administration …………………….. 105 Unit 3 Preparation for Retirement ………………….
116 Unit 4 Reforming Personnel Management Organs in the Public Service …………………………… 125  PSM 813 MODULE 1 MODULE 1 INSTITUTIONAL FRAMEWORK FOR MANAGING PERSONNEL Unit 1 Institutional Framework for Managing Personnel Unit 2 Formulation and Implementation of Personnel Policies in the Civil Service Unit 3 Manpower Planning and Budgeting Unit 4 Personnel Procurement UNIT 1 INSTITUTIONAL FRAMEWORK FOR MANAGING PERSONNEL CONTENTS 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objectives 3.0 Main Content 3.1 Institutions and /Organs 3.2 Functions of the Civil Service 3.3 The Civil Service Commission 3.4 National Council on Establishment 3.5 Office of the Head of Civil Service 3.6 Personnel Management Board 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutor-Marked Assignment 7.0 References/Further Reading 1.0 INTRODUCTION The concept of personnel refers to people in formal organisations who were employed for the purpose of realising the organisational goals.
However, it must be noted that these individuals go into the organisation with their own desires; after all, work is not an end but a means to an end.
So, the employee is in the organisation with the hope that while helping to fulfill the objectives of the organisation, conditions or opportunities would be created for the individual to realise his personal aspirations.
This may have informed the unanimity among authorities with regards to the definition of personnel management.
This is conceptualised as involving a host of activities aimed at guiding, directing and motivating the employees of an enterprise towards the accomplishment of the goals of the enterprise while at the same time helping them collectively or severally to realise their personal aspirations (Flippo, 1980:5; Armstrong, 1984: 13; Obisia, 2004: and Ania, 2005; 2).
1  PSM 813 PERSONNEL MANAGEMENT IN GOVERNMENT Although, as we have stated, the government of the day enunciates and implements its policies, programmes and projects, through the instrumentality of the public service, our focus in this unit is the Civil Service which is a major component of the public service and is equally accepted as the government’s central bureaucracy.
It is instructive to note that practices in other agencies and parastatals reflect, to a large extent, the situation in the Civil Service.
Within this context, we have organs and /or bodies that play major roles in the management of staff, which will be of importance to us.
2.0 OBJECTIVES At the end of this unit, you should be able to: • explain the concepts of personnel management and public service • identify the organs responsible for managing personnel in the public service • outline the specific roles of the identified organs.
3.0 MAIN CONTENT 3.1 Institutions and/Organs All the organisations that constitute the Public Service have their own institutional arrangements for appointments, promotion, discipline, and general management of their staff.
The Armed Forces have their own arrangement.
The universities and statutory corporations have their own Appointment and Promotion Boards.
In big federal statutory corporations such as Nigeria Ports Authority (NPA), Nigerian National Petroleum Corporation (NNPC) etc the appointments, promotions and discipline of staff on grade levels 01-06 are handled by the management of the various bodies while those of officers on GL.07 and above are subject to approval of the Governing Boards of which the Chief Executives of the respective organisations are members.
In cases where Governing Boards are yet to be constituted, decisions on personnel matters affecting officers on grade levels 07 and above are usually cleared with the supervising ministries.
In the case of the Police, Judiciary, Teaching Service, and Local Government appointments, the Police Service Commission, Judicial Service Commission, Teaching Service Commission, and the Local Government Service Commission handle appointments, promotions and discipline respectively.
In the overall management of personnel, the Inspector-General of the Police, the Chief Justice of the Federation and Chief Judges in the States, the states Ministries of Education and 2  PSM 813 MODULE 1 Ministries of Local Government exercise some powers delegated to them by the various commissions.
3.2 Functions of the Civil Service With the emergence of modern states and the development of parliamentary system of government, the Civil Service evolved as the bed-rock of the Executive Arm of Government.
Its main task came to be the implementation and execution of the polices decided upon by the Legislature or the Executive through the Council of Ministers or the Executive Council.
To effectively carry out its functions, the Civil Service relies on acquisition and maintenance of competent staff which are handled through certain bodies and organs.
These are identified one after the other for discussion.
3.3 The Civil Service Commission This organ is established as a statutory body, by the Constitution of the Federal republic of Nigeria, 1999 to among others: • Appoint persons to offices in the civil service; and • Dismiss and exercise disciplinary control over persons holding such offices (Constitution of the Federal Republic of Nigeria, (1999:141).
The same Constitution states that “the Commission shall not exercise any of its powers under the sub-paragraph (as stated above) in respect of such offices of heads of divisions of Ministries or of departments of the government of the Federation as may from time to time be designated by an order made by the President except after consultation with the Head of Civil Service of the Federation”.
In furtherance of the foregoing, the Commission has responsibilities to: • set up general and uniform guidelines for appointment, promotion and discipline • monitor the activities of each Ministry/Extra-Ministerial Department on appointment, promotion and discipline so as to ensure that the guidelines are adhered to • serve as a body that handles all petition cases emanating from Ministeries, and Extra-ministerial departments regarding appointments, promotions and discipline and • maintain comprehensive and up-to-date personnel records for the entire civil service.
So, as Omole (1992: 41) posits, the concept of an extra-ministerial body like the Civil Service Commission, charged with the responsibility of 3  PSM 813 PERSONNEL MANAGEMENT IN GOVERNMENT recruitment and other personnel functions, is not novel or peculiar to Nigeria.
It is in consonance with the concept of the Central Personnel Agency which came into being in the United States of America (USA) of the 1880s.
3.4 National Council on Establishment The National Council on Establishment plays a role in the Public Service Personnel Management by providing a forum for the coordination and harmonisation of conditions of service for the staff of the Federal and State Civil Services.
Although its role is advisory , its importance is emphasised by the fact that its ministerial meetings are presided over by the Head of Service of the Federation and all the states Commissioners and Permanent Secretaries responsible for establishments and service matters are members of the council.
At the Federal level, its major product is the Scheme of Service which stipulates various positions/cadres in the service, their entry points and requirements/qualifications for entry into such positions/cadres.
3.5 Office of Head of Civil Service This office has the following other offices or departments each of which makes great inputs towards personnel management in the Civil Service.
A.
Establishment and Service Matters This office: a. Coordinates Grading in the Civil Service and Parastals; b.
Carries out public service management and reforms; c. Prepares condonation of break in service; d. Handles establishment matters, staff compliments, gradings, manpower statistics, conditions of service and appointments, schemes of service.
e. Formulates personnel policies and practices-continuous review of civil service rules, application of rules and regulations; f. Handles staff relations; g. Relates with Negotiating Councils; h. Services National Council on Establishments, and i.
Maintenance Central Records Office B.
Career Management Office (i) Controls the Administrative, Professional, Executive and Secretarial Cadres including Library and Stores Staff (ii) Manages careers of officers on grade levels 14 and above in the Administrative and Professional cadres (iii) Manages careers of Administrative Officers on grade levels 08 – 13 4  PSM 813 MODULE 1 (v) Coordinates activities which relate to Civil Service Maters of Federal Ministries and extra-ministerial departments (iv) Liaises with Parastatals on Public Service Matters (vii) Handles Public Service Utility Monitoring Corps (vii) Handles matters affecting Permanent Secretaries and (viii) Prepares Honours and Awards to Civil Servants C. Manpower Development Office a.
Takes charge of training and development of all categories of staff in the service which include: Professional and Administrative cadres; Executive and Technical cadres; Secretarial cadres; Clerical , Sub-clerical and other cadres b.
Handles specialised training requirements of Ministries and extra-ministerial departments c. Arranges for conferences, seminars and study leave d. Relates with the Administrative Staff College of Nigeria (ASCON) e. Oversees the newly established Civil Service College f. Supervises the six federal Training Centres, Lagos, at Enugu, Calabar, Ilorin, Kaduna and Maiduguri g. Provides Technical Assistance in training; and relates with African Associations for Public Administration and Management (AAPAM), African Centre for Administration and Development (CAFRAD,) Centre for Management Development (CMD), Nigeria Institute of Management (NIM) etc.
SELF- ASSESSMENT EXERCISE List the offices in the Office of Head of Civil Service of the Federation.
3.6 Personnel Management Board In each Ministry and extra-Ministerial Department/Office is a Personnel Management Board.
The Board comprises the following: a.
Junior Staff Committee (JSC) (Local) This committee exists only in the Ministries/Departments that have Area or Zonal Offices in the States.
The composition of this committee which should reflect federal character of the Federation is as follows: the Director of Personnel Management Department as the Chairman, and seven other members not below grade 08.
The Committee handles the appointment, promotion and discipline of officers on grade levels 01 – 06 at the 5  PSM 813 PERSONNEL MANAGEMENT IN GOVERNMENT state/zonal level.
Quorum at any meeting of the JSC is 5 members, including the Chairman.
b.
Junior staff Committee (JSC) (Headquarters) This committee handles the appointment, promotion and discipline of officers on grade levels 01 – 06 at the headquarters of the Ministry/Department concerned.
The composition of the committee which should also reflect the federal character of the Federation is as follows: Director of Personnel Management department as the Chairman, and seven other members not below grade level 12.
Just as in JSC (Local) quorum at any meeting of this committee is 5 members including the Chairman.
c. Senior Staff Committee (SSC) This committee comprises of all the Directors in the Ministry/Extra-Ministerial Department concerned, a Civil Service Commissioner as an observer.
The Personnel Secretary of the Ministry/Department as the Chairman.
The Committee handles cases of officers on Grade levels 07 – 13 (except pool cadres).
Recommendations made here are usually forwarded to the Civil Services Commission.
d. Senior Staff Committee (Pool) This committee exists only in the office of Head of Service.
It handles cases of pooled officers controlled by the Office of Head of Service.
These are: Administrative Officers, Executive Officers, Librarians, Library Officers, Secretariat Cadres and Stores, Supply and Purchasing Officers on grade level 07 – 13.
Recommendations of the committee are subject to the approval of the Civil Service Commission.
The composition of the committee is as follows: i.
Permanent secretary , Career Management Office – Chairman; ii.
Permanent Secretary Civil Service Commission - Member iii.
Director, Office of Establishment and Management Services – Member iv.
Director, Ministry of Finance - Member v. Director, Ministry of Education – Member vi.
Director, Ministry of Works - Member vii.
A Commissioner in the Civil Service Commission – an Observer; and viii.
Director, Career Management Office – Member/Secretary.
In addition, there is a Senior Staff Committee in each pool office such as the Ministries of Information and National Orientation, Justice, the Office of the Auditor-General, the Office of the Accountant-General etc.
The Committee comprises all the Directors in the Ministry/Office and a Civil Service Commissioner as an observer.
The Permanent Secretary, Auditor-General or the Accountant-General, as the case may be, is the 6  PSM 813 MODULE 1 Chairman of the Committee.
The committee handles cases of officers on salary grade levels 07 – 13.
Quorum at any meeting of the Senior Staff Committee is a simple majority of the membership.
Recommendations made by this committee are usually forwarded to the Civil Service Commission.
Generally speaking, meetings of the Junior Staff/Senior Staff Committees of Ministries/Extra-Ministerial Offices are held regularly but not less than twice a year.
Personnel Management Board This is the main Board from where the various committees earlier described emerged.
The Board comprises the following: • Honourable Minister (at the Federal Level) as the Chairman • The Permanent Secretary of the Ministry as a Member • A Commissioner from the Civil Service Commission as an observer • All the Directors in the Ministry as Members, while the Director of Personnel Management also serves as the secretary.
• The Board handles cases of officers on grade levels 14 and above.
It also supervises the work of its various committees.
4.0 CONCLUSION Although the identified organs and institutions carry out their respective functions and responsibilities, they are not mutually exclusive in that there are dove-tailings and overlapping here and there.
Having identified these organs and institutions and articulated their functions and responsibilities, we shall in the next unit commence discussions on the processes involved in managing personnel in the civil service.
5.0 SUMMARY This unit emphasises the point that in government establishments the employees are relied upon for the realisation of government policies, programmes and projects.
In managing these staff, certain organs were deliberately established to play unique roles.
These organs include: The Civil Service Commission, National Council on Establishments, Office of Head of Civil Service and the Personnel Management Board/Committees in each Ministry/Extra-Ministerial Department.
The unit thus, identified and discussed these functions and /or roles.
7  PSM 813 PERSONNEL MANAGEMENT IN GOVERNMENT 6.0 TUTOR-MARKED ASSIGNMENT i.
Identify the organs for managing personnel in the Civil Service ii.
Explain the unique roles of each of the organs you have identified.
7.0 REFERENCES/FURTHER READING Aina, S. (2005).
Managing the Human Capital in Nigeria.
Lagos: Fountain Training Consult.
Federal Republic of Nigeria (1999).
Constitution of the Federal Republic of Nigeria, Third Schedule, Part 1 Lagos: Government Press.
Federal Republic of Nigeria (2001).
Policy Guidelines on Personnel Matters by the Federal Civil Service Commission.
(Abuja: Federal Civil Service Commission.
Flippo, E.B.
(1980).
Personnel Management.
Tokyo: McGraw-Hill, Kogakusha Ltd. Maduabum, C.P & Gayya, C.U (2004).
Introduction to Organisational Behavior.
Lagos: Concept Publications Limited.
Maduabum, C.P (1998).
Perspective on Manpower Planning and Development in Nigeria: Text and Cases.
Badagry: ASCON Press.
Obisi, C.P.
(1996).
Personnel Management in Nigeria.
Lagos: Jackbod Enterprises.
Omale, I.
(1992).
“Past Practices in Personnel Management in the Nigerian Civil Service: Issues and Procedures.” In: Yahaya, A. D. & Akinyele, C. I.
(Eds).
New Trends in Personnel Management: A Book of Readings.
Badagry: ASCON Press.
8  PSM 813 MODULE 1 UNIT 2 FORMULATION AND IMPLEMENTATION OF PERSONNEL POLICIES IN THE CIVIL SERVICE CONTENTS 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objectives 3.0 Main Content 3.1 Need for Policies 3.2 Formulation of Personnel Policies 3.3 Implementation of Personnel Policies 3.3.1 Recruitment, Discipline and Promotions 3.3.2 Compensation System 3.3.3 Training and Staff Development 3.3.4 Career Planning 3.3.5 Retirement 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutor-Marked Assignment 7.0 References/Further Reading 1.0 INTRODUCTION Personnel Management is defined by Armstrong (1977) as obtaining, organising and motivating the human resources required by the enterprise; developing an organisation climate and management style which will promote effective effort and cooperation and trust between all the people working in it; and helping the enterprise to meet its legal obligations and social responsibilities towards its employees with regard to the conditions of work and quality of life provided for them.
The above stated concerns could, in general, be regarded as the objectives of personnel management.
Personnel Policy is the medium or strategy for achieving the stated objectives.
Whereas it is possible for small organisations or commercial concerns e.g.
a commercial bank, to state clearly in not more than a page, its personnel policy, it is not that easy in government.
In fact, since the establishment of the Civil Service, and all through its evolution, there has not been a single personnel policy.
Rather, what we have in the Civil Service is the existence of a policy framework for each personnel function.
We should, therefore, not be talking of personnel policy, but policies in the Civil Service.
Thus, we have recruitment policy, promotion policy, training policy etc.
9  PSM 813 PERSONNEL MANAGEMENT IN GOVERNMENT 2.0 OBJECTIVES At the end of this unit, you should be able to: • explain the concept of policy and the need for it • identify the procedures for formulating and implementing personnel policies in the Civil Service • identify specifically, the personnel functions for which policies have been formulated and implemented in the Civil Service.
3.0 MAIN CONTENT 3.1 Need for Policies As stated above, policies provide the means for carrying out management processes and, as such, are an aid to decision-making.
While objectives determine what is to be done, policies explain how it is to be done.
Carefully developed policies are vital to the management of personnel, because employees are sensitive to any difference in the treatment, no matter how slight, that they may receive as compared with other persons.
Human beings are the one resource which cannot be merely programmed (trained) and serviced (paid) to perform efficiently.
For human beings, work and the work place are only part f their existence.
It is usually the most important part since, for some people, it is the source of their livelihood.
Unlike all other resources, human beings have minds of their own.
They do not always view work and the way it should be done in the same way as the organisation or the individual manager.
Also, and perhaps most importantly, human beings have needs which vary from persons to persons and time to time that influence their work performance according to whether or not they are being met.
One thing that will impair employees’ efficiency and morale the most quickly, is for the boss to display favouritism when making decisions, such as those relating to promotions, vacations, work schedules, wage increases, assignment of overtime, or infractions of rules.
But when policies are already clearly laid down regarding these subjects, decisions can be made more rapidly and more consistently.
Managers or supervisors can act with a degree of confidence in resolving problems since they have a more objective basis upon which to make and to defend their decisions.
10  PSM 813 MODULE 1 3.2 Formulation of Personnel Policies The Nigerian Civil Service was seen by the colonialists as a force whose dual functions could essentially and primarily assuage administrative difficulties and serve the vital role of welding the country together.
The highest echelon of the Civil Service from the time of conception, was staffed with British officials and, like many colonial bureaucracies, its goals were limited, the crucial one being maintenance of law and order.
Nigerian participation in the colonial service was limited to clerical functions performed by by-products of the fledging primary and secondary schools who were absorbed into its lower cadres.
Indeed, all personnel functions at the time were geared towards, and limited by the need to maintain law and order.
The conditions of service of the British officials were determined and handed down to them by the Home Office before departure from British.
In respect of all other civil servants, the Governor or the Governor-in-Council made the decisions and passed them down for implementation.
It could be through instructions from the Home Office or through experience.
Personnel policies and practices were therefore, determined solely by the colonial administration during the period.
After Independence, Civil Servants were allowed to have unions.
The Whitely Council metamorphosed into the National Public Service negotiating Councils in 1964.
Like in the Whitely Councils, officials of the Establishments Department or the official side, represent government as employers, while the trade unions represent civil servants.
Representatives of unions come to the Negotiating Council with proposals for change and/or review of existing policies or for completely new ones.
The proposals were discussed extensively and once agreement was reached, it was referred to the National Council on Establishment (NCE), especially if the matter had a nation-wide application.
The NCE approached government with the proposals for approval.
Whatever was approved was communicated to all Ministries and Departments for implementation, through the necessary Establishment‘s circulars.
Apart from proposals submitted by unions, ideas emanate from Ministries and Departments as a result of their experience in the implementation of certain policies.
These are submitted to the NCE via appropriate memorandum and whatever the outcome of such discussion was passed on to the decision-makers for approvals or otherwise.
The advent of the military in politics in Nigeria made little difference in the procedure of formulation of policies as the organs mentioned above were still retained and being used.
The decisions of the NCE that affect the Federal Civil Service were made to apply to the states as well.
11  PSM 813 PERSONNEL MANAGEMENT IN GOVERNMENT Issues that apply to the Federal Civil Service alone, depending on the implications, might stop with the then Head of the Civil Service who decided on appropriate policy action or when necessary, were referred to the National Council of Ministers for approval.
The NCE itself was set up to harmonise conditions of service in the Civil Service in the country.
Hence, for purposes of federal character, the NCE is enjoined to get involved in issues that cut across states and, where necessary, was required to take into account views from various states.
For very important issues with far-reaching financial and security implications, decisions of the NCE are first referred to the National Council of Ministers which, if in agreement with the proposals, forwards the memorandum to the National Council of States before it went to the highest ruling body in the country- the Armed Forces Ruling Council.
Whatever was approved by the AFRC was communicated to Ministries and Departments through circulars for implementation.
Parastatals have their unions too and they negotiate their terms with their respective organisations.
In the last five years, however, they have adopted a kind of united front-the Association of Senior Staff of Public Corporations which is a registered member of the Nigerian Labour Congress.
SELF -ASSESSMENT EXERCISE List any five personnel functions for which polices could be formulated.
3.3 Implementation of Personnel Policies The implementation of personnel polices has always been by Ministries and Departments.
As soon as a decision was taken on any policy issue, it is communicated to the Ministry of Establishment which issues the relevant circular to ensure uniform application throughout the service.
The Ministry was, therefore, up to 1979, solely responsible for the monitoring and interpretation of personnel policies in the event of any ambiguity.
All of these are with exception of recruitment/appointment; discipline and promotion policies which are the exclusive preserve of the Federal Civil Service Commission.
The Civil Service Commission which was established by an Act of government had the sole responsibility for the recruitment, promotion and discipline of all officers in the Federal Civil Service.
However, in order to facilitate matters, the Commission in its wisdom delegated authority for these issues to the accounting officers of various ministries and departments with respect of officers on grade levels 01 to 07.
12  PSM 813 MODULE 1 In 1979 the monitoring role of the former Ministry of Establishments was taken over by the Office of the Head of Service of the Federation which had four Departments namely: • Establishments Department • Manpower Development Department • Service Welfare Department; and • Public Service Department.
The Establishments Department took on the traditional responsibilities of the erstwhile Ministry of Establishments; while Manpower Development Department concerned itself mainly with the training and staff development of civil servants; and the Public Service Department was vested with control over the various pools of officers that were in the Service then.
In other words, it (Public Service department) made recommendations on promotion and discipline of pool officers in the entire Civil Service to the Federal Civil Service Commission for consideration.
What the Ministry of Establishments was doing, in effect, before 1979, was inherited by the Office of the Head of Service and the functions carried out by the four Departments named above.
The Federal Civil Service Commission, of course, remains as a constant.
Such was the position until 1988 when the new Civil Service Reforms introduced fundamental changes that affected the structure and form of the Civil Service.
By the Reforms, each Minister is both the Chief Executive and Accounting Officer of his Ministry.
The office of the Head of Service was abolished and the Federal Civil Service Commission took over the Establishment and Pensions; and the Management Service and Training Department.
The former Public Service and Service Welfare departments became totally irrelevant under the new dispensation and were hence disbanded completely.
The Federal Civil Service Commission hence, had the responsibility for the appointment, discipline and promotion of officers on Grade Levels 07 to 10 while the functions in respect of officers on Grade Level 01-06; and 11 and above were to be carried out in the respective Ministries and Departments.
To facilitate this, Junior and Senior Management Boards were set up in the Ministries and were to operate under stated guidelines in the Civil Service Reforms Decree.
The Commission was, however, still enjoined to issue guidelines on personnel policies for Service-wide application.
All Ministries then had three Central Departments, namely; Personnel Management; Finance and Supplies; Planning, Research and Statistics; and a maximum of five operational Departments depending on the need and size of the Ministry concerned a situation that exists up till today.
13  PSM 813 PERSONNEL MANAGEMENT IN GOVERNMENT Therefore, what has happened in terms of implementation of personnel policies is to place all Departments having personnel duties or functions under the Commission.
The Commission, as it were, would issue guidelines on major personnel policy issues while implementation still rests with the Ministries and Departments.
It is a neater arrangement than the period between 1979 and 1988 when personnel functions were scattered under different organizations.
For example, the Commission was responsible for recruitment, discipline and promotion, while Establishments Department was responsible for compensation policy and fridge benefits.
Manpower Development Department was responsible for training and staff development while the Public Service Department controlled pool officers and was, therefore, in charge of performance appraisal.
The new arrangement should certainly make for better co-ordination and positive results in this direction.
We should now look at a few personnel policies and their implementation in the Service so as to bring out vividly the state f the art.
3.3.1 Recruitment, Discipline and Promotion As mentioned earlier under Reforms, the Federal Civil Service Commission has sole responsibility for the above functions for all officers on GL 07 to 10.
Ministries and Departments are solely responsible for the functions in respect of their officers on Grade Levels 01 to 06 and Grade Level 11 and above.
The number of people required to carry out the functions of a particular Ministry/Department in the various approved established posts is determined and agreed with the Establishment and Pensions Department at the beginning of each year.
Existing vacancies in respect of posts graded GL.07 to 10 are communicated to the Commission which assists in recruitment.
The others are determined by the Junior and senior Management Boards in the Ministries.
In recruitment, the scheme of service indicates the qualifications required for specific posts (cadres) in the service.
The scheme of service relates to the grading exercise.
Therefore, it cannot be drawn up in isolation of the grading exercise.
Professional groups like ICAN, COREN, etc, have, in recent times, been involved in determining what should be the entry qualifications into the relevant cadres.
The Commission and all concerned are, therefore, guided by the scheme of service during recruitment.
As it is expected, exiting vacancies are often filled through promotion of serving officers.
In the past, the Commission laid down the policy for promotion and it guided the office of Head of Service in making its recommendations on promotion in respect of officers.
Two major conditions-seniority and merit-determined through the Annual 14  PSM 813 MODULE 1 Evaluation Review, played paramount importance in determining who got promoted.
Under the Reforms, seniority has been relegated to the background with a weighting of only 5% , while training has been brought to the limelight with an enhanced weighting of 15% .
Other parameters and their weighting are APER score 50%, interview 30%.
The Reforms have also stipulated the minimum number of years an officer should remain on a particular grade level, after which he qualifies for consideration for promotion to the next higher grade.
It is expected that by giving each Ministry the power to appoint, discipline and promote its staff, a good system of performance evaluation which will enhance healthy competition among staff will be achieved.
The only danger under this arrangement is the possibility that an officer whose face is disliked by his superior officers may be made to mark time or frustrated out of the Service.
3.3.2 Compensation System This comprises wages and salaries structure in the Service, indirect compensation in form of fringe benefits and deferred payments like pensions and gratuity.
The wages and salaries structure and, indeed, compensation system in the Service had evolved over the years and modified continually by the provisions of the various Commissions set up by government.
Starting from Hunt Commission of 1934 through Harragin Commission of 1964, Gorsuch of 1954/55, Morgan Commission, Udoji Commission, to the setting up of permanent monitoring bodies like the Public Service Review Unit, the Productivity, Prices and Income Board (PPIB), the National Council on Establishment, and the National Public Services Negotiating Council.
The wages and salaries structure operating in the Civil Service had been adjusted in line with realities of the time.
The permanent bodies mentioned above, are expected to review constantly the salary structure such that employees are not worse off in inflation.
This is fashioned after what obtains in many parts of the world, especially in the USA where all salaries are adjusted upwards by 3% every year to take care of the effects of inflation on real income.
For a mixture of many reasons, the bodies have not lived up to expectation.
3.3.3 Training and Staff Development The objective of government is to make training a systematic and sustained regular affair.
It is expected to lead to the development of staff to enable them give off their best and make the best use of their capabilities.
A number of policies had been put in place in the past to achieve the stated objectives but not much had really been achieved because, even though government accepted the concept of training, it has continued to pay lip-service to it.
It started from a situation whereby 15  PSM 813 PERSONNEL MANAGEMENT IN GOVERNMENT there was no training policy under the colonial regime, when training of Nigerian staff did not enjoy any priority, to the Nigerianisation policy of the few years proceeding and after Independence, which saw a kind of education boom, when many Nigerians were trained at home and abroad in relevant disciplines to take over from the colonial administrators.
The staff development division that was responsible for training sponsored a number of policies, improved the situation with the major efforts being the Ministerial Training Committee System, established in the Service in 1987.
The policy enjoined all Ministries to constitute Ministerial Training Committees with members drawn from all Departments of the Ministries and a departmental training officer appointed to service the Committee as Secretary.
The main role given to training under the present Reforms, has been to emphasise the provisions of the extant training policy since training has, by implications of the Reforms, become mandatory for all officers.
Even though the Reforms made training a shared responsibility between the Commission and the Ministries and Departments, they empower the Commission to issue guidelines on training for Service-wide application.
The Managing Services and Training Department of the Federal Civil Service Commission organised a National Conference on Human Resources Development and Utilisation Policy in Nigeria.
It was the first bold attempt to give the country an integrated and comprehensive policy on human resources development and utilisation.
3.3.4 Career Planning Career planning is an important personnel function in which a career structure is mapped out for all officers in the organisation.
Career development is a process which enables an organisation to meet its current and projected manpower requirements.
It promotes the growth and development of individuals in an orderly and systematic manner, taking into account the organisation’s needs as well as the individual’s interests and aspirations.
It implies a planed system of development and career progression of employees, which may not be within a single functional group but may stretch across functional and organisational lines when it is felt that an employee can be developed and utilised more effectively by doing so.
In this process, it lays as much emphasis on the attainment of individual and group goals as on organisational goals and seeks to match them by integrating the individual with the organisation.
The former manpower Development Department (MDD), designed a career plan for various categories of officers in the Service.
To a large extent, for lack of funds and relevant commitment on the part of government, it has not been possible to implement the plan for careers in the Service.
It is only in the armed forces that officers enjoy 16  PSM 813 MODULE 1 enhanced career plan.
When an officer is recruited into the Army, for example, depending on the entry point and qualification, the officer has a reasonable clear idea of how he can progress in his career.
Specific examinations are set, and those who are qualified to take the examinations are clearly stated.
Successful candidates are promoted to the next higher grade and the unsuccessful ones are given the opportunity to re-sit the same examination two or three times thereafter, and if they still cannot make it they are required to retire.
At each stage, the requirement for promotion is a source of indictment to the Civil Service and it has been seen in some quarters as the main reason for declining productivity and lowering standards in the Service.
3.3.5 Retirement The notes for guidance issued by the commission and the Pension Act are very clear on the exit policy in the Civil Service, i.e.
how an officer can retire or be retired.
Unfortunately, this is an area where sharp differences exist between actual practice and the laid down procedure.
The mass purge of 1975 attempted to kill the goose that laid the golden egg.
The unfortunate incident delivered a death-blow on the corps of the Nigeria Civil Service.
Although there were bad eggs in the service, the indiscriminate mass purge of the system shattered the hope of thousands of dedicated civil servants.
The service has not recovered from the lethal blow.
If anything, the mass purge, compounded by those of 1984 and subsequent years only increased the propensity for venality in the case of insecurity of tenure of office.
Section 4 of the 1979 Pension Act (Decree 102 of 1979) states that: “the Minister may, at anytime, request an officer to retire or retire him in public interest if he is satisfied that his services are no longer required”.
Recent happenings would show that this clause may have been overused as it does not remove all the procedures that should have been followed before retiring an officer.
Decree No 17 of 1984 reinforces the clause and covers all the mass retrenchment that followed.
To make matters worse, the retrenchment cannot be questioned in the court of law only if the phrase “retired in the public interest” is not inserted in the letter.
The big question is who determines the public interest if the culprit is the President who, unfortunately, cannot be subpoenaed to any court to explain what public interest means?
If civil servants are expected to perform at their peak, all intermittent and devastating shocks administered on the civil service and intimidation of civil servants must be stopped forthwith.
17  PSM 813 PERSONNEL MANAGEMENT IN GOVERNMENT 4.0 CONCLUSION It is a common saying that the civil servant is the worst enemy of the Civil Service.
If one should bring to focus how the military budgets comprehensively for its needs and how vigorously the requests are canvassed and positive results achieved, one may be inclined to give some thought to that saying.
In the author’s little experience, the main culprit for the generally poor state of personnel management in the Civil Service is top management.
There is unlikely to be any improvement until those with political power and top civil servants really do understand and accept that all organisations, including the Civil Service, are people; that given unlimited resources and ideal forms, people can still prevent these from producing desired results.
Until such a time that we develop a philosophy of management which recognises that it is people that make or break an organisation, and that more time and care should be devoted to the management of this service, we are unlikely to see any improvement in the state of personnel management and, therefore, the operational effectiveness of the Civil Service.
5.0 SUMMARY This unit stated earlier that when policies are clearly laid down, decisions can be made more rapidly and more consistently.
Against that backdrop the unit established the need for policies and identified the procedure for formulating and implementing personnel policies in the Civil Service.
In addition, specific functions for which policies are formulated and implemented were identified by the unit.
6.0 TUTOR-MARKED ASSIGNMENT What do you understand by Personnel Policies and how are they formulated in the civil service?
7.0 REFERENCES/FURTHER READING Armstrong, M.A.
(1977).
Handbook of Personnel Management Practice.
London: Kogan Page.
Beach, D.S.
(1975).
Personnel: The Management of People at Work (3rd ed.).
New York: Macmillan Pub, Co. Harbison, F.H.
(1973).
Human Resources as the Wealth of Nation.
London: Oxford University Press.
18  PSM 813 MODULE 1 UNIT 3 MANPOWER PLANNING AND BUDGETING CONTENTS 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objectives 3.0 Main Content 3.1 Conceptual Clarifications 3.2 Charts and Matrices 3.3 Situation in the Civil Service 3.4 Factors Considered in Preparing Manpower Planning & Budgeting in the Civil Service 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutor-Marked Assignment 7.0 References/Further Reading 1.0 INTRODUCTION The department of Personnel Management in any organisation is largely dependent on the size of the organisation which in turn is moderated through manpower planning.
Manpower planning in the public service is important for both the recruitment and budgeting process of every ministry or extra-ministerial- department hence the focus of this unit on the subject.
2.0 OBJECTIVES At the end of this unit, you should be able to: • define manpower planning • explain the use of charts and matrices in manpower planning • identify the factors considered in preparing manpower planning and budgeting in the civil service.
3.0 MAIN CONTENT 3.1 Conceptual Clarifications Manpower Planning could be conceptualised as a composite of activities that ensure the availability of adequate number and caliber of staff, which an organisation needs, both for present and future requirements (Maduabum, 1998: 4-5).
This view is supported by the British Department of Employment and Productivity (1976), which defines the concept as a strategy for the acquisition, utilisation, improvement, and 19  PSM 813 PERSONNEL MANAGEMENT IN GOVERNMENT preservation of enterprises’ human resources.
Another view of the concept is adopted as the development of critical human competence, skills and attitudes which will match occupation, professional, administrative and technical demands for national and sectoral development of all the desired activities of a nation (Lupton, 1973 :ix);Hopes, 1976:41 – 45; Armstrong, 1979:41, Conor and Garson, 1982 :29; and Attwood, 1985: 12 – 14).
Similarly Ogunniyi (1992: 123) posits the concepts as involving a critical analysis of supply, demand, surplus, shortages, wastages and utilisation of human resources.
Its primary goal is the adoption of policy actions and strategies which will not be stressful and /or be a negation of endeavours to balance the equation of supply and demand of manpower required for socio- economic and political development of a nation.
It is equally concerned with the development of critical human competence, skills and attitudes, which will match occupational, professional, administrative and technical demands for notional and sectoral development of all the socially desirable activities of a nation.
In sum, manpower planning is actively making decisions and establishing programmes for targeting manpower needs to meet the organisational goals and objectives on a continuous basis.
It is concerned with: • Development of essential human competence, skills and attitudes • Matching education and training to suit occupational, professional, technical and administrative positions • Setting manpower objectives • Developing manpower policies • Employment functions-recruiting, interviewing, selecting, placing and orientation and • Other personnel functions (Ogunniyi, 1992, Ibid) Hence manpower planning is the first and most important of all the personnel functions, because these functions are systematically undertaken such that one dovetails into the next.
The implication is that if manpower planning is inadequately undertaken, the consequence will have adverse effect on subsequent functions in that chain.
3.2 Chats and Matrices A good manpower plan should be able to anticipate the number of personnel that will need to be appointed, trained, promoted, retired, etc., over a period of time.
It is for this reason that some human resource charts and matrices are kept in the personnel/administration department of ministries, departments and agencies (MDAs) to facilitate human resources forecast.
It must be noted that the computerisation, of this exercise has been taken care of by the Human Resources Management 20  PSM 813 MODULE 1 Information System.
Examples of such charts and matrices are described below: (a) Human Resource Inventory This is an inventory showing the summary of staff position for an establishment for a particular period.
In the civil service, these records are compiled on a quarterly and yearly basis.
Ordinarily, inventories provide information on the number of people available in a given period.
For example, if there are inventories covering 1st, 2nd, 3rd and 4th quarters of a particular year, these could serve as the basis for comparing the inventories for the different quarters for trends and the explanation for them.
From the trends, projections can be made.
It also helps to plan adequately to cope with the future.
Inventories are thus prepared at various levels of the organisation.
The lower the level at which it is undertaken the more detailed the information.
They are usually prepared for organisations along occupational lines as shown overleaf: Table 3.1: Human Resource Inventory Chart Departments S/NO Cadres A B C D E 1 Administrative Officers 2 Executive Officers 3.
Account Officers 4 Maintenance Staff 5 Secretaries 6 Clerical Officers (b) Education and Qualification Statistics This information is usually kept for the managerial, professional and technical staff in organisations, particularly in the education sector.
The assumption here is that there is a correlation between educational qualification and skills.
In such cases, the number of these categories of people in the organisation becomes important.
An educational matrix for employees shows immediately who needs to be trained and in what areas.
In some organisations, this matrix is used to provide information as to who is and who is not likely to stay.
(c) The Age Distribution Matrix The age of the employee is very important because it is believed that as people move up the ladder in organisations, their potentials and ability decrease.
There is a critical period at which employees are at their peak in terms of contributions in the organisation.
The period is generally between 30 and 60 years, 21  PSM 813 PERSONNEL MANAGEMENT IN GOVERNMENT after which their contribution decreases.
Thus, age distribution matrix will reveal: • Those who can still benefit from training programmes and remain useful to the organisation • Those who cannot be trained because they are on their way out and • Those who are likely to leave the organisation and when, so that their replacement can be planned for The matrix could be represented as shown below: Table 3.2: Age Distribution Matrix Age Administrative Accountants Engineers Secretaries Others Groups Officers Totals 18 – 25 26 – 30 31 – 35 36 – 40 41 – 45 46 - 50 51 – 55 56 – 60 (d) Length of Service Chart • Directly related to age distribution matrix is the length of services chart.
This reveals at a glance, those who are due for retirement.
A typical length of service chart is shown: Table 3.3: A Length of Service Chart.
Length of Administrative Accountants Engineers Secretaries Others Service in Officers years 0 - 5 6 – 10 11 – 15 16 – 20 21 – 25 26 – 30 31 – 35 (e) The Establishment and Vacancy Return Matrix As the name suggests, this matrix reveals three important facts, namely: 22  PSM 813 MODULE 1 • The approved establishments for every post • The number of people serving , i.e.
number of officers in post and • Vacancies existing This is done for every position in the organisation.
Departments prepare this matrix and forward to the personnel department which is expected to collate and process for all positions in the organisation.
Approved establishment means the number of positions approved to be filled for a particular job in an annual budget.
From here, other facts could be derived.
For instance, where the number approved by the budget for the job of Assistant Director (Administration) in an organisation is two, and the number in-post or strength is one, the vacancy should be one.
A typical example is reflected : Table 3.4: Establishment and Vacancy Returns Matrix Position Establishment In-Post Vacancy (Strength) Chief Admin.
Officer Asst.
Chief Admin Officer In the civil service, the convention is that the establishment returns should be made by every unit each month.
These returns must go to the Establishment and Pensions Office of the Office of Head of Service and to the Civil Service Commission.
When a ministry sends requisition to fill vacancies, it must be sent to the Establishment and Pensions Office which will in turn look at the approved establishment for the ministry and determine whether or not the ministry is over-or under-staffed.
3.3 Situation in the Civil Service In practice, particularly in the public service or civil service, Manpower Planning and Budgeting are inextricably linked in that manpower planning determines the success or otherwise of the budget.
Infact, even at the conceptual level, the budget is usually the product of planning.
Sometimes, manpower planning is considered as the process which stems from manpower budget.
Accordingly, Ebegbuna, (1992: 146 – 147) explains that manpower planning is a specialised field in its own right.
However, it is good to be aware of the close link between the two subjects.
According to the author, whereas manpower budgeting is concerned with estimating manpower requirements in terms of numbers skills, grades etc, manpower planning , on the other hand, is concerned with having the right persons in the right numbers in the right place at the right time.
In other words, the process involves the development of policies and programmes that will ensure that manpower supply meets the need of the National Plan or any establishment.
The umbilical cord 23  PSM 813 PERSONNEL MANAGEMENT IN GOVERNMENT relationship between manpower budgeting and manpower planning is clear.
The latter forecasts demand for, and analyses the supply of the right skills, professions, qualities and effectiveness while the former draws on these projections in estimating manpower requirements for approved programmes.
The submission made by Omale, (1992: 44-45) is equally informative.
According to him, three processes are involved in the determination of future manpower requirements and action plans for meeting them: • Manpower inventory which consists of data which describe the present workforce in both quantitative and qualitative terms • Manpower forecast, which is data on the manpower required at specific times in the future, described either in gross numbers or in specific categories such as skill, educational level and experience.
In government organisations, the specific times during which manpower requirements are made are at annual budget periods.
By its very nature, manpower forecast is essentially a line responsibility and is done on a departmental basis (Famulare, 1972: 6-8) and • Manpower plan which involves specific action plans or blue print for bridging the gap between the forecast and the inventory (Stahl, 1962:19) In view of the forgoing, we posit that it will be useless to prepare a manpower budget without having made an assessment of the prospects of being able to provide adequate manpower at the right time to realise the budget forecast.
3.4 Factors Considered in Planning Manpower Planning and Budgeting in the Civil Service These are: A Workload Assessment • Determine the relevance of Organisational Objectives; • Analyse existing staff structure of the organisation; • Analyse staff strength (nominal roll) to determine the ratio of manpower to workload; • Analyse jobs (using job description and staff inspection reports ); and • Analyse the salary grade level in relation to level of responsibility.
B Establishment Factors • Mandatory upward movement in accordance with approved schemes of service and Establishment circulars; 24  PSM 813 MODULE 1 • Variation in establishments due to unforeseen jobs.
etc; • New policy on staffing; • Government policies on certain programmes; and • Decided guidelines.
C Staffing Inspection Findings • Staffing Inspection is undertaken to ensure cost- effectiveness of programmes by eliminating waste of human resources through duplication or overlapping of functions or under-employment of staff.
It entails going to the field to see the job being done in order to ascertain the need for it, its volume and complexity.
In short, staff inspection is used to: • Examine the work to confirm that it needs to be done in order to fulfill the objectives of the agency; • Ensure that the organisational structure in which work is done is conducive to its most efficient and economical performances ; and • Ensure that staff numbers and grading (as already approved) and level of responsibility are correctly related to the needs of the job.
D Organisational Objectives • It is important to ensure that the job for which manpower is required is related to the organisational objectives.
By analysing set objectives, we should be able to identify the necessary ACTIVITIES needed to achieve them.
These activities or TASKS can be measured in terms of their quantum and complexity such as structure of the organisation, span of control, job analysis and job description.
E Financial Ceiling and Staff Ceilings • By ceiling, we mean the maximum above which the organisation must not go.
Hence, manpower planning aims towards such ceilings.
Financial ceiling of course determines staff ceilings.
Problems sometimes arise where cost of staffing overshoots the financial ceiling.
SELF-ASSESSMENT EXERCISE List the factors considered in preparing manpower planning, budgeting in the civil service.
With these major guidelines, the annual authorised establishment containing staff complement for each ministry is prepared.
First, an Establishment Call Circular is issued to all Ministries and Extra- Ministerial Departments after the Call Circular from the Ministry of Budget and Planning in respect of Capital and Overhead costs have been 25  PSM 813 PERSONNEL MANAGEMENT IN GOVERNMENT circulated.
The Establishment call circular is sent out to request for the personnel proposal of Ministries and Extra-Ministerial Departments providing them with all the necessary guidelines to be followed.
Attached to the call circular is a time table fixing dates for Ministries to meet with officials of the Office of Head of Service, to defend their proposals.
There is also a time limit when the proposals must be received.
On receipt of these proposals, they are examined by Budget Officers to enable them highlight the increases proposed and reasons for such increases.
Meetings or dialogue with the various ministries then commence.
At these meetings, consensus is reached on the number of new posts approved for each ministry for the financial year under review.
These decisions are processed in ‘‘Minute’’ form and sent to the Head of Service for his approval which is copied the Chairman, Civil Service Commission.
After receiving the approval of the head of Service, Official letters legalising decisions of the meetings are conveyed to the ministries to enable them crosscheck the Authorised Establishment Booklet.
The Establishment booklet now reflects created posts as in terms of funds and other requirements.. On the basis of the approved establishment, individual ministries and extra ministerial offices can thereafter prepare their personnel cost projections for the succeeding year in response to the call circular from the Budget Office in respect of Budget preparation.
In preparing the personnel cost projections, the following are usually taken note of: • The most recent circulars on salaries, allowances and pensions serves as the basis for the projection.
• Steps 9 on the relevant Grade Level are used in the calculation • A copy of the approval of the Office of Establishments for Manpower budget is attached.
• The nominal roll of staff as at June of the preceding year is attached.
• The names of new staff recruited in the preceding year as well as those of staff who had left service since January of the preceding year are also attached.
Thereafter, each MDA will defend her proposal before the Budget Committee of the Budget Office and when the appropriation bill is later tabled before the Legislature, the MDA will again defend her proposal before the Appropriation Committee of the National Assembly.
Recruitment by MDAs can only commence after the passage of the budget which determines how far the approved staff establishment can be implemented.
26  PSM 813 MODULE 1 4.0 CONCLUSION Manpower Planning at plant or cooperate level deals with planning activities in various personnel functions.
Hence it is imperative to plan for engagement and adjustment of employees for change.
In this respect, planners must be aware of the fact that the implementation of plans is more important than drawing one out.
Therefore, the human element in planning is critically important.
Whatever plans are made, individuals affected will always evaluate plans in terms of themselves.
5.0 SUMMARY The significant phenomenon of manpower planning lies in the fact that it deals mainly with requirements of manpower guided by the corporate policies and objectives.
In this unit therefore detailed clarifications of the concept was undertaken.
The unit thereafter identified and explained the use of charts and matrices in manpower planning.
The practice in the civil service was then discussed.
In the process, factors considered in the carrying out the exercise were equally identified and explained.
6.0 TUTOR-MARKED ASSIGNMENT Explain the step-by-step procedures in carrying out manpower planning and budgeting in the civil service.
7.0 REFERENCES/FURTHER READING Ebegbuna , E.O (1992).
“Staff Inspection and Manpower Budgeting” in, Yahaya, A. D. & Akinyele, C. I.
(Eds).
New Trends in Personnel Management: A Book of Readings.
Badagry: ASCON Press.
Maduabun, C.P.
(2008).
The Mechanics of Public Administration in Nigeria.
Lagos: Concept Publications.
Maduabun, C.P.
(1998).
Perspectives on Manpower Planning and Development in Nigeria: Text and Cases.
Badagry: ASCON Press.
Oguniyi, I.O (1992).
“Manpower Planning: Issues and Problems in Nigeria.” In: Yahaya, A.D. & .
Akinyele, C. I.
(Eds)..New Trends in Personnel Management: A Book of Readings.
Badagry: ASCON Press.
27  PSM 813 PERSONNEL MANAGEMENT IN GOVERNMENT UNIT 4 PERSONNEL PROCUREMENT CONTENTS 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objectives 3.0 Main Content 3.1 The Processes Involved in the Procurement Function 3.2 Personnel Procurement Exercise in the Civil Service 3.3 Secondment and Transfer 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutor-Marked Assignment 7.0 References/Further Reading 1.0 INTRODUCTION This becomes necessary after vacancies are declared as a consequence of manpower planning and budgeting undertaken.
Personnel procurement means the acquisition of the individual men and women, which an organisation requires for its tasks.
It also refers to the employment of persons that an organisation requires for its tasks.
Based on the unanimity of perception, the procurement function is a composite of activities at the end of which somebody or a number of persons emerge as employees (Flippo, 1980:39; Armstrong, 1984:132; Omale, 1992: 47; Aina, 2005:85; and Obisi 1986:24).
In many organisations, procurement and processes involved in it are fairly routinised.
Its importance is underscored by the fact that if the processes of engaging employees are badly done, the right caliber of personnel would be procured and in effect, organizational objectives would not be attained.
2.0 OBJECTIVES At the end of this unit, you should be able to: • explain the processes involved in personnel procurement • analyse the personnel procurement practice in the civil service • differentiate between appointment, secondment and transfer.
28  PSM 813 MODULE 1 3.0 MAIN CONTENT 3.1 The Processes Involved in the Procurement Function These are: 1.
Pre-Procurement Preparation Here, we • Identify the vacant positions • Analyse the jobs of those positions in order to determine the job description (schedule of duties) and job specification (what it takes in terms of requirement (qualifications ) etc to carry out that schedule of duty; and • Seek authorisation to fill the vacancies.
2.
Recruitment This is the next stage in the process.
In this process, prospective candidates are attracted to an employment opportunity.
It entails all the activities that are undertaken to make prospective candidates sufficiently interested as to apply for employment.
Such activities range from all sorts of advertisements, use of town criers, use of recruitment agencies, visits to institutions to even walk-ins etc.
This process ends when applications are being received after the deadline for such applications and its success is determined by the quantity of applications received and the quarters from which such applications emerge.
It is instructive to note that unlike the impression being created particularly in the civil service ‘‘Recruitment’’ is not synonymous with ‘‘Employment’’ or ‘‘Appointment’ ’ because, as we can see from the explanation above, Recruitment is just a second stage in the Employment process.
About this wrong perception Omale (1992:47) states: • The Civil Service hardly sees recruitment in its proper conceptual perspective.
In the Civil Service, Recruitment is tantamount to Employment, i. e all that it takes to get an applicant interested in a job in the organisation, through examining or interviewing him, to issuing him a letter of appointment.
In its conceptual and restricted sense, however, recruitment is that process which starts from getting an applicant interested enough in a job and in a particular organisation to write an application, and the process stops when his application has been received in the organisation.
Thus, recruitment is the salesmanship which organisations do of themselves and the various jobs they have for filling.
3.
Selection 29  PSM 813 PERSONNEL MANAGEMENT IN GOVERNMENT This process is a system of sieving, a system of eliminating the bad and picking the good.
Here are a composite of several processes such as: • Short listing: Where we use the Job Specification to identify those who are prima facie suitably qualified and invite them to the next stage of the selection process • Testing: Where one form of written test or the other is administered in order to get the best candidates.
This purpose is better achieved where and when the job to be performed is reduced to testable forms and neutral but professional bodies involved in its execution.
The Administrative Staff College of Nigeria (ASCON) is very proficient in this, having acquired enormous experience in carrying out the assignment for such organs as The National Assembly Service Commission, the Lagos State Civil Service Commission, the Head of Service Delta State; the Head of Service Kano State; the Petroleum Equalisation Fund Management Board, the Petroleum Technology Development Fund (PTDF); Office of Head of Service of the Federation etc.
• Interviewing: in which the candidates appear face-to-face before a panel comprising of leaders of the organisation.
Here, questions and answers are provided, during which the panelists score the candidates based on desired qualities.
In the civil service, this job is done both by the Civil Service Commission and the Personnel Management Board/Committees.
• Conducting Physical and health Examination to determine the suitability of the selected candidates health-wise ; and • Appointing, where letters of appointment are issued to successful candidates.
• On resumption however, appointed candidates should be placed in positions for which they applied.
Failure to do this as in some cases in the civil service, amounts to mismatching the candidates and their jobs; an action that can only produce negative results.
3.2 Personnel Procurement Exercise in the Civil Service As earlier explained, the Civil Service Commission is statutorily responsible for carrying out this process through the length and breadth of the Civil Service.
However, in doing this, the Commission is restricted to recruiting and appointing officers on entry points, that is, grade levels 07 to 10.The implication is that at entry points, federal, state or local government character is expected to be reflected, that is, Geographical Spread aimed at fulfilling part of the requirement of 30  PSM 813 MODULE 1 federalism.
And the Civil Service Commission is entrusted with that responsibility.
The filling of all other positions has been delegated to the Ministries and Extra-Ministerial Departments/Offices by the Commission.
In doing this, Ministries and Extra-Ministerial Departments/Offices are expected to carry out a thorough Job Analysis, determine duties and tasks to be performed (Job Description or Schedule of Duties) which would enable them to, through their appropriate personnel Management Board or Committee procure the appropriate candidate.
In addition, they are expected to adhere strictly to the approved scheme of service.
Candidates seeking appointment to a Ministry/Extra – Ministerial Department/Office should obtain and fill, a complete duplicate “Application Forms” from the Ministry/Department of their choice or the Civil Service Commission.
While one of the completed forms is returned to the Ministry, its duplicate is submitted to the Civil Service Commission.
For a detailed analysis of this procedure we reproduce hereunder the guidelines provided by the Federal Civil Service Commission.
1.
Appointment To be eligible for permanent and pensionable appointment into the Federal Civil Service, the applicant must be a Nigeria as defined in the Constitution of the Federal Republic of Nigeria.
In addition, the applicant must: (a) Possess a certificate signed by the Chairman or Secretary of his Local Government indicating his State of Origin and Local Government Area (b) Not be less than 16 years and not more than 45 years of age (c) Possess such minimum qualifications as are specific in the approved scheme of service (d) Be certified by a Government Medical Officer as medically fit (e) Possess a testimonial of good conduct from his last employer of if not previously employed, from the last school or institution attended (f) State whether or not he has been convicted of a criminal offence (g) State all employment he was engaged in and, if he had left any employment, why he did so or if he is still in any employment whether or not he is under any obligation to remain in it (h) State whether or not he is free from financial embarrassment and 31  PSM 813 PERSONNEL MANAGEMENT IN GOVERNMENT (i) Possess the NYSC discharge or exemption certificate where applicable.
2.
Appointment of Junior Posts (a) The Commission delegates the recruitment of junior staff on salary Grade Levels 01 – 06 to Ministerial Offices which shall be required to adhere strictly to the character principle in the employment of staff within these grade levels.
To ensure compliance with this requirement and for the purpose of monitoring the exercise of this delegated power, quarterly returns of appointments made shall be forwarded to the Federal Civil Service Commission not later than one month after the end of the preceding quarter.
(b) At the State/Zonal level, each Ministry/Extra-Ministerial Office shall have its own Junior Staff Committee which shall fill vacancies with the indigenes of that State/Zone who possess the qualifications prescribed in the approved Scheme of Service.
(c) No holder of a degree, HND, NCE, or their equivalent shall be employed into a junior post, (d) The Chairman of the State Civil Service Commission or his Representative shall attend the Junior Staff Committee meeting at the local level for appointment matters as an observer.
Notice of all meetings together with the memoranda and agenda shall be forwarded to the Chairman of the State Civil Service Commission, ten working days before the meetings.
(e) At the beginning of each year, the Headquarters of each Ministry/Extra-Ministerial Office shall work out the actual establishment for each state/zonal office and forward to the Federal Civil Service Commission for information.
(f) Recommendations of the Junior Staff Committee of each Ministry/Extra-Ministerial Office shall be submitted to the Permanent Secretary of the Ministry for approval and implementation and thereafter to the Federal Civil Commission for Information.
(g) Any Ministry operating on Zone basis shall involve the State Civil Service Commissions of the State in that Zone as in sub section (iv) above.
(h) All recruitments shall reflect the geographical spread within the states covered by the Zonal Office.
(I ) The procedure for appointment shall be the same as in appointment to senior posts.
32  PSM 813 MODULE 1 3.
Appointment to Senior Posts (a) Appointment to posts graded Grade Levels 07 – 10: is undertaken directly by the Federal Civil Service Commission.
(b) Appointment to posts graded Grade Levels 12 and 13 is undertaken directly by the Federal Civil Service Commission after due advertisement as the need arises (c) Appointment to posts graded Grade Levels 14 – 17: is undertaken directly by the Federal Civil Service Commission.
Applications for appointment to these grades shall be in response to advertisements and shall be routed through the head of the Civil Service of the Federation who may add his comments, if any, before forwarding them to the Federal Civil Service Commission for consideration.
4.
Application Forms All applicants for senior posts in the Civil Service must obtain and return completed application forms to the Federal Civil Service Commission.
5.
Advertisement All direct appointments, including transfer to posts graded, Grade Level 12 and above, shall be by open advertisement.
Such advertisements shall be made by the Commission but with inputs provided by the relevant Ministry/Extra-Ministerial Office with regards to the relevant qualifications and experience required for the advertised post, vacant position and nominal roll indicating the antecedents of serving officers in the post immediately below the advertised posts.
Where the posts into which the appointments are to be made are graded, Grade Levels 14 and above, the commission shall advertise the posts and forward the replies to the Ministry/Extra- Ministerial Office concerned for short-listing.
The result of the short-listing and the comments of the Ministry shall be returned to Commission through the Office of the Head of the Civil Service of the Federation.
Advertisements shall be published twice in three National Dailies and response of applications must reach the Commission within six weeks from the date of first publication.
6.
Interview The Commission shall interview all eligible candidates for senior posts.
The Permanent Secretary of the Commission shall sign letters of appointment or any other officer(s) designated by him.
Such letters will derive their authority from the approved minutes 33  PSM 813 PERSONNEL MANAGEMENT IN GOVERNMENT of the Commission or as otherwise directed by the Commission.
Where an applicant has accepted an offer of a position that is lower than that for which he initially applied, he shall not after assumption of duty, petition for upgrading or review on account of comparison with his erstwhile or other colleagues.
7.
Confirmation of Appointment The Commission shall carry out confirmation of all probationary appointments.
The Director of Personnel Management of a Ministry/Extra-Ministerial Office shall, as a matter of policy, present to the Senior Staff Committee the names of all officers who are due for confirmation and who in addition to serving for 2 years must have passed the prescribed Civil Service Examinations, where necessary, and shall have earned good reports during the period, for recommendation to the Federal Civil Service Commission for approval and gazetting.
8.
Temporary Appointment The recruitment of persons into temporary positions by Ministries and Extra-Ministerial Offices is hereby abolished.
A breach of this rule shall be an offence, which may attract appropriate disciplinary action, including surcharge.
9.
Acting Appointment Acting appointments, subject to vacancy ; shall be approved by the Commission on the recommendation of the Senior Staff Committee, provided officers so recommended have spent at least one year on the substantive grades of Grade levels 07 – 13 and two (2) years on the substantive grades of Grade Levels 14 – 16, as the case may be.
The commission shall issue the Movement Forms for gazette action.
10.
Special Appointment All Ministries/Extra-Ministerial Offices shall accept appointments made by the Commission to National Youth Service Corps Presidential Merit Award Winners whose employment is automatic regardless of vacancy constraint.
Similarly, where there are vacancies, the Presidential order, which grants disabled persons special concession in appointments to posts in the public services, must be respected.
11.
Contract Appointment (a).
Contract appointment may be offered to expatriates ONLY when suitable Nigerians are not available.
(b) Nigerians may be appointed on contract terms: (i) If they are pensioners; or (ii) If they are 45 years of age or over at the time they are being appointed.
(iii) If they specifically request to be employed on contract terms and it is deemed in the best interest of the service 34  PSM 813 MODULE 1 (c) For non-Nigerians, the provisions of the Public Service Rules regarding contract appointments, shall apply in all cases (d) Non-Nigerian women married to Nigerians shall remain on contract until granted Nigerian citizenship before being considered for permanent appointment.
(e) The Federal Civil Service Commission shall offer contract appointments.
SELF -ASSESSMENT EXERCISE List the different types of Appointments in the Civil Service 3.3 Secondment and Transfer (a) A transfer is the permanent release of an officer from one scheduled Service to another or from one class to another within the same service (b) Secondment is a temporary release of an officer to the service of another Government agency or international organisation of which Nigeria is a member for a specified period.
The provisions governing transfer and secondment of officers are contained in chapter 2, section 6 of the Public Service Rules and shall be strictly complied with.
Procedure a.
Applications for transfer/secondment to posts graded Grad levels 01 – 06 shall be determined by the Ministry/Extra-Ministerial Office of the applicant’s choice provided the powers are not used to distort the federal character principles The Junior staff Communities shall be responsible for transfer/secondment to posts graded, Grade levels 01 – 06.
There shall be no anticipatory approval by the Chairman of the Committee.
b.
Applications for transfer/secondment to posts graded, grade Levels 07 – 10 in any Ministry/Extra-Ministerial Office shall be determined by the Federal Civil Service Commission.
c. Applications for transfer/secondment to posts on salary Grade Level 12 and above shall be made in duplicate to the federal Civil Service Commission in response to advertisement, while those on Grade Levels 07 – 10 shall be made in the Commission’s application forms.
35  PSM 813 PERSONNEL MANAGEMENT IN GOVERNMENT d. Applications for the transfer/secondment to posts graded Grade levels 12 – 13 shall be in response to an advertisement and shall b e determined by the Federal Civil Service Commission.
1.
Transfer/Secondment to posts graded Grade levels 14 – 17 shall be determined by the Federal Civil Service Commission.
Applications for transfer/seconement to these Grade Levels shall be in response to advertisement and shall be routed through the Head of Civil Service of the Federation who may add his comments, if any, before forwarding them to the Federal Civil Service Commission.
2.
In considering applications for transfer in response to advertised posts attracting salary Grade Levels 12 – 17, a balance shall be maintained between the federal character principle and merit.
3.
Advertisement for all posts graded Grade Levels 12 and above shall be open to both serving officers as well as those outside the service.
4.
All applications for transfer shall be supported by the following documents: (a) Completed Application form for appointment to Federal Civil Service (FORM FCS C2), duly countersigned by the applicant’s employer (b) Evidence of qualifications (c) APER for the 2 years immediately preceding the date of the application (d) Certified copy of officer’s up-to-date Record of Service showing clearly the career progression of the applicant (e) Recommendation from the applicant’s employer, including a statement that the officer will be released if the applicant is successful.
The recommendation must be from the Secretary, Civil Service Commission of the State or Secretary, Local Government Service Commission or Director-General/Head of a Parastatal which is scheduled under the Pension Act as the case may be and (f) Certificate of Local Government/State of Origin 5.
Conditions for Effecting Transfer/Secondment (a) No applicant shall be considered for transfer-on-promotion to any Ministry/Extra-Ministerial Office except in response to an advertised post.
(b) An applicant shall be considered for transfer: (i) if he has been confirmed in his previous service and his qualifications, experience and career progression are in accordance with the scheme of service.
(ii) provided the contemplated transfer would in no way jeopardize the promotion prospects of deserving serving officers; 36  PSM 813 MODULE 1 (iii) where the Commission is satisfied that there are vacancies not only in the relevant grade but also in the applicant’s discipline or specialty; (iv) if he has served in his current grade for the stipulated minimum number of years prescribed for promotion to an advertised post (in respect of serving officers in the Federal, State or Local Government Services) (c) Where an applicant has accepted an offer of a position that is lower than that for which he initially applied, he shall not after assumption of duty, petition for upgrading or review on account of comparison with his erstwhile or other colleagues.
(d) Serving officers accepted on transfer into the Federal Civil Service from state government and other government agencies shall be placed on the post they would have attained by normal promotion, as provided in the schemes of their cadres, if they had joined the Federal, Civil Service in the first instance.
(e) Officers transferred or seconded to the Federal Civil Service shall assume duty within two months from the date of notification of approval of the transfer; otherwise the offer shall be regarded as having lapsed.
(f) Once approval has been granted for transfer or secondment of an Officer’s service, the Federal Civil Service Commission shall simultaneously inform: • the officer • the releasing office/service which should convey the date of the officer’s release • the receiving office/service which should convey the date of officer’s assumption of duty to the Commission.
When the officer’s date of assumption of duty is known, the Federal Civil Service Commission for records and gazette action shall raise a movement form, and copies sent to the Accountant-General of the Federation and the Auditor-General for the Federation.
A Federal Officer who wishes to take up an appointment with another Scheduled organisation should submit his transfer request through the normal channels to the Federal Civil Service Commission.
If he succeeds in securing the appointment, he should give a minimum of one-month notice after which he can assume duty in the new organisation.
However, if the transfer request is not approved, he will be timeously communicated so that he can decide whether to return to his original service or resign his appointment.
37  PSM 813 PERSONNEL MANAGEMENT IN GOVERNMENT Secondment 1.
Secondment at an officer’s request shall be for an initial duration of two years, after which the officer must apply for extension, seek for transfer or return to his original post.
The appropriate Committee shall consider all requests for secondment and extension and its recommendations thereon submitted to the Federal Civil Service Commission.
2.
Secondment on grounds of public policy and its duration shall be at the discretion of the Federal Civil Service Commission.
3.
Ministries/Extra-Ministerial Offices shall send quarterly returns on all of officers who are on secondment to international organisations at the instance of Government to the Commision.
Furthermore, Presidential Order on appointment of Disabled Persons and National Youth Service Corps (NYSC) Presidential Merit Award Recipients is expected to be strictly adhered to.
In the case of the former, the Orders stipulate the granting of concessions while in the later it emphasises automatic appointment.
The appointment of successful candidates either by direct appointment, transfer of service, secondment etc, the resumption of such candidates and their placement on appropriate positions, mark the end of Personnel engagement in the service.
4.0 CONCLUSION Personnel Procurement, as explained so far, is aimed at getting the right candidate to occupy a vacant position.
This can only be successfully undertaken if the attribute of the candidate matches what is thought to likely make for success on the job.
With a good procurement exercise which is systematic and internally consistent, which is checked often for reliability and which is validated using job specification, the right candidate is likely to be procured.
And in the civil service a lot depends on the Civil Service Commission and other relevant organs.
5.0 SUMMARY This unit has so far demonstrated that for the right candidate to be procured into the Civil Service, the various organs that are expected to contribute one way or the other must discharge their responsibilities creditably.
This informed first, the identification of these organs and their respective responsibilities , then the processes that must be undertaken etc.
This unit equally identified and explained all forms of 38  PSM 813 MODULE 1 appointments and further extended the discussion to the issue of transfer of service and secondment.
6.0 TUTOR-MARKED ASSIGNMENT i.
Describe the various types of appointment in the Civil Service.
ii.
Differentiate between Transfer of Service and Secondment.
7.0 REFERENCES/FURTHER READING Armstrong, M.A.
(1984).
Handbook of Personnel Management Practice.
London: Kogan Page Limited.
British Department of Employment and, Productivity (1976).
“Company Manpower Planning.” Manpower Papers No.
1, London.
Federal Republic of Nigeria (2001).
“Guidelines on Issues of Personnel.” Maduabum, C.P.
(1998).
Perspectives on Manpower Planning and Development in Nigeria: Text and Cases.
Badagry: ASCON Press.
Maduabum, C.P., (2008).
The Mechanics of Public Administration in Nigeria.
Badagry: ASCON Press.
Management in the Civil Service of Nigeria.
Abuja: Federal Civil Service Commission.
Obisi, C. (1996).
Personnel Management in Nigeria.
Lagos: KACKBOD Enterprises.
39  PSM 813 PERSONNEL MANAGEMENT IN GOVERNMENT 40  PSM 813 PERSONEEL MANAGEMENT IN GOVERNMENT MODULE 2 TRAINING AND DEVELOPMENT Unit 1 Training and Development Unit 2 Performance Appraisal Unit 3 Promotion and Discipline Unit 4 Wage/Salary Administration Unit 5 Employee Welfare Services Unit 6 Industrial Relations UNIT 1 TRAINING AND DEVELOPMENT CONTENTS 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objectives 3.0 Main Content 3.1 Conceptual Clarifications 3.2 Institutional Arrangement for Training in the Civil Service 3.3 Training Institutions 3.4 Arrangement under which an Officer Can Go on Training in the Civil Service 3.5 General Guiding Principles 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutor-Marked Assignment 7.0 References/Further Reading 1.0 INTRODUCTION As far back as the mid-70s, the Public Service Review Commission (alias Udoji) made the following observations about training as being the centrality of Human Capital Development in the Nigerian Public Service.
Training is a continuous activity from recruitment (induction and orientation to retirement ….. Training is vitally important for our Public services.
We need to train people who are result-oriented, who can recognise opportunities and meet objectives… Our findings re- emphasise the importance of training.
Training will be the most urgent consideration in accepting and implementing our report (Federal Republic of Nigeria 1974 :19-21).
41 None PSM 813 PERSONEEL MANAGEMENT IN GOVERNMENT 2.0 OBJECTIVES At the end of this unit, you should be able to: • explain the concepts of training and development • differentiate between training and development • explain the institutional arrangement for training in the Service • outline the different arrangements under which an officer can go on training in the Civil Service.
3.0 MAIN CONTENT 3.1 Conceptual Clarifications As a concept, training encompasses those acts, events and episodes in which people engage to improve their performance in specific job- related test (Jahns, 1981: 107).
Various other perceptions are derived from this.
For instance: 1.
Training is the modification of behavior through learning experience (Lynton and Pareek.
1978:48).
2.
Training is the development of a person’s knowledge, skills and attitudes for a vocational purpose (Reilly, 1979:22).
3.
Training refers to the teaching/learning activities carried out for the primary purpose of helping members of an organisation to acquire and apply knowledge, skills, abilities and attitudes needed by that organisation to carry out its mission (Otto and Glaser, 1970:34) Our conclusion from the forgoing is that training provides the opportunity for the: • Employee to acquire or update the already acquired knowledge, skills and attitude (KSA) required performing in a given position.
Development on the other hand, is • Described by Tracey, (1979:49) as an organised set of experiences designed to improve the job performances of an individual in his current position and to prepare personnel with potentials for advancement to a higher more responsible position in the enterprise.
We explained elsewhere, the interrelationship between training and development which we, of course, traced right from education.
This is restated hereunder.
41 PSM 813 MODULE 2 • …while education is generalising and provides an individual with the basic knowledge, skills and attitudes to qualify him for a given position, training focuses on improved competence to perform in that position while development is concerned with enabling him contend with higher responsibilities that accompany higher positions along his career path.
(Maduabum, 2001:10).
Of course we know that “approaches to training” which influence the type of training policy to be enunciated in whatever organisation are: The Administrative Approach; the Welfare Approach, the Political Approach; the Organisational Development Approach and the Systematic Approach.
And that the systematic approach which is the most scientific and objective approach emphasises on a step-by-step approach to training such as, first identifying who needs training and the type of training needed, then assigning the most appropriate training to meet the identified needs, then implementing the training so designed; and finally, evaluating the worth or impact of the training both immediately after the training and later on the job performances.
3.2 Institutional Arrangement for Training in the Civil Service In the Civil Service particularly at the federal level are the following: a.
Ministerial Training Committees (MTCs) Established via a Circular (No SMD/1907/48 of 13th January, 1987) to among others, ensure that staff development programmes produced for the organisation satisfy the following criteria: increase the efficiency and effectiveness of personnel in their present jobs, develop and harness the potentials of officers fully and prepare them to assume higher responsibilities, motivate personnel constructively to make maximum contributions to current and future operations of their organisations etc.
b.
Training Liaison Officers: (TLOs) established via a Circular (No SMD/1954 of 14th March, 1988) to among others: monitor training activities and operations of training committees.
Provide guidelines and information on developments and issues relating to training.
Assist in implementing training programme etc.
c. Departmental Training Officers: (DTOs) established via a Circular (No 1907/48 of 13th January, 1987) to among others: assess staff development needs in his organisation; prepare a programme as to how their training needs can be met; and ensure that the programme is approved and every effort is made to implement it.
In addition, the DTO serves as the liaison Officer between his organisation and the Manpower Development Office 42  PSM 813 PERSONEEL MANAGEMENT IN GOVERNMENT (MDO) Office of Head of Service of the Federation.
(Maduabum, 1966:94-95) The major organ responsible for training in the Service however, is the Manpower Development Office (MDO) in the Office of Head of Service.
This Office has fashioned a development programme which in broad outline, shows the type of training and staff development activities available to any officer in accordance with his needs and potential from the time he joins the civil service to the time he would normally retire.
Under this programme, for instance, the messenger (though the cadre is slated for scraping under a reform Agenda) who wants to convert to a typist can undergo the relevant course at any of the Federal Training Centres located at Maiduguri, Kaduna, Ilorin, Lagos, Enugu and Calabar.
While the clerical officer or typist who wants to convert to the secretarial cadre can undergo the secretarial course at the same institution.
In order to introduce officers on salary grade levels 05 and 06 to rudimentary management concepts, the Office organises supervisory management courses regularly.
Also organised regularly is the induction course designed to introduce newly employed senior officers to the content and context of their jobs, that is, the social, economic and political environment in which they will operate as civil servants.
For the senior officers on grade levels 08 and above, the career development programme is equally comprehensive.
After the induction course, specifically between grade levels 09 and 12, an officer is expected to attend one or more of the middle management courses.
These include: General Management Course (GMC), Personnel Management Course (PMC), Financial Management Course (FMC), Project Management Course (PMC), Manpower Development and Training Course (MDTC) etc.
At grade levels 13 and above, officers are expected to attend advanced courses such as the Advance Management Course (AMC), the Advance Financial Management Course (AFMC), the Advanced Human Resource Management Course (AHRMC) the Advance Project Management Course (APMC), Management Consulting Course (MCC) etc.
Under the decentralised training policy of the Federal Government, each Ministry sponsors her officers with the approval of the central organs-the Manpower Development Office to appropriate courses at the appropriate time.
The Ministries do this through their Departmental Training Officers.
In other words, each ministry has a Departmental Training Officer (DTO) who, in addition to organising induction courses for newly employed professional colleagues and clerical grade officers, acts as a major link between his Ministry and the Manpower Development Office (MDO).
He ascertains his department’s training needs, draws up implementation programmes, 43 PSM 813 MODULE 2 implements those within his competence and refers others to the MDO for implementation.
The Office directly organises trainers’ courses for the DTOs.
Through the Federal Training Centres, it also organises training programmes for confidential secretaries, typists etc.
The management training for all senior civil servants on grade levels 08 and above is provided by the Administrative Staff College of Nigeria (ASCON).
3.3 Training Institutions It is instructive to note that although ASCON is the only institution with a mandate to provide management and administrative training in form of courses, workshops, seminars etc , to the public servants, there are other institutions running similar programmes capitalising on the Federal Government’s Training Liberalisation Policy.
These institutions include: Centre for Management Development (CMD) (although its mandate is on Management Education and Management Trainers Records).
Industrial Training Fund (ITF).
(Although its mandate is on re-imbursing certain expenses incurred in training in the private sector particularly in the industries as a means of compelling the industries to train their staff, in addition to monitoring training activities in the private sector to ensure that they meet minimum standards);.
National Centre for Economic Management and Administration (NCEMA) is already merged with CMD etc.
The National Institute for Policy and Strategic Study (NIPSS) is a unique institution with a mandate to provide a nine-month policy and strategic management course for public servants at the apex of their careers.
There are professionally institutionalised training schools located here and there.
These include: • Prisons Training School and Staff college at Lagos, Kaduna etc • Police College, Staff College and Academy at Lagos, Jos and Kano respectively • Immigration Training School and Staff College at Orlu, Kano and Sokoto • Defence Academy, Staff College and War College at Kaduna, Jaji and Abuja respectively • Customs Training Schools in Lagos etc • Treasury Training School in Lagos • NITEL/NIPOST Training Schools in Lagos etc • A host of others.
44  PSM 813 PERSONEEL MANAGEMENT IN GOVERNMENT 3.4 Arrangements under which an Officer Can Go on Training in the Civil Service Generally, there are six different arrangements under which an officer can go on course in the civil service.
There are: 1 In-service Training - A This category applies to courses funded by the Manpower Development Office, of the Office of Head of Service.
An Officer who undertakes a course under this arrangement would be entitled to have his salary paid while he is on course and would also be entitled to have his tuition as well as other attendant costs borne by the government.
In addition, if the course is undertaken abroad, the officer might be entitled to an appropriate estacode allowance.
2.
In-Service Training – B An officer who goes on a course in this category is entitled to all the benefits enjoyed by an officer who undergoes a similar course under in-service training ‘‘A’’ arrangement.
However, the cost would be borne by his Ministry or Extra-Ministerial Department/Office rather than the Manpower Development Office (MDO) which, in this instance, only gives an approval in principle.
3.
Study Leave with Pay Under this arrangement, the officer bears all the costs attendant to his undertaking the course but would be paid his salary during the period of the course.
4.
Study Leave without Pay An officer who goes on a course under this arrangement not only bears all attendant costs but also does not enjoy his salary during the period of the course 5.
Scholarship Any officer awarded a scholarship either by the government or any other reputable and recognised organisation is automatically entitled to a study leave without pay.
He may enjoy his salary in addition to the scholarship award only under very special circumstances.
6.
Technical Assistance An officer may be lucky to secure the technical assistance of another country or an international organisation to pursue a course.
At best, such an officer would only enjoy an Estacode Supplementation to the award by the donor Agency.
His salary will of course, be paid during the period of the course.
45 PSM 813 MODULE 2 No matter under which of the above six arrangements an officer has to undertake a course, whether locally or abroad, he must secure the written approval of the Manpower Development Office (MDO) of the Office of Head of Service before he abandons his post and proceeds on the course.
Neither his boss nor his Ministry is empowered to authorise him to go on the course before securing the approval of the MDO.
It should be noted that although when an officer may have completed a course of instruction, he may have acquired a qualification which is superior to that acquired in his substantive post, this fact in itself will not be accepted as giving him an automatic claim to an advancement beyond his present substantive post.
His application for such a claim will, in other words, be processed along with those of others and will be considered strictly on its merit.
SELF- ASSESSMENT EXERCISE Outline the different arrangements under which an officer can go on training in the Civil Service.
3.5 General Guiding Principles The following general principles contained in the guidelines issued by the Manpower Development Office in 2004 are to guide training efforts in ministries/Offices: • Officers should, as a first step, be posted to areas of their expertise before they are sponsored on training programmes that will enable them function more effectively.
• Ministries/Offices should conduct in-house induction courses for newly recruited officers in the service within four (4) weeks of appointment.
The Manpower Development Office should organise centralised induction courses for officers recruited or promoted into GL 07 – 10 within three (3) months of their appointment or promotion.
• Officers should not be released for or sponsored on course simply to enable them acquire certificates and qualifications.
Rather, training should be systematic, progressional and aimed primarily at developing skills knowledge and attitudes necessary for performance enhancement of a specific schedule of duties.
• On-the-job and in-house methods of training should be used extensively by ministries and offices, especially in the training of junior staff, as they tend to be cheaper and more effective.
• After training, an officer should be deployed to a post to which the training undertaken applies so that maximum use of the skills 46  PSM 813 PERSONEEL MANAGEMENT IN GOVERNMENT and knowledge acquired can be made and the service can derive full benefits from the investment made in the year.
• In designing and/or identifying courses, efforts should be made to keep course periods to the shortest possible time within which the set objectives can be achieved.
• In implementing training programmes, priority attention should be given to government-owned training institutions.
However, ministries and offices should, whenever desirable, feel free to utilised the services of reputable private management consultancy firms.
Such firms and their principles should be registered members of recognised professional bodies.
• All in-house training programmes conducted by ministries/offices should include in their curricula topics on National ethics and anti-corruption drive in the public service.
In this regard, the service of Code of Conduct Bureau is readily available for use.
4.0 CONCLUSION Against the background of the role of training in the service, government has put everything in place to ensure that the performance of the training function is strengthened, for a more effective service delivery.
The provisions of the guidelines for training in the Federal Civil Service, is one sure way of assisting all arms of the service in discharging their training responsibilities.
5.0 SUMMARY Training and Development ensure acquisition or updating of competence for performing assigned duties and tasks.
The government recognises this hence, all the efforts made to ensure that they are adequately carried out in the service.
In view of this, this unit identified the institutional arrangement for training of officers in the Civil Service, some training institutions, and other arrangements under which officers can undertake courses of instruction .
The unit finally outlined general guiding principles to be strictly observed particularly by the Department Training Officers (DTOs) in performing their functions.
6.0 TUTOR-MARKED ASSIGNMENT Explain the arrangements under which an officer can go on training in the Service.
47 PSM 813 MODULE 2 7.0 REFERENCES/FURTHER READING Federal Republic of Nigeria (1974).
Main Report of the Public Service Review Commission.
Lagos: Federal Ministry of Information, Government Printing Press.
Jinks, M. (1976).
Training of Employees Dorest: Elanfor Press.
Maduabum, C.P.
(2008).
The Mechanics of Public Administration in Nigeria.
Lagos: Concept Publications.
Maduabum, C.P.
(2001).
Capacity Building and Utilisation in Nigeria.
Lagos: Teitlords Publishers Ltd. Reilly, W. (1979).
Training Administrators for Development.
London: Heinemann Ltd. Tracey, W. (1979).
Training and Development Systems.
New York: AMACOM.
48  PSM 813 PERSONEEL MANAGEMENT IN GOVERNMENT UNIT 2 PERFORMANCE APPRAISAL CONTENTS 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objectives 3.0 Main Content 3.1 The Public Service Experience 3.1.1 The Confidential Reporting System 3.1.2 The Open Reporting System 3.1.3 The Target Setting System 3.2 Format of the New System 3.3 Organisational Problems of the APER Forms in the Civil Service 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutor-Marked Assignment 7.0 References/Further Reading 1.0 INTRODUCTION The concept of Performance App raisal enjoys unanimity of perception among authorities.
However, the definition provided by the United States of American Office of Personnel Management appears more comprehensive than many others.
It states: • All periodic written assessment of job performance measured against responsibilities, goals and /or tasks, specific duties assigned and agreed to as well as identification of strengths and weaknesses demonstrated by employees’ potential and training or development needs (US/DPM, 1960: 65).
From the definition above, we could infer that performance appraisal is a regular and continuous process by which the quantity and styles of performance and the various factors that influence performance are assessed and evaluated.
It also involves an appraisal of the growth potential of an employee, with a view to providing organisations with information that not only leads to positive actions but also ensures that individuals are provided with necessary feedback for performance improvements, personnel growth and job satisfaction (Gbeja, 1992: : 137).
The purposes of Performance Appraisal therefore are: 49 PSM 813 MODULE 2 1.
To improve the management of staff resources by helping employees realised and fully utilise their potential while striving to achieve organisational goals; and 2.
To provide employees, supervisors and managers information necessary for decision-making in areas such as Merit , Promotion, Career Development, Reorganisation and Award , Lateral re-assignments and Warning or Counselling.
2.0 OBJECTIVES At the end of this unit, you should be able to: • define performance appraisal • state the objectives of performance appraisal • describe the content of the Annual Performance Evaluation Report (APER) form in use assess the current APER form in use.
3.0 MAIN CONTENT 3.1 The Public Service Experience 3.1.1 The Confidential Reporting System In the Public Service, the system of appraising staff metamorphosed from Confidential Appraisal System, through Open Reporting System and Target Setting System.
It would be recalled that the system inherited from the Colonial Administration was the Confidential Reporting system.
In this system, the officer reported upon had no idea of his assessment.
As the name suggests, it was absolutely confidential.
Although it had its merits such as countering ‘‘window dressing’’ or eye service’’ on the part of the employee/performer, its demerits as identified by the Udoji Commission of 1972-74 were overwhelming.
It was seen as being highly subjective and gave so many powers to the assessors who, in turn, behaved as ‘‘overlords’’.
These criticisms led to its demise and replacement with the ‘‘Open Reporting System’’.
This system, we must acknowledge, was introduced by the Public Service Review Commission (Alias Udoji ) of 1974 and its full application took effect in 1976.
3.1.2 The Open Reporting System The Open Reporting System allows the officer reported upon to have an idea of the assessment of his performance by the reporting officer.
The essence of the Open Reporting System was to enable the employee to be judged on his qualities as they emerge in his work and to develop his potential through training.
The basic elements of the appraisal are: 50  PSM 813 PERSONEEL MANAGEMENT IN GOVERNMENT Power of Analysis • Capacity to anticipate problems and develop solutions in advance and Ability to continue the analysis of a problem until all the relevant aspects have been thoroughly and critically examined.
Imagination • Ability to discern the various possibilities and alternatives which are inherent in problem areas that are not obvious to less perspective observers.
Judgment and Reliability a.
Ability to make consistently sound decisions or proposals and perform competently under pressure.
b. Inspiring And Effective Leadership c. The extent to which the officer is successful in getting things done through people because he is able to inspire and lead them through superior knowledge or example etc.
SELF-ASSESSMENT EXERCISE List the basic elements of appraisal.
Other Characteristics of the Appraisal System Other characteristics of the appraisal system are: • Short range development; and • Ultimate potential of the officer and training • For purposes of promotion and other assessment of officers in a competitive situation, it may be necessary for reports to go through an equalisation process which recognises the characteristics of reporting officers themselves.
• Although Decree No 43 of 1988 endorsed the OPEN Reporting System as the most viable system of appraising staff, it however, provides the following modifications.
• It is obligatory for supervisors to set targets for their subordinates.
These targets should be in Quantity, Quality, Cost and/or /Time.
Directors unlike the Permanent Secretaries were to be annually evaluated.
Each Minister/Commissioner was expected to submit the Report of his Ministry’s Performance to the President every year.
51 PSM 813 MODULE 2 • Evaluation was, thus , based on four criteria • Actual Performance vis-à-vis Standards • Character Traits • Attendance and Punctuality at work • Leadership Performance.
• Instrument for Performance Appraisal Although there are various instruments that can be used for performance appraisal; the one in use in some public service organisations is titled: ‘‘Confidential Annual Performance Evaluation Report” .
(APER Form GEN 79) it has four parts viz: Part 1: Personal Record of Employee, which includes Job Description and ad-hoc duties performed.
Part II To be completed by Reporting Officer.
Here, the performance of Officers reported upon is assessed.
This also contains ratings.
PART III This solicits; other information from reporting officer, such as Training Needs, Promotability, Potentials and General Remarks about officers reported upon.
PART IV Countersigning Officer’ Report (if any): Here, the countersigning officer who should be the overall Head of Department or Organisation as the case may be, endorses or otherwise the report.
In addition, the last page of the form contains.
“Notes on Rating of Aspects of Performances in Paragraph 14” which Reporting Officers are supposed to study carefully before completing the APER Form.
52  PSM 813 PERSONEEL MANAGEMENT IN GOVERNMENT Ratings generally take the Likert Scale Form as indicated hereunder: Table 2.1 S/N A B C D E 1 Foresight 2 Penetration 3 Judgment 4 Expression on Paper 5 Oral Expression 6 Numerical Ability (if Applicable) 7 Relations with Colleagues 8 Relations with Public 9 Acceptance of Responsibility 10 Reliability under pressure 11 Drive and Determination 12 Application of Professional/Technical Knowledge (if Applicable) 13 Management of Staff (if applicable) 14 Output of Work 15 Quality of Work 16 Punctuality Weighting (For Officers On Grade Levels 03 and Above) A (Excellent) - 12 points B Very Good - 10 ” C Good - 8 ” D Satisfactory - 6 ” E Poor - 4 ” When an officer, for instance, scores 6 As and 10 Bs, his % score is 6 x 12 = 72 10 x 10 = 100 172 The base is 12 x 16 = 192 % Score = 172 x100 = 89.58 = 90% 192 x 1 For officers on Grade Levels 01 and 02 the weighting is as follows: A = 3 B = 2½ C = 2 D = 1½ E = 1 53 PSM 813 MODULE 2 Appraisal Interview This is a component of the Open Reporting System.
Here is a dialogue between the appraiser and the appraisee.
The persons to be interviewed should have early notice and re-assured of the purpose of the meeting.
He should be asked to consider his own performance over the period to be reviewed, noting the successes as well as failures, and the contributory factors that had been present in either case.
Furthermore, the appraiser should prepare himself by studying the employee’s job description and agreed standards of performance (and jointly kept to date).
He must ask himself.
• What overall results have been attained by the employee?
• Which results have been greater than forecast and why?
• Which results have been lower than forecast and why?
In these meetings, the appraiser must endeavour to put the employee at ease –the setting should be as informal as possible.
He should acknowledge good work and show him where he could improve.
By so doing, the benefit of performance evaluation will be greatly enhanced by the skillfully managed appraisal interview.
Criticisms of the Open Reporting System This system has been highly criticised for: giving room to subjectivity; assessing more of human characteristics rather than job performance; Assessors operating to the “Gallery” that is pay glowing tribute to an appraise with A ratings in the portion he will see and sign (Part II) and providing a negative comment in the portion he does not see (Part III) (Longe, 1984:6).
Consequently, a new APER Form was introduced in the Civil Service following the provisions of Decree No 43 of 1988.
3.1.3 The Target System The New Civil Service Annual Performance Evaluation Report CSAPER (Target Setting System of Report) This is the new Performance Evaluation Reporting System to be used in evaluating the level of achievement of tasks assigned to officers on grade levels 01-07 in the Civil Service as against target set for each one of them.
While the inputs for carrying out the assessments are gathered daily, weekly, monthly, quarterly etc, the report is completed on or after 31st December of every year.
54  PSM 813 PERSONEEL MANAGEMENT IN GOVERNMENT 3.2 Format of the New APER Two separate APER forms are designed for use throughout the Civil Service.
The form with blue colour is designed for use by officers on grade levels 01 and 02 while the white form is designed for use by officers on grade levels 03 and above.
Essentially, each of the forms is divided into five parts viz: Part 1: Personnel Records/Particulars of the officers reported upon Part II: Target setting, Achievement of target etc Part III: Assessment of Performance, Aspects of Performance etc.
Part IV: Declaration by Reportee and Reporting Officer Part V: Declaration by countersigning officer The white form has 18 paragraphs while the blue has 13.
Generally, the form for officers on grade levels 03 and above is more comprehensive for obvious reasons.
Weighting Procedure In accordance with paragraph 59 of the Guidelines of the Civil Service Reforms, “Annual Performance Evaluation Report” has been allocated 50% as part of the criteria to be used for promotion.
In order therefore, to be able to quantify each performance, the following weight ratings should be applied: Outstanding - A = 6 Very Good - B = 5 Good - C = 4 Satisfactory - D = 3 Fair - E = 2 Poor - F = 1 There are four (4) broad headings in the new Guideline under which officers are to be judged and reported upon.
These are: Job Assessment/General Ability = 14 points Character Traits = 6 ” Work Habits = 4 ” Leadership Performance at work = 4 points = 28 points 55 PSM 813 MODULE 2 To arrive at the maximum points attainable, each of the above factors is multiplied by 6 which is the maximum score allocated for an outstanding performance.
The grand total thus comes to (28 x 6) 168 points.
Put differently, each of the above factors gives a maximum as indicated as follows: Job Assessment (14 x 6) = 84 points Character Traits (6 x ) = 36 ” Work Habit (4 x 6) = 24 ” Leadership Performance = 24 points = 168 points If an officer scores 4 As and 10Bs in Job Assessment (General Ability), His weighting will be (4 x 6 = 24) + (10 x 5 = 50) = 74 84 If he scores 6Bs on Character Traits his weighting will be 5 x 6 = 30 36 points If he scores 2 As and Bs in Leadership Performance (2 x 6 = 12) + (2 x 5 = 10) = 22 24 points If he scores 2 As and 2Bs in Leadership Performance = 2x 6 = + (2 x 5 = 10) 22 24 points His total scores will be Job Assessment (General Ability) = 74 Character Traits = 30 Work Habit = 22 Leadership Performance = 22 148 In order therefore to compute his total score in % as weighted on a maximum of 50% we have.
148 x 100 or 148 x 50 = 44.04 168 2 168 1 50 Inherent Superiority of the New APER Form Over the Old One 56  PSM 813 PERSONEEL MANAGEMENT IN GOVERNMENT Unlike the existing APER Form, the reportee sees everything written on him in the appraisal form before appending his signature.
Costs elements are introduced which novel in traditional Civil Service are setting.
Officers are now to be assessed on the basis of target set, including Performance Standards, previously agreed upon in relation to achievements , unlike hitherto when targets were not specified , and assessment was based on the amorphous job description or describing achievements in jargons.
Date of submission of report to reporting officers is indicated to check undue delay in completing reports.
Reasons are given for rating awarded There is potential for increased dialogue between boss and subordinate on matters relating to work.
It is assumed to be less Judgmental and emotional than the old one.
Much as attractive as it may appear, it requires courage, patience and mental sophistication to operate the new scheme which appears more complex than the old one.
We must however submit that the public service currently is divided in the use of the APER Forms.
While some public service organisations use the old ones as earlier pointed out, others are using the new forms.
3.3 Organisational Problems of the APER Forms in The Civil Service We reproduce hereunder the submission of Omale (1992: 42-43) which appears to capture the scenario in the service: • The procedure for completion and submission of these reports is such that it left a lot of room for fraudulent practices.
The Civil Service Commission has, for example, no way of knowing the names and ascertaining the signatures of the officers responsible for completing and countersigning the reports in the various Ministries.
Under such a situation, an officer could get any “friendly” senior officer to complete the form on him and get it submitted to the Commission.
The malpractice was made easier to penetrate by the frequent and constant movements of staff from Ministry to Ministry and thus, frequent changes in superior and subordinate officers in the Ministries.
57 PSM 813 MODULE 2 Another problem connected with the evaluation reports is the use of three consecutive years’ reports for consideration for promotion or punishment.
Again, perhaps due to large number of these reports and the inadequacies of storage facilities as well as lack of knowledge of storage /retrieval procedures, the incidence of missing reports were rife.
And when reports were missing, substitutes had to be written in arrears and, of course, even where they were written by the same officers, they were certain not to contain the same “facts” as the “lost one”.
Invariably, however, the officers who wrote the original ones would not be available to write the substitutes and so they would have to be written by officers under whom the officer reported upon never worked at the material time, and this occasioned fake reports.
A third problem with respect to these reports is that, with the connivance of clerical staff, officers who have adverse reports could retrieve them from the Civil Service Commission and replace them with favourable ones which they get written for them by “friendly” top officers.
4.0 CONCLUSION What all these problems boil down to is that the tool which the commission uses to assess officers for promotion and or discipline is subject to “fakery” in very many ways.
The consequence of this could have been the advancement of those who least deserve it and the failure to sanction those who deserve sanction.
It is not possible to assess the magnitude of such malpractices but when this is added to the falsification of performance rating which arises as a result of fear or favour, or lack of know-how in the appraisal of staff, one might be correct to attribute much of the mediocrity and inefficiency in the Civil Service to these phenomena.
5.0 SUMMARY This unit commenced by explaining the concept of performance appraisal.
It then stated the objectives of performance appraisal which should expose the performance of employees on the basis of which they are either rewarded positively or negatively.
The unit then described the public service experience thus analysing the system used at various periods such as the Confidential Reporting System, the Open Reporting System; and the Target System.
The unit finally identified inherent problems with appraisal system in the public service.
58  PSM 813 PERSONEEL MANAGEMENT IN GOVERNMENT 6.0 TUTOR-MARKED ASSIGNMENT Compare and contrast the different systems of apprising staff in the Civil service.
7.0 REFERENCES/FURTHER READING Akinyele (ed).
New Trends in Personnel Management: A Book of Readings.
Badagry: ASCON Press.
Gbeja, O.O, (1992).
“Staff Performance Evaluation”, in Ali, D. Y.
& C. I. Akinyele (ed).
New Trends in Personnel Management: A Book of Readings.
Badagry: ASCON Press.
Maduabum, C.P (2006).
Reforming Government Bureaucracies in Nigeria: The Journey So Far.
Badagry: ASCON Press.
Omale, I.
(1992).
“Past Practices in Personnel Management in the Nigerian Civil Service: Issues and Procedures” in Ali, D. Y.
& C. I.
United States of America (1980).
Guide for Improving Performance Appraisal , Office of Personnel Management US/OPM Washington D.C: Government Printing Office.
59 PSM 813 MODULE 2 UNIT 3 PROMOTION AND DISCIPLINE CONTENTS 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objectives 3.0 Main Content 3.1 Guidelines on Promotion Matters 3.2 Discipline: Defined 3.3 Disciplinary Procedures 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutor-Marked Assignment 7.0 References/Further Reading 1.0 INTRODUCTION Simply put, promotion is the elevation or an advancement of an employee from his present position to a superior position.
The understanding is that he is matured after relevant training and job experience to be advanced.
In other words, his current capabilities can only be more fully realised in the advanced position.
In the Civil Service, this is done subject to availability of vacancies.
In other words, promotion is not a right but a privilege that must be earned.
Similarly, people face sanctions where their behavior in the work place runs counter to the norms or standards.
This sanctions which is called discipline is aimed at correcting the misbehavior.
2.0 OBJECTIVES At the end of this unit, you should be able to: • explain the concepts of promotion and discipline • outline the guidelines provided by the Civil Service Commission on promotion Matters • outline the disciplinary procedures in the Public Service.
3.0 MAIN CONTENT 3.1 Guidelines on Promotion Matters The following guidelines on promotion matters are however, provided by the Civil Service Commission: 60  PSM 813 PERSONEEL MANAGEMENT IN GOVERNMENT (a) Promotion to Posts Graded Levels 02 - 06 (i) Junior Staff Committee (Headquarters/Local) There shall be established in each Ministry/Extra- Ministerial Office (as a delegated body) a Junior Staff Committee which shall be empowered to interview eligible officers and recommend their promotion to posts graded Grade levels 02 – 06 to the Permanent Secretary for approval and implementation.
The Committee shall also recommend to the Permanent Secretary, for approval and implementation, the upgrading and conversion of eligible officers to the grades.
(ii) The Ministry/Office shall forward returns on the promotion of the affected officers to the Federal Civil Service Commission within 3 weeks of the completion of the exercise for purposes of information, monitoring and statistics.
(iii) Movement Forms for gazeting action shall be signed by the Director of Personnel Management of the Ministry/Extra-Ministerial Office.
Promotion exercise shall be undertaken by the Junior Staff Committee based on the following requirements: • Number of available vacancies • only officers who should have spent a minimum of 2 years on a grade on the date of promotion shall be considered for promotion to the next grade • seniority list of all the officers showing such antecedents as state of origin, date of birth, dates of first and present appointments • the APER for the last two years • where interview/examination is involved, marks shall be awarded as follows: Interview “ “ “ “ “ 70% APER “ “ “ “ “ 20% Seniority “ “ “ “ “ 10% Overall P ass Mark` “ “ “ “ 60% • Where the Scheme of Service prescribes the passing of an examination as a condition for promotion, such examination shall be regarded as a prerequisite for consideration.
• Officers who have pending disciplinary cases against them shall not be considered for promotion until they are cleared.
An officer who is cleared from a disciplinary case may be considered for notional promotion if his colleagues have been promoted during that period provided that other criteria for promotion are satisfied.
61 PSM 813 MODULE 2 (b) Promotion to Posts Graded Grade Levels 07 - 14 (i) The Senior Staff Committee in each Ministry/Extra- Ministerial Office shall be charged with the responsibility of recommending eligible officers for promotion/upgrading and conversation to posts on salary Grade levels 07 – 14 to the Federal Civil Service Commission.
(ii) There shall be one Senior Staff Committee in the Office of the Head of the Civil service of the Federation to be charged with the responsibility of recommending eligible officers for promotion/upgrading and conversion to posts on salary Grade Levels 07 – 14 to the Federal Civil Service Commission in respect of the following pool cadres: • Administrative Officer/Executive Officer Cadres • Library/Stores/Secretarial/Reportorial Cadres (iii) Ministries that house cadres of pooled officers, such as • Accountants • Auditors (External) • Engineers/Architects/Surveyors/Technicians, etc • Information Officers • Legal Officers • Medical/Health and Auxiliary Officers, shall have Senior Staff Committee which shall be charged with the responsibility of recommending eligible officers for promotion/upgrading and conversion to posts on salary Grade Levels 07 – 14 to the Federal Civil Service Commission.
(iv) The Permanent Secretary of the Ministry/Extra-Ministerial Office, the Accountant-General of the Federation, the Auditor-General of the Federation as the case may be, shall be the Chairman of the Senior Staff Committee.
Other members shall be all the Directors in the Ministry/Office.
The Director of Personnel Management shall be a Member/Secretary of the Committee.
• A Commissioner of the Federal Civil Service Commission shall attend meetings of the Senior Staff Committee as an Observer.
His absence from the meeting of the Senior Staff Committee shall render its proceedings null and void.
• Quorum shall be a simple majority of the membership.
(v) In forwarding the recommendations for promotion to the Commission, the following information must be provided: (a) Number of available vacancies 62  PSM 813 PERSONEEL MANAGEMENT IN GOVERNMENT (b) Seniority list of all the officers in the field of selection showing such antecedents as State of origin, date of birth, dates of first appointment and confirmation and present appointments.
(c) The last three years APER scores together with the average for all the officers within the field of selection.
(d) Interview scores of the officers; (e) only officers who should have spent a minimum of 2 years on grade Level 06, a minimum of 3 years on grade Levels 07 – 14.
And a minimum of 4 years on Grade levels15 and 16 on the date of promotion shall be considered for promotion to the next grade.
(vi) Promotion from Grade Levels 06 – 07 shall be preceded by an interview/examination, except where a grade level 06 post is a training post, in which case, advancement from Grade level 06 to 07 shall be based on satisfactory report on the officer.
(vii) Where promotion from grade Levels 08 – 09 is not subject to vacancy but subject to confirmation of appointment, the affected officers shall not be promoted until they have been confirmed.
(viii) Promotion criteria shall be weighted as follows: Interview: “ “ “ 70% APER “ “ “ 20% Seniority “ “ “ 10% (2 marks for each year after Maturity) Overall Pass mark “ “ 60% (ix) Officers on Grade Levels 07 – 13 shall be interviewed/examined by The Senior Staff Committee.
(x) Officers who have pending disciplinary cases shall not be considered for promotion until they are cleared.
(xi) Recommendations from the Senior Staff Committee shall be submitted to the Federal Civil Service Commission not later than six weeks from the date of the last meeting of the Committee.
SELF- ASSESSMENT EXERCISE Outline the information that must accompany recommendations to the Civil Service Commission for promotion.
(c) Promotion to Posts graded Grade Levels 15 - 17 (i) The senior Staff Committees of Ministries and Pool Officers shall make recommendations for promotion to 63 PSM 813 MODULE 2 posts graded Grade Levels 15 – 17 to the Federal Civil Service Commission.
In forwarding the recommendations to the Commission, the following information must be provided: • Number of available vacancies; • Only officers who should have spent a minimum of 3 years on Grade Level 14 and 4 years on Grade Levels 15 and 16 on the date of the promotion shall be considered to the next grade; • Seniority list of all officers in the field of selection, showing Such antecedents as state of origin, date of birth, dates of first Appointment, confirmation and present appointments; • The scores for the last three years with the average score for all Officers within the field of selection; • Where the Scheme of Service prescribes the passing of an examination as a condition for promotion, such examination shall be regarded as a prerequisite for consideration; • Officers who have pending disciplinary cases against them shall not be considered for promotion until they are cleared.
An Officer who is cleared from a disciplinary case may be considered for notional promotion if his colleagues had been promoted during that Period provided that other criteria for promotion are satisfied.
(ii) The Head of Civil Service of the Federation may add his comments, if any, before forwarding the recommendations to the Federal Civil Service Commission.
(d) Vacancies (i) Promotion shall be subject to availability of vacancies, except where otherwise indicated in the Scheme of service.
Ministries shall declare vacancies to the Commission within three months of the approval of the annual budget.
Failure to do so may attract appropriate sanction against erring Ministries.
As a means of authenticating the vacancies, a master list of approved vacancies for the current year shall be forwarded to the Commission by the Office of Establishments and Management Services each year.
(e) Promotion Interview (i) All officers due for promotion shall take written examinations.
Officers on grade Levels 07 – 13 shall be interviewed/examined by the Senior Staff Committees while officers on Grade Levels 14 – 16 shall be 64  PSM 813 PERSONEEL MANAGEMENT IN GOVERNMENT interviewed/examined by the Federal Civil Service Commission.
A Representative of the Head of Civil Service shall be present at the interview/examination of officers on Grade Levels 14 and 16 as an observer.
(ii) In order to ensure fairness to all attending a promotion interview, they shall all be asked the same questions which must be set at the time and place of the interview.
Where it is not possible to complete the interview in one day, fresh questions of equal weight shall be drawn on subsequent days.
(iii) Interview/examination marks shall be awarded as follows: Interview “ “ “ “ 70% APER “ “ “ “ 20% Seniority “ “ “ 10% Overall Pass Mark “ “ 60% (f) Effective Date of Promotion Effective date of promotion shall be 1st January, following the promotion exercise (g) Notional Promotion Officers on approved leave of absence, secondment, approved study leave with pay, special assignment, etc., who fall within the field of selection shall on return appear for an interview/examination and, if successful, be granted notional promotion to put them at par with their colleagues.
Officers on approved study leave without pay may be considered for notional promotion on their return to duty after the successful completion of the course but such officers shall first appear for a promotion interview/examination and meet the criteria for promotion.
(h) Conversions All conversions from one cadre to another shall be based on the acquisition of the qualifications prescribed in the approved Scheme of Service for the cadre to which the officer seeks to convert and the possession of cognate experience.
The notional date of conversion shall be the date the officer acquired the qualification or when vacancies occurred, which is the later while the actual effective date (for remuneration) shall be January 1, following the date of conversion (i) Contract Officers (i) Recommendations for the offer of contract appointment to an officer shall be made by the relevant Senior Staff Committee to the Federal Civil Service Commission for consideration.
(ii) Contract officers are eligible for promotion where there are vacancies but such promotion shall not jeopardise the chances of serving career officers.
However, officers who 65 PSM 813 MODULE 2 have retired from the public service and are retained on contract appointment shall not be eligible for promotion.
All contract appointments shall be subject to review annually and recommendations for renewal shall be submitted to the Federal Civil Service Commission for consideration.
(j) Appeal on Promotion Matters Aggrieved officers may petition within six months after the promotion exercise.
However, where a petition is submitted after six months of a decision, the petitioner shall explain the reason for the delay; otherwise the petition shall not be entertained.
3.2 Discipline: Defined The Public Service, just like any other organisation has its Norms, Values, Interests, and Standards of Behaviours etc.
In order to ensure compliance to these, there are corresponding sanctions for non- compliance.
This is what discipline entails.
That is, modification of employee’s behavior through sanctions or punishment.
Some of the punishable offences in the service are: late coming, absenteeism without permission; inefficiency, leaking of official secrets; dishonesty, corruption; drunkenness, false claims against government, foul language; insubordination or disobedience of lawful order, falsification or suppression of records; failure to keep records, financial embarrassment; engaging in business without authority, engaging in political activities; and acts prejudicial to state security etc.
Where any or some of these offences are committed, the appropriate Personnel Management Organ invokes its instruments for maintaining discipline.
These instruments include: Public Service Rules, Notes for Guidance; Financial Regulation; and Policy Circulars.
In these documents are clearly stated the type of punishment which any of the mentioned offences will attract.
Some of these types of punishment include: verbal and written queries and warnings; reprimand; severe reprimand; reduction in rank, with holding of salary increment; termination of appointment, compulsory retirement; and outright dismissal.
Again, we state hereunder, the guidelines provided by the Civil Service Commission in this regard.
3.3 Disciplinary Procedures A.
If the Permanent Secretary is of the opinion that disciplinary proceedings should be instituted against any officer, he shall instruct the appropriate staff committee through the Director of 66  PSM 813 PERSONEEL MANAGEMENT IN GOVERNMENT Personnel Management to initiate such proceedings in accordance with these Guidelines.
B.
(i) Any act of misconduct by an officer shall without delay be dealt with under these guidelines.
(ii) Any case of misconduct for which adequate provision is not made under these guidelines shall be reported to the Commission, and the Commission shall issue guidelines as to how the case shall be dealt with.
C. Any disciplinary proceeding against a female officer, which would otherwise have been taken during the time of her maternity leave, shall be postponed until her maternity leave has expired.
D. If it appears, while the institution of disciplinary proceedings is being contemplated, or in the course of an inquiry or investigation that an offence against any enactment may have been committed by an officer, the institution or continuation of such disciplinary proceedings shall be postponed and the Director of Personnel Management shall, on the direction of the appropriate authority, unless the Police have taken action, refer the matter to the Attorney-General of the Federation.
If the Attorney-General does not consider it desirable to institute criminal proceedings, the Director of Personnel Management shall, on the direction of the Permanent Secretary, prepare disciplinary charges against the officer.
E. If criminal proceedings are instituted against an officer in any court of law, disciplinary proceedings upon any ground involved in the criminal charge may not be taken until after the conclusion of the criminal proceedings and the determination of any appeal therefrom.
However, disciplinary action may be taken on the non-criminal aspects of the officer’s conduct, or on any other charges arising out of his conduct, in the matter, provided that such charges do not raise substantially the same issues as those of which he has been acquitted.
F. If disciplinary proceedings for an officer’s dismissal are instituted or are about to be in instituted, and the Permanent Secretary considers that the interest of the Civil Service requires that such officer should cease forthwith to exercise the powers and functions of his office, he may; (i) Interdict him if he holds a permanent appointment; or (ii) Terminate his appointment, by payment of the appropriate remuneration in lieu of notice, if the officer holds a temporary appointment.
G. If criminal proceedings are instituted against an officer or are about to be instituted, the Permanent Secretary may suspend him 67 PSM 813 MODULE 2 from service until the determination of the proceedings or any appeal there from.
H. (i) Where the Director of Personnel Management considers that an officer should.
be interdicted under Rule F or suspended under Rule G, he shall report the case with the recommendations to the permanent Secretary (ii) Where the Permanent Secretary is satisfied, after considering the report and recommendation of the Director of Personnel Management that an officer should be interdicted under Rule F or suspended under Rule G, he may order the officer to cease to exercise any powers and functions and the Permanent Secretary shall cause the case to be referred to the appropriate Committee which may confirm or deal with it otherwise.
(iii) If an officer is interdicted or suspended, he shall be informed in writing and the interdiction or suspension shall take effect from the date he is so informed.
(iv) If the criminal proceedings against a suspended officer result in his acquittal, or if the disciplinary proceedings against him (including any disciplinary proceedings with a view to dismissal instituted or continued in punishment of Rule D) result otherwise than in his dismissal, he shall be reinstated in his office by the disciplinary authority with effect from the date of the suspension or interdiction.
(v) Under no condition should interdiction or suspension be made to last more than 3 months in the first instance.
Where the need for extension arises, the permission of the Federal Civil Service Commission shall be obtained.
Any officer who is interdicted shall not leave his station without the permission of the Permanent Secretary, and shall keep the Director of Personnel informed of the address at which instructions to him can be delivered.
If he fails to comply with instructions delivered at such address within twenty-four hours of such delivery, he shall be regarded as being absent from duty without leave.
Where an officer under interdiction has received permission from the Permanent Secretary to leave his station, any condition imposed by the Permanent Secretary in respect of his so leaving, shall be complied with by him and failure to do so may be regarded as misconduct for which disciplinary proceedings may be instituted under these , Guidelines J.
(i) An officer who is under interdiction shall, subject to the provisions of Rule 1, receive such salary , not more than one half of his monthly remuneration, as the appropriate authority shall think fit.
(ii).
If disciplinary proceedings against such an officer result otherwise than in his dismissal, the whole of the remuneration 68  PSM 813 PERSONEEL MANAGEMENT IN GOVERNMENT withheld from him shall be restored to him when the final decision is taken.
K. An officer acquitted of a criminal charge in any court of law shall not be dismissed or otherwise punished on any charge upon which he has been acquitted, but nothing in this rule shall prevent his being dismissed or otherwise punished on any other charge arising out of his conduct in the matter, unless such charge raises substantially the same issues as those on which he has been acquitted.
In the event of the acquittal or of the discharge, whether amounting to an acquittal or not, of an officer who has been charged with a criminal offence, the Director of Personnel Management shall consider whether he should recommend the institution or continuance of disciplinary proceedings against such officer, but before recommending the institution or continuance of disciplinary proceedings in pursuance of this rule, he shall, after consultation with the Permanent Secretary refer the matter to the Attorney-General of the Federation for an opinion as to whether or not disciplinary proceedings can properly be instituted or continued under these Guidelines.
In the event of a discharge which does not amount to an acquittal, the Director of Personnel Management shall ascertain from the Attorney-General of the Federation that further criminal proceedings against the officer are not proposed.
L. An officer adjudged by a court of law to be guilty of a criminal offence (other than a minor traffic or sanitary offence or the like) shall not receive any emolument from the date of such judgment, pending the decision of the appropriate authority.
M. If an officer is convicted of a criminal offence, the Director of Personnel Management shall inform the appropriate authority in writing of the decision of the court.
Copies of the charges and the court ruling shall be made available to all members of the authority.
N. (i).
Without prejudice to the power to institute disciplinary proceedings in respect of any absence from duty without leave or reasonable casue , the appropriate authority may dismiss him without following the procedure prescribed in rule L. (ii).
An officer shall be considered and treated for all purposes as having been dismissed from service by the very fact, and from the very date of his having committed any of the following acts of omissions.
(a) Absenting himself from duty without leave or reasonable course; (b) Resigning or purporting to resign his appointment without having first given due notice , and without serving for the period of the notice of such resignation, or paying in lieu thereof in accordance 69 PSM 813 MODULE 2 with the provisions applicable in the circumstance provided that if the officer concerned can later satisfy the appropriate authority that the circumstances of his having committed any of the acts of or omissions aforementioned do not justify his dismissal from the Civil Service, the appropriate authority may, without prejudice to the power to institute disciplinary proceedings in respect of such acts or omissions and with a view to a less punishment that dismissal being imposed,, revoke the dismissal.
IV.
The following are the disciplinary measures that may be taken under and in accordance with these Guidelines.
(i) dismissal, termination or retirement; (ii) Reduction in rank (iii) Reduction in salary (iv).
Loss of pay/non payment for the corresponding days an officer is not at his duty post/station without authority; (v) Withholding or deferment of increment (vi) Surcharge (vii) Reprimand (viii) Written warning (ix) Verbal warning O.
Nothing in Rule N shall be construed as limiting or otherwise affecting any powers of the appropriate authority: (i) To call upon an officer to retire or withdraw on the grounds of public Interest, or (ii) To terminate a contract officer’s appointment prematurely or to terminate a temporary appointment, or (iii) To terminate or extend a probationary appointment, or to order that an officer acting in higher post should revert to his substantive appointment, or (iv) To defer or withhold increment, without proceedings under Rule B P. Whenever the Permanent Secretary considers it necessary to institute disciplinary proceedings against an officer and he is of the opinion that the misconduct alleged against the officer is such as would, if proved, justify the officer’s dismissal from the service, he should instruct the Director of Personnel Management to commence disciplinary procedures as follows: (i) The Director of Personnel shall prepare and forward to the officer a brief statement of the facts of which the allegation against him is based and shall call on him to state in writing within a specified reasonable period, any grounds upon which he relies to exculpate himself.
70  PSM 813 PERSONEEL MANAGEMENT IN GOVERNMENT (ii) The Director of Personnel Management shall, immediately after the expiration of the specified period, forward to the appropriate Committee with his comments or recommendation any such statement as the officer may have furnished or report to the appropriate Committee the fact that the officer has failed to furnish an exculpatory statement.
Q.
The appropriate Committee on receiving the report or statement together with the comment and recommendations referred to in paragraph P (ii) above may: (i) Consider the issue , depending on the clarity of the facts disclosed; (ii) Seek further clarifications of any doubtful points or call on the officer to submit fresh representations through the Director of Personnel Management who shall add his own comments and recommendations as to punishments, if any , to be imposed; or (iii) Appoint a special disciplinary Committee comprising at least three persons to hold an inquiry into the matter provided that none of the accusers, including all members of the relevant Committee and the Director of Personnel, shall be a member of such disciplinary Committee.
(iv) Forward the reports or statement together with comments and recommendations through the office of the Head of Service to the Commission for officers on Grade Levels 14 – 17 SELF-ASSESSMENT EXERCISE List the disciplinary measures that may be taken under and in accordance with the provided guidelines.
4.0 CONCLUSION Ordinarily, it is the expectation of every public servant that he/she will be promoted to the top but it does not happen that way.
The structure of service is pyramidal and therefore, when a large number of people come into the service together of the entry point, not all of them will be at the top at the same time.
Movement in form of promotion must therefore be earned with exceptional performances.
Similarly, to guide an officer’s productivity, certain behaviors are prescribed and failure to comply attracts sanctions in form of disciplinary measures.
71 PSM 813 MODULE 2 5.0 SUMMARY This unit explains promotion and discipline as both positive and negative rewards respectively for performance in the service.
It therefore outlines the guidelines provided by the Civil Service Commission for promotability of officers in the Service as well as disciplinary measures for erring officers.
6.0 TUTOR-MARKED ASSIGNMENT i.
State the conditions under which an officer could be promoted in the public service.
ii.
List any ten (10) offences and their attendant sanctions in the Service.
7.0 REFERENCES/FURTHER READING Federal Republic of Nigeria (1999).
Guidelines on Personnel Matters.
Lagos: Federal Civil Service Commission.
Maduabum, C.P, (2006).
Reforming Government Burcueacries in Nigeria: The Journey so Far.
Badagry: ASCON Press.
Maduabum, C.P.
(2008).
The Mechanics of Public Administration in Nigeria.
Lagos: Concept Publications.
72  PSM 813 PERSONEEL MANAGEMENT IN GOVERNMENT UNIT 4 WAGE/SALARY ADMINISTRATION CONTENTS 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objectives 3.0 Main Content 3.1 Conceptual Classifications 3.2 Wage/Salary Reviews in the Nigerian Public Service 3.3 National Salaries, Income and Wages Commission 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutor-Marked Assignment 7.0 References/Further Reading 1.0 INTRODUCTION Wages and salaries constitute money paid to employees as part of the compensation for their labour or efforts towards achieving the organisational goals.
The payment of wages and salaries is a reflection of a transaction between the employees and employer involved in the employment contract (Banjoko, 1996: 135).
For the workers, pay has economic, psychological, social and political values.
It is therefore, the most tangible thing an employee takes away from his organisation on a regular basis.
The employee sees it as a mere routine as long as it comes, but where it fails to come when expected, the employee becomes frustrated because, he had already budgeted for it.
The consequence is agitation, leading to union activities that may climax into strike actions, lock-outs etc.
To the employer, wage/salary is important because, it often constitutes the greatest single cost of doing business and it is a major factor in attracting, retaining and motivating workers.
The value and adequacy of wage/salary attract greater concern when viewed against the backdrop of the common perception that, “A Company which pays peanuts will attract monkeys”; hence, the need to ensure its efficient management.
2.0 OBJECTIVES At the end of this unit, you should be able to: • define salary administration • differentiate between wage and salary • trace the evolution of wage/salary administration in Nigeria • outline the functions of the National Salaries Income and Wages Commission.
73 PSM 813 MODULE 2 3.0 MAIN CONTENT 3.1 Conceptual Classifications There is however, a basic difference between wage and salary.
Graham (1988): 121) explains that a wage is the payment made to manual workers while a salary is a fix periodical payment to a non-manual employee.
It is usually expressed in annual terms implying a relatively permanent employment relationship, although normally paid at monthly intervals.
He further explains that “salaried workers are usually termed ‘staff’ while, wage earners are called ‘casual workers’”.
The two terms will however; be used interchangeably in their widest application.
The management of employee compensation generally, and in particular, wages and salaries, presents complex problems to a lot of organisations, particularly the public sector organisations which are highly complex.
This is because; there is no science of pay.
Flippo (1980: 148) explains further that one of the most difficult functions of Personnel Management is that of determining rates of monetary compensation.
Not only is it one of the most complex duties, but it is also one of the most significant to both organisation and the employee.
The management of this very important monetary aspect of employee’s compensation is what is referred to as Wage and Salary administration.
The need to administer and control wages and /or salaries is to ensure equity both within and outside the organisation itself and with respect to widening the local and national employment situation.
In administering wages and salaries therefore, Whitmore and Ibbeton (1977:87) insist that two major considerations arise: “First is the need to regularly review the wages and salary situation in those areas where similar employment conditions and types of work pertain, and second, to hold under constant review the steadily changing factors which influence the total field of payment within the organisation itself’’.
There are, however, essentially three ways to administer wages and salaries These are: 1.
Adhoc: Here, there is no attempt to evaluate jobs before assigning payment rates to them.
Increases in pay are therefore given erratically, often, at the demand of workers through the union.
2.
Merit review: Here, jobs are evaluated before fixing wages and salary range.
Workers are appraised normally and given personal increases which will move their pay at varying speed through the 74  PSM 813 PERSONEEL MANAGEMENT IN GOVERNMENT range.
In other words, individual efforts and merit are rewarded; and 3.
Incremental Scale: Here, all jobs are evaluated and graded with a salary range and standard annual increment which is, automatic.
Other factors which determine wage fixation include: • Ability to pay, • Comparable wages • Government policies • productivity • the living wage and • Collective Bargaining.
3.2 Wage/Salary Reviews in the Nigerian Public Service The incidence of wage employment marked the beginning of industrial relations and personnel management in Nigeria.
The genesis of wage employment in Nigeria is therefore, the public service.
Throughout the colonial period and up to 1971, wage and salary administration in the Nigeria Public Service was by adhoc method whereby there was no job evaluation before determining pay, and increases in pay were usually in reaction to workers demand.
In fact, the history of wages and salary administration in Nigeria can be traced to the numerous agitations by Nigerian employees against discrimination in employment by the colonial government.
The agitations culminated in unilateral wage reviews or through committees or commissions.
These are outlined hereunder: (i).
Rice Committee of 1920 which led to the doubling of existing war bonus (ii) Hunts Commission of 1943 which structured the wages of unskilled labour (iii).
Bridges Committee of 1941 which reviewed the wages of African Government Workers in Lagos and recommended compensatory awards called “Costs of Living Allowance (COLA)”.
This was however, not implemented.
This brought Michael Imodu, the then President of the Nigerian Railway Workers Union, to limelight as he successfully organised a strike action that forced the then colonial government to implement the COLA (iv).
Tudor Davis Commission of 1945 which harmonised remuneration in the public sector (v).
Miller Committee of 1946 which classified unestablished labour into Grades 1, 2 and 3 and established skilled artisans into Grade 1,2 and 3 75 PSM 813 MODULE 2 (vi) Harragin Commission of 1946 which revised the structure and salaries in the public service after recommending a two-service structure Viz: Senior and Junior (vii).
Cowan Enquiry of 1948 which introduced Whitney Councils in Nigeria for negotiating salaries in order to avert strike actions (viii).
The Unilateral political Award of 1954 which was a salary increase of over 100% unilaterally awarded to her employees by the Western Regional Government (ix).
Gorsuch Commission of 1954 which abolished the two structured service and established five- grade structure with parallel classes for both administrative and professional cadres.
It thereafter recommended a new set of salary scales based on the revised grade structure (x).
Morgan Commission of 1954 - 55 recommended increases in salaries in the Western Region at the instance of that Region’s Government (xi) Mbanefo Commission of 1957 which recommended a progressive leveling up of minimum wages paid throughout the country (xii).
Morgan Commission of 1963 which recommended a progressive leveling up of minimum wages paid throughout the country (xiii).
Elwood Grading Team of 1966 which regraded all the jobs in the public service as a scientific and equitable basis for determining salaries (xiv) Adebo Commission of 1970 which recommended among others, zonalisation of wages and salaries; reduction of wage zone from six to three; increase in the minimum wage per zone etc (xv).
Udoji Commission of 1972 which recommended among others: Increase in remuneration in the public service by almost 100%, generous granting of Pensions and Gratitude , compressing of over 600 salary structures, grades and posts in the administrative and professional structure to one - Unified Grading and Salary Structures (UGSS), with Grade Levels 01 to 17 (xvi).
Cookey Commission of 1982 which recommended the pulling out of the staff of Universities from the UGSS and to operate a separate structure called University Salary Structure (USS) prepared for it by the commission (xvii).
The Onosode Commission of 1981 which reviewed the structure of salaries in the public enterprises or parastals and recommenced the removal of some parastatals from the UGSS leading to disparity in salaries of public servants and (xviii).Some other Unilateral Awards were: • 45% salary increase ‘across the board’ by the Presidential Reform of the ‘‘Babangida regime’’ 100% increase in allowance by the ‘Abacha regime’ in 1995 76  PSM 813 PERSONEEL MANAGEMENT IN GOVERNMENT • The harmonised Public Service Salary Structure (HAPSS) released by the ‘‘Abdulaslami Administration’’ with an increase of about 55%; and • The Obasanjo Administration’s minimum wage of N7,500.00 which was announced on May – Day in year 2000 • The Obasanjo Administration’s consolidated salary of 2007 • The Jonathan Administration’s minimum wage of N18, 000 of 2011 SELF-ASSESSMENT EXECISE List the pre-independence reviews of wage/salary.
Two Major Issues Of all these reviews and scenarios, two major issues standout clearly:- (a) The approach of the Public Service Review Commission (a.k.a.
Udoji) of 1972 -74 was the most scientific and objective approach ever adopted in salary review in the history of Public service in Nigeria till date.
The Commission adopted the combined processes of Job Analysis and Job Evaluation and consequently graded all the jobs in the Nigeria Public Service, before fixing salaries.
The classification emerging therefrom is as follows: (i).
Professional, Administrative, Technical, Technological, Clerical (PATTC) to which it gave Salary Grade Levels 03 – 12.
(ii).
General Services Operational (GSO) to which it gave salary grade levels 01 – 06; (iii).
Senior Management (SM) to which it gave salary grade levels 13 – 17; and (iv).
Nigeria Police Force (NPF) to which it gave salary grade levels 01-17.
(b) In January, 1991 the Federal Government under the Babangida administration introduced a new wage policy which deregulated wages and salaries in Nigeria – a major shift in wage and salary administration.
According to the President in his 1991 Budget speech, “ the time has come for wage fixing to reflect varieties and differences in the ‘ability to pay’ as between the Federal Government , the State Governments, Local Governments and Parastatals”.
(Quoted in Maduabum, 2006:265).
The implication of this is that the federal government expected every employer in the public sector to negotiate directly with his employees or 77 PSM 813 MODULE 2 unions based on capacity to pay.
This is a paradigm shift in the annals of wage/salary administration in the Public Service of Nigeria.
3.3 National Salaries, Income and Wages Commission The establishment of this commission which is currently an organ of government is a major thrust that was a clear departure from what the situation was from the onset.
From the experience so far garnered, it was clear that the use of adhoc committees and, in some cases, unilateral means of awarding salaries could not successfully proffer a logical and resolute solution to the problems they were ab initio set to tackle.
There, then, became a need to set up a permanent body which would adequately address the persistent issue of regular review of wages and salaries and its attendant problems such as strained relationship between employers and employees etc.
Equally of note is the fact that, some of the adhoc commissions in the past recommended the establishment of such a body.
It is against this background that the Federal Government decided to establish the National Salaries Income and Wages Commission as a permanent national facility which is expected to be a potent tool for government to adjust along annual budgetary exercises, any aspects of wages and salaries which require attention, with the aim of forestalling likely problems.
The Commission was set up by Decree No.
99 of 1993 under the then Federal Military Government of General Ibrahim Badamasi Babangida to perform the following functions as stated in part II of the decree.
a. to advise the Federal Government on national incomes policy; b. to recommend the proportions of income growth which should be utilised for general wage increase c. to inform the federal government of current trends in wages and propose guidelines within which increases in wage should be confined d. to keep federal government informed on a continuing basis of movements of all forms of income an propose guidelines relating to profits, dividends, and all incomes other than wage e. to encourage research on wage structure (including industrial, occupational and regional) and any other similar factors such as income distribution and household consumption patterns f. to keep prices under continuous surveillance, interpret price movements and relate them to other developments in the national economy g. to propose measures for the regulation of prices and wages in the various sectors of the economy and for the control of hoarding; 78  PSM 813 PERSONEEL MANAGEMENT IN GOVERNMENT h. to encourage and promote schemes for raising productivity in all sectors of the economy i. to establish and run a data bank or other information centres relating to data on wages and prices or any other variable and for that purpose to collaborate with data collection agencies to design and develop an adequate information system j. to inform and educate the public on prices, wages and productivity, their relationships with one another and their interplay in determining standards of living and real economic growth k. to examine and advise on any matter referred to it by the Federal and State Governments concerning any of the functions conferred on it l. to examine, streamline and recommend salary scales applicable to each post in the public service m. to examine areas in which rationalisation and harmonisation of wages, salaries and other conditions of employment are desirable and feasible as between the public and private sectors of the economy and recommend guidelines which will ensure sustained harmony in work compensation policies in both the public and private sectors.
n. to examine the salary structures in the public and private sectors and recommend a general wages framework with reasonable features of relatively and maximum levels which are in consonance with the national economy.
o. to examine and recommend effective machinery for assembling data on a continuing basis, taking into account changes in the cost of living, productivity, levels of pay in the private sector and other relevant economic data on which public sector salary and other benefits can be reviewed annually.
p. to examine the current rate of retirement benefits and recommend appropriate mechanism for periodic review of retirement benefits; q. to inquire into and make recommendations on any other matters which, in the opinion of the Commission, appear to be relevant to the foregoing and therefore ought, in the public interest, to be inquired into and r. to undertake any other activity which is likely to assist in the performance of the functions conferred on it.
With the establishment of the commission and its performance so far, it is hoped that stability in wage/salary regimes will no longer be far- fetched.
79 PSM 813 MODULE 2 4.0 CONCLUSION By way of conclusion we provide the general rules on emoluments in the service as follows: • On first appointment emoluments shall be paid from the date of assumption of duty.
• On transfer from another government to Federal Civil Service a staff shall be eligible for the emolument attached to his/her new office with effect from the day he/she assumes duty.
• An officer on an incremental grade level shall normally be granted an increment unless he/she is on interdiction/suspension or has disciplinary action pending against him/her.
• The incremental date for an officer appointed or promoted to a post in the service shall be 1st of January of the year following at least six(6) months of service or promotion.
5.0 SUMMARY In this unit, the whole gamut of wages and salaries were clarified.
The unit thereafter traced the evolution of wage/salary administration in Nigeria from its inception in 1920 to date.
It finally outlined the functions of the National Salaries, Income and Wages Commission.
6.0 TUTOR-MARKED ASSIGNMENT Outline the functions of National Salaries, Income and Wages Commission.
7.0 REFERENCES/FURTHER READING Anjorin, D. (1992).
“Compensation Scheme in the Public Sector”, in Ali, D. Y.
& C. I. Akinyele (ed).
New Trends In Personnel Management : A Book of Readings.
Badagry: ASCON Press.
Gellerman, S. (1968).
“Motivating Men with Money” in March edition of Fortune Magazine.
U.S.A. Maduabum , C.P.
(2006).
Reforming Government Bureaucracies in Nigeria: The Journey So Far.
Badagry: ASCON Press.
Maduabum.
C.P.
(1998) .“Wage/Salary Administration: A Sour Point in Labour- Management Relations in Nigeria”, African Administrative Studies.
No 50 80  PSM 813 PERSONEEL MANAGEMENT IN GOVERNMENT Whitemore, A.
& Ibbefon, J.F.R.
(1977).
The Management of Motivation and Remuneration.
London: Business Books Ltd. 81 PSM 813 MODULE 2 UNIT 5 EMPLOYEE WELFARE SERVICES CONTENTS 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objectives 3.0 Main Content 3.1 Leave Matters 3.2 Medicals 3.3 Responsibilities of Ministries and Extra-Ministerial Offices 3.3.1 Responsibility of Health Care Provider 3.3.2 Medical Examination 3.3.3 Facilities for Medical Treatment 3.3.4 Medical Treatment Overseas 3.3.5 Medical Check - Up 3.3.6 Sick Leave 3.4 Obligation of Government when an Officer Dies 3.5 Compensation and Insurance for Loss of Life 3.6 National Health Insurance Scheme (NHIS) 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutor-Marked Assignment 7.0 References/Further Reading 1.0 INTRODUCTION Employee Welfare Services are services outside salary which are provided to the employee in order to make him happy and willing to put in his best.
To this extent, it is clear that these services perform motivational functions.
As stated by Ajileye (1992: 157), apart from specific recommendations of the various public service review commissions in the past, there is continued government efforts to motivate public servants through the introduction of welfare schemes like pensions and gratuity, housing and transport subsidy, loans to build or purchase own house , provision of club houses and staff canteens, introduction of staff buses, supply of drinking water where there are shortages, review of fringe benefits, granting of meal subsidy, motor vehicle refurbishing loans, creation of games and sporting activities at, or near the place of work and measures to address individual complaints and frustrations through fair rules and regulations, and house journals.
One of the highly impressive welfare packages enunciated as a policy in the public service is the establishment of day-care_centres close to the secretariat of the Civil Service for use by nursing mothers.
82  PSM 813 PERSONEEL MANAGEMENT IN GOVERNMENT 2.0 OBJECTIVES At the end of this unit, you should be able to: • explain the concept of welfare services • identify the welfare services available to a public servant • state benefits of welfare services to both the employee and his employer.
3.0 MAIN CONTENT In view of the fact that the monetisation policy has absorbed such services as transportation (provision of vehicles at government expenses) and accommodation, they will not be discussed in this unit.
3.1 Leave Matters Leave refers to the authorised absence of an officer from duty for a specific purpose as provided for in the Public Service Rules.
The types of leave in the service are described as follows: 1.
Annual leave is the absence of an officer from duty for a period as may be authorized by superior officers in accordance with the grade of the beneficiary as follows: (a) GL 07 and above - 30 calendar days (b) GL 04 – 06 - 21 calendar days (c) GL 03 and below - 14 calendar days 2.
Proportionate leave is a vacation granted to a new or retiring officer in proportion to the number of days he/she has put into service.
3.
Deferred leave is that which an officer is granted in exceptional circumstances by the Permanent Secretary or Head of Extra - ministerial Department to carry forward to the next leave year because of exigency of duty.
4.
Causal leave is the absence of an officer from duty for a short period not exceeding an aggregate of 5 working days within a leave year as may be authorised by a superior officer.
The casual leave shall only be granted after an officer has exhausted his/her annual leave.
5.
Sick leave is the absence of an officer from duty on account of ill health as authorised by a health care provider.
6.
Maternity leave is the authorised absence from duty of a serving female officer granted by a superior officer on account of pregnancy covering prenatal and postnatal period.
7.
Examination leave is a special leave granted an officer for the purpose of taking an examination.
83 PSM 813 MODULE 2 8.
Sabbatical leave is the absence of an officer on Grade Level 15 or equivalent and above from duty for the purpose of research either within or outside Nigeria for a period of twelve months.
A qualified officer is entitled to this once in five years.
9.
Study Leave is the leave granted to a confirmed serving officer to undertake an approved course of study within or outside the country.
There are three types of study leave as stated below: (a) In-Service Training; (b) Study leave with pay; and (c) Study leave without pay.
10.
Leave for religious purposes is granted to officers going on religious pilgrimages other than officials assigned to cover such activities, and such leave shall be part of their annual leave.
11.
Leave of absence is absence of an officer from duty authorised on grounds of public policy 12.
Pre-retirement leave is a special leave granted an officer to cover three months before the commencement of the effective date of retirement.
3.2 Medicals A number of relevant concepts need to be clarified, namely: Health, Safety, and Health Care Provider (HCP).
Health can be defined as the condition of a person’s body and mind or the state of being physically and mentally healthy.
On the other hand, safety is concerned with the prevention of accidents and hazards.
The health and safety of workers/employees are important to both the employer and the employee.
But a health care provider can be described as a body qualified and registered to provide health care services.
In our discussion, a health care provider must be duly appointed in accordance with the National Health Insurance Scheme (NHIS).
Details about NHIS are contained in the later part of this unit.
3.3 Responsibilities of Ministries/Extra Ministerial Offices In each ministry/office, the Administration/Personnel Management Departments are to maintain an up-to-date record of the residential addresses of the officers and staff employed there.
So, whenever an officer’s absence from duty is not explained by him/her within 2 hours, enquiry must be made at his recorded address to ascertain the cause of absence, which could be due to illness.
Whenever an officer becomes so ill that he/she is physically unable to present himself/herself for medical examinations, the circumstances and his /her whereabouts should be reported by the ministry/office to the 84  PSM 813 PERSONEEL MANAGEMENT IN GOVERNMENT nearest health care provider.
And when it is desirable to appoint a medical board to ascertain whether or not the officer is physically capable of performing his duties, it is the responsibility of the Permanent Secretary/Head of Extra-ministerial office to initiate action in that regard.
3.3.1 Responsibility of Health Care Provider When an officer presents himself/herself to a health care provider for examination, the latter is to examine and treat him/her and give him/her a certificate as the health care provider considers appropriate or, if he/she is admitted to a hospital as an in-patient, inform his/her ministry/extra-ministerial office.
3.3.2 Medical Examination On first appointment, an officer is to be examined by a duly appointed health care provider, who will certify that the officer is sound in health for employment in the pensionable establishment.
Thereafter, every five years, an officer is to present himself to a health care provider for examination to certify that the officer is sound in health and fit to continue in service, without bias to government policy on the right of individuals, as this pertains to specific diseases from time to time.
The fee for such examination shall be paid by the government.
The medical certificate, reports of medical boards and dental treatment reports, are to be treated as strictly confidential.
But this does not preclude the keeping of an officer’s record in the Ministry of Health.
The permanent Secretary/Head of Extra - ministerial Office may at any time call upon an officer to present himself/herself to an approved health care provider, or to a duly constituted medical board for medical tests.
3.3.3 Facilities for Medical Treatment The medical facilities in Nigeria provided to all officers and their families and the scale of charges are to be determined by the National health Insurance Scheme.
However, a staff that prefers to be treated by a private practitioner instead of availing himself/herself of services of an authorised health care provider will personally bear all expenses incurred through such treatment.
3.3.4 Medical Treatment Overseas Every application for medical treatment abroad must be supported by a consultant’s report from an authorised health care provider.
It must be submitted to the Permanent Secretary, Federal Ministry of health by the 85 PSM 813 MODULE 2 sponsoring ministries or parastatals/organisations.
The Permanent Secretary will then make his recommendations to the Heads of Civil Service of the Federation.
Approval will be notified to the applicant by the Head of Civil Service of the federation with copies to the Federal Ministries of Finance and Foreign Affairs and the appropriate Nigerian mission abroad.
As a further control measure, the choice of consultants/clinic abroad will be made by the Nigerian mission.
However, where contact already exists between a patient and a consultant, the mission may endorse the arrangement.
The mission’s medical consultant will vet all bills before settlement to ensure that they are proper and reasonable.
Permission may be granted an officer’s spouse to accompany him/her, at government expenses, where the ailing officer is considered to be in ‘‘life or death’’ condition, in consequence of which immediate medical treatment or hospitalisation abroad is recommended.
In such a case, the commitment of the Federal Government shall be limited to the provision of return air passage for the two of them, together with the payment of estacode rate in respect of only one spouse.
This is because if the patient is hospitalised, his/her spouse will remain in a hotel, or that if the officer remains as an outpatient, the two of them will utilise the same hotel accommodation.
Even then, this privilege is not automatic as it is a necessary requirement that a specific approval from the competent authority must be obtained prior to the journey abroad.
3.3.5 Medical Check - Up Officers on Grade Levels 16 and above are entitled to medical check-up locally once a year while officers on Grade Levels 12 to 15 are entitled to medical check-up locally once in two (2) years.
However, if, as a result of such check-up, it is recommended that a further medical consultation should be undertaken/given abroad, permission to do so may be granted by the President or Head of the Civil Service of Federation, as the case may be.
Expenses incurred in respect of medical check-ups authorised under this scheme should be settled by the relevant ministry/extra-ministerial office.
3.3.6 Sick Leave An officer not being on leave of absence who is absent from duty on ground of ill health will, provided such absence is covered by proper authority , be regarded as being absent on sick leave.
The maximum aggregate sick leave an officer not hospitalised can take is forty-two (42) calendar days within a year.
Where the officer has been absent from duty on grounds of ill health beyond 42 calendar days within a year, he/she should be made to appear before a medical board with a view to 86  PSM 813 PERSONEEL MANAGEMENT IN GOVERNMENT ascertaining whether or not he/she should be invalidated from service.
Such period, in excess of the prescribed aggregate, will be without pay and will be reckoned with for purpose of pension.
An officer incapacitated as a result of injury sustained in the course of his/her official duties shall be entitled to draw full emolument until he/she is discharged from sick leave of permanently invalidated.
And any officer recommended by a medical board or a health care provider as permanently invalidated will forthwith commence vacation leave prior to retirement.
An officer hospitalised may be allowed three (3) month’s sick leave in the first instance on the certificate of an approved health care provider.
Beyond that period, his/her permanent secretary/head of extra- ministerial office must make arrangement for him to be examined by a medical board so as to ascertain whether he should be invalidated from the service or allowed further paid sick leave.
SELF-ASSESSMENT EXERCISE List the medical issues that must be addressed as part of welfare services.
3.4 Obligation of the Government When an Officer Dies When a pensionable officer dies in the service of government, government shall handle the following: 1.
Preparation of the body for embalmment, where necessary 2.
Settlement of mortuary bills 3.
Provision of coffin or casket at the approved rate and 4.
Payment of the cost to the family, not exceeding more than one page adverts in one national newspaper for the publication of obituary.
3.5 Compensation and Insurance for Loss of Life Again, where an officer dies after the completion of the minimum period of qualifying service, his/her legal representative or his/her next –of- kin shall receive his /her entitlement under the life insurance policy maintained under Section 9 (3) of the Pension Reform Act 2004.
The following persons, when travelling by air, land, or sea at government expense, will be eligible for free insurance cover to be provided by the ministry/extra ministerial office of the staff concerned as follows: 87 PSM 813 MODULE 2 Traveller Capital Benefits Staff N2, 000,000.00 Wife of Staff N1, 000,000.00 Child of Staff N1, 000,000.00 Non-Official N1, 000,000.00 Youth Corper N1, 000,000.00 3.6 The National Health Insurance Scheme (NHIS) This scheme came into being by virtue of Act No.25 of 1999.
However, the commitment date stood at May 29, 2005 in the formal sector.
The aim is to provide comprehensive health care delivery at affordable cost.
In terms of coverage, the programme covers various categories of persons: civil servants, armed forces, police and allied services, tertiary institutions, organised private-sector workers, voluntary contributors and persons in Diaspora.
The informed-sector programme covers the urban self-employed, rural community dwellers, prison inmates, children under five and permanently disable persons.
To join the scheme, individuals have to collect and complete registration forms from National health Insurance Scheme officers.
Registration is free.
Ordinarily beneficiaries are limited to oneself, spouse and four children (who are under 18 years of age).
However, forms are available for additional children, wives and extra dependants.
These would be covered by a surcharge.
Contributions Currently, contributions are fixed at a total of 15% of basic salary per staff.
The employer pays 10% while the employee pays 5%.
Variable flat rate(s) contributions are established for all the informal sector programmes.
Benefits Beneficiaries would enjoy outpatient care, prescribed drugs, diagnostic test, maternity care, consultation with specialists, hospital care in a standard ward for a stay limited to 45 days per annum, eye examination, dental care and counseling.
Implementation • Every subscriber is issued a computerised identity card for use diligently and fraud-free access to health care.
• Beneficiaries are at liberty to select any hospital/clinic of their choice, whether government or private, as long as it is accredited.
• Beneficiaries can change their health care provider after six (6) months if they deem the services unsatisfactory.
88  PSM 813 PERSONEEL MANAGEMENT IN GOVERNMENT • Beneficiaries would be able to access prescribed drugs from the National Health Insurance Scheme accredited pharmacy they wish.
4.0 CONCLUSION It should be noted that staff welfare scheme is goal-oriented.
It helps to resolve organisational conflict and problems that are directly related to the degree or level of employee satisfaction.
Other purposes are to increase employees’ involvement and identification with their organisation and to get management to address the employees’ personal and work - related problems before they ever arise and to assure them that they are important members of their organisation.
5.0 SUMMARY It is certain that employee welfare services provide a positive source of motivation.
Aside from basic salaries and job - related allowances which can motivate employees to give their best to their jobs, there are other things.
These were discussed in this unit.
They include: Level matters, medical issues, organs responsible for ensuring provisions of such services.
The unit equally addressed provisions of the National Health Insurance Scheme and, finally, government’s obligations when an officer dies in service.
6.0 TUTOR-MARKED ASSIGNMENT i.
What are the functions of the National Health Insurance Scheme?
ii.
What are the benefits of employee welfare services?
7.0 REFERENCES/FURTHER READING Ajileye, J.A.
(1992).
“Staff Welfare Scheme: A Strategy for Motivation” in Ali Ali, D. Y.
& C. I. Akinyele (eds).
New Trends in Personnel Management: a Book of Readings.
Badagry: ASCON Press.
Federal Executive Council (2008).
Public Service Rules (Revised Edition).
A Document in the Office of Head of Civil Service of the Federation, Abuja.
89 PSM 813 MODULE 2 UNIT 6 INDUSTRIAL RELATIONS CONTENTS 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objectives 3.0 Main Content 3.1 Conceptual Clarifications 3.2 Scope and Content of Industrial Relations 3.3 Handling Industrial Relations at the Micro Level 3.4 Handling Industrial Relations at the Macro Level 3.5 Settlement of Trade Disputes 3.6 Disputes in Essential Services 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutor-Marked Assignment 7.0 References/Further Reading 1.0 INTRODUCTION Globally, industrial relations practice did not start until the Industrial Revolution in Europe when they started having formal employment in industries.
And in Nigeria, it started with the coming of colonial masters when they brought formal paid employment.
Since then, the public service had had a good share of it.
In fact, the first two unions in Nigeria (i.e.
the Nigerian Union of Teachers and the Railway Workers Union) operated in the public service.
At the beginning, industrial relations practice was rough but seems to have improved with time.
2.0 OBJECTIVES At the end of this unit, you should be able to: • explain the concepts of labour management relations and industrial relations • describe the structure and roles of the industrial relations unit in the services • describe the machinery for negotiation in the services • discuss internal and external machineries for dispute settlement • describe the steps to take in establishing and maintaining effective labour management relations.
90  PSM 813 PERSONEEL MANAGEMENT IN GOVERNMENT 3.0 MAIN CONTENT 3.1 Conceptual Clarifications Organisations are made of people who constitute the labour force.
Generally, the labour force can be classified into five levels, namely: • Top management • Senior management • Middle management • Supervisory management and the • Rank and file.
On the other hand, the labour forces can be grouped into two based on the circumstances in which the five levels listed above find themselves.
The two groups are: a.
Management: made up of top and senior management personnel who occupy privileged positions and represent the employer in an organization and b.
Employees: Made up of middle and supervisory management personnel as well as lower level personnel who support management in carrying out the day-to-day functions of the organisation.
They are also known as ‘‘workers’’ or ‘‘labour’’.
The interaction between these two groups (i.e.
management and labour) in an organisation is known as labour Management Relation.
It becomes Industrial Relations the moment government comes into it as a third party.
Yesufu (1982) describes industrial relations as “the whole web of human interaction at work which is predicated upon, and arises out of the employment contract.” 3.2 Scope and Content of Industrial Relations The scope of industrial relations embraces relationships between management and labour; between labour and labour; between labour and the state; among management staff; between employers (management) and the state; as well as among the state, employers and labour.
In specific terms, an industrial relation is concerned with labour issues which include the following: a.
Employment problems and security b.
Conditions at work 91 PSM 813 MODULE 2 c. Remuneration in terms of level, frequency, method of payment and wage-fixing d. Labour grievances and disputes e. Levels of production and efficiency f. Safety, health and welfare at work and g. Social security like maternity leave, workmen’s compensation, retirement, etc.
3.3 Handling Industrial Relations at the Micro Level Here, we are talking about industrial relations within ministries and extra ministerial office.
Labour relations matters are handled by a unit within the Administration or Personnel Manager Department.
The unit, which is headed by an officer of the rank of Assistant Director, has three major roles to play.
These are: • Advisory - that is, giving expert advice to the management on how to promote good relations in the work place • Services - in the sense that some services are actually provided by the unit.
Such services include: a.
Setting in motion the machinery and procedure for labour- management consultation b.
Handling workers’/ labour’ s grievances c. Dealing with union executives and d. Organising industrial relations training.
• Strategic – by developing strategies and policies which aim to contribute to the creation and maintenance of a good climate for labour – management relations.
In terms of arrangement for negotiation and discussion, the union in any ministry/office always comes together and meets with the management on the platform of a negotiation council to discuss and negotiate peculiar problems or local issues.
Any agreement reached is usually within the broad policy of the government.
3.4 Handling Industrial Relations at the Macro Level This refers to the way industrial relations matters are handled either at the national public services level or at the federal public services level which goes beyond individual Ministries and Extra- ministerial offices.
At the federal level, government has some agencies that carry out industrial relations functions.
They include: • The Federal Ministry of Labour; • The Office of Establishments and Pensions; and • The National Salaries, Income and Wages Commission.
92  PSM 813 PERSONEEL MANAGEMENT IN GOVERNMENT In terms of machinery for collective bargaining and discussion at the service-wide level, there is the National Public Services Negotiating Council where both federal and state governments are represented.
At the state level, there is the Office/Bureau of Establishments which handles labour relations matters.
Major negotiations and discussions at the state level are carried out on the platform of the State Joint Negotiating Council between representatives of the various unions and government officials.
3.5 Settlement of Trade Disputes Conflicts or trade disputes are inevitable in any work organisation.
Hence, the need to establish procedures for orderly and quick resolution of disputes so as to maintain industrial peace and harmony.
There are two sequential approaches to dispute settlement.
These are internal and the external machineries.
Internal Machinery This is a pre-agreed or self – imposed undertaking by the parties to resolve all grievances, whether individual or collective, through specified machinery without resort to industrial action.
This involves a grievance procedure.
The Nigerian civil service does not have a clear cut grievance procedure.
Rather, what it has are disciplinary procedures and a procedure for writing petitions and appeal by an individual over matters relating to appointments, promotion and discipline.
For a collective grievance, representatives of both union (s) and management of a ministry / office or government can always meet to settle the dispute.
But, if it is a service-wide matter, the union(s), led by their officials, can always meet.
A typical example is the case of Academic Staff Union of Universities (ASUU) and government team.
External Machinery This is the statutory procedure as outlined in the Trade Disputes Act of 1976.
The procedure becomes relevant if the internal machinery has been exhausted and no agreement has been reached.
This machinery involves the following; • Mediation • Conciliation • Arbitration and • National Industrial Court.
Mediation This is the first method of third party intervention in settling a trade disputes.
It requires that, if attempts to settle a dispute through the 93 PSM 813 MODULE 2 internal machinery fails, the parties to the dispute shall, within seven days of failure, or within seven days from the date on which the dispute arises or is first apprehended, meet together by themselves or their representatives, under the chairmanship of a mediator mutually agreed upon and appointed by or on behalf of the parties, with a view to settling the dispute amicable.
A mediator has no formal authority to impose a settlement but rather, acts as a facilitator for the parties.
Conciliation In the event of failure of the mediator, the matter should be reported to the Minister of labour who may then decide to appoint a fit person as conciliator.
The conciliator is usually an official of the Ministry of Labour.
The conciliator brings the parties together, encourages them to discuss their differences and assists them in developing their own proposed solution.
If a settlement is reached within seven (7) days of his appointment, the conciliator shall forward a memorandum on the terms of settlement signed by the representatives of the parties to the Minister.
But, if no settlement is reached within seven days, the conciliator is again expected to inform the Minister of Labour who will then decide on the next line of action.
Arbitration Within 14 days of the failure of the conciliator to settle the dispute, the Minister of Labour is empowered to refer the dispute for settlement to the Industrial Arbitration Panel (IAP).
The Industrial Arbitration Panel has 21 days to consider a trade dispute and make an award.
On receipt of the award, the Minister must publish the details and allow not more than 21 days within which any of the parties who is not satisfied, may raise an objection.
If no objection is raised, the award is confirmed and thus becomes legally binding on both parties.
However, if it is rejected by either of the two parties, the Minister may refer it back to the panel or refer the dispute to the National Industrial Court (NIC).
As a matter of law, all intra-union disputes are to be referred to the Industrial Arbitration Panel (IAP) or the NIC for necessary action.
The National Industrial Court (NIC) Disputes that are not resolved by the Industrial Arbitration Panel are automatically referred to the National Industrial Court (NIC) for adjudication.
The court has exclusive jurisdiction to: • Make final awards for the purpose of settling trade disputes • Determine questions as to the implementation of • Any collective agreement 94  PSM 813 PERSONEEL MANAGEMENT IN GOVERNMENT • Any award made by the Industrial Arbitration Panel or the National Industrial Court itself;and • Any term of settlement of any trade dispute as recorded in the memorandum of agreement following conciliation.
The National Industrial Court has 30 days limit for determining trade disputes.
Board of Inquiry The Trade Dispute Act (sections 23 and 24) empowers the Minister of labour to appoint a board of inquiry which primarily is fact-finding machinery.
The board will cause inquiry to be made into reasons for the disputes and the circumstances.
The board may proffer solutions to the extent that it may aid negotiation but it does not, in principle, serve as settlement machinery.
It is important to state that the appointment of a board of inquiry is not in the direct line of conciliation and arbitration procedures.
SELF-ASSESSMENT EXERCISE The Trade Dispute Act of 1976 establishes machinery for resolving disputes in the services.
What are they?
3.6 Disputes in Essential Services Essential services include such services as electricity, water supply, medical, cable, postal and telephone, banking, military, police, prisons, fire brigade, and so on.
With regard to disputes in this sector, the Trade Disputes (Essential Services) Act of 1976 provides that disputes in essential services can be apprehended by the Minister and referred to the National Industrial Court without passing through conciliation or the Industrial Arbitration Panel.
The same Act also bans the use of strike and lockout in the essential services sector.
4.0 CONCLUSION It must be emphasised that Industrial Relations is concerned with the systems, rules and procedures used by unions and employers to determine the reward for effort and other conditions of employment, to protect the interest of the employed and their employers, and to regulate the ways in which the employers treat their employees.
This of course includes the processes of collective bargaining as well as formal procedure agreement.
5.0 SUMMARY This unit discussed the concept of labour Management Relations and when it becomes Industrial relations.
It identified such issues as 95 PSM 813 MODULE 2 employment problems and security; conditions at work, remuneration, grievances and disputes, safety, social security e.t.c.
as being the concern of Industrial Relations.
The unit equally discussed the handling of industrial relations both at the micro and macro levels.
It finally examined the machinery for resolving disputes in the public services.
6.0 TUTOR-MARKED ASSIGNMENT i.
List the labour issues that are of concern to Industrial Relations.
ii.
Describe the machinery for resolving disputes in the public service.
7.0 REFERENCES/FURTHER READING Ana’naba, W. (1971).
The Trade Union Movement in Nigeria.
New York: African.
Eniaiyejuni, B.O.
(2005).
Management of Industrial Relations in Nigeria.
Lagos: Concept Publication Ltd. Otobo,D.
& Omole, M.A (eds) (1992).
Readings in Industrial Relations in Nigeria.
Lagos: Malthouse Press Limited.
96  PSM 813 PERSONNEL MANAGEMENT IN GOVERNMENT MODULE 3 PERSONNEL DISENGAGEMENT Unit 1 Personnel Records Unit 2 Pension Administration Unit 3 Preparation for Retirement Unit 4 Reforming Personnel Management Organs in the Public Service UNIT 1 PERSONNEL RECORDS CONTENTS 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objectives 3.0 Main Content 3.1 Conceptual Clarifications 3.2 Aims of Personnel Records 3.3 Life-Cycle of Personnel Records 3.4 Types of Personnel Records 3.5 Problems of Managing Personnel Records 3.6 Suggestions for Effective Management of Personnel Records 3.7 Computerisation of Personnel Records 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutor-Marked Assignment 7.0 References/Further Reading 1.0 INTRODUCTION In the Public Service there is general lack of adequate information and data for government’s decision- making and operations.
But, the problem is not really that of lack of data.
The fact is that plenty of data are available in the Ministry and Departments and in the rest of the country.
The perennial problem is that the available data are never harnessed, processed, collated, analysed and stored in a manner to facilitate retrieval and usability.
All these have been due to the high degree of levity with which everybody seems to regard hard information and data for decision – making and operations.
2.0 OBJECTIVES At the end of this unit, you should be able to: • state what a record/personnel record is 97 PSM 813 MODULE 3 • identify the aims or purpose of such records • construct the life-cycle of personnel records • differentiate types of personnel records • identify problems of managing personnel records • make suggestions for effective management of records / personnel records.
3.0 MAIN CONTENT 3.1 Conceptual Clarifications Records, according to the Concise Oxford Dictionary (1970) is a register set down for remembrance or reference and which has been put in writing or other legible shape.
Thus, against this background, Hill (1988) sees record as the history upon which present action is based in an effort to determine the future.
It is obvious that this definition is not all that helpful.
Rather, a record should be seen as the systematic and careful setting (or writing) down of important events or facts either for remembrance or for future reference, or both.
A more comprehensive and detailed definition of records is provided by the Cabinet Office in London thus: • any paper, photograph, microfilm, drawing, chart, magnetic tape or any copy of a printout thereof, that has been generated or received by any organisation and had been used by that organisation or its successor as evidence of its activities, or because of the information contained therein.. Against this background, personnel records provide the basic information for manpower policies, plans, and procedures.
They enable management to know more about their workforce and the knowledge and skills available which can thus contribute to improving and maintaining productivity.
Every employee record, according, to Hill (1968) must, therefore, have complete information necessary to identify his/her occupation as well as his/her salary, promotion, e.t.c.
Records are, therefore, essential elements in the information systems which support the activities of organisations.
3.2 Aims of Personnel Records Personnel records are kept for a variety of reasons, depending on the objectives, functions and environment of the organisation.
As a guide, the following are regarded as being pertinent: 98  PSM 813 PERSONNEL MANAGEMENT IN GOVERNMENT • To furnish the much needed information on organisational manpower, which is useful for both internal and external management of the organisation • To provide accurate information on manpower planning in terms of educational qualifications, cognate experience, knowledge and skills of employee, their potentials and placement opportunities; • To generate information on human resource research.
That is, necessary information is supplied to validate hiring, selection, placement and promotion criteria • To furnish information on employee strengths and weaknesses, so that appropriate training and development schemes can be designed and implemented in a systematic fashion • To provide information on how best to conduct industrial/employee relations • To generate information on the capability and productive profiles of each employee.
That is, manpower recognition which will assist in determining bonus payments, advancement/promotion, demotion, transfers, e.t.c and • To provide factual data as a basis for decision-making in every area of personnel work, e.g., manpower forecasting and planning; recruitment and selection; training and development and health and safety (Armstrong, 1977).
SELF-ASSESSMENT EXERCISE What are the aims of personnel records?
3.3 Life-Cycle of Personnel Record Records, according to experts, contain information and data from which decisions are made, plans developed and control exercised.
It is, therefore tantamount to stating the obvious by saying that such records must contain correct information in the proper form and shape, and be made available as and when required “on a need to know basis.” If this is not so, then the value of such records will diminish.
Records managers must, therefore, know the life-cycle of records in order to enhance their utility value.
Six distinct phases are discernible in any records life-cycle; as depicted below.
99 PSM 813 MODULE 3 Fig.
1.1: Life-Cycle of a Record/Personnel Records Personnel records creation has three distinct phases (Torrington and Chapman, 1979).
The first phase deals with information about the job itself (Working Party, 1978) and goes further to spell out the job description, and the man specification prior to advertising the vacant job.
The second phase is the completion of the standard Application Form.
Here, the prospective employee (or new employee) inserts required or requested biodata in the blank spaces provided in the form.
This serves as the core of his permanent records to which references will often be made.
The third phase deals with pieces of additional information elicited both during the interview process and when offer of appointment is accepted and upon assumption of duty.
3.4 Types of Personnel Records Personnel record, as earlier on noted, is a sub-set of the Personnel Information System (PIS).
It is also another sub-set of general records system; other types of record being policy, and cases or Transaction Records.
In essence, personnel records serve as data bank of people, that is, the organisation’s workforce.
This is because people are employed 100  PSM 813 PERSONNEL MANAGEMENT IN GOVERNMENT because of their strength and their capacity to perform.
Personnel records must, therefore, contain data about people on: • the capacities, and characteristics of individual employee, e.g., age, sex, qualifications and experience • career progression of each employee • records of training received, etc • records of performance and productivity • audit of employees in post (Working Party, 1978).
Arising from this, the following variety of personnel records can be readily identified: • Personal file (Open and Confidential) • Records of Service • Personal History Cards • APER forms as completed by each job-holder • Bond Agreement Forms as completed by each employee • Salary Records • Pension Records • Establishment Records • Staff Training and development records, etc.
3.5 Problems of Managing Personnel Records A number of problems associated with the handling of personnel records can be identified.
In a nutshell, these are as follows: • In accurate, incomplete and incorrect document • Explosive volumes of records-which is tantamount to over- creation or over-generation of data and attendant duplication.
Hence, the Records Management Society of Great Britain (1987) reveals that most organisations create, process, and expend more resources on information services than are necessary • Lack of safeguards on the confidentially, accuracy and relevance of personal information • Poor and inadequate storage facilities-manifest in accommodation and equipment infrastructure • Increasing search time- which is a manifestation of poor retention and retrieval procedures • Increasing retention of useless and outdated records-which is indicative of absence of regular record census • Absence of validation mechanism- which is a function of the problems originally inherent in input data collection to ensure 101 PSM 813 MODULE 3 that it is correct and updating to ensure its currency, reliability and verifiability • Uncontrollable access, misplacement and loss of vital documents; and • Low calibre staffs are put in charge of records, arising from low value attached to records, or misinformation about the value of good record-keeping in organisational life.
3.6 Suggestions for Effective Management of Personnel Records In view of the myriad of problems identified above (the list is, however, not exhaustive) it has become necessary that there should be an attitudinal change to records keeping.
This is because of the increasing realisation of the importance of records as the giant ‘‘memory’’ of organisation.
Records are the product of office work, which are inevitable to effective organisational transactions.
They are necessary corollary to efficient and effective planning, organising, controlling and communicating within organisations.
Against this background, the following broad suggestions are proffered.
Management Concept • Adoption of Records Management Concept.
This is the application of systematic analysis and control of records from their creation through processing, maintenance and protection to final disposal.
It is the control of quantity, quality and cost of records.
• There should be clear definition of user needs.
• Personnel records systems should be designed to meet felt and real needs; and such a system should be sufficiently flexible to be adaptable to the increasingly changing and complex needs.
• There must be open communication between the users and the record manager.
This will ensure that users are well informed and cooperative • Redundant records must be identified and disposed of promptly on a regular basis • A monitoring technique must be adopted to maintain high standards, and to measure performance on regular basis.
Periodic Records Inventory A records inventory or census is a comprehensive gathering of information about records created or processed by an organisation.
This is to ensure that only essential records are created, used, maintained and stored.
The inevitable advantages of such census are as follows: 102  PSM 813 PERSONNEL MANAGEMENT IN GOVERNMENT • Records being held can be easily identified • Quick determination of the media on which they are held • It will help to determine the purpose of the records • The inventory will reveal the appropriateness of records under retention, and It will assist in determining the relevance and suitability of such records in meeting user/management needs in making cost-effective decisions.
3.7 Computerisation of the Personnel Records System The best approach to computerising the records system will be determined by a number of factors, viz: • Nature of the records themselves • Objectives and nature of the organisation • The organisational structure-is it centralised or decentralisation?
(Gallagher, 1986) • Fund availability and • Human factor (Peltu,1985) After installation, the system must ensure: • Confidentiality of data • Flexibility • Easy use and • Data accessibility on “a need to know basis “-through the use of a password.
The advantages of computerisation over the manual system, according to the Pay and Manpower Statistics Working Party,(1978) include: • Greater capacity and flexibility in the use of data • Greater processing capability for sorting, aggregating or manipulating data analytically or mathematically • Greater speed of processing • Greater range of input capability • Facility for automatic output in a range of usable forms and • Greater flexibility and continuity in development 4.0 CONCLUSION In view of the crucial role of records as the life-blood of a flourishing organisation, it is hereby suggested that a records management association should be formed.
The association will ensure high professional standards in the management of records in the personnel 103 PSM 813 MODULE 3 departments of all ministries and parastatals throughout the country.
No other period is more opportune for the establishment of such a body than this era of professionalism in the civil service, which is the hallmark of the new Civil Service Reforms.
5.0 SUMMARY This unit observed a high degree of levity with which everybody seems to regard hard information and data for decision-making and operations.
It identified some of the aims of personnel records and links these to their life-cycle to demonstrate the organic unity between the two.
A few endemic problems were equally identified.
And the unit propounded a number of remedies and options which include periodic records inventory, computerisation and the establishment of the Records Management Association.
6.0 TUTOR-MARKED ASSIGNMENT Identify the problems of personnel records in Nigeria’s Public Service and proffer solutions for solving the problems.
7.0 REFERENCES/FURTHER READING Cabinet Office, London, Records Management Programme Adviser for Departmental Records Officers, (DROs) Guidelines Nos.
1-9.
Dyer, B.
(1979).
Personnel System and Records (3rd ed.).
Britain: Gower Press.
Gallagher, M. L. (1986).
Computers and Personnel Management.
London: Heinemann.
Pay and Manpower Statistics Working Party (1978).
Guidelines for the Development of Personnel Record System in Local Authorities (2nd ed.).
Peltu, M. (1985).
Using Computers: A Manager’s Guide.
Manchester: National Computing Center.
Records Management Society (of Britain), (1987).Records Management Information: A Bulletin of RMS.
Editor: Graham Southwood, January, 1987.
104  PSM 813 PERSONNEL MANAGEMENT IN GOVERNMENT UNIT 2 PENSION ADMINISTRATION CONTENTS 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objectives 3.0 Main Content 3.1 Conceptual Clarifications 3.2 Arrangement under the Non-Contributory Scheme 3.3 Implementation of the Non-Contributory Scheme 3.4 Objectives of the Pension Reform Act.
2004 3.5 Features of the New Scheme 3.6 Withdrawal from Retirement Savings Account 3.7 Death of an Employee 3.8 Transitional Arrangements 3.9 Institutional Arrangements 3.10 Security of Contributions 3.11 Processing of Retirement Benefits 3.12 Group Life Insurance Policy for Employees 3.13 Documentation Requirements 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutor-Marked Assignment 7.0 References/Further Reading 1.0 INTRODUCTION The purpose of the pension scheme is to provide the employees of an organisation with a means of securing, on requirement, a standard of living reasonably consistent with that which they enjoyed while in service.
In effect, pension administration refers to the totality of plans, procedures and legal processes of securing and setting aside of funds to meet the social obligation of care which employers owe their employees in retirement or in case of death.
2.0 OBJECTIVES At the end of this unit, you should be able to: • define some relevant terms • discuss the legal framework for pension administration in the service • discuss the challenges posed by the contributory pension scheme • state the benefits of the contributory pension scheme 105 PSM 813 MODULE 3 • describe the institutional arrangements put in place under non- contributory as well as contributory pension scheme.
3.0 MAIN CONTENT 3.1 Conceptual Clarifications ‘‘Gratuity’’ refers to a lump sum of money paid to an employee by the employer on the basis of the percentage of final salary attached to the years of service put in by the employee.
On the other hand, ‘‘pension’’ refers to a fixed amount paid an employer or his representatives at regular intervals, usually on a monthly basis, to a retired employee or his/her assignee till death for past services rendered.
3.2 Arrangement under the Non-Contributory Scheme The Pension Act No.
102 of 1979 was the basic pension law from which other pension laws have developed in the Nigerian public service.
The law had retrospective effect from April 1, 1974.
The other laws which catered for specific occupational groups but retained the major components of the pension Act 102 of 1979 include: • The Armed Forces Pensions Act No.
103 of 1979 • The Pension Rights of Judges Act No.5 of 1985 and • The Amendment Acts Nos.
57 of 1988; 29 of 1991; and 62 of 1991.
The arrangement under these laws was that the employers (federal, states and local governments) would be fully responsible for the payment of gratuity and pension to their respective retired officers.
The laws provided that only employees on permanent and pensionable appointment were entitled to receive retirement benefits, if they retired in pensionable circumstances.
The qualifying service for gratuity and pensions shifted from 10 years and 15 years to five years and 10 full years respectively.
Again, an officer who retired voluntarily could not draw pension until he/she attained the age of 50 years.
Under this arrangement, the benefit scheme was graduated based on the officer’s length of pensionable service while the computation of the officer’s benefits was based on his total annual emolument.
The computation of benefits is shown in the table below.
106  PSM 813 PERSONNEL MANAGEMENT IN GOVERNMENT Table 2.1: Retirement Benefits Table Years of Qualifying Gratuity as Percentage Pension as Percentage Service of Final Total of Final Total Emolument.
Emolument.
5 100 - 6 108 - 7 116 - 8 124 - 9 132 - 10 100 30 11 108 32 12 116 34 13 124 36 14 132 38 15 140 40 16 148 42 17 156 44 18 164 46 19 172 48 20 180 50 21 188 52 22 196 54 23 204 56 24 212 58 25 220 60 26 228 62 27 236 64 28 244 66 29 252 68 30 260 70 31 268 72 32 276 74 33 284 76 34 292 78 35 300 80 However, for judges, they were entitled to 100% of their total emolument after serving for fifteen continuous years as a judge of the High Court.
In the case of academic staff of universities, Pension Act 11 of 1993 stipulates that a person who retires as a Professor in the university, or has been continuously in the service of a university in Nigeria up to retiring age, shall be entitled to 100% of his/her terminal annual emolument as pension.
The same goes for the Armed Forces, Service Chiefs, including the Inspector-General of Police who would also take 100% of their total emoluments as pension.
Again, 107 PSM 813 MODULE 3 followingthe recommendation of the National Council on Establishments, via Establishment Circular No.
B.63216/S.1/X/757 of June 23, 1998, government approved that officers appointed from the government service to the post of Head of Service were to earn 100% of their annual emolument as pension for life, and similarly Permanent Secretaries, who have put in a minimum of twenty (20) years of pensionable service, would earn 100% of their annual emoluments as pension for life.
3.3 Implementation of the Non-Contributory Scheme This scheme was based on a defined benefit scheme.
If an officer retired from service, and, provided he had served the qualifying period for pension, he/she was entitled from the pension fund to a lump-sum gratuity and a pension for life payable on monthly installments.
The state governments were responsible for retirement benefits of their staff from the Consolidated Revenue Fund charges.
Until a proper account was made of the funds previously obtained, a state government would not receive further funds from the Consolidated Revenue Fund.
At the federal level, by a Circular Ref.
No.
B.49951/S.4/V1/337 of August 21st, 1985, the payment of gratuities was decentralised.
By this, each ministry/extra ministerial department was expected to apply to the Establishments and Pensions Office for funds to settle the gratuities of its retiring staff.
The objective was to remove the problems and delay experienced when the pensions and gratuities were solely paid by the Establishment and pension’s office.
Until a proper account was made of the funds previously obtained, the ministry/extra ministerial department would not receive further funds from the Establishments and Pensions Office.
However, the implementation was characterised by a number of problems.
Firstly, there was lack of funding resulting from inadequate budgetary allocation.
The situation was so bad that the outstanding pension liabilities had accumulated and stood at about N2 trillion as at January, 2004.
In fact, the proportion of pension to salaries increased from 16.7% to 30% between 1995 and 1999.
Secondly, pension administration was weak and inefficient; hence, there were delays in pension processing and lack of transparency.
Thirdly, there were cases of outright embezzlement in the civil In the light of the foregoing, the Federal Government thought it wise to embark on Pension Reform as part of its overall reform agenda.
Following the passage of the Pension Reform Bill by the National Assembly, the President signed it into law on June 25, 2004.
This marked the birth of the Pension Reform Act 2004.
108  PSM 813 PERSONNEL MANAGEMENT IN GOVERNMENT 3.4 Objectives of the Pension Reform Act 2004 The objectives of the Act, among others, are to: • Ensure that retirement benefits are paid as and when due • Empower the workers, and promote a saving culture • Ensure transparent and efficient management of pension funds • Establish a uniform regulatory and supervisory framework • Encourage wider coverage.
SELF-ASSESSMENT EXERCISE Outline the objectives of the Pension Reform Act.
3.5 Features of the New Scheme It is contributory, in the sense that both the employer and the employee jointly contribute a minimum of 15% of employee’s basic salary, housing and transport allowances.
The employer contributes 7.5% and the other 7.5% is contributed by the employee.
However, in the case of the military, the employer contributes 12.5% while the employee contributes 2.5%.
The foregoing notwithstanding, the employer may choose to bear the full burden that the contribution shall not be less than 15%.
Again, an employee can also make additional contributions.
Every employee is expected to open and maintain a Retirement Savings Account (RSA) in his name with any Pension Fund Administrator (PFA) of his/her choice.
The employee shall notify his/her employer of the PFA chosen.
The employer deducts the contribution and remits same on monthly basis to the Pension Fund Custodian(PFC) not later than 7 working days from the day the employee is paid his/her salary.
The PFC in turn will notify the Pension Fund Administrator within 24 hours for the later to credit the employee’s Retirement Savings Account (RSA).
Contributions are invested on behalf of the employee by the Pension Fund Administrator.
The employee cannot transfer his/her Retirement Savings Account from one PFA to another more than once in a year without adducing any reason for such transfer.
The scheme covers all employees in the public service of the federation, all employees of the Federal Capital Territory, and employees in the private sector, working for organisations with five or more employees.
At the same time, certain categories of officers are exempted.
They are employees with three years or less to their retirement, existing pensioners and some members of the judiciary.
109 PSM 813 MODULE 3 An Additional Voluntary Contribution Account (AVC) can be opened by those eligible and those exempted under the Retirement Savings Account.
Withdrawal from the account can be made before the end of five years subject to taxation or after five years without tax.
The account increases the value of retirement benefits available for distribution at the point of retirement.
3.6 Withdrawal from Retirement Savings Account Account holders can only withdraw from the account upon retirement or attaining the age of 50 years, whichever is later.
However, an account holder can withdraw from the account before the age of 50 years if he/she is retired on medical grounds or in accordance with the terms and conditions of his/her employment.
The modes of withdrawal are as follows: 1.
Programmed monthly or quarterly withdrawals calculated on the basis of expected life span 2.
Annuity (an agreed amount paid at stated intervals) for life purchased from a life assurance company with monthly or quarterly payments 3.
Lump—sum withdrawal, provided that the amount left after withdrawal shall be sufficient to procure annuity, or fund— programmed withdrawal that will produce an amount not less than 50% of the account holder’s annual remuneration as at the date of retirement.
3.7 Death of an Employee The Act provides that the employer shall maintain a life assurance policy with a minimum of thrice the total emolument in favour of each employee.
Where an employee dies, his entitlement under the life assurance policy will be paid into his Retirement Savings Account.
Benefits would be paid to beneficiaries under the will of the employee.
But in the absence of a will, benefits would be paid to the following: 1.
Spouse and children of the deceased 2.
Recorded next of kin or any person appointed by the probate registry as administrator of the deceased’s estate.
3.8 Transitional Arrangements Employees under any of these schemes before the Pension Reform Act, and having over three years to retirement, will be issued with bonds called Federal Government Retirement Bonds for the value of their accrued pension rights.
The bond is redeemable upon retirement and 110  PSM 813 PERSONNEL MANAGEMENT IN GOVERNMENT added to the Retirement Savings Account.
The supervision and management of the issuance and redemption of the bond is handled by PenCom.
3.9 Institutional Arrangements (a) National Pension Commission (PenCom) This body is made up of 13 members, including a part-time Chairman and a Chief Executive Officer referred to as the Director-General.
Others are four (4) full-time commissioners, and one representative each from the Office of the Head of Civil Service of the Federation, Federal Ministry of Finance, Nigeria Labour Congress (NLC), the Nigerian Union of Pensioners,(NUP),the Nigeria Employers’ Consultative Association(NECA), THE Central Bank of Nigeria (CBN) And the Securities and Exchange Commission(SEC).
The functions of PenCom include the following: (i) Regulation and supervision by way of: • Overall policy formulation • Approving, licensing and supervising of Pension Fund Administrators and Pension Fund Custodians • Maintaining a National Data Bank • Receiving and investigating complaints (ii) Inspection and examination of books by: • Investigating affairs of various operators • Publishing a list of operators annually • Taking reports from Auditors of PFA and PFC (iii) Imposition of sanctions.
(b) Pension Fund Administrators (PFAs) According to the list of Pension Fund Administrators posted on PenCom website, there were 23 Pension Fund Administrators as at January 1, 2009, namely: • AIICO Pension Managers Limited • ARM Pension Managers Limited • Crusader Sterling Pensions Limited • First Alliance Pension & Benefits Limited • First Guarantee Pensions Limited • IBTC Pension Managers Limited • Leadway Pension PFA Limited • Legacy Pension Managers Limited • NLPC Pension Fund Administrators Limited • Pension Alliance Limited • Premium Pension Limited • Sigma Vaughn Sterling Pensions Limited • Trust Fund Pensions Plc 111 PSM 813 MODULE 3 • Oak Pensions Limited • Penman Pensions Limited • Anchor Pension Managers Limited • APT Pension Fund Managers Limited • Amana Pension Managers Limited • Evergreen Pensions Limited • Royal Trust Pension Fund Administrator Limited • CRIB Pension Fund Administrator Limited • Future Unity Glanvils Pensions Limited and • Fidelity PENSION Managers.
Although another PFA, known as Standard Alliance Pension Fund Administrator was presented to the public on Thursday, February 14, 2008, the name was not posted.
The functions of Pension Fund Administrators include the following: (i) To open and maintain Retirement Savings Accounts for employees that use them (ii) To invest and manage the pension funds in a manner prescribed by PenCom (iii) To provide regular information to the employees or beneficiaries (iv) To pay retirement benefits to employees in accordance with the provisions of the Pension Reform Act 2004; and (v) To report to PenCom.
(c) Pension Fund Custodians (PFCs) Just as the name suggests, PFCs are responsible for the warehousing of the pension fund asset.
They are licensed financial institutions and the shareholders are to guarantee the pension fund assets held by the custodians.
As at January 1, 2009, only names of four (4) custodians were posted on the net by PenCom.
They are: • UBA Pensions Custodian Limited; • Zenith Pensions Custodian Limited; • First Pensions Custodian Nigeria Limited; and • Diamond Pension Fund Custodian Limited.
Their functions are to: • Receive contributions from employers and notify the Pension Fund Administrator within 24 hours of receipt for the Pension Fund Administrator to credit the Retirement Savings Account of the employees concerned • Hold pension fund assets on trust for its clients 112  PSM 813 PERSONNEL MANAGEMENT IN GOVERNMENT • Execute transactions and undertake activities relating to pension fund investments upon instructions from the Pension Fund Administrators and • Report to PenCom.
3.10 Security of Contributions PenCom is the regulatory body set up to monitor the activities of PFCs to ensure that investments made with the funds are in line with the laid- down prescriptions.
Aside, a stakeholder of the custodian is licensed financial institutions with a minimum net worth of N50 billion and a total balance sheet of not less than N125.0 billion.
The parent company of the Pension Fund Custodian (PFC) issues a guarantee for the full sum of funds held in the Pension Fund Custodian’s bank account on behalf of the Pension Fund Account.
In addition, the PFC insures all assets under custody against fire, burglary, etc.
The PFC also takes fidelity guarantee insurance cover on all its employees.
With all the foregoing in place, the contributions of employees are secured.
3.11 Processing of Retirement Benefits In order to ensure that officers receive their retirement benefits promptly, departmental pension officers are required to forward the up- to-date record of service of the officers accompanied with the under listed documents: • Pension Form GEN,62(in duplicate) with two recent coloured passport photographs • Birth certificate or sworn declaration of age • Record of Service • Acceptance letter of retirement • Letter of appointment or gazette publications of first appointment • Letter of confirmation of appointment or gazette publication • Clearance Certificate of none-indebtedness signed by Director of Finance and Accounts • Evidence of last promotion • Current Personnel Emolument Card/Last Pay Certificate • Evidence of transfer of service(where applicable) • Evidence of condonation and merger of service(where applicable) • Carbon copy of audited computation sheet of terminal benefits • Signed payment voucher for receipt of gratuity (if applicable).
and • Stamped Death Certificate (for deceased officers).
113 PSM 813 MODULE 3 Public Service Rule 020809 provides that “forwarding of departmental files and other documents not expressly structured above shall no longer be a condition for processing of retirement benefits.” 3.12 Group Life Insurance Policy for Employees Section 9(3) of the Pension Reform Act provides that every employer, to which the Act applies, shall maintain life insurance policy in favour of its employees for a minimum of three times the annual total emolument of the employees.
The life insurance policies are to be provided only by selected insurance companies and not Pension Fund Administrators.
For effective implementation of the section, the National Insurance Commission(NAICOM)and National Pension Commission(PenCom) have anchored the “Guidelines for Life Insurance Policy for Employees” to be followed by employers and insurance companies.
3.13 Documentation Requirement • Each employer shall obtain an insurance certificate from the insurer.
• Such certificate shall be accompanied by a schedule which shall indicate, amongst other things, the period of coverage, the number and details of staff at inception/renewal date, their total emoluments, the benefit payable and the annual premium/date of full payment.
• The insurance certificate shall be issued to employers by the insurer within a month from the policy inception/renewal date.
• Employers shall display a copy of the insurance certificate in a conspicuous place within the premises, for the information of the employees, as evidence of having taken such policies.
• Employers shall send a copy of the insurance certificate with the schedule of benefits to the National Pension Commission and the Pension Fund Administrators where the employees maintain their Retirement Savings Accounts (RSAs) not later than 31st March every year.
• Employers shall be required to commence renewal negotiations in writing, within two (2) months to the expiration of the current insurance coverage.
Such negotiation must be conducted before the last day of the current cover.
• Full payment of the insurance premium shall be made, at the latest, on the first day of insurance cover.
• Where an employer fails to effect full payment of premium at the stipulated time, the insurer shall report such failure to the 114  PSM 813 PERSONNEL MANAGEMENT IN GOVERNMENT National Pension Commission within fourteen (14) days of non- receipt of premium.
4.0 CONCLUSION Pensions are supposed to take care of the employed after spending more than half of his adult life serving an organisation.
It is an obligation on the part of the employer hence it has to be adequately managed.
5.0 SUMMARY Discussions in this unit deliberately connected from what the situation was before the Pension Act of 2004.
The unit thereafter examined the objectives of the new scheme, its implementation framework and procedures as well as the relationship between the National Pension Commission and the Pension Fund Administrators (PFAs) etc.
The unit also discussed briefly the Group Life Insurance Policy.
6.0 TUTOR-MARKED ASSIGNMENT Outline the advantages of the new pension scheme.
7.0 REFERENCES/FURTHER READING Establishment Circular No.
B.49951/S.4/V1/337 of 21st August, 1985.
Establishment Circular No.
B.632/S.4/X/757 of 23rd June, 1998.
Federal Government of Nigeria (1979).
Pension Act No.
102 of 1979.Lagos: Government Printers.
Federal Government of Nigeria (2004).
Pension Reform Act, 2004.
Lagos: Government Printers.
National Pension Commission (2006).
“Guidelines for Life Insurance Policy for Employees” in The Guardian Newspaper of Thursday, June29, 2006, pp.
54—56.
115 PSM 813 MODULE 3 UNIT 3 PREPARATION FOR RETIREMENT CONTENTS 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objectives 3.0 Main Content 3.1 The Need to Plan for Retirement 3.2 Strategy for Retirement 3.3 The Challenge of Starting a Business 3.4 Considerations 3.5 Acquisition of Resources to start a Business 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutor-Marked Assignment 7.0 References/Further Reading 1.0 INTRODUCTION Retirement is one phenomenon that many workers dread to undertake hence the numerous cases of swearing and re-swearing of affidavit in other to adjust one’s age as he approaches the age of qualification for retirement.
Wehmer (2000:1005) defines retirement as giving up or being caused to give up one’s work, especially on reaching pensionable age.
He further explains that the concept entails going away into seclusion for recuperation; being removed from circulation.
In support, Phil long (1997:12) defines the concept as (i) the state or condition of being withdrawn from society or publicity; and (ii) a withdrawal from occupational or business activity.
From the foregoing definitions we can infer that retirement is a major component of disengage • Physical and mental pressure which arise with age.
This informs administrative pecking of retirement age • Financial solvency; that is the ability of individuals to afford not being in employment usually for others • The need for employers to open up higher position to staff who are more active mentally and physically • Disenchantment with the work environment, business ethics, or economic, social or political order • Ill-health and • Desire to have greater control over ordering of one’s life and the extent of time spent working.
116  PSM 813 PERSONNEL MANAGEMENT IN GOVERNMENT 2.0 OBJECTIVES At the end of this unit, you should be able to: • explain the need to plan for retirement • describe the strategy for retirement • identify challenges of starting a business • outline other considerations and action plans.
3.0 MAIN CONTENT 3.1 The Need to Plan for Retirement There is a lot of argument in favour of planned retirement.
First, it has become a fact of life that the period of gainful employment in a person’s life is a part of his whole existence and therefore should contribute to its enrichment and fulfillment.
This enrichment, it has also been asserted, should continue beyond one’s retirement.
Secondly, the state of the retired population is one aspect of society and should constitute an issue of national importance.
Thirdly, there is the number and a near geometric rate of growth of the population of retired people to contend with.
Fourthly, there exists large numbers of noticeable healthy and active retired people.
Besides, unplanned retirement creates some avoidable problems, notable among which are: • a state of boredom • a condition of financial anxiety • distress • a tendency to lapse into a state of apathy and complete inactivity • unexpected death within a few years of retirement • disintegration of health, strength, attitudes and general well-being • loss of contact with colleagues and • feeling of dissatisfaction and an unfulfilled life.
Fortunately, there are veritable advantages or benefits derived from a well-prepared retirement plan.
The following benefits readily come to mind: • good health • adequate security • provides some kind of preoccupation • reduces concern for money • eliminates a feeling of uselessness and not being wanted and 117 PSM 813 MODULE 3 • eases the process of adjustment to a completely different framework for one’s life.
SELF- ASSESSMENT EXERCISE What are the benefits derived from a well-prepared retirement plan?
3.2 Strategy for Retirement For retirement to be meaningful to retirees, retiring and prospective retiring officers, it should be seen as a multi-party exercise, involving the Government, Employers, the Employees, the Society and Family.
Each of these parties should be prepared to act in a way that will ease or smoothen the pains of separation from what perhaps has been a life-long career.
In order to ensure satisfaction therefore, the following specific lines of action are suggested: • There should be gradual disengagement from work • counseling sessions should be held for officers • Employers should make adequate financial provisions for the prompt payments of retirement benefits lump-sum • There should be post –retirement support so that employers would still make available to their retired staff, usual social, sporting and health facilities • Employees preparing for retirement should start developing new interests outside the employer’s circles and • Above all, retiring staff should identify and start pursuing, post- retirement occupations suitable for their styles.
With regards to the last strategy, a choice can be made between the following: • Writing • Getting another paid job • Pursuit of hobbies • Serving as volunteer • Starting one’s own business – a small or medium size business 3.3 The Challenge of Starting a Business One of the strategies being adopted by the Government to reduce unemployment is to encourage the youth, the retired and retiring persons to take up self-employment.
But as we all know, self-employment 118  PSM 813 PERSONNEL MANAGEMENT IN GOVERNMENT cannot be for everyone.
Indeed, self-employment is more meaningful to those who are entrepreneurial.
In 1803, Jean Baptist described the entrepreneur as the agent who “uses all means of production and who finds in the value of products the establishment of the entire capital he employs and the value of the wages, the interest and the rent which he pays, as well as the profits belonging to himself”.
He added that an entrepreneur commonly but not necessarily supplies either his own or borrowed capital, but in order to succeed, he must have “good judgment, perseverance, and a good knowledge of the world as well as well as business”.
He must also possess the art of leadership and administration.
Therefore, the entrepreneurial function is that of bringing together,, the factors of production and the provision of continuous management, as well as that of risk-bearing.
Generally, studies have shown that entrepreneurs think and behave differently from other people.
Their thoughts are by: • Concern about doing well • Achieving a standard of excellence set by themselves or by other people.
• Doing better than they have done • They like to win in competition • They need to succeed because doing well at a challenging task provides them with major sources of pleasure and satisfaction in life .
Thus, the desire to achieve cannot be satisfied by money.
The foregoing identified entrepreneurial characteristics can be summarized as follows: • The desire to take personal responsibility for decisions • Preference for decisions involving a moderate degree of risk and • An interest in concrete knowledge of the results of decisions.
• An entrepreneur, therefore, can be conceived as a person who initiates, establishes, organises, maintains and expands economic activity of an enterprise.
Therefore, the first challenge of starting a business is to develop an entrepreneurial attitude.
(Fadeyi, 1991: 10 – 12).
• In other to perform these tasks, the entrepreneur needs specific skills, abilities, traits and motives.
In this respect, it has been established that: • The trade entrepreneur is very hard working, knowledgeable in marketing and commercial aspects of production, is generally an 119 PSM 813 MODULE 3 advocate in terms of education, and training, is calculative and secretive in his activities.
The technically qualified entrepreneur is full of enthusiasm, wants to try out new things, has creative urge, is a self-reliant, intelligent and hard working.
He has learnt to use at least the basics management tools and techniques, including human relations.
He is generally successful and his success has made him future-oriented and generally able to bring about expansion diversification in productive activity.
The entrepreneurs who have earlier been artisans or workers in small or large factories are intelligent, have a limited range of skills, narrow vision, are independently spirited, are conscious of economic use of resources though poorly equipped in so far as modern managerial skills are concerned.
Graduate engineers and previously experienced/employed persons also do very well as entrepreneur managers when they choose to set up a manufacturing enterprise.
Some of the well educated and equipped among the traders also acquit themselves very well.
The foregoing underscores the importance of other challenges or the key success factors (KSF) required in starting and running a business, namely: strong motivation, identification of a business idea or project, self-confidence and operational competence, and ability to muster necessary resources.
These imply that starting a business as an alternative to employment requires as much planning as does the preparation for retirement.
3.4 Considerations Having decided to start a business, it will be useful to consider the following questions and the suggested action plans.
1.
What does it take to start one?
a.
Technical competence b.
Mental ability c. Human relations (interpersonal skills) d. High achievement drive e. Creativity 2.
In which direction should one look?
a.
Manufacturing (converting raw materials to useful products) b.
Merchandising (buying and selling) c. Service (do someone else’s donkey work) 120  PSM 813 PERSONNEL MANAGEMENT IN GOVERNMENT 3.
Wish to start – where to start from, when?
a.
Start by first finding the business, b.
Then the capital c. Not by the other the way round d. Best time to start is now.
4.
How do you find the business?
a.
Think b.
Think of what people need, what you need c. A product or service, existing or not, Be creative; d. Talk to established small business owners.
e. Visit the Ministry of Commerce and Industry (also for information on registration) f. Ask a banker (He may help with capital later) 5.
Buy an-going small business?
a.
This is alright provided the price is good and you are prepared to assume control immediately.
You bare the best manager.
But get an expert to help assess the business.
You must find answers to the following questions: b.
Why is the business being sold?
c. What is the present physical condition?
d. What is the condition of the inventory and other assets?
e. What are the liabilities?
f. How many of the personnel are going to remain?
g. What type of competition does the market face?
h. What does the overall financial picture look like?
6.
Suppose the option is to start a new business?
Then start right now, you may end up big.
a.
First, carry out a market research b.
Determine to whom product/service will appeal.
c. Where do such people live?
How are they?
d. Are there any competitors in the area?
e. How well established are they?
f. What does the future of the business look like?
Once a business idea has been conceived and validated, it becomes relatively easy to build up the business plan.
In this regard, a business plan is seen as a detailed description of why, how and when an enterprise will achieve a stated level of profitability.
After reading the plan, a prospective investor or other interested party should know precisely what the management or sponsors of the business intend to do with the money and the human resources at its disposal.
The length and sequence of contents in a business plan will vary with the complexity of the proposed venture.
Certain key elements are always needed, however, to describe why, how and when economic success will be accomplished.
In general, the sponsor must articulate a 121 PSM 813 MODULE 3 crisp picture of the business venture, its background, critical success factors, products and services.
Next, the sponsor must explain WHY the business will succeed.
This “why” is answered by identifying “who” outside the enterprise is interested in and qualified to buy what the business has to sell and the way it plans to sell it ( the marketing component).
Then the sponsor must spell out “who” in the enterprise that will do “what”, to produce and market the product or service (the organization and management component).
This is the HOW.
Finally, the sponsor should cover WHEN the business will succeed by showing the planned flow of funds into and out of the business over time (the financial plan component).
3.5 Acquisition of Resources to Start a Business All businesses require inputs.
These inputs can be categorised into two, namely: basic and supplementary.
Basic resources are those that are very fundamental for the business to function, whereas supplementary resources are those inputs that are secondary in nature to the business .
For a business to operate effectively, its basic resources or inputs must be acquired and put in place.
These inputs are: • Location – land, premises or building • Equipment – machinery, utensils and appliances/equipment.
The various research institutes in Nigeria now develop local technology.
• Labour – staff or workers at various levels.
• Materials – ingredients and/or raw materials.
The Raw Material Research and Development Council has identified and documented uses and sources of locally available industrial raw materials).
• Capital – equity fund and loan.
Capital is need in all aspects of business – and will be sourced from the sponsor’s personal contribution or equity or from borrowing, or both.
Sourcing capital through borrowing especially from banks desires more than a passing reference.
This is so because, more than half of loan application to banks do not see the light of the day.
This unfortunate situation occurs principally because most loan applications do not fulfill the basic requirements for qualifying for a loan.
On receiving a loan application, the bank will want to see the actual or projected financial report (Balance Sheet) of a business, a reasonably accepted yield on a proposed commitment.
The credit analyst will be influenced by the economic climate vis-à-vis the profitability of an underlying productive venture and the management structure and financial superstructure of a borrowing company/business.
Therefore, to qualify for a bank loan, a prospective borrower will first need to pass what is known as the two 122  PSM 813 PERSONNEL MANAGEMENT IN GOVERNMENT C’s test, that is, the test of Character, and Capability, and then the following issues will form the basis of a final decision: • Relevance of purpose of borrowing to the need of the company/business • Evidence that the loan sought is adequate to finance the target project.
• Prospects of repayment (as revealed in the analysis of profit and loss account and projected cash inflow/budget).
• Financial condition or a state of health of the business – based on capital base, net worth and liquidity ratio • Adequacy of securities pledged.
• Ability of the management • Industrial stability Capital can also be sourced from the various Government funding schemes like the Matured People’s Programme of National Directorate of Employment, the Working-For-Yourself Programme of the Federal Ministry of Industries, the Entrepreneurship Development Programme of the Nigeria Bank for Commerce and Industry, the National Economic Reconstruction fund, the Small and Medium Enterprise (SME) Scheme, and the African Enterprises Fund (AEF).
The statement made by a one- time Chief of General Staff of the Nigerian Army, Major General Oladipo Oladiya is informative.
He stated that “Planned retirement makes the future a better place to live, and it helps to increase the chances of longevity of the retiring officer.” In addition, we have identified other beneficial effects of planned retirement such as: • It allows officers/individuals to prepare for the future by developing series of ideas that will eventually be pruned down to one • It allows the individual to examine his /her strengths and weaknesses in respect of what to do after retiring • It prepares the mind for the challenging task of Managing one’s life as against having others manage it • It challenges one’s mental alertness to seeking opportunities within one’s immediate environment and using one’s initiative to determine the best option to take and • It removes the psychological effect of the fear of the unknown after retirement.
4.0 CONCLUSION Retirement is an inevitable phase of a public servant.
Sine every human being goes through stages of evolution in his life, retirement should 123 PSM 813 MODULE 3 therefore be that phase which should be looked forward to.
Unfortunately, many do not look forward to it hence, they do not prepare for it.
It is a natural phenomenon that someone who spent more than half of his adult life in a sort of regimented activity will definitely feel strange when such an experience comes to an end and is immediately followed by a more or less direct opposite type of life.
This therefore underscores the need to plan for retirement hence a subject of discussion in this unit.
5.0 SUMMARY This unit explained the concept of retirement and the need to plan for retirement.
The unit identified various strategies to be adopted in retirement.
These strategies include: psychological, emotional, physical etc, in order to ensure balance health of the retiree.
One of the strategies for retirement is what to do after retirement.
A popular occupation these days is being self employed by starting your own business.
The unit hence dwelt extensively on this by identifying the challenges and opportunities.
6.0 TUTOR-MARKED ASSIGNMENT i.
Identify strategies that should be adopted for a smooth retirement.
ii.
Outline the issues to be considered in starting a business.
7.0 REFERENCES/FURTHER READING Fadeyi, B.
(1991).
“Implications of and Preparation for Retirement.” An unpublished paper presented at the Seminar on Preparing Civil Servants for Retirement, held at the Administrative Staff College of Nigeria (ASCON), Topo-Badagry.
Osinnowo, F.A.O.
(1990).
“Sourcing of Equipment and Available Technology for Small Scale Industries.” An unpublished paper delivered at the Small Enterprise Development Consultancy course for Common Wealth Countries held at ASCON, Topo- Badagry.
124  PSM 813 PERSONNEL MANAGEMENT IN GOVERNMENT UNIT 4 REFORMING PERSONNEL MANAGEMENT ORGANS IN THE PUBLIC SERVICE CONTENTS 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objectives 3.0 Main Content 3.1.
The Scenario Before 1988 3.1.1.
Public/Civil Service Commission 3.1.2.
Ministry of Establishment 3.1.3.
Office of the Permanent Secretary 3.2.
The Current Situation 3.2.1.
Framework at the Micro-level 3.2.2.
Framework at the Macro-level 3.2.3.
Extra-Ministerial Departments 3.2.4.
Parastals and other Bodies 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutor-Marked Assignment 7.0 References/Further Reading 1.0 INTRODUCTION This unit discusses the various structures that have been put in place for managing personnel in the public service.
Amendment or otherwise of these structures by reform actions in quest of improved outfit, problems identified in the process, as well as actions or inactions of the various structures are also discussed.
The chapter equally discusses enhancement or inhibition of management of personnel in the service by these various structures.
The institutional framework emanated from a simple structure in 1914, referred to as the Secretariat which housed five senior officers, top among whom was a Chief Secretary.
Around this were grafted specialised departmental organisational structures.
The increased size of the public service over the years and the complexity of management that accompanied it instigated various changes.
However, the point should be made that most of the review commissions and anels that were set up, made little contributions towards restructuring the already existing structures as they mainly focused action on improved wages and salaries and other conditions of service and/or benefits to public servants.
Attempts at restructuring are identified as follows: 125 PSM 813 MODULE 3 • 1946 – Harragin Commission was responsible for institutionalising two structures of senior and junior service; and • 1954 – Gorsuch Commission –responsible for introducing five structures so as to have a comfortable middle part.
• Although the Udoji Commission of 1972-74 introduced a number of changes, in terms of re-structuring, it is credited mainly with merging the then existing numerous salary structures into one unified grade salary structure.
2.0 OBJECTIVES At the end of this unit, you should be able to: • describe the personnel management organs in the Public Service prior to the 1988 Civil Service Reforms • analysed the impact of the 1988 Reforms • explain the current situation.
3.0 MAIN CONTENT 3.1 The Scenario Before 1988 The scenario before 1988 was an institutional framework that could be categorised into: • three, namely: Public Service Commission, the Establishment Department of the then Office of Head of Civil Service, and the Permanent Secretaries’ Office.
In addition to these were two other categorisations called the “Pool Service” or the “Centrally Deployed Classes” and “Professional Class”.
The Centrally / Deployed Classes constituted an agglomeration of officers whose services were required in every ministry and extra-ministerial department and were thus, posted from one ministry to the other after serving a minimum of three years in a ministry.
The ‘Dotun Philips Study Team referred to this group of officers as “Jack of all Trades”, and thus attempted to dislodge them through professionalisation.
However, the merit of this pool officer’s arrangement is that they gain experiences as the move from ministry to ministry.
All these experiences, they would find invaluable later-on as top civil servants.
Examples of this group are Administrative Officers, Accounts/Stores Officers, Executive Officers, and Personal/Confidential Secretaries, etc.
126  PSM 813 PERSONNEL MANAGEMENT IN GOVERNMENT Functions of these main organs were as follows: 3.1.1 Public/Civil Service Commission This Commission was charged with: • The responsibility for appointment, promotions and discipline of all cadres and levels of officers in the service.
The Commission however delegated the powers to appoint, promote, and disciple of junior staff (that is, those on Grade levels 01-06) to the Permanent • Secretaries who undertook these functions in their respective ministries/departments.
In each ministry/department, there existed Department Advisory Committee (DACs) and Selection Boards in accordance with the provisions of section 16 (1) of the Public Service Commission Regulation of 1971.
This section had stated that Advisory Committees and Ministerial or inter-Ministerial Selection Boards may be constituted at the request of the Commission to consider candidates for appointment or promotion, and the commission itself may summon any of such candidates for interview.
It is instructive to note, however, that the Public Service Commission (which is more commonly referred to currently as the Civil Service Commission) system in Nigeria is a legacy of British Colonial Administration.
Its existence as of today is constitutionally entrenched.
In other words, the constitution of the Federal Republic of Nigeria inter alia, vests it with the powers: (a) “ to appoint persons to offices in the Federal Civil Service and (b) to dismiss and exercise disciplinary control over persons holding such offices.” Since independence in 1960, many changes have taken place in the socio-economic and political life of Nigeria.
The Federal Civil Service has grown tremendously in size as well as in the scope and complexity of its functions.
As a result, the Civil Service Commission has, since 1967, increasingly delegated some of its powers to Permanent Secretaries, Heads of Extra-Ministerial Departments and Heads of Pool Services.
The inevitable delegation of powers by the Commission was occasioned not only by the need to enforce discipline, and thereby enhance efficiency in the service, but also an attempt at reducing the workload of the commission thereby ensuring its operational efficiency.
In exercising the powers delegated to them in respect of appointment, promotion and discipline, Ministries/Departments were enjoined to comply with the procedure laid down in the Notes for Guidance issued by the Civil Service Commission.
127 PSM 813 MODULE 3 The scenario therefore appeared confusing and yawned for streaming.
This was later to be adequately addressed and redressed by reform actions.
The main problem encountered by the public Service commission was the style of structure which isolated it from the operating ministries/departments.
This is because, as the situation exists in the private sector in which a lot of improvements are observed, it is expected that an operating unit should be autonomous at least to the extent of hiring, motivating, and firing the staff who work for it.
Another problem encountered by the Commission was the burgeon of the service over time.
The composition and complexion of the Commission could not keep pace with the increase, with the result that its volume of work increased over and above what the Commission could cope with.
At least, the Udoji Commission of 1972 – 74 picked holes with the public service commission along these lines.
3.1.2 Ministry of Establishment This had at various times either diminished or reduced to a department in the office of Head of the Civil Service and at other times metamorphosed into a full-fledged ministry all at the whims and caprices of the particular government in power.
Its functions were: 1. specifying conditions of service 2. the implementation and continuous review of the civil service rules 3. the determination of staff numerical strength and grading within the service 4. the preparation and maintenance of staff records and statistics; 5. conduct of staff reviews and 6. consultation with staff unions and associations.
The problem arising from this arrangement is the dichotomy between the Public Service Commission and the Establishments Ministry or Department.
This is because, there existed two separate organs handling personnel job.
The implication of this is that the organ which was in charge of determining availability of vacancies and knows the urgency attendant to the filling of such vacancies was different and distanced from the organ that had the knowledge of the training needs of the service.
In addition, the person that trained was different from the person that promoted hence, training never counted in the promotability of officers, particularly senior administrative positions.
128  PSM 813 PERSONNEL MANAGEMENT IN GOVERNMENT 3.1.3 Office of the Permanent Secretary This office never possessed defined and separate existence.
This is because each ministry had the delegated responsibility for employment, promotion, and discipline of all its junior staff on grades levels 01-06.
In addition, the office had delegated powers to give temporary appointments to officers on grade level 07, pending their interview by the Civil Service Commission.
Each Permanent Secretary also had the responsibility to report on all senior officers in his ministry to the Public/Civil Service Commission and to liaise between his ministry and the Establishment/Ministry/Department on staff matters, particularly welfare.
The Secretary for Administration and Finance in each ministry as well as the Staff Officer played leading roles in the employment, promotion and discipline of junior staff.
They recommended action on any of these functions through the Department Advisory Committee (DAC) to the Permanent Secretary for his necessary action.
The problem with this ministerial in-house arrangement was that, in employment matters , it hardly paid heed to merit principles probably in response to the constitutional provisions on the application of the ‘‘Federal Character’’ in employment.
Although the point still has to be made that in the first place, the existence of vacant positions were hardly published.
The best it did was to shortlist candidates found to be prima facie suitably qualified for interview from its usually burgeoning file containing unsolicited applications.
Secondly, those who got to receive letters of invitation to the employment interviews were mainly relatives and hangers-on as well as house –boys of top officials of government.
As clearly articulated by Omale (1992), notes such as “We Spoke” “bearer is my in-law’s daughter”, “please absorb as a store-keeper”, were rampant in the ministries, shortly after budget had been approved and ministries given the go ahead to recruit.
This has been the remote cause of constant conflicts between the Establishment Department and the Ministries.
Accusations and counter-accusations between the two organs were rife.
While the establishment department, which is saddled with the responsibility of ensuring that ministries did not over-employ by approving or disapproving the budgetary allocation regarding staffing, accused the ministries of indiscriminately recruiting officers over and above the number approved in the budget without clearance from it, the ministries on the other hand, accused the establishments department of indiscriminately slashing down the number of staff which they require and which they made provisions for in the budget.
Another problem with the ministerial personnel office was that it was invariably staffed with non-personnel experts.
The so-called staff officers who played leading personnel roles, because they were usually the first to come into contact with the new entrant and were the ones closest in contact with most members of staff, were mainly officers who belong to 129 PSM 813 MODULE 3 the executive cadre, who probably started their careers as clerks.
All through their lives, they had been trained as procedures and regulations men.
They were “one track ’’ men who by training and experience, were defenders of the “established order” and deniers of benefits to staff and the public (Omale, 1992).
Reform action on the institutional arrangement seems to have resolved these problems, at least to a large extent.
For instance, the bulk of the job of hiring, motivating and firing etc.
now rests with the operating ministries/departments.
The responsibilities of the Civil Service Commission as articulated in Decree No.
43 of 1988 are stated inter alia: (i) Recruitment of staff into Grade leves 07 to 10 in the service.
In doing so, the Commission was expected to adhere to the principle of “Federal Character” at those points of entry (ii) Set up general and uniform guidelines for appointment, promotion and discipline (iii) Monitor the activities of each Ministry/Extra-Ministerial Department on appointment, promotion and discipline in order to ensure that the guidelines are strictly and uniformly adherer to; (iv) Serve as an Appellate Body for all petitions from Ministries/Extra-Ministerial Departments regarding appointments, promotion and discipline.
(v) Maintain comprehensive and up-to-date personnel records for the entire civil service (vi) Review and propose modifications constantly in the operational methods and organisation structure of the Civil Service.
Another solution to the problem of the tripartite arrangements particularly the dichotomy and overlap in roles and functions of the Public Civil Service Commission and Establishment Department, seemed to have been effected at the initial implementation of Decree No 43 of 1988, when both organs were integrated under the ambits of the Public Service Commission.
The problem of in-house ministerial arrangement was arrested through the provisions of the 1988 reform which stipulate that the Ministries and Extra-Ministerial Department then had greater autonomy regarding personnel matters.
They were given full powers to promote and discipline officers on grade levels 07 to 10 while the powers to appoint them was still being retained by the Civil Service Commission.
Part of the provisions of the reform under its professionalisation ‘‘clause’’ was the establishment of a Personnel Management Department in each ministry essentially for the handling of personnel matters in that ministry.
To further streamline the personnel functions in the ministries 130  PSM 813 PERSONNEL MANAGEMENT IN GOVERNMENT and Extra-Ministerial Departments, the reforms provided for the establishment of Personnel Management Board in each Ministry /Extra- Ministerial Department.
This Board handled the appointment, promotion and discipline of staff in that ministry/department.
The Board also had two main committees – the Senior Staff Commission (SSC) and the Junior Staff Committees (JSC).
The institutional arrangement was such that for the Ministry/Extra- ministerial department that have area offices in the states, they should have two Junior Staff Committees; Junior Staff Committee (Local) which handled the appointment, promotion and discipline of junior officers on Grade levels 01-06 at the Local level or outstation that is, in the area or state in which that ministry /department is operating.
The composition of the committee was not less than five senior officers in the Department in such state office.
The Chairman of that committee was the most senior officer in that department but should not be below Grade level 10 while other members were not below Grade Level 08.
At the Headquarters, the committee was known as Junior Staff Committee (JSC) (Headquarter).
Again, the members were not less five, but this time, they were not below grade level 12, and the Chairman was the Director of Personnel in that ministry.
The Senior Staff Committee (SSC) perform similar function, but for senior officers on grade levels 07 – 13.
The SSC appointed officers only on grade levels 11 to 13 as the Civil Service Commission did the same for those on grade levels 07 to 10.
The Committee was composed of nine members of not below grade level 14, a member of the Civil Service Commission who had an observer status, and the then Director- General of the ministry as the Chairman.
The other categories of senior officers were handled by the Personnel Management Board (PMB).
The Board handled the appointment, promotion, and discipline of these officers.
The Board comprised of all directors in the Ministry, a Civil Service Commissioner an observer, the then Director-General of the Ministry, and the Honorable Minister/Commissioner as the Chairman.
It should be noted that the presence of the Civil Service Commissioner at both the Senior Staff Committee SSC and the Personnel Management Board (PMB) was to ensure that the guidelines provided by the Commission were strictly adhere to.
In addition, the practice of recruiting Junior staff at the headquarter and deploying them to states stopped since each state office was empowered to carry out that function through its Junior staff Committee (JSC) and in so doing ensure that the principles of ‘catchment area’ (employing officers from the state) was strictly adhere to.
Similarly, the composition of each Ministry’s Personal Management Board and its Committee was such that, it in the words of Professor Dotun Philips, it should have fair geo-political representation 131 PSM 813 MODULE 3 so that officers from just one area of Nigeria would not monopolies these bodies.
Another vital personnel office which we earlier addressed was the defunct Public Service Department in the Office of Head of the Civil Service.
This department was responsible for the pooled officers or centrally deployed cadre officers such as the Administrative and Executive Officers.
This was the department that moved this category of officers from one Ministry/Extra-Ministerial Department to another with its attendant problems.
One of the major problems of such an arrangement was that these categories of officers continue to be generalist administrators as long as they remained in the service.
The 1988 Reforms however abrogated the practice of pooling offices and scrapped the Public Service Department.
This further gave impetus to the professionalization of the civil service, which was one of the highlights of the reform.
With this arrangement, every officer was expected to make his career in a Ministries/Extra-Ministerial Department of his choice.
The erstwhile administrative/executive officers were supposed to be provided with a choice to belong to any of the three common management departments of Personnel Management; planning, research and Statistics; and Finance and Supplies in a particular ministry.
SELF -ASSESSMENT EXERCISE Itemise the responsibilities of the Civil Service Commission as articulated in Decree No 43 of 1988.
3.2 The Current Situation The last section of this unit discusses practices with regards to the management of bureaucrats in Nigeria, in the new Millennium (year 2000) and beyond.
For ease of analysis, we shall approach the institutional arrangement as currently being practiced from two levels viz.
the Micro level, which discusses the superstructure put in place within each ministry and Extra-Ministerial Department; and Macro level, which discusses the super structures within the service but outside the Ministry/Extra-Ministerial Department yet exercising considerable influence with regards to practices within the Ministries and Extra- Ministerial Departments.
The practices are all based on the recommendations of the Civil Service Review Panel (a.k.a.
Ayida panel) of 1994, which set out to resolve the discrepancies identified in Decree Nos.
43 of 1988 and 80 of 1993 respectively.
It should be pointed out that not all the recommendations of the panel were accepted by Government.
However, those that were accepted were subsequently adopted and implemented.
132  PSM 813 PERSONNEL MANAGEMENT IN GOVERNMENT 3.2.1 Framework at the Micro level In each Ministry /Extra-Ministerial Department exist the following: • Junior Staff Committee (JSC) Local ( for only the Ministries/Extra-Ministerial Department that has area offices) • Junior Staff Committee (JSC) Headquarters’ • Senior Staff Committee (SSC); and • Management Staff Committee (MSC) Junior Staff Committee (JSC) Local Officers of given Ministries/Extra-ministerial departments in the states or at zonal levels have Junior Staff Committee which is responsible for handling personnel matters particularly appointments, promotion and discipline of junior officers on GLs.
01 – 06.
The composition of the committee should not be more than nine and not less than seven members.
The Chairman is the Director of Personnel Management Department while other members should be senior officers of not less than GL.
08 at the state, area or zonal offices.
The arrangement is such that where there are no officers on these levels or where the number of officers on these levels is less than seven, more officers but not exceeding three in number, would be sent from the Headquarters.
The composition of the committee should as much as possible reflect the federal character of the federation.
Quorum at meetings of the Junior Staff Committee should be five members, including the Chairman.
The Junior Staff Committee (JSC) Headquarters The Junior Staff Committee (JSC) at the Headquarters of each Ministry/Extra-Ministerial Department comprises of not more than nine and not less than seven senior officers who must not be below Grade level 12.
The Director of Personnel Management Department is the Chairman.
The committee handles personnel matters particularly appointments, promotion and discipline of junior officers on Grade levels 01-06 at the headquarters of the Ministry/Extra-Ministerial Department.
The composition of the committee equally reflects the federal character of the federation as much as practicable.
Quorum of the meetings is usually five members including the Chairman.
Senior Staff Committee (SSC) Senior Staff Committee (SSC) exists in each Ministry/Extra-Ministerial Department.
The Committee comprises of all the Directors in the Ministry, Civil Service Commissioner as an Observer, the Permanent Secretary of the Ministry as Chairman, and the Director of Personnel Management as 133 PSM 813 MODULE 3 Member/Secretary.
The committee handles personnel matters of officers on Grade Levels 07 – 13 (except of course pool cadres).
It does not however handle appointment of senior officers at entry points of Grade Levels 07 – 10 as this is directly handled by the Civil Service Commission.
In addition, recommendations of this committee in respect of senior officers on grade levels 07-10 are forwarded to the Civil Service Commission for ratification.
Management Staff Committee (MSC) The practices are all based on the recommendations of the Civil Service Review Panel (a.k.a Ayinda panel) of 1994 which set out to resolve the discrepancies identified in Decree Nos 43 of 1988 and 80 of 1993 respectively.
It should be pointed out that not all the recommendations of the panel were accepted by government; but those that were accepted subsequently were adopted and implemented.
Management of Pool Officers Cadres Officers belonging to the newly introduced pool cadre are located in two areas vis: the office of Head of Civil Service; and peculiar Ministries /Extra-Ministerial Departments.
Discussions of the management of pool officers would therefore be guided by such areas of location.
Office of Head of Civil Service In this office, is a Senior Staff Committee which handles cases of pool officers controlled by the office.
In this category are: Administrative Officers; Executives Officers; Librarians; Library Officers; Secretarial Cadre; and Stores, Supply and Purchasing Officers all on grade levels 07-13.
Whatever is recommended by the SSC here is usually subjected to the approval of Civil Service Commission.
The composition of the committee is as follows: Permanent Secretary.
Public Service Office as the Chairman, while other members include: Permanent Secretary, Civil Service Commission; Director, Office of Establishment and Management Services Director, Ministry of Finance; Director, Ministry of Education; Director, Ministry of Works and Housing; and Director, Public Service Office, who should, in addition, serve as the Secretary .
A Commissioner from the Civil Service Commission is also a member but with an observer status.
Peculiar Ministries/Extra-Ministerial Departments These include: Ministry of information and Culture; Justice; Office of Accountant –General; and Office of Auditor-General.
In each of these also is a Senior Staff Committee.
The Chairman in each of the ministries is the Permanent Secretary.
In the case of the Accountant - General’s Office, the Accountant- General is the Chairman.
And the Auditor- General is the Chairman of the committee in his office.
In each, all the Directors are members and a Civil Services Commissioner is also a 134  PSM 813 PERSONNEL MANAGEMENT IN GOVERNMENT member with an Observer Status.
Here also, the committee handles the cases of officers on grade levels 07 – 13.
Whatever recommendations that are made by the senior staff committee is forwarded directly to the Civil Services Commission.
In all cases, however, both the Senior Staff Committee (SSC) and the Junior Staff Committee (JSC) are expected to meet regularly but not less than two times a year.
3.2.2 Framework at the Macro Level As earlier stated, there are certain super structures which are, strictly speaking, outside the ministries and extra-ministerial departments, but which, as part of the civil service, exercise enormous influences on the operations within the ministries.
Such influences, sometimes, come in form of directives through circulars or provision of guidelines for operations etc.
They sometimes function as vital links between the Ministries and Extra-Ministerial Departments and the Head of the executive arm of government, that is, the President or Vice President.
These structures are: • Office of Secretary to the Government of the Federation • Office of the Head of the Civil Service of the Federation and • The Federal Civil Service Commission.
• Each of these is, however, replicated in each of the States of the Federation.
• Office of the Secretary to the Government of the Federation The duties of the Secretary to the Government of the Federation include: • Serving as Secretary to the National Council of State, Federal Executive Council , and other Constitutional Councils which are Chaired by the President or Vice president • Coordinating the activities of Ministries and Government Agencies, especially on the implementation of government policies and decisions • Dealing with constitutional, political and economic matters as may be referred to the Presidency • Administrative Tribunals and Commissions of Enquiry • Coordinating National Security and Public Safety matters • Protocol matters • Coordinating appointment to Statutory Bodies and Agencies • Dealing with the matter relating to conditions of services of political office holders in the Executive, Legislature and Judiciary ; 135 PSM 813 MODULE 3 • Processing matters on prerogative of mercy • National Honours and Award • Petitions and Appeals to the President from non public officers • Liaison with Secretaries to State Governments • Residential accommodation for Political Office Holders Management of the following departments: • Cabinet Secretariat • General Services Office • Political Affairs Office • Economic Affairs Office • Special Services Office • Ecological Funds Office • Police Affairs Office and • Special Duties Office; Office of the Head of the Civil Service The duties of the Head of Civil Service of the Federation include: • To provide leadership and direction to the Civil Services by maintaining high morale, Esprit-de-corps and good image of the service • Fostering professionalism among civil servants • Advising the President, in consultation with the Chairman, Federal Civil Service Commission, on the appointment and deployment of Permanent Secretaries; • Promoting good relations between Ministers and other political office holders on the one hand, and Permanent Secretaries and other Civil Servants on the other hand • Career development of all Senior Management Staff (GL.14 and above), including training scheme for such officers • Establishment matters of the Civil Services • Providing management services to the Civil Service • Personnel records and statistics of the Civil Service • Civil Service Pension Schemes • Staff salaries , Wages and allowances of the Civil Service • Civil Service Training Institutions • Should be in attendance at the Federal Executive Council Meetings • Coordinating Industrial Relations of the Civil Services and providing the Secretariat for the Public Services Negotiating Councils 136  PSM 813 PERSONNEL MANAGEMENT IN GOVERNMENT • National Council on Establishment • Service Welfare Matters • Allocation of Office and Rsidential accommodation to civil servants • Providing staff for newly established and ad-hoc bodies • Managing the following offices headed by Permanent Secretaries • Public Service • Service Welfare • Establishments and Management Services • Manpower Development • Liaison with States Heads of the Civil Service.
Civil Service Commission This is a statutory body established by the constitution of the Federal Republic of Nigeria.
With regards to its composition, paragraph 10, part 1 of the third schedule of the constitution of the Federal Republic of Nigeria, 1999, states inter alia: “The Federal Civil Service Commission shall comprise the following members: a Chairman; and not more than fifteen other members, who shall, in the opinion of the President, be persons of unquestionable integrity and sound political judgment.” The roles of the Commission include: • Employment of officers on grade levels 07- 17 after due consultations with the relevant ministries and extra-ministerial departments and staff pools • Ratification of promotions by Ministries, Extra-ministerial departments and pools for officers on grade levels 07 – 17 • Discipline of all officers on grade levels 14 – 17 • Serving as an observer at the Management Staff Committee and Senior Staff Committee meetings • Serving as an appellate body on matters of appointment, promotion and discipline;and • Updating, issuing and circulating ‘Guidelines for Appointment, Promotion and Discipline as well as Notes for Guidance Series’ regularly.
3.2.3 Extra-Ministerial Departments The Civil Service is defined, in accordance with the constitutional provisions as Ministries and Extra-ministerial Departments.
Experience and findings from researches undertaken in the past inform clarification 137 PSM 813 MODULE 3 of these concepts.
While bodies referred to as Ministries appear straight forward and easily understood, bodies that belong to the extra- ministerial departments appear confusing.
Aside from Offices located in the Offices of the Secretary to Government and Head of Civil Service respectively, each of which is headed by a Permanent Secretary, the following are also included as extra-ministerial departments: • Office of the Auditor- General • Civil Service Commission • Judicial Service Commission • National Electoral Commission • National Population Commission • Public Complaints Commission • Revenue Mobilization, Allocation and Fiscal Commission • Code of Conduct Bureau • Federal Character Commission • National Human Rights Commission • National Boundary Commission • National Salaries, Income and Wages Commission and • Police Service Commission.
By character and composition, the newly established Anti-Corruption Commission fall within the purview of extra-ministerial department.
Each of the above is headed by a Chairman on a similar status as an Honourable Minister but does not belong to the Executive Council.
A similar arrangement, which exists in the ministry, where a civil service head (that is a Permanent Secretary), is the Accounting Officer, is replicated in the Extra-Ministerial Departments.
In this case, however, the Civil Service head, who is not designated Permanent Secretary, is the Accounting Officer.
Depending on the type of extra-ministerial department, he is sometimes referred to simply as “Secretary” or “Executive Secretary”.
3.2.3 Parastatals and Other Bodies Again, the constitutional provisions on the concept of the Public Service as defined in this unit, encompasses essentially the Civil Service and Parastatals cum-other bodies.
For the management of staffers of these bodies and parastatals as well as the state public services, it is not mandatory that the modus operandi adopted at the federal civil service should be the case.
These other organs are at liberty to adopt and adapt whichever method that suits their uniqueness.
It is therefore beyond the scope of this unit to identify the parastatals one after the other for purposes of analyzing the framework adopted by them.
Suffice it to state that the essential elements of what we discussed in this unit could be 138  PSM 813 PERSONNEL MANAGEMENT IN GOVERNMENT identified in these parastatals and other government agencies.
However, the recently revised and released Civil Service Rules as well as Financial Regulations, now titled Public Service Rules etc., were deliberately designed by government to encompass all its Agencies such as parastatals.
The implication is that, a uniform modus operandi, with regards to rules and regulations etc.
is being enforced in the civil service and parastatals as well as other Governmental Agencies.
4.0 CONCLUSION Structure is inevitable for effective management of any outfit.
This belief informed the establishment of such structures for managing personnel in the public service.
However reforms ensured that personnel management organs are structured and restructured to meet the demand of a certain period which of course includes the current dispensation.
5.0 SUMMARY Reforming personnel management organs in the public service to various forms at various periods ostensibly to ensure effective management of personnel at given periods.
This unit discussed these periods which include the pre and post 1988 period and the current dispensation.
The unit equally looked at the Extra-Ministerial Departments as well as parastatals and other bodies.
6.0 TUTOR-MARKED ASSIGNMENT i.
Explain the current functions of the Civil Service Commission.
ii.
Compare and contrast the structures during and after the 1988 period.
7.0 REFERENCES/FURTHER READING Federal Republic of Nigeria (1988).
Civil Service (Re-organization) Decree No 43, P. A799.
Federal Republic of Nigeria (1999).
Constitution of the Federal Republic of Nigeria.
Lagos: Federal Government Press.
Maduabum, C. P. (2006).
Reforming Government Bureaucracies in Nigeria: The Journey so Far.
Badagry: ASCON Press.
Omale, I.
(1992).
“Past Practices in Personnel Management in the Nigeria Civil Service: Issues and Procedures” in Ali, D. Y.
& Akinyele, C. I.
(Eds).
New Trends in Personnel in Management: A Book of Readings.
Badagry: ASCON Press.
139 PSM 813 MODULE 3 Phillips, D. (1998).
Essentials of the 1988 Civil Service Reforms in Nigeria.
Ibadan: NISER.
140
