 NATIONAL OPEN UNIVERSITY OF NIGERIA SCHOOL OF BUSINESS AND HUMAN RESOURSES COURSE CODE:TSM 403 COURSE TITLE:CULTURAL TOURISM 1 2 COURSE GUIDE TSM 403: CULTURAL TOURISM Course Writers: Mr. Johnson .
J. Zogore Dept.
of Economics University of Jos Content Editor: Dr. ( Mrs) Rahila Gowon Directorate of General Studies University of Jos Course Coordinator: Mrs. Ofe .I.
Inue School of Business and Human Resource Management National Open University of Nigeria Victoria Island, Lagos Programme Leader: Dr. O J. Onwe School of Business and Human Resource Management National Open University of Nigeria Victoria Island, Lagos 3 TABLE OF CONTENTS PAGE Introduction………………………………………………………………… 3 What you will learn in this Course………………………………………… 3 Course Contents…………………………………………………………… 3 Course aims………………… ……………………………………………… 3 Course Objectives……………………………………………………………4 Course materials…………………………………………………………….
4 Study Units………………………………………………………………… 4 Tutor Marked Assignments (TMAs)……………………………………….
5 Main content ……………………………………………………………….. 5 Final Written Examination:………………………………………………… 5 Conclusion………………………………………………………………….
5 Blurb……………………………………………………………………… 6 References/Further Readings ……………………………………………… 7 4 INTRODUCTION The course Cultural Tourism (TSM 403) is a core course which carries two credit units.
It is prepared and made available to all the students who are taking B.Sc.
Tourism Studies (TSM) programme with specialization in Cultural Tourism; is a programme tenable in the School of Business and Human Resources Management.
The course is a useful material to you in your academic pursuit as well as in your workplace as mangers and administrators.
What you will learn The course is made up of fifteen units, covering areas such as development, ideas and types of tourism.
It also has related areas such as travel, sustainable development, strategic planning, budgeting and factors that influence choice of tourism.
This course also gives an insight on cultural heritage in Nigeria and the development of Ecotourism, impacts of passenger transportation and tourism attractions in Africa with particular reference to Nigeria and Kenya, among many.
This course Guide is meant to provide you with the necessary information about the entire course, the nature of the materials you will be using and how to make the best use of the materials toward ensuring adequate success in your programme as well as the knowledge of cultures, customs and sustainability of the tourism industry.
Also included in this course guide are information on how to make use of your time and information on how to tackle the Tutor-Marked Assignments (TMAs) questions.
There will be tutorial sessions during which your instructional facilitator will take you through your difficult areas and at the same time have meaningful interaction with your fellow learners.
Course Contents The course consists of the basis of cultural tourism, how tourism evolved from the grassroots, different cultures of people and how they affects tourism, changing attitudes of host populations and reasons for these changes, benefits of tourism to culture, how to preserve tourism, the reasons why people travel, tourists trends, historical developments, tourism marketing, the local factors and socio-cultural impact, cultural barriers, ethnic diversity and global culture.
Course Aims The main aim of the course is to expose you to the nature of cultural tourism, the mechanisms necessary for managing cultural tourism and related matters in the tourism industry.
The course also aims at making you to have greater appreciation of the role ecotourism plays in sustaining and preserving endangered species of plants and animals, and how it helps researchers, especially anthropologists in their research.
The aims of the course will be achieved by: 1.
Explaining the nature of cultural tourism.
2.
Describing the necessary mechanisms for managing tourism 3.
Explaining how culture is preserved 5 4.
Explaining why people travel 5.
Discussing the local factors that influence rural tourism 6.
Explaining cultural barriers and ethnic diversity.
Course Objectives After completing this course, you should be able to: 7. discuss the nature of cultural tourism 8. identify the necessary mechanisms for managing tourism.
9. discuss how culture is preserved 10.discuss why people travel 11.state the local factors that influence rural tourism.
12.identify cultural barriers and ethnic diversity Course Materials The major components of the course are: 1.
Course Guide 2.
Study units 3.
Assignment Guide 4.
Recommended study materials and textbooks Study Units There are fifteen units in this course, which should be studied carefully, such units are as follows: Module 1: The Evolution of Cultural Tourism Unit 1: Cultural Tourism: An Overview Unit 2: Development of Domestic Tourism Unit 3: Rural Tourism Unit 4: Cultural Diversity and Tourism Unit 5: Nigeria Cultural Heritage and Tourism Unit 6: Museums, Culture and Tourism Unit 7: The impact of tourism on culture Module 2: Leisure as Tourism Unit 8: Leisure and Tourism Unit 9: Leisure conditions and objective aspects of the individual Unit 10: Ecotourism Unit 11: Tourism Attractions in Africa (Nigeria and Kenya) Module 3: Transportation Systems and Strategic Planning Unit 12: Passenger Transportation Unit 13: Air Travel Unit 14: Vacation Ownership and Tourism 6 Unit 15: Strategic Planning in Tourism Model 1 introduces you to the area of cultural tourism, its development and impact on the environment and culture.
Module 2 deals with leisure and tourism, Ecotourism and it also gives distinct examples of tourism attractions in Africa.
Module 3 examines the various types of transportation, types of vacation and the strategy for planning the tourism industry.
The course (TSM 403) comprises of 15 units and it is recommended that a three hour period should be allocated to each unit and contains objectives, main content, Tutor- Marked Assignment and Self-Assessment Exercises which when followed carefully will in no small way assist you in achieving the aims and objectives of the course.
Study Plan The table below serves as a study plan that will guide you throughout the study of this course Unit Title of study Unit Weeks/Activity Assignment Course Guide 1 Module 1: The Evolution of Cultural Tourism 1.
Cultural Tourism – An 2 Assignment overview 2.
Development of Domestic 3 Assignment Tourism 3.
Rural Tourism 4 Assignment 4.
Cultural Diversity and 5 Assignment Tourism 5.
Nigeria’s Cultural Heritage 6 Assignment and Tourism 6.
Museums, Culture and 7 Assignment Tourism 7.
The Impact of Tourism on 8 TMA 1 to be submitted culture Module 2: Leisure as Tourism 8. Leisure and Tourism 9 Assignment 9. Leisure conditions and 10 Assignment Objective Aspects of the Individual Situation 10.
Ecotourism 11 Assignment 11.
Tourism Attractions in 12 TMAs 2 should be Africa (Nigeria and Kenya) submitted 7 Module 3: Transportation systems and Strategic Planning 12.
Passenger Transportation 13 Assignment 13.
Air Travel 14 Assignment 14.
Vacation Ownership Tourism 15 Assignment 15.
Strategic Planning and the 16 TMAs to be Tourism Industry submitted Revision 17 Examination 18 Total 18 Each study unit will take at least two hours and it includes the introduction, objectives, main content, self assessment exercises, conclusion and summary as well as references/further readings and other area boarders on the tutor-marked assignment questions.
Some of the self-assessment exercises will necessitate contacting some organizations.
You are advised to do so in order to observe industrial relations in practice.
Assignment: Tutor-Marked Assignment There are 15 student units in this course, each unit should be completed in a week and it is expected that it will take you two hours to cover the material.
A time table has been designed for you indicating the required weeks to complete the course.
The recommended textbooks and study materials in the references section of each unit are meant to give more information if you can find the materials.
There are self-assessment exercises as you go through each sub unit, and at the end of the unit is the tutor-marked assignment which is meant to evaluate your understanding of the material.
Answer and submit as indicated on the time table.
MAIN CONTENT Each unit contains self-assessment exercise ranging from between 2 to 3 depending ion the subunits in each unit.
These exercises are mean to help you assess your understanding of the material in each sub unit and the unit in general.
At the end of each unit, there is a tutor-marked section that contains two questions which cover the material studied in the unit.
These assignments should be submitted to the tutor for marking.
These Tutor- Marked Assignments will take up to 30 percent of the total score of the course.
Final Written Examination 8 At the end of this course, you will write the final examination.
It will attract the remaining 70%.
This makes a total final score to be 100% CONCLUSION The course, Cultural Tourism (TSM 403) exposes you to the issues involved in cultural tourism and how to manage and sustain them.
On the successful completion of the course, you would have been armed with the materials necessary for efficient and effective management of matters relating to the cultural tourism and/or organization.
BLURB TSM 403: CULTURAL TOURISM TSM 403 Cultural Tourism is a 2 credit course to be taken in the fourth year of the undergraduate degree Tourism programme at the National Open University of Nigeria.
It will be available to all learners as a core course in the programme.
The course is made up of fifteen study units and a courses guide.
It introduces learners to the basics of cultural tourism and the various levels in which culture has continued to have an impact on tourism through ecotourism, cultural and heritage preservation and also through museums and so on.
9 REFERENCES/FURTHER READINGS In addition to the main text, you will find the underlisted References/Further Readings and internet websites useful for your studies.
It is therefore advisable that you make the best use of them.
Anderson, J. R. L. (2002) the Ulysses factor New York: Harcourt Brace Jovanovich Arizpe, L. (2000) “Cultural Heritage and Globalization”.
In Avrani E., Mason, R and Torre, M. D. eds.
Values and Heritage Conservation.
Loss Angeles: Getty conservation Institute.
Aryear, G. (1998); The Travel Agent: Dealer in Dreams, 5th ed.
Englewood Cliffs, New Jersey: Prentice Hall.
Atherton, T. C. (1991); Regulation of tourism destination planning, development and management including a critique of the systems and practice in Australia, (unpublished) M.Sc.
dissertation, University of Surrey.
Avrani, E., Mason R. and Torre, M. D. (2000).
Values and Heritage Conservation.
Loss Angeles: Getty conservation institute.
Baily, M. (2001) “Travel Business: Rooms at the Top”, Asia Business, 27, 9 September, 2001, P. 60.
Barbier, E. B.
(1997); The concept of sustainable Economic Development.
Environment Conservation, 14(2), 101-10.
Basu, A.
(2002); Culture, the Status of Women and Demographic Behaviour.
Oxford: Clarendon Press.
Berry, D. S. and Shuldiner, P. W., Blomme, G. W. and Jones, J. H. (2003).
The technology of Urban Transportation, Evanston, Illinois: worthwestern University Press.
Blau, J.
(2003); Social Contracts and Economic Markets.
New York: Plenum Bray, W. P. (2003); Transport and Communications, London: Weidenfeld & Nicholson, LTD. 10 Brotherton, R. (2002, P.18); An introduction to the UK Hospitality Industry: A comparative Approach, Oxford: Butterworth Heinemann.
Brown, J. K. (1999); This Business of Issues: Coping with the Company’s Environments, New York: The Conference Board, Inc. Bwagwati, J.
(2003)“Borders Beyond Control”.
Foreign Affairs 82(1):98-104 Chambers, R. (1993), Rural Development: Putting the last first.
New York: Longman Scientific & Technical.
Coffman, C. D. and Recknage, H. J.
(2001), Marketing for a Full House, Ithaca, New York: Cornell University Press.
Costanza, R., Daly, H. E. and Bartholomew, J.
A.
(1991) Goals, agenda and policy recommendations for ecological economics.
In R. Costanza (ed).
Ecological Economics.
The Science and Management of Sustainability.
New York: Columbia University Press.
Daily, G. (ed) (1997).
Natures services-societal dependence on Natural Ecosystems, Washington DC: Island Press Davidson, R. (1999).
Tourism, London: Pitman Publishing Depiah, k. a.
(1996), “Race, culture, identity misunderstood connections”.
In K. Anthough Apiah Amy Gutmann, eds Colour consciousness: The political morality of Race.
Princeton: Princeton University Press.
Desteigguer, J. E. (1997).
The Age of Environmentalism, New York: McGraw Hill.
Dogget, R. and O’Mahoney, R. (1994).
The Leisure Environment Donohoe, M. (2006); Causes and health consequences of environmental degradation and social justice: Social Sciences 1(1111) 111 – 112 Drucker, P. F. (1999); Management: Tasks Responsibility; Practices.
New York: Harper & Row.
Economic Research Highlights from World Travel and Tourism Council.
http://www.wttc.org.
11 12 Ellis, J.
(1993), Why people play.
Englewood Cliffs, New Jersey: Prentice Hall.
Explore the following websites: Financial Times, 2004, “French film makers fear for L’Exception culturelle”.
9 January.
Forero, J.
(2003), “Seeking Balance Growth vs. culture in Amazon”.
The New York Times 10 December.
Gamst, F. C. and Norbeek, E. (1996).
Ideas of culture: sources and uses.
New York: Holt Reinhart and Winston.
Grief, A.
(2004), Cultural Beliefs and organization of Society.
A Historical and Theoretical Reflection on Collective and Individualistic Societies.
Journal of Political Economy 102 – 912 – 20.
Grossman, G. M and Krueger, A.
B.
(1995); Economic Growth and environment.
Quarterly Journal of Economics, 112-78.
Haffajee, F. (1999) “South Africa: Blending Tradition and Change” UNESCO Courier.
November.
(htt://www.unesco.org/courier/1999_11/uk/dossier/Ext 23htm).
Harrison, L. E. and Hunington, S. P. (eds) 200) Culture Matters.
How values shape human progress, New York: Basic Books Harrison, L. E., Huntington, S. P. (eds) 2000.
Culture Matters: How Values Shape Human.
Progress: New York Basic Books.
Holloway, R. J. Hancock, R. S. (2003) Marketing in a change environment, New York; John Willey and Sons.
http://www.mbunisafaris.com/data./attractions/specific/Aberdare http://www.mbunisafaris.com/data/attractions/specific/mount_ke http://www.mbunisafaris.com/data/attractions/specific/Nairobi_N- File://E:/yankari_game_reserve.htm -http://www.mbunisafris.com/data attractions.vrt http://www.nigerianfield.org/abuja_files/AssopFalls2005htm 13 Indigenous Australia (2003).
“What is Cultural Heritage” [htt://www.dreamtime.net.au/indigeneous/culture.cfm] February, 2004.
Inglehart, R. and Baker, W. (2000) “Modernization, Cultural change and the Persistence of Traditional Values, American Sociological Review 65:19-51.
Jafari J.
(1997); Tourism models: The socio-cultural aspects; Tourism Management.
Vol.
8 no.
2, Pp.
151-9 Jomo, K. S. and Hui, W. C. (2004).
“Affirmative Action and Exclusion in Malaysia: Ethnic and regional Inequalities in a Multicultural Society”.
Jones, P. (2002); Introduction to Hospitality Operations: An indispensable guide to the Industry London; Continuum.
Justus, G. R. (2001) “Microhotel: How “simple” Translates into success”, The Cornell Hotel and Restaurant Administration Quarterly,35, 8 December, 2001 Kaplan, M. (1995) Leisure: Theory and Policy, New York: John Wiley & Sons, Inc. Kiphing, N. and Wolf, R. I.
(2003).
Transportation and Politics, New York: D. Van Nostrand Company Inc. Lane, H. E. and Hartesvelt, M. (2003) Englewood Cliffs New Jersey: Prentice Hall Ross, J. E. and Kamie, M. J.
(2005) “Strategic Thinking: Key to Corporate Survival”.
Management Review, February, 20655, P.9 Lumberg, D. E. and Lumberg, C., B.
(1995, Pp.
3-8); International Travel and Tourism, second edition.
New York: John Wiley & sons.
Mayo, E. J. and Javis, L P. (2001).
The Psychology of Leisure Travel: Effective Marketing and Selling of Travel Services.
Bostons: CBI Publishing Company.
McDonald, M. (2003) “USAIR’s Lagow: BA Links Strategic Partnership” Travel Week, August 30, P.30 Murphy, P. E. (1995); Tourism: A community Approach, New York: Methuen.
14 Muthin, D. and Satteredwaite, D. (1990); Human Settlements and Sustainable Development Nairobi UN Centre for Human settlements (habitat).
Parets, R. T. (1997), “Getting their share”, Lodging, Vol.
44, No., 12, December, 1997, P. 40.
Patterson, T. C. and Susser, I.
(eds) (2001).
Cultural Diversity in the United States.
A critical Reader, Oxford: Blackwell.
Putman, R. (1993) “The Prosperous Community: Social Capital and Public Life” American Prospect 13.35.
Rodolfa, S. (2004).
”Indigenous Peoples in Comparative Perspective”.
In UNDP Human Development Report, (2004) Ross, J. E. and Kamie, M. J.
(1993) “Towards the formalization of Strategic Planning: A conceptual framework” Sloane school of Management technical Report 7 Boston December, 1993.
Sen, A.
(2004) “Cultural Freedom and Human Development”.
Sen, A.
(2004).
“Cultural Freedom and Human Development”.
Sen, A.
(2004a) “Cultural Freedom and Human Development .
Seth, P. W. and Bhat, S. S. (2005: P.55).An Introduction to Travel and Tourism, New Delhi: Sterling Publishers Private Limited.
Seyla, B.
(2002).
The Claims of Culture: Equality and Diversity in the Global Era.
Princeton: Princeton University Press.
Smith, V. L. (1999); Hosts and Guests: The Anthropology of Tourism, 2nd ed.
Philadelphia, Pa: University of Pannsylvanice Press Spencer, J. E. and Thomas, W. L. (1998, P.47).
Introducing Cultural Geography, New York: John Wiley and Sons.
UNDP: Human Development Report, (2006:p.46) New York: Oxford University Press 15 UNEP (1995); Major International Environmental Relevant to industry 1972-1995.
Industry and Environment.
18(4), December, 1995 Veutzel, R. A.
(2001, P. 898) “Leaders of the Hospitality Industry or Hospitality Management” An Introduction to the Industry, 6th ed.
Dubuque, Iowa, Xendall/Hunt.
Wahab, S., Crampton, L. J. and Rothfield, L. M. (1993: P.10).
Tourism Marketing Fourth edition, London: Tourism International Press; Wolchuk, S. (2001) “Worlds Largest Hotels,” Hotels, August 2001, P. 7.
World Commission for Culture and Development (1995) “Our Creative Diversity; Report of the World Commission on Culture and Development; Paris.
World Tourism Organization (WTO) www.world-tourism .org.
World Tourism Organization (WTO).www.world tourism.org.
World Values Survey (2004) “World Values Survey” [http://www.worldvaluessurvey.org] February 2004.
1. www.24hourmuseum .org.uk 2. www.artscouncil.org.uk 3. www.museums .gov.uk 16 TSM 403: CULTURAL TOURISM Course Writers: Mr. Johnson .
J. Zogore Dept.
of Economics University of Jos Content Editor: Dr. ( Mrs) Rahila Gowon Directorate of General Studies University of Jos Course Coordinator: Mrs. Ofe .I.
Inue School of Business and Human Resource Management National Open University of Nigeria Victoria Island, Lagos Programme Leader: Dr. O J. Onwe School of Business and Human Resource Management National Open University of Nigeria Victoria Island, Lagos 17 PREFACE Cultural tourism is regarded as a special type of, and area of tourism that is anchored on people’s interest and active participation in the search for new and deepened cultural and exotic experiences that would normally include those of emotional, intellectual, aesthetic, sociological and psychological.
This is with a view to satisfying curiosity and needs.
Cultural tourism involves the movement of people to a variety of cultural facilities and attractions that would normally not be available within their normal and to a certain extent immediate place(s) of residence(s) and environment.
Cultural tourism is also key to broadening people’s participation in areas such as the promotion of cultural and exotic resources by investing in both the quality of life and arts with a view to promoting and sustaining cultural tourism projects and programmes.
Like all projects and programmes, cultural projects and programmes depend wholly on development of strategic plans and strategies, assessment, researching and marketing for tourists.
Here, the role of collaboration by key players in the industry becomes critical.
Tourism as the world’s largest industry is considered to be dynamic, evolving and a consumer-driven entity.
The scope of tourism is the concern of travel, lodging, foodservice and recreation.
By implication therefore, tourism is the art, business and science of passenger transportation, accommodation and catering.
Culture on the other hand is regarded as both natural and learned behaviour.
It comprises of attitudes, beliefs, customs, traditions and beliefs.
Module I, which is the concern of the evolution of cultural tourism consists of seven units, discusses the genesis of cultural tourism to date.
Accordingly, cultural tourism or culture tourism is that subset of tourism that is based on the culture of people of a country, region and by extension continent.
18 Cultural tourism includes those of both rural and urban areas.
That of the former depicts a variety of traditions of indigenous people and their cultures, while the latter showcases historic, ancient and modern cities and their cultural facilities which include museums, zoos and theatres.
Cultural tourism as led to huge receipts that have been used to promote economic development.
Cultural Tourism (TSM 403) cannot in anyway or manner pretends to cover all aspects of the subject and study of tourism in all its ramifications.
It however contains a mixture of chats, data, figures and tables including statements that are based on research and others on my opinion which is not necessarily supported by data and/or evidence.
With particular reference to leisure which is part of the main content of the course, its analysis has been related to values which have been identified to be some of the determining factors that influence tourists and the sustainability of the tourism industry.
This development is particularly noticeable in industrialized economies where the practice of leisure and tourism is perceived and accepted as an annual ritual that must be performed especially by the affluent.
Indeed, the issue of leisure and values has attracted the attention of economists and other social scientists to the extent that they are now studying the area or field of leisure and tourism.
The analysis of leisure and tourism among other units is the subject of this module which consists of four units.
Transportation systems and related issues as they affect the tourist industry is the subject of module 3 which comprises of four units.
Accordingly, this subject is broad in scope because it affects various aspects of cultural tourism in particular and the tourism industry in general.
This makes its analysis rather incomprehensive given the time frame within which to complete the text and the amount of material expected.
As discussed in the main content, the issue of passenger transportation as it relates to the tourism industry is based on a variety of interrelated systems and problems which range from economic, physical, regulatory, marketing, and sustainability of change.
Furthermore, because the transportation systems are the concern of several academic disciplines (architecture, economics, civil engineering, public administration, geography, sociology and Technology), their treatment of the transportation systems differs, though interrelated.
This course (TSM 403) raises fundamental issues that are the concern of cultural tourism in particular and the tourism industry in general, especially as they centre on leisure and people’s social experiences.
Students will no doubt benefit from the discussion that is contained in the course particularly as it is supported by theoretical illustrations and practical suggestions that would serve the students’ interest regardless of their cultural diversity.
19 Finally, I which to express my gratitude to Dr. Dimis I. Mailafia who was instrumental to this work and my research assistant, Billy.
J. J. Zogore Department of Economics Faculty of Social Sciences University of Jos, P.M.B.
2084, Jos Nigeria 20 TSM 403: CULTURAL TOURISM UNIT 1: Cultural Tourism: An Overview 1.0 INTRODUCTION Cultural tourism can be understood to be the type of tourism that is usually undertaken by visitors for the purpose of the demand for a variety of cultural activities and products that would normally not be available within and around their immediate environment.
Cultural tourism takes the form of local, national, regional and international dimensions as the tourism-generating points.
These are enhanced by a geographical motion, state of mind, and a behavioural pattern that revolves around the love, and search for culture manifestations.
These include people who are eager and are interested in enriching their information and knowledge about other places, other people’s way of life, traditions and customs.
Also, people who are interested in archeology, history of past civilizations, historic buildings and ruins, battle fields, and shrines, and those who would like to visit Museums of antique and modern art, paintings and sculptures as well as to attend concerts and famous festivals.
The idea and sense of curiosity which is inherent in human beings and the urge to learn to know, which is rather a continuous process is motivated by travel to visit and see old cities and other historic landmarks.
Because learning is reinforced and enhanced by the will and interest to learn and not only merely by what people see, it becomes very necessary for the tourists or visitor that are particularly interested in culture to respond to what they see and identify themselves with the cultural messages that the various relics depict and offer.
Needless to emphasis, cultural tourism or travel for culture often increases with a wide spectrum of education.
By implication, this means that well-informed and educated people in many countries are the ones that form the majority of those who seek and increase their knowledge by undertaking travels and visits.
2.0 OBJECTIVES After studying this unit you will • Define and explain what is cultural tourism • Give reasons why people travel, and • Identify and list some tourist products in and outside Nigeria.
21 3.0 MAIN CONTENT 3.1 The Reasons Why People Travel People travel for many reasons that include holidaying and congression tourism.
The major feature of holidaying tourism is the period of stay in a particular destination or destinations which is usually motivated by a factor or a combination of factors.
These include work pressure, the need to leave the normal environment of abode and the climate and the inquisitiveness of other sceneries, places and people of other places.
The factors are reinforced by one or the aggregation of celebrating cultural festivals, entertainment, outdoor recreation and sports, relaxation or touring through a new country or region.
The holidaying tourism can b e at the level of medium, luxurious and mass, depending on the type of package in terms of facilities, quality of services and the price at and of the destination.
The holidaying tourists can classify into two main groups: The “conservations” and the “Adventururists”.
The former group consists of those tourists that usually go to the same country or destination whenever they want to travel.
This group is not interested in changing its country and destination.
In most cases the group constitutes of married people with children who must have bought houses or apartments and would always want to use them during a particular period of the year.
The latter group on the other hand is made up of people who would like to travel to and visit different countries and destinations whenever the need arises.
For obvious reasons, this group is better informed of places and facilities it experiences because of the different, countries and destinations they visit at different times.
In each of these groups however, age brackets, social structure, gender occupation and income level are major determinants and therefore influence the behavioural patterns of their travels and visits.
The other reason why people travel is due to congress tourism which takes a great proportion of international tourism because of the annual increases in the international congresses and meeting that take place almost throughout the world.
In fact this is the kind of a tours-market segment that countries interested in the development and sustainability of their tourism industry should target, particularly because of the quantum of income these tourists are capable of generating.
Factors that determine the geographical distribution of the international congresses include: i) sufficient congress facilities and organization arrangements; ii) location of the main and/or subsidiary offices of the congress organizing associations; iii) location of congress venue in relation to potential participants; 22 iv) sufficient lodging facilities and tourist attractions of the congress venue; v) accessibility; vi) cost; vii) importance of the venue in relation to the congress area (Spencer and Thomas, 1998, p.47) 3.2 Tourist Products Tourism products constitute of raw materials in a potential tourist destination that need to be developed in order to be considered as suitable tourist products.
These raw materials can be categorized into two groups; namely the natural framework and the cultural-value-system.
The former consists of ecological context and climate, landscape and scenery, and seascape, while the latter includes cultural manifestations, historical and archeological relics, modern technological achievements, religious buildings such as those seen in Israel and Mecca, see also Anderson (2002; p. 30).
However, in order to turn these raw materials into tourist products and thus a tourist destination, requires that certain plants and equipment need to be employed in order to actualize the project that can be considered and used as a market-destination-relationship.
In their explanation Seth and Bhat (2005, P.55) have asserted that “as far as a tourist is concerned, the product covers the complete experience from the time he leaves home on to the time he returns to it”.
The tourist product can be regarded as the aggregation of the following factors; i) accessibility of the tourist destination; ii) facilities at the destination which include security, accommodation, catering, entertainment and recreation, and iii) attractions of the destination that would include but not limited to its image to the tourist’s mind and delight.
3.3 Tourist Trends Tourism trends can be classified into three categories, namely primary, secondary and opportunity.
This classification as pointed out by Seth and Bhat, (2005) is based on the fact that “tourism in its present form… makes millions of people move from their homes in search of holiday...” Accordingly, the primary tend constitutes a large percentage of the tourist traffic, and as expected accounts for the main portion of the revenue realized at the destination(s).
Factors such as affinity, proximity and security determine the continuous functioning of the primary tourist trend.
Countries such as the United 23 States of America, Italy, France and Spain being the world’s top tourism earners have taken advantage of the primary tourist trend (Table 1).
This they have successfully done by investing substantially on market intelligence, product and price policies, aggressive marketing functions and continuous product development through their Research and Development (R&D) programme with a view to meeting the desires and needs of the visitors.
Table 1.1: Percentage of Tourist Traffic 2000 - 2001 Rank International % Change Market Tourism Share Receipts (US $billion) 1999 2000* 2000*/1999 2000* 1.
United States 74.9 83.8 11.9 17.6 2.
Spain 32.5 - - - 3.
France 31.5 - - - 4.
Italy 28.4 27.7 -2.5 5.8 5.
United Kingdom 20.2 19.3 -4.7 4.0 6.
Germany 16.7 - - - 7.
China 14.1 16.2 15.1 3.4 8.
Austria 12.5 11.5 -8.6 2.4 9.
Canada 10.2 10.8 5.9 2.3 10.
Greece 8.8 9.3 5.8 2.0 11.
Mexico 7.2 8.0 10.8 1.7 12.
Hong Kong (China) 7.2 8.0 10.7 1.7 13.
Thailand 6.7 7.5 12.5 1.6 14.
Australia 7.5 - - - 15.
Russian Fed.
7.5 - - - Source: WTO *Data as collected in WTO database January 2001 The secondary tourism trend is the trend that over the years yielded good results to tourist destinations because of its continuous movement to many other destinations.
The momentum of the secondary tourist trend has been sustained largely by the activities of tour operators and travel agents, whose role is extremely important to the growth of the tourist industry, both nationally and internationally, see for example, universal federation of Travel Agents Associations www.uftaa.com.
The opportunity or “chance” tourist trend is rather completely different from both the primary and secondary tourist trends in the 24 sense that it is far and remote from the tourist destinations.
In other words, though it exists, but it is not very distinct to the level of being impacted on any particular destinations and their receipts.
It is better described as a transient tourist market and effort to devote time and funds to researching in this particular type of tourist trend may not yield any fruitful result.
3.3.1 Cultural Tourism as a Resource Cultural tourism or culture tourism is very significant for people and their environment particularly when it is celebrated in such a way and manner that would ensure the preservation and promotion of the uniqueness of its heritage.
This is because this development gives, especially the host communities the opportunity to improve upon their arts and cultural facilities that can attract tourists both locally and international who are always willing to spend so much money on such facilities to the advantage of the local communities as this boosts the latter’s economy.
Recent findings by the Organization for Economic Cooperation and Development (OECD) have confirmed that cultural tourism has become very popular in the world today to the extent that cultural tourists are spending quite a substantial amount of money than the normal standard tourists.
Such huge spending has resulted to country and regional economic development.
Excellent examples of this are Kenya, Tanzania, Cote d’Ivoire in Africa and the state of Florida, United States of America.
It is however important for ministries and/or agencies responsible for arts, culture and tourism to promote such a venture through strategic planning, training and retraining as well as providing funding to individuals and groups that would undertake research work on the economic and social impact of cultural tourism.
Students are advised to visit and explore the following website: culturalheritagetourism.org.
4.0 CONCLUSION Cultural tourism is undertaken when people are motivated to travel to various destinations to see and satisfy their desires and needs of a variety of cultural heritage of other people and countries.
Other reasons why people travel include holidaying which is categorized into “conservatives” and “adventurists”, and congress tourism.
Tourism products which are raw materials in potential tourist destinations are classified into natural framework and cultural value –systems.
Again, tourist products are indeed closely related to motivations to travel for travel.
And it is these motivations which reveal the kinds of destinations and facilities that tourists are interested in visiting and patronizing.
Here, it is only reasonable to note that products and facilities should take shape and dimensions 25 based on the tourists’ tastes, motives and the scope of the attractions and facilities offered by the destinations.
From the perspective of the tourists, these products and facilities become personal experiences that indeed differ in desire, needs space and time frame.
5.0 SUMMARY This unit has identified cultural tourism as one of the motives or purposes why people travel.
Accordingly, cultural tourism can be understood to be travelers embarked upon by people when they are motivated to visit, see and desire the cultural heritage of their country and/or those other countries.
These include products and facilities such as ancient and historical monuments, modern and scientific technologies, art galleries and places of religious interests.
6.0 TUTOR-MARKED ASSIGNMENT 1.
What do you understand by cultural tourism?
2.
Explore the following website; Universal Federation of Travel Agents associations www.uftaa.com, and summarise under suitable sub-headings the information provided.
SELF-ASSESSMENT EXERCISE 1: Question: What is Cultural Tourism?
26 7.0 References/Further Readings Anderson, J. R. L. (2002, P.92) the Ulysses factor New York: Harcourt Brace Jovanovich Brotherton, R. (2002, P.18); An introduction to the UK Hospitality Industry: A comparative Approach, Oxford: Butterworth Heinemann.
Seth, P. W. and Bhat, S. S. (2005: P.55).An Introduction to Travel and Tourism, New Delhi: Sterling Publishers Private Limited.
Spencer, J. E. and Thomas, W. L. (1998, P.47).
Introducing Cultural Geography, New York: John Wiley and Sons.
27 TSM 403: CULTURAL TOURISM UNIT 2: Development of Domestic Tourism 1.0 INTRODUCTION Man has been traveling for centuries, he has been traveling in search of food since prehistoric times, and more recently for business reasons.
In fact, the holidays or recreation tours date far back in history.
For instance, carvings in the tombs of the Pharaohs of ancient Egypt attracted the attention of kings to the extent that they organized and held royal parties as they took tours for pleasures to fish and hunt in river Nile and on the desert, respectively.
Wealthy Romans left their city homes during, the summer when it was usually hot to spend their holidays in sea sides on the Bay of nipples.
Also, ancient Rome was always crowded with visitors who had made pleasure tours to the ancient city to watch athletic contests and other games of interest (Wahab et al 1993:p.10).
In Nigeria, many people have taken and are still taking pleasure tours to places such as the Wase rock, Kura Falls and the ancient Jos Museum in Plateau State, Argungun fishing festival in Kebbi State, the Obudu Cattle Ranch and Tinapa shopping complex in Cross River State; the ancient city of Benin in Edo State for its historic sculpture, Yoruba arts and cultural festivals, including the Osun festival in Osogbo; Igbo yam Festivals, and the Yankari Game Reserve in Bauchi State, to mention but a few examples.
To facilitate and sustain early travels, inns and supplies of food and services were developed subsequently, man developed and grasped the idea of making profit by attracting investors to his Inn, resort and destination through which tourism and its marketing was established.
The way and manner through which tourism was developed in the past differs from the approach of modern tourism, especially of the past three or two decades.
However, some aspects of the marketing of tourism of the previous years are still useful and applicable to many travel destinations and facilities.
In the same vein, it is obvious that the development of tourisms will be quite different from what can be regarded today as a developed modern integrated tourism.
28 2.0 OBJECTIVES After studying this chapter, you will be able to: • Narrate the historic development of tourism industry • Define the concepts that are vital that are vital to the approach of the tourism industry.
• Identify the factors that has been responsible for the expansion of the tourism industry.
3.0 MAIN CONTENT 3.1 Historical Development of Tourism – Product Oriented The historical development of domestic tourism in particular and tourism in general was that of concerted efforts to demonstrate and convince potential visitors as clientele that the goods and services of a particular destination were those that they, the potential visitors want.
The product which is the combination of attractions of the destination becomes critically significant in a promotion.
If, for instance the destination is the famous Wase Rock in Plateau State that possess special features and accommodates a variety of exotic species of animals, efforts should be made to convince the potential visitors that have interest in such features.
The goal of promoting the destination would be to convince the visitors that they will have a good product for their money.
But if the destination is a sea shore area such as the bar beach in Lagos, the same approach should be employed in an effort to convince the potential visitors (though they may be afraid of the ocean) that this is the actual place that would offer them an assurance of a delightful and memorable holiday.
Today, the practice of basing a marketing programme mainly on the product as the assets and resources of the destination is now the vogue.
This is seen and noticed in advertisements and the brochures which are based on the product, the assets and resources of the destination with little or no much attention and emphasis being given to the needs, desires and/or whims of those they seek to attract as visitors and customers (Ventozel, p.89).
The continued use of the product-oriented marketing approach, have recorded quite a substantial number of visitors (Lumberge and Lumbeng, 1995, Pp.3 -8).
This growth has mainly been due to the expansion of the travel markets, particularly the group travel which has recorded more people with more time and more money, which could be earmarked for travel, pleasure and business.
29 3.2 Modern Tourism Marketing – Visitor Oriented In recent times, more attention has been turned away from the hitherto product oriented to visitor oriented tourism.
This has led to the development of new concepts such as visitor motivation and visitor satisfaction.
This change became necessary when the first tourism development marketer ask the question: ‘what do those potential visitors want or desire?’ Instead of what do we now have that we might sell?’ In deed such a change did not occur immediately as many destinations and resorts still held on to the historic and traditional product-oriented approach to the promotion of the travel industry.
However, at a later stage, many factors led to the changes because tourism marketers noticed that marketers of other products were directing their marketing efforts to the needs and desires of their potential customers.
With the expansion in the number of people traveling domestically and to some extent internationally, a number of destinations and changes in products equally grow to accommodate visitors and their needs and desires.
Another major change that took place to sustain the visitor oriented approach was the planning of domestic tours in several ways: (1) by a professional based on a mass – production, (2) by an amateur; or (3) by a professional on a custom basis.
These new innovations led to: (a) the development of a destination that would be in line with the tourism’s needs and desires, and (b) the selection of some sub-markets that would need and desire that or those similar destination(s).
Such changes from product oriented to visitor oriented tourism increased the number of visitors and travels to the extent that a mere product tourism marketing could not sustain.
This led to a further change in the development of the domestic tourism, see also Wahab et al.
(1980, P.13).
3.3 Tourism Marketing – Destination Oriented The approach of the modern visitor oriented marketing has led to the increase in both domestic and international travels.
Such an increase has been attributed to the availability of information on the characteristics and motivations; the effectiveness in the tourism work is the effectiveness of the tourism marketing as well as the services of the volunteer visitor information person.
Figure 2.1: Volunteer Visitor information Person, Manitoba’s VIP Program welcomes TOURIST Need help?
Stop me Source: Adapted from Lumberg & Lumbeng 30 Yet other factors that have continued to be responsible for the expansion of tourism include:- i. increase in population growth; ii.
increase in real per capital income; iii.
increase in educational attainment; iv.
increase in life expectancy; v. improvement in transportation technology and system; vi.
increase in the leisure available to millions of people; and vii.
increase of people with previous travel experiences see United Natios Development Programme: Human Development Report, (2006:p. 46).
Also, while considering the impacts of change on the overall economy of a country, factors such as economic, environmental, government and social are excellent examples.
For instance, the economic factor leads to increased profits and employment opportunities within both the tourism industry and which other sectors supply the tourism industry.
The environmental factor accounts for improvements and enhancements in the environmental quality, thus attracting and satisfying the needs and desires of the tourists.
With regard to government, this leads to increase in licence, taxes and other destination government revenues.
In terms of social, this increases the opportunity for the exchange of ideas between and among a variety of people with diverse cultures, and areas that could lead to improvements in understanding, appreciation and good will (UNDP: Human Development Report, 2004; P.1).
These examples are in no way exhaustive.
4.0 CONCLUSION The development of tourism which started locally shows that man has been traveling for millennia for many reasons that have included business, search for food and the desire for recreation.
To make the tourist industry functional, Inns and adequate supplies of food items and other resources were developed.
However, when man grasped the idea of profit, he quickly improved on his Inn and destination through which the concept of tourism marketing was established.
Over the years, the tourism marketing approach went through three stages – product oriented, visitor oriented and destination oriented with the ultimate objective of tourism to achieve benefits for the destination and its people.
Also, a number of factors influence the trends in travels, particularly to destinations blessed with assets and resources such as beautiful natural scenery, delighted climate that of Jos Plateau, great works of arts and human inventions, and other great resources, which that include a variety of cultures that people can appreciate and share from all over the regions of the world.
31 5.0 SUMMARY Historically, it has been established that the evolution of domestic tourism started many centuries ago when man started touring, beginning with his immediate environment to admiring local carvings and undertaking fishing and hunting expeditions in far away rivers and deserts, respectively.
Today globally, with the development of tourism, people have and are still traveling for pleasure and holidays.
Such travels have resulted to changes that influenced the economy, environment, government and the entire society.
6.0 Tutor – Marked Assignment 1.
Trace the historical development of the tourism industry from the domestic to the international level.
What are the major factors that have influenced the evolution of the tourist industry?
What is the future of the tourism industry?
SELF-ASSESSMENT EXERCISE 2: Question: Why is Tourism Industry important?
7.0 References/Further Readings Lumberg, D. E. and Lumberg, C., B.
(1995, Pp.
3-8); International Travel and Tourism, second edition.
New York: John Wiley & sons.
UNDP: Human Development Report, (2006:p.46) New York: Oxford University Press Wahab, S., Crampton, L. J. and Rothfield, L. M. (1993: P.10).
Tourism Marketing Fourth edition, London: Tourism International Press; Veutzel, R. A.
(2001, P. 898) “Leaders of the Hospitality Industry or Hospitality Management” An Introduction to the Industry, 6th ed.
Dubuque, Iowa, Xendall/Hunt.
32 TSM 403: CULTURAL TOURISM UNIT 3: Rural Tourism 1.0 INTRODUCTION The worldwide growth of rural tourism has generated a considerable interest in research that focuses on the impact of tourism on the rural and sometimes remote environments at different scales and with varying emphasis, often dependant upon the disciplinary bias of the researcher.
It is increasingly being acknowledged that multidisciplinary research skills needed to understand the operation, organization, impact and management of tourism in different rural destinations and areas require a greater degree of interdisciplinary cooperation and research which is able to broaden our understanding of tourism phenomena.
This unit aims to develop a greater understanding of how rural tourism enterprises operates and factors that influence the different stages of its development.
This unit also explores the nature, development and management of rural tourism.
Any remote tourist attraction that has a unique culture draws the attention of people that love adventure and people who like to satisfy their curiosity.
Most remote areas are not very well known, until a few tourists discover the area.
When the area starts becoming popular some of the local entrepreneurs provide facilities to cater for visitors.
There are a variety of terms used to describe tourism activities of the areas.
Some of the terms are Agric-tourism, farm tourism, soft tourism, alternative tourism and many others.
Heath wise, rural tourism offers tourists good air that is not polluted by the industries and cars found in urban areas and also the less noise pollution.
In place of traditional package holidays, ethical advocates propose a range of alternatives-ecotourism, community tourism, cultural tourism and green tourism to name a few all of which prescribe a big dose of nature, crowds and resorts frivolity and fun.
2.0 OBJECTIVES After reading this unit, one should be able to • discuss the term carrying capacity • understand the local factors that influence rural tourism • discuss the importance of rural tourism 33 3.0 THE CARRYING CAPACITY Carrying capacity is that level of tourist presence which creates impacts on the rural community, environment and the economy that are acceptable to both the tourists and hosts, which is sustainable over a period of time.
As tourism activities can had an impact on the social, cultural, environmental and economic character of a destinations, coupled with the belief that these impacts can grow in magnitude as the volume of tourist arrivals increase; it is believed that there may be some threshold level of visitor presence beyond which the impact becomes unacceptable or intolerable.
When these happen these threshold limits are referred to as “saturation limits” and not the same as “carrying capacity”, because the carrying capacity has some notion of sustainability.
Tourists’ presence is used for carrying capacity rather than tourist numbers that is used for “saturation limits”.
This is because it is necessary to adjust the absolute number of visitors to take account of a number of factors.
These factors include; the length of stay, the characteristics of the tourists/hosts, the geographical concentration of visitors and the degree of seasonality (Atherton, 1991, P. 151-9).
It is important to measure tourism presence in some unambiguous manner.
This could be done in terms of tourism “units” where the number of visitor arrivals weighted according to the above factors in order to provide a standardized unit.
It is important to note that there are difficulties in incorporating day visitors with those visitors who stay overnight.
The former are likely to have a different impact per hour of stay than the ones that stay over night.
Furthermore, tourism is associated with impacts on society, culture, environment, and the economy, therefore, the carrying capacity is likely to occur in one of these areas first but not in all of them at once.
A destination may realize that tourism activities bring pressure to the local ecosystem before creating any serious threats to the social structure, culture or economy.
That is to say the carrying capacity for a particular destination is determined by environmental considerations and that the other factors may be running below capacity level.
The determination of carrying capacity can be shown as a function of a variety of factors that follow planning and regulation to generate an impact on the tourism destination.
Figure 2 below shows a schematic framework for the determination of the carrying capacity.
34 Figure 3.1: Carrying Capacity Local Alien factors factors Planning Process Management of Development Technology Impacts Social Cultural Environmental Economic Parameters Standards Carrying capacity Source: Adapted from Atherton and Shelby (1991) 3.2 Local Factors Local factors influence the choice of tourism destinations.
Local factors include; social structure, culture, environment, economic structure, political structure and resources.
In this segment, we are going to explain and elaborate on these local factors.
The social structure of a country or any community determines the level of tolerance for the presence of tourists.
Culture is another influencing factor as cultural characteristics of a destination play an important role in determining impact.
The more unusual the cultural background, the more attractive the destination may become (Murphy, 1995, P.107).
The result can bring about the commercialization of cultural features, and traditions, such as dances, costumes and the destinations arts and crafts.
The environment is another factor, it can be changed by the presence of tourists.
The environment can be natural or man-made.
Environmental change is inevitable.
The economic structure will determined the benefits and cost associated with tourism activity.
The more developed and 35 industrialized the economy is the more robust.
It will be such economies that are able to secure the maximum benefits from tourism while in carrying the minimum costs (Jafari 1997, P.10).
The political structure sometimes reflects the ideals and beliefs of the host community and can also actively encourage tourism development or hinder it.
The available resources, i.e.
labour, capital and land, have a major influence on the acceptability or desirability of tourism development and on the form that development takes.
When local resources are scarce, competition for them will be high and the opportunity cost of using these resources for tourism will also be high.
On the positive side, tourism development may results in improved infrastructure, which will be available to hosts as well as tourists and thereby enhance the quality of life for the local residents.
3.3 The Socio-cultural Impact of Tourism There are a variety of ways in which we can look at tourism and socioeconomic development.
The development of the tourist product is inextricably linked to the contribution that tourism development can make to the general economic development of any tourist destination.
The development of tourism products to some extent determine the type of tourism activity, which will in turn be partly determined by the socioeconomic characteristics of the tourists.
Similarly, the economic and sociological impact of tourism on the host population will partly be determined by the type of tourism product.
The product brought about by the interaction of hosts and tourists is a well-document phenomenon, and the findings of Smith (1999) in her book on the anthropology of tourism have rapidly gained acceptance in the academic world.
As already stated any form of economic development will carry with it impactions for the social structure and cultural aspects of the population.
Even domestic tourism, where hosts and tourists are generally from the same socio-cultural background results in social and cultural change as a result of this hosts/tourists contact (Smith 1999, P. 107).
A typical development scenario of considering the tourism product as it grows from infancy to maturity follows this sequence.
A few tourists “discover” an area or destination.
In response to this discovery, local entrepreneurs provide new facilities or special facilities to accommodate the growing number of visitors and, more importantly to attract more of the visitors.
Gradually, the public sector begins to provide new or improved infrastructure to cater for the inflow of the visitors.
Finally, institutionalized or mass tourism is developed, which is commonly resort-based and sold as a package.
It is based upon large volume 36 production in order to exploit economies of scale in marketing, accommodation and transportation.
3.3.1 The Socio Economic Basis of Tourism Development There are a number of factors that influence the attitude of people towards tourism at both domestic and international levels.
These include the following; i.
Age: it is unlikely that most elderly people decide to take up a trekking mountaineering vacation, or choose a resort because of its nightclubs.
ii.
Education: There is a tendency to associate the more adventurous and independent vacations with the more educated portion of the population.
iii.
Income levels: Income levels have an obvious influence on the decision of people to travel, the locations to which they travel to and often the mode of transport.
iv.
Socio-economic background: The previous experiences of people will play an important role in determining the type of holiday they will consume in future time periods.
For instance, children form the higher socio-economic groups, who are accustomed to frequent trips abroad, are likely to continue this pattern throughout childhood.
In addition to socio economic characteristics of the tourists, the tourism development process, together with its implications, should be examined.
This approach encompasses the psychological basis for tourism development, the sociological basis for tourism development and the socioeconomic basis for tourism development.
In genera, there is a direct socio cultural impact which results from the contact between hosts and tourists.
De Kadt (197a, p.19) suggests that there are three broad categories of such contact as follows: i.
When the tourists buy goods and services from hosts; ii.
When the hosts and tourists share a facility (beach, transport, restaurant, etc).
and iii.
When tourists and hosts meet for cultural exchange.
The first two of these types of contacts are associated with the majority of the negative aspects of social contacts, whereas the last type of contact is primarily positive in nature.
By comparing these areas of contacts with Smiths (1999, p.26) typology of tourists, it is evident that the explorer/adventurer tourist is most likely to take part in the latter positive type of interaction and the mass tourist with the former type of contact.
37 4.0 CONCLUSION Rural tourism is fast growing, because people who love adventures are moving to these remote areas to be able to feel the natural environment.
In addition, rural tourism is an avenue for learning, thus, educationists, historians and anthropologists are participating in a lot of rural tourism.
The level of tourists’ presence creates impacts on the rural community.
Local factors influence the choice of tourism destinations.
These factors are social structure, culture, environment, economic structure, political structure and resources.
Cultural characteristics of a destination play an important role in determining impact.
5.0 SUMMARY Tourism development usually results in improved infrastructure that will be available to hosts as well as tourists.
These developments enhance the quality of life for the local residents.
Labour, capital and land are resources that have a major influence on the acceptability and desirability of tourism development.
The social structure of a country or any community determines the level of tolerance for the presence of tourists.
The more unusual the cultural background, the more the destination becomes appealing to tourists.
6.0 Tutor-Marked Assignment 1.
Explain the term carrying capacity 2.
What are the local factors that determined rural tourism?
3.
Briefly discuss the socio-cultural impact of tourism SELF-ASSESSMENT EXERCISE 3: Question: List some of the factors that have impact on rural tourism as a tourist destination.
38 7.0 References/Further Readings Atherton, T. C. (1991); Regulation of tourism destination planning, development and management including a critique of the systems and practice in Australia, (unpublished) M.Sc.
dissertation, University of Surrey.
Jafari J.
(1997); Tourism models: The socio-cultural aspects; Tourism Management.
Vol.
8 no.
2, Pp.
151-9 Murphy, P. E. (1995); Tourism: A community Approach, New York: Methuen.
Smith, V. L. (1999); Hosts and Guests: The Anthropology of Tourism, 2nd ed.
Philadelphia, Pa: University of Pannsylvanice Press 39 TSM 403: CULTURAL TOURISM UNIT 4: Cultural Diversity and Tourism 1.0 INTRODUCTION Culture is a learned behaviour.
People learn unique sets of beliefs, values, attitudes, habits, customs, traditions and other forms of behaviour of the society they live in.
Apart from cultures like African, Latino, European and American, there are cultural variations and dimensions like African-American, Asian- America, Hispanic – American, European-American and French Canadian.
African and Nigerian examples are African Arabs of North Africa and the Shuwa Arabs in Borno and Northern Cameroun These cultural variations are a blend of cultures.
Culture has an influence on the behaviour of the people and because different cultures bring about different behaviour in people, it is important to be aware and respect the culture of others to avoid misunderstanding.
In the hospitality and tourism industry, cultural barriers exist.
Therefore, it is important to understand ethnic diversity issues of minorities, and how to train ethnic groups to understand the various cultural aspects in our hospitality and tourism industry.
Multicultural management recognizes cultural differences among employees in the hospitality and tourism industry, as members of distinct ethnic groups.
Multicultural management is managing the organization that allows differences in values like gender, economic level, age and ethnic groups in the hospitality and tourism industry.
It has become necessary for managers and employees to have a cross cultural awareness and an understanding of ethnic identity.
Employers are responsible for creating and maintaining a working environment that is pleasant, and for avoiding hostile, offensive, intimidating or discriminatory conducts or statements.
This includes respect for everybody’s culture.
2.0 OBJECTIVES After reading this unit, one should be able to 1. define culture and list the types of cultural context 2. discuss the terms ‘‘ethnic and cultural diversity’’ 3. list the different trends in marketing, human resources and culture.
40 3.0 MAIN CONTENT 3.1 Cultural Barriers Culture is manifested in several ways, which include mode of dressing, language, food, gestures, and manners.
Rodolfo (2004, P.6) has recognized the importance of these attributes.
A lot of individuals usually have difficulties in dealing with other customs and languages.
Other components of culture barriers are values, assumptions and perceptions, which are more harder to comprehend than customs and languages.
There are two contexts to culture.
There is the low-context culture and the high-context culture.
A low-context culture has the bulk of its information, intentions and meanings in simple words and sentences.
The high context culture has a context of great importance and what is behind the words is as important as the words themselves.
Therefore, a person from a low-context culture will naturally find it very hard to adjust and operate in a high –context cultural society.
Most of the countries in the Western hemisphere have a low context culture, examples include North America and Northern Europe.
Information and intentions are expressed in words and sentences in a very clear and understanding manner.
Countries like Japan and other countries in Asia have a high – context culture.
In Japan for example, not only what is said counts, but how it is said, who said it and when it was said.
Also of significance is what was not said.
Gestures, pauses, silences and even the tone convey meanings.
In the high context culture, reading between the lines and interpreting the meaning behind the words is of utmost importance.
Language can be another barrier to cultural understanding.
Sometimes even when people use the same language, there can be misunderstandings and misinterpretations.
It is the same words and symbol being used but those same words can have different meanings from different individuals that come from different cultural backgrounds (see also Seyla, 2002, P.5).
3.2 Ethnic Diversity Ethnic diversity as asserted by Patterson and Susser (2001, P.11) is a way of accepting all people regardless of their manners, appearances, customs and languages or beliefs.
The study and appreciation of cultural diversity provides any organization in the hospitality and tourism industry a conducive workplace as it enriches the workplace and also enriches the human and customer relationship.
The world of ethnic diversity is growing at an alarming rate.
Some of the factors responsible for the growth in ethnic diversity are the technological advancement in the hospitality and tourism industry.
Because of easier modes of transportations, migration is rampant.
People travel to other places to gain employment.
The 41 hospitality and tourism industry as the largest employer of labour in the world employs most of these migrants.
All over the world the hospitality and tourism industry employs Hispanics, African – Americans, Asian – Americans, Africans, Asians, and Europeans, among many others that relocate at will to any part of the world they choose to.
This core group of people from diverse cultures make the backbone of the hospitality and tourism industry.
It is projected that between one quarter to one-third of all workplaces in a given region will constitute of racial or ethnic minority groups in the nearest future (World Commission on Culture and Development (1993, P.16).
Today’s managers and employers are welcoming the ethnic diversity they encounter.
This is bringing about a personal desire to learn more about cultures and environments different from their own.
The employers who do not see cultural pluralism as an addition or extension of the practice of the globe as a society must realize that they are not prepared to function effectively as hospitality and tourism managers in pluralistic environment.
To be able to interact with people from different cultures, it is vital to understand their values, norms and priorities.
Culture has profound impact on the attitudes, priorities and behaviour of individuals and groups.
Hospitality and tourism managers have a responsibility therefore, to develop and recognize the realities facing the hospitality industry and ethnic and cultural diversity is a large part of that reality (World Tourism Organization (WTO) www.world tourism.
org).
3.3 Global Culture Along with the great cultural diversity of the earth’s people, there has been a new development called a global culture.
The term refers to the spread of common elements of culture to many different areas of the world.
As rightly pointed out by Jagdish in his article, “Borders Beyond Control” the world is a shrinking one.
This means that globalization has made the world smaller and technology has made all the corners of the world more accessible.
The growing speed of communications is an important part of this process.
People in one part of the world can watch television and satellite programmes of events happening in another part of the world thousands of miles away.
The mobile phone technology has even brought the world closer and communication to friends, loved ones and business associates is just a few buttons away.
The interdependence of countries in the world in terms of trade has been another reason for the rise of a global culture.
This development was well expressed by Harrison and Hunting (2000, P.13).
Furthermore, food, clothing, technology and goods of all types are traded among all the world’s people.
42 Migration has been one of the most unifying factors of global culture.
Large scale migrations have taken place many times in human history.
In the 1900s, migrations have resulted in the mixing of people of one culture with people from another cultural background.
Technological advances in the travel industry have been a great impact on cultural diffusion.
Travel has increased in speed and efficiency and people now travel from one end of the world to another in a matter of hours.
As a result of migration, most countries in the world have people of more than one culture.
An example can be found in the United States of America.
America has received cultural influences from Western Europe, Asia and Africa.
This has resulted to variations in culture.
These variations are African – America, Asian – American, Hispanic-American and French – Canadian.
These cultural variations are a blend of culture.
Another typical example can be found in the South African society, where there is a mixture of Britons, Portuguese and Indians.
There have also been inter-marriages among these different nationalities that have helped in breaking down the barriers of culture.
3.3.1 Cultures of Other Ethnic Groups in Nigeria As we have read earlier in this unit, there are more than 250 languages that are spoken in Nigeria, with English considered to be the official language.
The major languages, i.e.
Hausa, Igbo and Yoruba, were also discussed in the early part of the main content.
It will be logical to try and discuss some of the other tribes, ethnic groups, their heritage and locations.
Although in the northern part of the country, the Hausa language is the dominant language, there are also other smaller tribes like the Kanuri and the Bora people in Maiduguri, Borno State, the Zuru people in Kebbi stat and the Billiri ethnic group in Gombe state.
The Middle belt also known politically as the North Central region boasts of the most diverse ethnicity in the whole of Nigeria.
It has almost 65 percent of the tribes in Nigeria.
In Plateau State for example, Bassa Local Government Area has one of the highest diversity in its ethnic groups.
These include Buji, Jere, Lemoro, Amo, Irique and Rukuba to mention just a few.
Other tribes in the state are Mushere, Ngas, PYem, Chip, Goemai, Qua’an Pan, Mwagavul and Berom.
Also in the middle Belt, we have the Bachama and Michika from Adamawa State, the Egon, MAda, Wamba and also Baribari people of Nasarawa State.
We also have the Nupe and Gwari people Niger state, which is also in the middle belt region.
Benue State also has the Tiv and Idoma, while the Jukun people are in Taraba State.
In south west of Nigeria, it is almost comprised of the Yoruba people although the location of their towns make the dialect to differ a little among them.
An invasion had started on the Yoruba people by the Jihad movement and ended up around Kwara State and that is the reason the Yoruba dialect has a little variation.
43 Starting from the northern part of the Yoruba Kingdom i.e.
in Ilorin down to its southern part i.e.
Oyo, Ogun, Osun and to Lagos, the unique thing about the different level of variation is the dialect.
They however understand each other.
In other words, the dialect variation is not a language barrier.
In the southeastern part of Nigeria, the Igbo people are the most dominant ethnic group, but like the Yorubas, their dialect also has a little variation depending on the location.
The Igbo kingdom has its northern boundary from Benu State, down to Enugu, Anambara, Imo, Ibonyi and so on.
Just like the Yoruba people, the variuation in their language is not a language barrier as they understand each other.
Another very interesting region in Nigeria is the south-south region.
Its peculiarity is almost like that of the middle belt region.
It is located in between the south west and south east and it is also a bit diverse.
Some states in the region like Edo and Delta are having the Warri people, while the Itsekiri and Iroboh people.
The Calabar people are from Cross river, while we have the IJaw people from Bayelsa.
The most important feature of these regional ethnic groups is the uniqueness found in their various but respective cultural heritage.
4.0 CONCLUSION Culture is a learned behaviour.
Any body living in a particular society learns from its culture unique sets of beliefs, values, attitudes, habits, customs and traditions.
Culture influences the way people behave.
There are many differences among the various cultures and it is best to be aware and respect the culture of others, otherwise misunderstanding is bound to happen.
Multicultural management recognizes cultural differences among employees that are attributable to membership in distinct ethnic groups.
Cultural barriers exist in the hospitality and tourism industry, that is why it is important to understand ethnic diversity issues, minorities and how to train ethnic groups in order to understand the various cultural aspects in the hospitality and tourism industry.
Language can be another cultural barrier.
Sometimes people using the same language can have misunderstandings or misinterpretations among themselves because of cultural differences.
5.0 SUMMARY Culture is a behaviour learned by living and growing up in a society as the societal beliefs, values, attitudes, habit and customs are all learned.
Differences in culture can bring about misunderstandings due to lack of understanding and respect for other people’s culture.
Cultural barriers include, factors such as style of dressing, language, food, gestures manners.
Ethnic diversity on the other hand, refers to accepting all people regardless of appearances or mannerisms.
Cultural diversity 44 enriches any organization especially the hotel and tourism industry, which is the highest employer of labour in the World.
6.0 Tutor – Marked Assignment 13.Define culture and explain its impact on the hospitality and tourism industry today 14.What do you understand by cultural barriers?
15.Define the term multicultural management.
SELF-ASSESSMENT EXERCISE 4: Question: Why is Cultural Diversity important in tourism?
7.0 References/Further Readings Bwagwati, J.
(2003)“Borders Beyond Control”.
Foreign Affairs 82(1):98-104 Harrison, L. E. and Hunington, S. P. (eds) 200) Culture Matters.
How values shape human progress, New York: Basic Books Patterson, T. C. and Susser, I.
(eds) (2001).
Cultural Diversity in the United States.
A critical Reader, Oxford: Blackwell.
Rodolfa, S. (2004).
”Indigenous Peoples in Comparative Perspective”.
In UNDP Human Development Report, (2004) Seyla, B.
(2002).
The Claims of Culture: Equality and Diversity in the Global Era.
Princeton: Princeton University Press.
World Commission for Culture and Development (1995) “Our Creative Diversity; Report of the World Commission on Culture and Development; Paris.
World Tourism Organization (WTO) www.world-tourism .org.
45 TSM 403: CULTURAL TOURISM UNIT 5: Nigeria Cultural Heritage 1.0 INTRODUCTION Cultural heritage form our individual, local and national identities.
It shapes relationships with our neighbours and with other communities around the world.
It is believed that respect for, and celebration of our diverse cultural heritage promotes human understanding and economic development in an increasing interdependent world.
Organizations and projects that preserve or rediscover important cultural works and major historic sites should be supported in order to provide ongoing access and enjoyment for current and future audiences.
These programmes include a broad range of arts and culture; from historic land marks and public spaces to dance, theatre music, film and visual arts.
These works represent a range of diverse cultures.
The criteria for supporting such programmes is the ability of these programmes to embrace preservation and enable ongoing public access and exposure through one or more of the followings: (i) ensuring public engagement with a restored work of art or historic site; (ii) producing or presenting a new interpretation of a work that is in danger of being lost; and preserving significant cultural traditions.
Nigerian culture is as multi-ethnic as the people in Nigeria.
The people of Nigeria still cherish their traditional languages, music, dance, and literature.
Nigeria comprises of three large ethnic groups, which are Yoruba, Hausa – Fulani and Igbo.
However there are other ethnic groups as well.
Thus, culture in Nigeria is most positively multi-ethnic.
The culture of Nigeria gives a lot of value to different types of arts, which primarily include ivory carving, grass weaving, wood carving, leather works, calabash carving, pottery, painting, cloth weaving, glass and metal works.
2.0 OBJECTIVES After going through this unit, the student should be ale to * discuss the diverse cultures of Nigeria * enumerate the culture heritage of the three major ethnic groups * explain the importance of culture in retaining the national unity of Nigeria 46 3.0 MAIN CONTENT 3.1 Cultural Diversity There are more than 250 languages spoken in Nigeria, while English is considered to be the official language.
However, it is notable that not more than about 50 percent of the population is able to speak in English.
Every ethnic group has got its own language, which it prefers using as the standard mode of communication among its members.
The Nigerian culture include varieties of types of clothing as there are different groups of people living in the country.
What is common in their dressing style is the conservativeness.
Nigerian culture gives a lot of importance in treating guests with utmost care and warmth.
The hospitality of the people represents this tradition, that is why people are not suppose to say thank you, when they are offered food.
Among the sports, Nigerians enjoy soccer the most.
Polo cricket, swimming and wrestling are popular among the affluent classes.
Nigeria culture is as old as 200 years and what makes it stand out is its diversity.
Despite Nigeria’s turbulent history of military dictatorships and bloody coups, culture has retained its importance.
The right to culture is anchored in the constitution and plays an important part in retaining the national unity in the most densely populated country in Africa.
Nigeria has a rich cultural heritage of some 250 different ethnic groups.
Saving the cultural heritage has received a lot of attention from the ministry of culture and tourism, which revealed its new master plan for that purpose early in March, 2005.
Under the supervision of the National Commission for Museums and monuments, Nigeria also enforces a strict regiment of rules to prevent the theft of arts and artifacts.
The ministry policy is implemented by the National Council for Arts and Culture (NCAC).
In addition, each of the 36 states in Nigeria has its own arts council for the development of the local cultural sector.
The Nigerian cultural policy is currently under revision.
Government wants to place more emphasis on cultural cooperation with the business and local communities.
These communities have virtually no contact with the arts circuits in the cities and make little use of modern technologies (Forero, 2003, P.19).
The Cultural Heritage of the Hausa/Fulani The Hausa numbering more than 30 million, are the largest ethnic group in west Africa, are widely distributed geographically and have intermingled with many different people.
Islam was introduced in the area by the fourteenth century.
The Hausa people are concentrated mainly in nonwestern Nigeria and in adjoining southern Niger.
The area is surrounded by farming communities.
Some of the 47 cities of this region are Kano, Sokoto, Zaria and Katsina.
They also happen to be among the greatest commercial centers in sub-Saharan Africa (Africa South of the Sahara desert).
Hausa People are also found living in other countries of West Africa such as Cameroon, Togo, Chad, Benin, Burkina Faso and Ghana.
Hausa is the most widely spoken language in West Africa.
It is spoken by an estimated 22 million people.
Another 17 millioin people speak Hausa as a second language.
According to tradition, Bayajidda, the mythical ancestor of the Hausa migrated from Baghdad in the ninth or teenth century AD.
After stopping at the Kingdom of Borno, he fled to the West and helped the king of Daura slay a dangerous snake.
As a reward,, he was given the Queen of Daura in marriage.
Bayajidda’s son, Bawo, founded the city of Biram.
He had six sons who became rulers of other Hausa city – states.
Collectively, these are known as Hausa Bakwai (seven Hausa).
Most Hausas are devout Muslims who believe in Allah and in Muhammad as their prophet.
They pray five times a day, fast during the month of Ramadan, give alms to the poor and aspire to make the pilgrimage (hajj) to the Muslim holy land in Mecca.
Traditionally, about a week after a child is born he or she is given a name.
Boys are usually circumcised at around the age of seven.
In their mid-to-late teens, young men and women may become engaged.
Celebrations begin among the bride, her family and friends as he or she is prepared for marriage.
Male representatives of the brides and the grooms’ families sign the marriage contract.
Following a death, Islamic burial principles are always followed.
The deceased is washed, wrapped in a shroud, and buried facing eastward to the land of Mecca.
In rural villages, Hausa people usually live in large households (gidaje) that include a man, his wife, his sons and their wives and children.
Based on Islamic custom, most married Hausa women live in seclusion.
They only go out for ceremonies or seek medical treatment.
Women wear veils and are often escorted by children when they leave their homes.
Hausa men are recognizable by their elaborate dress and dressing mode.
Many wear large flowing gowns (babban riga) with elaborated embroidery around the neck.
They also wear colourful embodied caps (huluna).
The Hausa man according to Islamic law can marry up to four wives (Avram, Mason and Torre, 2000, P.10).
The Hausa people are well known for their craftsmanship.
They are leather tanners and leather-workers, weavers, carvers, sculptors, ironworkers and blacksmiths.
In their cultural heritage, music and arts are important in everyday life.
From a young age Hausa children participate in dances which are held in public places, such as market squares.
Work songs often accompany activities in the rural areas.
Praise singers sing about community histories, leaders and other prominent individuals.
There are cultural activities in the north that has attracted and brought tourists to the area such as the annual Argungu fishing festival and others.
48 Cultural Heritage of the Igbos – Nigeria There are two major ethnic groups in southern Nigeria.
We have the Igbo and the Yoruba ethnic groups.
The Igbo people are the second largest group of people living in southern Nigeria.
They are socially and culturally diverse, consisting of many subgroups.
Although they live in scattered groups of villages, they all speak one language.
Igbo land is located in southeastern Nigeria with a total land area of about 15,800 square miles or about 41,000 square kilometers.
The Igbo area (south east) has the low-lying deltas and river bank areas that are heavily inundated during the rainy season and are very fertile.
The central belt is a rather high plain.
The Udi highlands are the only coal-mining areas in West Africa.
The Igbo people have no common traditional story of their origins.
Historians have proposed two major theories of Igbo origins.
One claims the existence of a core area or “nuclear Igbo land”.
The other claims that the Igbo descendants came from waves of immigrants from the north and the west who arrived in the fourteenth and fifteen centuries.
Three of these are the Nri, Nzam and Anam.
The Igbos have a system of beliefs that explain how everything in the world came into being.
They explain what functions the heavenly and earthly bodies have and offer guidance on how to behave toward the gods, spirits, and one’s ancestors.
Rites of passage include circumcision which takes place after eight days of the birth of a boy.
The name- giving ceremony is a formal occasion celebrated by feasting and drinking.
The process of marrying an Igbo woman is a long, elaborated one.
It takes several years.
The process falls into four stages asking the woman’s consent, negotiating through a middle man, testing the bride’s character and paying the bride price or dowry.
Death in old age is accepted as a blessing.
After death, the body is clothed in the person’s finest garments.
The corpse is placed on a stool in a sitting position.
Old friends and relatives visit and pay their last respect (Arinze, 2000, P. 10).
The cultural heritage of Yoruba The largest ethnic group living in the south western part of Nigeria are the Yoruba people.
The Yoruba speaking people although farmers often live in large pre- industrial cities.
Each Yoruba sub-group is ruled by an influential paramount chief, or Oba who is usually supported by a council composed of chiefs of various ranks.
The Oni of Ife is accepted as the spiritual leader of the Yorubas, and the Alafin of Oyo is their traditional political level.
The Yorubas also share a traditional religious belief.
It features the workshop through cults and secret societies of gods as Ogun, the god of war and Iron; Shango, the god of thunder and lightening; and Orisha Oko, the goddess of farmland.
The Yoruba people have a very rich cultural 49 heritage and their ceremonies have drawn the attention of the international community and tourists who usually come over to see the rich culture of the Yoruba people.
These people have the famous talking drum.
Nigerian arts and traditions have been revived since independence, partly because of the realization of the desirability of preserving Nigerian culture and partly because of the patronage the arts have received from abroad.
Among these arts are carved calabash from Ikot Ekpene or thorn carvings from the Yoruba land (Sen, 2004, P. 18).
Among the cultural heritage of the Yoruba people is the Gelede cultural play which is a rich culture of drama, masquerade, and poetry.
The Gelede society performs a ritual masquerade in gratitude for the harvest and to invoke the arrival of the rains.
This ritual is performed in the months of March to May.
During the ritual, the dance is conducted by the male members of the secrete cult who have been trained in the art of masking from the age of five.
Gelede offers a comedic, often facial spectacle, but its believers see it as a more serious function of social and spiritual control.
Gelede masks symbolize the omnipotent force of the ancestral mother, Iya Nla, who is believed both to nurture order and threaten stability in Yoruba communities.
The objective of the Gelee ritual is to identify and eliminate the negative aspects of female power and replace them with the more benevolent themes.
The dance masters create a satirical world drawn from aspects of daily life.
The marks worn include puppet masks that light heartedly represent traditional proverbs, and intricately curved animal masks that remind the audience of the dangers of ignoring social position and natural order in the world.
The Gelede masquerade starts with the Efe prayer songs that honour the ancestral and living mothers in the Yoruba society and render the ceremony propitious.
The maskers dance to the insistent rhythm of drums that play linguistic phrases called eka.
The cultural ritual now attracts a number of tourists and visitors.
Some of the tourists make it a routine to be present each year during the ceremonies.
4.0 CONCLUSION Cultural heritage give us our individual, local and national identities.
Respect for culture and celebration of our diverse cultural heritage promotes human understanding and economic development.
There are more than 250 languages in Nigeria and English is considered to be the official language.
The right to culture is anchored in the constitution and it plays an important part in retaining the national unity in Nigeria.
Among the different tribes and ethnic groups in Nigeria are the Hausa, Yoruba and Igbo tribes, which constitute a very large part of the population in Nigeria.
The Hausa people occupy the northern part of Nigeria, 50 while the Igbo people are from the south east and the Yoruba’s are from the south west of Nigeria.
5.0 SUMMARY Nigeria have a very diverse culture because it has the largest population in Africa and also has up to 250 ethnic groups.
The Nigerian culture gives a lot of importance in treating guests with utmost care and warmth.
Nigerian culture includes a variety of dressing.
What is common in the dressing of the different ethnic groups is that their dressing styles are usually conservative.
Among the largest cultural groups in Nigeria are the Hausas in northern Nigeria who are predominantly Moslems and the Igbos in South east and Yoruba in the south west.
6.0 Tutor-Marked Assignment 1.
What is cultural heritage?
2.
How does culture influence people’s lives?
3.
How is culture important to the unity of a diverse country like Nigeria?
SELF-ASSESSMENT EXERCISE 5: Question: Briefly describe Nigeria’s diverse culture 7.0 References/further Readings Arinze, L. (2000) “Cultural Heritage and Globalization”.
In Avrani E., Mason, R and Torre, M. D. eds.
Values and Heritage Conservation.
Loss Angeles: Getty conservation Institute.
Avrani, E., Mason R. and Torre, M. D. (2000).
Values and Heritage Conservation.
Loss Angeles: Getty conservation institute.
Forero, J.
(2003), “Seeking Balance Growth vs. culture in Amazon”.
The New York Times 10 December.
Sen, A.
(2004a) “Cultural Freedom and Human Development 51 TSM 403: CULTURAL TOURISM UNIT 6: Museums, Culture and Tourism 1.0 INTRODUCTION Visitors and tourists that visit or patronize museums and heritage organizations, do so to experience authentic and memorable awareness of the history and culture of the local community.
Museums and heritage organizations are for preserving and enriching our diverse cultural heritage.
In cultural tourism, a good cultural destination should be able to satisfy a tourist’s interest with breath taking landscapes, seascapes, art, nature, traditions, and other ways of life of the people in the Local community in question.
The local people are usually closely involved in cultural tourism.
The people of the locality organize tours and explain the significance or importance an image, stature or even a rock.
Cultural tourists have larger economic impact than tourists in general.
They spend more money than other tourist because they are usually required to stay for a longer period, since it is more like an educational visit.
Cultural heritage must be preserved, that is why Octavio Pas said “Every view of the world that becomes extinct, every culture that disappears, diminishes a possibility of life”.
It is in the light of this that museums have become a very important part of cultural tourism, because they are used in preserving a lot of things, which if not kept in these museums, will eventually get missing.
Although zoos and zoological gardens are not often thought as museums, they are considered “living museums’.
They exist for the same purpose as other museums; to educate, inspire action, study and to preserve a collection of animals.
2.0 OBJECTIVES At the end of this unit the student should be able to • discuss about the history of museums • understand the importance of museums • list the types of museums we have in Nigeria 3.0 MAIN CONTENT 3.1 Development and Evolution of the Museum The ‘museum’ comes from the Latin word, and is pluralized as ‘museums” or rarely “Musea”.
It is originally from the Greek word Mouseion”, which donest a 52 place or temple dedicated to the muses (i.e.
the patron divinities in Greek mythology of the arts), and hence a building set part for study and arts.
Museums collect and care for objects of scientific, artistic or historical importance and make them available for public viewing through exhibits that may be permanent or temporary.
Most large museums are located in major cities throughout the world and some local ones exist in smaller cities, towns and even by the country side.
Many museums offer programmes and activities for a range of audiences, including adults, children and families, as well as those for specific professions.
Programmes for the public may consist of lectures or tutorials by the museum faculty or field experts, films, musicals or dance performances and technology demonstrations.
Most of the time museums concentrate on the host region’s culture.
Although most museums do not allow physical contract with the associated artifacts, there are some that are interactive and encourage a more hands open approach.
Modern trends in musicology have broadened the range of the subject matter and introduced many interactive exhibits, which give the public the opportunity to make choices and engage in activities that may vary the experiences from person to person.
With the advent of the internet, there are growing numbers of virtual exhibits, i.e.
web versions of exhibits showing images and playing recorded sound.
Museums are usually open to the general public, sometimes charging an admission fee.
Some museums are public funded and have free entrance, either permanently or on special days.
Museums are not really operated to make profit, unlike private galleries which more often engage in the sale of objects.
There are governmental museums or non-profits museums.
There are also privately owned or family museums.
Museums can be a reputable and generally trusted source of information about cultures and history.
www.museums.gov.uk 3.2 Types of Museums There are many types of museums, from very large collections in major cities, covering many of the categories below, to very small museums covering either a particular location in general way, or a particular subject.
Categories include; fine arts, applied arts, crafts, archeology, anthropology and ethnology, history, cultural history, military history, science, technology, children’s museums, natural history numismatics, botanical and zoological gardens.
Within these categories, many museums specialize further, e.g.
museums of modern art, local history, aviation history, agriculture or geology.
A museum normally houses a care collection of important selected objects in its field.
Objects are formally occasioned by being registered in the museum’s collection with an artifact number and details recorded 53 about their province.
The persons in charge of the collection and of the exhibits are known as curators (www.24hourmuseum.org.uk).
Archeology museums specialize in the display of artifacts.
Many are in the open air, others display artifacts found in archeological sites inside buildings.
An art museum also known as an art gallery, is a space for exhibition of art, usually in the form of art objects from visual arts, primarily paintings, illustrations, and sculpture.
The specialized art museum is considered a fairly modern invention, the first being the Hermitage in Saint Petersburg, which was established in 1764.
History museums cover the knowledge of history and its relevance to the present and the future.
Some cover curatorial aspects of history, or a particular locality, while others are more general.
Such museums contain a wide range of objects, including documents, artifacts of all kinds, art, archeological objects, etc.
Antiquities museums specialize in more archeological findings.
Maritime museums, specialize in the display of objects relating to ships and travel on seas and lakes.
They may include a historic ship (or its replica), made accessible as a museum ship.
Military museums specialize in military history.
They are often organized from a national point of view, where a museum in a particular country will have displays organized around conflicts in which that country has taken part.
They typically include displays of weapons and other military equipment, uniforms, wartime propaganda and exhibits on civilian life during wartime, and decorations among others.
Mobile museum is a term applied to museums that make exhibitions from a vehicle, such as a van.
Some institutions, such as St. Vital Historical Society uses the term to refer to a portion of their collection that travels to sites away from the museum for educational purposes.
Other mobile museums have no “home site”, and use travel as their exclusive means of presentation.
Museums of natural history and natural science typically exhibit the work of the natural world.
The focus lies on nature and culture.
Exhibitions may educate the masses about dinosaurs, ancient history, and anthropology.
Evolution, environmental issues, and biodiversity are major areas in natural science museums.
Notably museums of this type include the National History Museum in London and Oxford University of Natural History in Oxford, English.
Open air museums collect and re-erect old buildings at large outdoor sites, usually in settings of re-created collection near Oslo in Norway.
Science Museums and technology centres revolve around scientific achievements, and marvels and their history.
To explain complicated inventions, a combination of demonstrations, interactive programmes and thought-provoking media are used.
Some museums way have exhibits on topics such as computers, aviation, railway museums, physics, astronomy and the animal kingdom.
Science museums, in particular, may consist of planetaria, or a large theatre usually built around a dome.
Museums may 54 have IMAX feature films, which may provide 3-D viewing, or higher quality picture.
As a result, IMAX content provides more immersive experience for people of all ages.
(www.artscouncil.org.uk).
3.3 Zoos and Zoological Gardens Zoos are not really seen as museums.
But they are also museums.
They are referred to as “living museums”.
The reason for this is because they exist for the same purpose as other museums.
Just as museums are used in preserving artifacts from the past, for the benefit of the younger and future generations, so also are the zoos.
Zoos are places where animals are kept for people to come and see.
Endangered species are also kept in the zoo, so that they can be protected from poachers.
Fore example, elephants are usually hunted down for their tusks.
Kangaroos are also endangered species.
Other examples of animals that are endangered animals are dolphins, sharks, and tigers.
Zoos also have zoological gardens and these gardens take care of plants and also help in preserving endangered plants.
Like Museums, zoos exist for the same purpose.
Then educate people on animals and plants and they inspire actins.
They also create an environment for study and preserve collections of plants and animals.
An example of a museum with a zoo and a zoological garden is the National Museum in Jos Plateau State Nigeria.
Museums serve to homogenize our views of the past by the following means (Dogget and O’mahoney, 1994, P. 175).
1. failing to account for matters of historical (or more accurately, historipographical) dispute, by not providing alternative view points.
2. by presenting the past in terms of a coherent, linear unified narrative.
3. by creating complex audio, visual and textual experiences, in which the observers is overwhelmingly confronted by the massive weight of all the physical evidence; the photos, the facts, the personal vignettes.
After being penetrated in such an intimate way by a holistic bodily experience; observers are then typically directed to gifts, where they are likely encouraged to purchase books which can help to further reinforce the desired indoctrination of the museums particular ideology.
4. they present a view of history based entirely upon the romanticization of the achievements of the achievements of great men, brilliant thinkers, cultural or scientific innovators, war heroes and their technologies.
55 4.0 CONCLUSION Museums collect and care for objects of scientific, artistic or historical importance.
Museums offer programmes and activities for a range of audiences, including adults, children and families, as well as those for more specific professions.
As is self evident to the seasoned traveller, most national museums around the world adhere to the same basic structural patterns, whereby the past is divided up into a series of epochs, beginning with “prehistory’, then passing through the ancient and medieval worlds until finally arriving at the world’s present time.
The museum is usually run by a director, who has a curatorial staff that care for the objects and arrange their display.
Large museums often will have research divisions or institutes, which are frequently involved with studies related to the museum’s items.
There are many types of museums, covering many categories or a particular subjects like; arts, archeology, cultural history, science, etc.
5.0 SUMMARY Museums make it possible for the younger or present generations to learn about prehistoric and medieval times.
Museums often cooperate to sponsor joint travelling, exhibits on particular subjects and educational exhibitions.
Museums preserve cultural history and are usually opened to the general public, sometimes charging an admission fee, while some museums that are publicly funded have free entrance, either permanently or on special days.
Programmes for the public may consist of lectures or tutorials by the museum faculty or field expert.
6.0 Tutor-Marked Assignment 1.
Discuss the history and development of Museums 2.
List five types of museums we have 3. outline the functions and importance of museums SELF-ASSESSMENT EXERCISE 6: Question: What do you understand by the term “Living Museums”?
56 7.0 References/Further Readings Dogget, R. and O’Mahoney, R. (1994).
The Leisure Environment Stanley Thornes Explore the following websites: • www.24hourmuseum .org.uk • www.museums .gov.uk • www.artscouncil.org.uk 57 TSM 403: CULTURAL TOURISM UNIT 7: The Impact of Tourism on Culture 1.0 INTRODUCTION The culture of a host population is often an important factor in attracting tourists to particular destinations.
Many tourists are interested in experiencing a culture which is different from their own.
The culture of a host population can take many different forms, but most examples fall into two categories.
The first category consists of customs which have been created by the host population.
The second includes the aspects of the host population’s everyday life, history and religion.
The first category of customs created by the host population ranges from their arts and crafts, such as local dances, artifacts, costumes and other every day objects, to special events such as festivals, colourful wedding ceremonies and carnivals.
Almost every region in the world has its own traditional form of dance, ranging from Spanish flamenco dancing, to Maori Poi dances and artifacts such as African carved wood masks, Tunisia rugs and locally made pottery that make popular souvenirs.
There are also such as the famous carnival in Rio de Janeiro Brazil (known as the world’s greatest party), the channel Islands festival of flower, and Bastille day in France which attract vast numbers of tourists.
In many countries, hospitality has been a matter of honour.
Aspects of the host population’s every day life, history and religion include local or national traditions and customs, their work and leisure activities and also their form of worship.
Tourists love to take photographs of “typical” scenes of the host population’s life.
These may include a picturesque group of old peasants sitting around tables outside a tavern in Greece, a game of ‘boules’ in France or a colourful outdoor fruit and vegetable market along, Jos Abuja road in Plateau State, Nigeria.
The many different aspects of a particular country’s culture have usually been formed long before the arrival of tourism.
However, the effect on the host population’s culture of it becoming not only something for the host population itself, but also a form of tourism attraction can change when it receives the attention of large numbers of tourists.
58 2.0 OBJECTIVES By the time a student has gone through this unit, the student is expected to • discuss the impact of tourism on culture • elaborate on how that impact is beneficial to culture • list some factors that can be responsible for changes in the attitude of the host population.
3.0 MAIN CONTENT 3.1 Changing Attitudes of Host Population In understanding the changing attitudes of host population due to tourism, one should imagine a self-contained, small community with a simple basic lifestyle that probably lives in a remote location and visited by very few strangers .The community has its norms and values, customs and traditions, as well as rules and standard of behaviour which have changed very little for a long time, perhaps for centuries.
All the members of the community have a special place in it, a special bond to each other, and are generally happy and contented with their relatively peaceful lives.
Then all of a sudden, a tourism industry discovers the relatively remote community to have abundant tourism potentials e.g.
water falls, which it quickly develops.
Tourists soon get to know about this new tourism destination and start arriving in droves.
It is quite obvious that for the greater part of the year, the members of this community will be out numbered by large numbers of wealthy, loud fun-seeking tourists, whose lifestyle, expectations, appearance and customs are completely different from their own.
It would really be surprising if these people are not affected by the experience of being surrounded by so many tourists who are completely different, in many ways, from themselves (see Davidson, 1999, P. 160).
The host population end up being actively involved with the tourists and most of them get employed in taking care of the needs of these tourists.
Most others that were involved in farming or fishing activities would abandon their occupations to gain employment in these attractions.
Another possible response of the host populations to tourists is that of imitation.
Tourists sometimes appear wealthy, successful and sophisticated.
This may be an effect of causing younger members of the host population to want to be more like the tourists.
They do this by imitating the tourists’ ambitions and values.
Members of the host community sometimes migrate to these tourist attractions to have more time to work and earn more money to be able to dress like the tourists themselves.
Contact with other people introduces foreign ideas, leading to changes in existing values and 59 behaviour.
This may even involve the massive imposition of foreign ways of life especially in terms of dressing.
Through change, cultures can adapt to altered conditions.
However, not all change is adaptive (Chambers, 1993, P. 10).
3.2 Beneficial Impacts of Tourism on Culture All over the world, traditional arts and crafts are dying out, as generations of people with particular skills are replaced by generations who do not learn these skills because they are thought to have become irrelevant to their modern way of life.
Because tourism creates an interest in this particular forms of culture, it can help in preserving traditional arts and crafts from being lost altogether.
A famous example of this is that of the Canadian Inuit, or Eskimo art of carving.
Before the arrival of European tourists in Canada, art was something of minor importance only to the Eskimo and not at all a main feature of their lives.
Tourist created a greater demand for souvenirs, and the host population responded by producing high quality carvings in soapstone of figures representing central themes of their culture, such as the animals they hunt.
The carvings reflect aspects of the traditional life of the Eskimos and are now the principal ways in which the host population expresses the qualities of its own culture.
Without the arrival of tourists and tourism and the demand for souvenirs, this particular Eskimo craft may have been lost forever.
Instead, the traditional art form has been given a new lease of life through tourism and the new generation of skilled craftsmen and crafts women has created a fulfilling and profitable venture (Gamst and Norbeck, 1996, P. 53).
Crafts in Britain have also benefited from the attentions of tourists.
Traditional hand-made artifacts are sold throughout the country in shops and craft centres, keeping alive skills which are part of the pre-industrial heritage of Britain.
Thatched cottages have for a long time been popular with domestic and inbound tourists, who regard them as an essential part of the traditional village.
In Nigeria and most part of the sub-Saharan Africa, the owners of these houses with thatched roofs ,on the other hand, are only too well aware of the expense and hard work involved in creating and maintaining such roofs, rather than the modern alternatives such as slate or tiles.
Yet, the popularity of thatched roofs among tourists has been one of the factors responsible for the continued demand for the ancient thatchers’ craft in Africa.
Some thatchers have even found employment in the United States of America where thatched roofs have become a status symbol, after being discovered in Africa by American tourists who have also kept the product of tie and die, and also, hides and skins in Northern Nigeria.
Most of the tourists are the ones that patronize tie and die.
The Yorubas have also kept on carving calabashes and sometimes even get to export them.
60 3.3 Tourism and Communication Between Cultures A researcher into tourism once wrote; “Tourism has become the noblest instrument of this century for achieving international understanding” This enables contacts among people from the most distant parts of the globe, people of various languages, races, creeds, political beliefs and economic standing.
Tourism brings them together.
It leads to personal contact in which people can understand attitudes and beliefs which were incomprehensible to them because they were different.
The belief that tourism can help to bridge gaps and create understanding between different cultures and communities through communication, is often held up as one of the positive effects of tourism in the world.
By travelling and coming into contact with people different from themselves, tourists are said to achieve greater understanding of the host population, and vice versa.
By this theory, tourism becomes a kind of educational process, and may be given the credit for such achievements as helping to maintain world peace, inspiring oppressed peoples to change their political regimes, and improving the situation of women in primitive societies (Jomo and Hui, 2004, P. 11, Basil, 2002, P. 13).
Certainly, people’s attitudes are changed mainly by holidays, and by the people whom they meet on their travels.
However, many tourists return home, apparently unaffected by what or who they have seen.
The question is whether tourism leads to real communication between cultures, or not.
This depends upon the type of tourism in question.
Real communication between cultures is often found less in mass tourism of big popular resorts than smaller and more personal resorts that usually cater for couples.
The latter type of tourism at most times caters or offers tourists the opportunity to be able to get to meet a lot of the host population on a neutral ground, not just like what is obtainable in the customer – employee relationship.
Also, tourists that travel in groups and have a tendency of keeping to themselves inside their tourists reservations, for example, hotel complexes, are less likely to have any serious impact on the host population.
The bottom line is that when communication between cultures is limited so also is the impact that one culture can have on another.
3.3.1 The Environmental Impact of Tourism The environment, whether it is natural or man-made, is the most fundamental ingredient of the tourism product.
However, as soon as tourism activities take place, the environment is inevitably changed or modified either to facilitate tourism or during the tourism process.
Environmental preservation and improvement are now at the forefront of many development decisions.
Such considerations are treated with much greater respect than they were during the first half of this century.
A brief survey of the literature shows that relatively little 61 research has been undertaken in analyzing tourism’s impact on the environment.
The empirical studies which have taken place have been very specific – such as the impact of tourism on the wildlife of Africa, on the pollution of water in the Mediterranean, or on particular coastal areas and mountains.
The diverse areas studied and the wide range of tourism activities involved make it difficult to bring these findings together in order to assemble a comprehensive framework within which to work.
In order to study the physical impact of tourism it is necessary to establish the following: • The physical impacts created by tourism activities as opposed to other activities.
• What conditions were like before tourism activities took place, in order to derive a baseline from which comparisons can be made; • An inventory of flora and fauna, together with an unambiguous index of tolerance levels to the types of impact created by different sorts of tourism activities; and • What indirect and induced levels of environmental impacts are associated with tourism activities.
The environmental impacts associated with tourism development can also be considered in terms of their direct, indirect and induced effects.
The impacts can be positive or negative.
It is not possible to develop tourism without incurring environmental impacts, but it is possible, with correct planning to manage tourism development in order to minimize the negative impacts while encouraging the positive impacts.
The direct environmental impacts of tourism include the following effects; as positive impacts: • The preservation/restoration of historic buildings and sites; • The creation of national parts and wildlife parks; • The protection of reefs and beaches; and • The maintenance of forests; 4.0 CONCLUSION Tourism has a lot of impact on culture.
The host population of a community that has been turned into a tourist attraction is bound to have changes in its culture.
The culture of a host population takes different forms, but there are two major categories: customs that are created by the host population, and aspects of their everyday life.
The former refers to their arts and crafts such as dances and customs while the latter refers to special events like festivals and carnivals.
Remote areas 62 with tourism potentials that have been discovered are at a maximum risk of losing its privacy, due to the institution of the tourists’ norms and values that are being observed.
Tourism creates a high demand for souvenirs.
The host population is now obliged to produce more of what it had been producing locally.
This helps in retaining cultures that would have been extinct by now.
Tourism helps in bridging gaps and creates understanding among cultures and communities through communication.
5.0 SUMMARY To summarize it all, tourism attracts a lot of visitors from different backgrounds and cultures.
These tourists bring their different cultures to the host communities.
The host communities on the other hand become influenced by the different cultures they come in contact with.
Culture has benefited from tourism because there are a lot of cultural artifacts like carvings, tie and die, hides and skins, calabash carvings that would have been extinct; but tourists like to buy and keep them as souvenirs and they pay good money for them.
This has encouraged host populations to continue producing these artifacts.
6.0 Tutor-Marked Assignment 1.
Explain the impact of tourism on culture 2.
How does the impact of tourism benefit culture?
3.
What is the importance of communications among cultures?
SELF-ASSESSMENT EXERCISE 7: Question: What do you understand by the term “changing attitudes”?
63 7.0 References/Further Readings Basu, A.
(2002); Culture, the Status of Women and Demographic Behaviour.
Oxford: Clarendon Press.
Blau, J.
(2003); Social Contracts and Economic Markets.
New York: Plenum Chambers, R. (1993), Rural Development: Putting the last first.
New York: Longman Scientific & Technical.
Davidson, R. (1999).
Tourism, London: Pitman Publishing Gamst, F. C. and Norbeek, E. (1996).
Ideas of culture: sources and uses.
New York: Holt Reinhart and Winston.
Jomo, K. S. and Hui, W. C. (2004).
“Affirmative Action and Exclusion in Malaysia: Ethnic and regional Inequalities in a Multicultural Society”.
64 TSM 403: CULTURAL TOURISM UNIT 8: Leisure and Tourism 1.0 INTRODUCTION Leisure as defined by Webster’s New Collegiate Dictionary is one’s free time and/ or freedom “provided by the cessation of activities – time free from work” and that leisure time is at” one’s convenience”.
It defines tourism as the “practice of travelling for recreation which in my opinion is informed by leisure as the main factor.
Leisure came to fore and subsequently gained prominence in the late 1960s when some leading American biologists conceived and gave birth to the idea that they would extend man’s life span by 20 years.
This “promise” led people to wonder about how they could contain boredom and loneliness unless some thoughts were made and actions taken to “invent the future” to new social roles.
This development was anchored on the concept of work which had to be changed and considered to go beyond maintenance as a basic need of man, although work has always been considered as the source of manhood and salvation.
The changes were on values by the workforce and time of work which could be exchanged for income since it became evident that national currencies were always decreasing in value, while the hour in its potential for alternative uses was increasing.
This was followed by negotiations between employees and their employers which resulted in paying workers for their vacations away from their homes.
This marked the beginnings of outdoor public recreation and thus gave rise to the leisure and tourism industries.
2.0 OBJECTIVES After studying this unit you will • explain the historical development of leisure and tourism industries • know the various conceptions of leisure • discuss time and, work as they apply to leisure.
• discuss the dynamics of culture in leisure.
3.0 MAIN CONTENT 3.1 Conceptions of Leisure Conceptualization is important to the study of every subject including leisure.
Accordingly, there are quite a number of conceptual topics that are basic to the 65 analysis and understanding of leisure, each of which relates to motivation, purpose and use of time.
These are intuitively discussed below i.
The humanistic model of leisure which is seen from two perspectives: one, as free time or time not devoted to paid vacations; two, the classical explanation of it to be schooling, or cultivation of the self and pre- occupied with the value of culture (Harrison, and Huntington, 2000, P. 16).
Also, this model assumes that life is divided into two parts – business and leisure, “war and peace, and actions; some aim at what is necessary and useful and some, at what is honourable”; ii.
The therapeutic model of leisure which refers to the uses of leisure for the purposes of social control, social statues and therapy as well as medicine and symbol; iii.
The quantitative model refers to leisure as the time left over when one would have completed work necessary for his maintenance.
iv.
The epistemological model refers to leisure as relating to activities and meanings that assume analytic and aesthetic views of the whole world.
v. The sociological conception which is based on Max Weber’s view which refers to leisure as a construct with attributes such as antithesis to the work of the participant and perceiving such activity as voluntary or free including pleasant outcomes such as sleep or a drink.
vi.
The institutional conception of leisure that seeks to differentiate if from some behaviour and value patterns such as education, marital, political and religious, see also World Values Survey (2004, p.4).
3.2 Time, Work and Leisure Economically, free time implies that leisure is not necessarily the same as non- work time.
This is because free time is completely different and far away from more than time for leisure.
For example, no any person works for 24 hours a day.
This is because out of the 24 hours, he or she eats, washes, sleeps and engages in other biological and domestic activities and functions that relate to one’s keeping a life functioning.
As pointed out by Kaplan (1995; p.27), in one’s life time of for instance, 72 years, he or she spends a total of 22 years in sleep, those in eating 6 years and those in work 10 years.
This means that almost half of the lifetime is not counted for, and that even if it is, not all of this would be for leisure.
Work is the opposite of free time, but definitely not of leisure, because free time and leisure exist in completely different worlds, although generally people have always thought of them to be the same.
Furthermore, free time implies a special way of calculating a special kind of time, while leisure refers to a condition of person which few desire and fewer achieve.
In other words, not everybody can 66 have leisure.
Also, leisure is made up of self-determined activity – experience that is within a person’s economically free time roles that is considered as leisure by those participating in it.
Leisure has the features of norms and constraints which provide opportunities for recreation, personal growth, and to some extent also provide service to others (Ellis, 1993, P.15).
these are considered to be three groupings of the whole content of leisure.
3.3 The Dynamics of Clusters and Culture in Leisure In recent times, the single most important development and change in the relationships of man is the speed and dimensions of information and communication.
As indicated in the second type of the conception of leisure, the range or dimension extends from one person to another person or persons throughout the world.
This situation is made possible through direct contacts across national and international boundaries, the processes of tourism, trade, studying abroad, films and television (Financial Times, 2004, P.4).
Accordingly, as shown in figure 4 below, the dynamics of clusters in leisure constitutes four pairs of relations though interdependence that necessitate the creation of both ecological and communication framework.
This takes the form of person family, group subculture, community – region and national-world relationships.
Figure 8.1: Relation of leisure to the level of clusters.
A B person Group family Subculture 1 Leisure dynamics Nation Community II world region Clusters D C 67 With regard to the dynamics of culture in leisure, seven external factors affect the choice, meaning and use of leisure.
These are age, education, income, place of residence, time, work and sex.
Thus leisure is a system of action together with these factors that provide access to culture.
The definition of culture that was prepared by Tailor in 1871 seems to be the one that has stood the test of time.
According to him, culture is “….
That complex whole which includes knowledge, belief, art, law, morals, custom, and any other capabilities and habits acquired by man and as a member of society”.
In this sense, the whole or totality can be divided or subdivided and regarded as a system as depicted in figure 5 below.
A quartet of factors that constitute the system is energy, social life, symbols and values (World Values Survey, 2004, P.9).
Figure 8.2: Relation of leisure to the cultural level A B Energy Social system System 1 Institutions II Clusters Symbolic III Value system Clusters system D C Perhaps the most significant and dominant of these factors is energy system being the total production and control of resources available and used by the society from which it derives motivation and rewards.
A social system is simply the structure and organization of people in both formal and informal groups that usually metamorphose into family, cult, religion and subculture.
A symbolic system on other hand refers to the involvement of leisure in a specific form that represents ideas that are outside leisure e.g.
people of Christian faith that observe Sunday as a holy day.
The value system is the way and manner in which a person or group chooses to develop interest or otherwise in a particular item by judging it as either good or bad, beautiful or ugly.
This is particularly so because leisure involves images (see also Sen, 2004, p.5), World Values Survey (2004, P.8) and World Tourism Organization).
68 3.3.1 The Dynamics of Constructs in Leisure The communications of influence of ideas goes on vertically in-depth of time as well as horizontally, in-depth of penetration.
A theory of leisure is essentially a theory of history.
Thus, it is no accidental that Homo Ludens is one of the classic documents for our study.
Sociology is sometimes partially handicapped in approaching leisure because of its non-historical view.
Understanding the present requires a concern with the future as it is used by traditional historians to provide a one directional narrative of events.
Our use of history is to find in its pages some broad types of social orders, types that may appear and reappear, or types that may serve us toward a visualization of desirable futures.
For example, in the constructs that follow, the Greek societies of Plato and Aristotle are placed under “cultivated” order, which is an explicit construction of the future.
This is an overt commission for which an author takes full responsibility.
Similarly, certain characteristics of our present will be found to be merely updated versions of “primitive” orders.
Leisure among the primitive illustrates the non-utilitarian as well as the utilitarian function.
The emphasis, rightly, has been to show the fusion of institutions.
Dancing for example, is generally an integral part of the religious ceremony.
But more recently, anthropology stresses the enormous range of social systems.
Among the complexities that are now understood are drawings, designs on pots, basket patterns, symbols, sculpture, iron works, and other artistic forms that stand purely as art e.g.
those found in Buji and Jere cultures in Bassa Local Government, Plateau State.
Similarly, games and folklore are among the vocabularies of primitive groups of former centuries or of today.
Nevertheless, the thread of pure game or play among relatively less stratified groups is of unique importance in contrast to pure leisure in sophisticated society with its clear institutional structures.
4.0 CONCLUSION There are quite a number of conceptual traditions of leisure that are critically significant to the study and understanding of the subject leisure.
Seven such concepts are identified and are related to each other particularly as they are important aspects of motivation, purposes and time use which are all determining factors of leisure.
Also, the dynamics of clusters and culture are factors that promote leisure.
While the former constitutes person family, group subculture, community-region and nation-world, the latter takes the form of a system which is embedded in energy, social life, values and symbols.
5.0 SUMMARY 69 This unit has analyzed the importance of conceptualization in studying and understanding of various subjects including leisure.
Accordingly, seven concepts were considered relevant in explaining the term leisure as it relates to tourism.
In order to practicalize leisure, time and work were found to be the major determining factors in a society.
Also, the dynamics of clusters and culture as components of leisure were highlighted.
6.0 Tutor – marked Assignment 1) How did leisure and tourism industries develop?
2) Discuss the various concepts of leisure.
SELF-ASSESSMENT EXERCISE 8: Question: Apart from the external factors, which other conditions are relevant to leisure?
7.0 References/Further Readings Ellis, J.
(1993), Why people play.
Englewood Cliffs, New Jersey: Prentice Hall.
Financial Times, 2004, “French film makers fear for L’Exception culturelle”.
9 January.
Harrison, L. E., Huntington, S. P. (eds) 2000.
Culture Matters: How Values Shape Human.
Progress: New York Basic Books.
Kaplan, M. (1995) Leisure: Theory and Policy, New York: John Wiley & Sons, Inc. Sen, A.
(2004).
“Cultural Freedom and Human Development”.
World Tourism Organization (WTO).www.world tourism.org.
World Values Survey (2004) “World Values Survey” [http://www.worldvaluessurvey.org] February 2004.
70 TSM 403: CULTURAL TOURISM UNIT 9: Leisure Conditions and Objective Aspects of the Individual Situation 1.0 INTRODUCTION Time is one of the conditioning factors that is a variable that can be generally identified and regarded as external and that is distinguishable from internal factors such as judgement, conscience, personality, taste or will.
However, the difference is not very muchof a residential accommodation which can be regarded as an external factor that can in itself have direct bearing on the alternative activities from which a person can choose.
External factors, can be measured though, are beyond people’s control.
In this unit we shall consider and analyze the relevance of seven external factors or conditions that have direct effect on the choice, meaning and use of leisure.
These factors are age, education, income, residential accommodation, sex, time and work.
However, other external factors are available: space, family situation, health, and nature and condition of housing.
Desire, needs, personality, judgement, taste and will are internal factors for leisure choices.
They are however, not treated here because they are used only for relative purpose and emphasis.
2.0 OBJECTIVES After studying this unit you will • be able to describe the conditions and aspects of an individual’s situation in relation to leisure.
• be able to explain the types of relation between external and internal factors influencing leisure.
• Be able to analyze how cultures are differentiated 3.1 External Factors All cultures are distinctly differentiated by factors and actions that various groups do, the types of rituals they perform and the confirmations as asserted by Brief (2004, P.20) and Haffasee (1999, P.13).
As pointed out by Inglehart and Barker (2004, 18), these factors are employed to lend symbolic support to the transitions – as in all institutions and situations including leisure.
Distinctions in age is extremely important in our everyday life as a society.
Such distinctions can be 71 based on the three perspectives such as accepted social roles, customs and/or traditions, and physical energy and skills.
Excellent examples of social role are those that are closely associated with childhood and play and older people with retirement and leisure.
With regard to skills, that can at most times be based on the number of years e.g.
music and teaching.
As to customs and/or traditions, those dictate the actual age bracket for some certain types of leisure and other social events to be undertaken which is covered by law based on the nations’ constitution.
For instance laws of most countries do not allow a person below 18 years to desire a vehicle or vote and be voted for.
In terms of physical energy, it is evident that physical differences play a major role as a liaison for joining customs and traditions, and roles of age with activities.
For convenience, some of these factors have been analyzed alone while others have been paired together: 3.1.1 Education Two major factors that influence leisure based on the importance of education are (i) the influence that education has on a person’s occupation, income and social status, and (ii) its impact on the style of life, curiosity, sense of discrimination, taste and values.
Experience has shown that the differences in leisure patterns among educated processionals is based on the nature of work and personality.
As argued by Sen (2004a, P.20) in his article “Cultural Freedom and Human Development”, leisure is a broader term than culture.
For example, the businessman and engineer, culture minded or not, will do better economically than many others, and they will therefore have a wide potential access to such leisure opportunities which, because of their values, they may not choose to seize.
Also, the more educated a person is, the more he or she would be aware of the alternatives, for example, he or she is not as likely to choose TV or radio simply because there is nothing else to do within his home or community.
Furthermore, men in educated families assist their wives more than less educated men.
In developed countries, couples dine more often away from home, and are aware of possible activities outside their homes which forms the basis for leisure and tourisms.
Lastly, the influence of leisure on a more educated person regardless of its type or nature would produce a significant amount of growth, creativity and self-actualization in him/her.
72 3.2 Income, Work and Time Leisure and tourist activities range from basically nothing to so many millions of naira for the purchase and maintenance of holiday tickets, hotel accommodating, facilities and games such as playing gulf etc, food and health.
The leisure concepts goes beyond a mere simple issue of what costs what, or who can afford what.
It is now a matter of one’s income and style of life.
Income has therefore become both subjective and objective factors in leisure because as affluence grows, it becomes manifested in values rather than in opportunities.
Also, there is a strong correlation between income and leisure.
This is because the higher the income, the more time one allocates to leisure.
With regard to work (which was earlier discussed to some extent) five factors determine the conditions for leisure.
These are (i) the nature of work; (ii) the relationship of the work to raw materials and location; (iii) the meaning and impact of the work to neighbours within the community; (iv) the continuity and discontinuity of skills, habits and values from work to non-work life such as leisure; and (v) the attitude toward work itself.
According to Putnam (1993, P.9), in work, man has gone much further than mere sustenance as has found the core of his life, and that work in its largest perspective is closely tied in with relation to family, to other persons, to nature, to objects, to lif;, it is literally life itself”.
Time is considered as the core issue of leisure because it involves projections for the future.
It has the following elements: - physical, objective, chronology and psychology.
The issue of time had early been discussed at length in the text.
3.3 Residence and Sex There is no doubting the fact that a place of residence is an important factor that has impact on the meaning, types and uses of leisure.
Quite a number of reasons have been advanced for this.
These include (i) general climate conditions; (ii) occupational and ecological structure of the area; (iii) the presence of man-made resources that constitute an array of resources such as sports arenas, amusement parks and/or playgrounds; (iv) resources of nature which include beaches, forests, flatland, hills and mountains; and (v) unique social structures of a community.
Naturally, the male or female element is usually considered as a major factor that impacts on a variety of behaviour including leisure.
This, no doubt is informed by the difference in both biology and chemistry of the male and female.
This difference though diminishing in sex divisions in the behaviour patterns of sociability particularly games and sports, education, the arts and volunteering in community works, the fact remains that the amount of participation in these activities differ considerably.
For instance, the arts had hitherto provided an 73 interesting case in the analysis and history of the division of sex participation.
In particular, there had always been an overwhelming proportion of men in the professional areas of the performing arts than women due to such factors as assigned roles of women at home, child care responsibilities, difficulties in travels and business undertakings.
3.3.1 Socio Cultural Benefits of Tourism Proponents of the sociocultural benefits of tourism are able to point out that tourism is a clean and green industry, that some hotels are built with great concern for the environment and use local crafts people, designers, and materials in order to harmonize with the locals.
Tourism brings new revenue to the area; it also creates and maintains higher levels of employment than if there were no tourism.
In some countries, hotels may be restricted as to the number of foreigners they employ and the length of their contracts.
This allows for the promotion of the local employees to higher positions.
Tourism may act as a catalyst for the development of the community because taxes help the government to provide social services such as schools, hospitals, roads, water and so on.
In addition, tourists often enjoy the cultural exchanges they have at all levels in the community.
The excursions, shopping, dancing, and many things to embellish the tourists ‘ experiences.
Ecotourism is not likely to have a significant socio-cultural impact in developed countries, where the economy is active and well-diversified.
The most noticeable change in established value patterns and behaviour occurs when tourism is a major contributor to the gross national product.
Ecotorusim or rural tourism can be a very interesting socio-cultural phenomenon.
Seeing how others live is interesting to many tourists, and the exchange of socio-cultural values and activities can be rewarding.
Providing that the number of tourists is manageable and that they respect the most community’s socio cultural norms and values, tourism can provide an opportunity for a number of social interactions.
A barbegue/suya spot is a very good example of a place for social interaction for foreigners.
Similarly, depending on the reason for the tourists’ visit, myriad opportunities are available to interact both socially and culturally.
Even a visit from one part of Nigeria to another can be both socially and culturally stimulating and satisfying.
For instance, I had a nice time in Calabar when I visited the famous Tinapa tourist side and shopping complex 3.3.2 Consensus and Tradition as Focus of Personality A powerful factor in selection among alternatives of leisure is the force of whatever is being done by others.
Before this force, everyone is doing it, women give way to fashion in dress and men to styles in cars.
All of us, as at Christmas 74 and Easter, are subject to an overwhelming spirit or atmosphere.
The consensus may be within a limited group, such as a gang or a collection of youth or a national event that embraces all of us.
An example is drawn from “Fasching” in Germany, which embraces all ages and has deep historical roots.
The carnival “Fasching”, came from pre-Latin festivities in which the catholic church absorbed the pagan ceremonies of masked dancers driving out the devils of winter.
Even today, as groups of young and old in such cities can still be seen wandering the streets until about 3 Am; singing, shouting, drinking and holding hands while many are dressed in uniforms of the eighteenth century.
This type of festival is more than a distraction and serves as an artificial way of relief from the rigid schedule of life, and everyone knows that the normal relationship of roles would quietly resume after the festivals.
Meanwhile, the collective catharis has already succeeded and no doubt as a counter revolutionary force.
In the present day, fairs, pageants, historical celebrations and holidays have an episode in collective leisure for which a meaning exists in history or is created.
The population as mass is involved.
There is a blend of planned order and of spontaneity.
The element of “pleasant expectation and recollection” is played on by the press in our day for such occasions.
4.0 CONCLUSION Time is one of the major determining factors as an external condition for leisure.
This and other external factors are distinct and completely different from internal factors.
The other external factors are age, education, income, residential accommodation, work and sex or gender.
These factors can be measured.
Also, internal factors that are relevant to leisure are highlighted though not analyzed for obvious reasons.
These factors are desire, needs, judgement, personality and taste.
Unlike external factors, internal factors cannot be measured.
In addition, they are used for the purpose of emphasis only.
5.0 SUMMARY Cultures are differentiated by factors and actions that various groups do, their rituals and confirmations.
As cultures differ due to certain factors, so is leisure.
These factors affect the choice, meaning and use of leisure.
The external factors include: age, education, income, residential accommodation, sex, time and work.
Other external factors which are also relevant to leisure include available space, family situation, health, nature and condition of housing.
Although there are internal factors for leisure which include; desire, needs, personality, judgement, and taste, they are only for relative purpose and emphasis.
75 6.0 Tutor-Marked Assignment 1.
Discuss by giving examples the conditions and aspects of an individual’s situation to leisure.
2.
How are internal factors related to external factors in leisure?
3.
How and why are cultures differentiated?
SELF-ASSESSMENT EXERCISE 12: Question: What are the major factors that influence leisure based on the importance of education?
7.0 References/Further Readings Grief, A.
(2004), Cultural Beliefs and organization of Society.
A Historical and Theoretical Reflection on Collective and Individualistic Societies.
Journal of Political Economy 102 – 912 – 20.
Haffajee, F. (1999) “South Africa: Blending Tradition and Change” UNESCO Courier.
November.
(htt://www.unesco.org/courier/1999_11/uk/dossier/Ext 23htm).
Indigenous Australia (2003).
“What is Cultural Heritage” [htt://www.dreamtime.net.au/indigeneous/culture.cfm] February, 2004.
Inglehart, R. and Baker, W. (2000) “Modernization, Cultural change and the Persistence of Traditional Values, American Sociological Review 65:19-51.
Putman, R. (1993) “The Prosperous Community: Social Capital and Public Life” American Prospect 13.35.
Sen, A.
(2004) “Cultural Freedom and Human Development”.
76 TSM 403: CULTURAL TOURISM UNIT 10: Ecotourism 1.0 INTRODUCTION The hospitality and tourism industry has witnessed a new phenomenon within a few years.
This phenomenon is called ecotourism.
It has continued to take tourists and the industry like a storm.
Ecotourism is known as adventure tourism, while some people look at it as responsible tourism or sustainable tourism.
Ecotourism has become the fastest growing segment within the world’s largest industry, i.e.
the hospitality and tourism industry.
Ecologists, Scientists and students view ecotourism as a life-long dream, while tourists see it as the latest trend in the hospitality and tourism industry.
For experts and leaders in the tourism industry, ecotourism is a potential prosperous business.
Ecotourism has been in existence for about two decades but the concept has been alive for much longer.
There is no true definition of what ecotourism really is because the term is a bit new and has become difficult to describe.
The definition contains elements and concepts that are associated with what is known as sustainable development.
It is believed that ecotourism is a key tool in achieving sustainable development, which is to meet the needs of the present without compromising the ability of the future generations to meet their own needs.
Another definition of ecotourism which is easier to the understanding of even the layman, describes ecotourism as responsible travel to natural areas that conserves the environment and sustains the well-being of the local people.
A true example of such a place in Nigeria that has been reserved as a destination for ecotourism is the Yankari game reserve in Bauchi State, Nigeria.
2.0 OBJECTIVES At the conclusion of this unit, students should be able to: • define ecotourism, and why it will continue to grow in importance.
• discuss why employment will continue to grow because of ecotourism.
• outline ways of preserving and sustaining the ecotourism industry.
77 3.0 MAIN CONTENT 3.1 Growth and Development of Ecotourism In the early 1970s, people in several remote areas of the world knew how important tourism could be, but they did not want to destroy the exotic environment that surrounded them (Mitlin and Satternwaite, 2000, p.20).
An example of such a place is a town in Mexico called Cancun.
Cancun used to be an exotic prime beach resort and the number of tourists was not very high.
Today there are more visitors than natives.
This is because when developers recognized the potentials Cancun had, they drew up a master plan that placed priority on environment protection, but Mexico started experiencing political and economic instability.
This instability and recession made the government and some top business individuals affected by the recession to start finding ways to bring money into the economy.
They turned to the tourism industry and Cancun was sacrificed.
The result of this sacrifice was that the natives were relocated to the mountain side, the exotic beaches became overpopulated and were clustered with visitors, tourists and garbage.
This point was emphasized by Daily (1997, p.7).
The reef which had a very rich Aqua life was damaged by ships coming into the Wharf.
Water treatment became insufficient to save what was left of the aqua life.
It also became impossible to meet the requirements of the number of growing visitors.
Like in the case of Cancun, other exotic beaches and islands got destroyed ecologically.
The natural and serene environments were punctuated by mass tourism, pollution and garbage.
When this sad stories were heard, ecologists and tourism leaders saw the importance of preserving the environment for future generations to also experience and enjoy earth’s natural beauty (Costanza, et al., 2001, P.107).
Most ecotourism destinations are found in areas with vast natural surroundings.
Examples of these places are tropical rainforests, coral reefs, deserts, and ice glaciers.
Ecotourism is also important because there is the presence of culture that is unique to the visitor.
The focus of ecotourism is to provide tourists with news about certain natural areas and the culture found within those areas.
Ecotourism helps to improve the local economy and conservation efforts of the natives.
78 3.2 Preserving the Ecotourism Industry Ecotourism projects are usually developed on a small scale because it is easier to control such sites.
Some of the reasons why ecotourism projects are developed on a small scale are because of limits that are normally set upon the community, the local tourism business and the tourists themselves.
These limitations, as pointed out by Barbier (1997, p.11), include strict control of the amount of water and electricity being used, tougher recycling measures, regulations in park and market hours and more importantly, the limitation of the number of visitors to a certain destination at any one time.
Another reason for keeping ecotourism destinations small is to allow for more “in depth” tours and educational opportunities.
Most of the more popular ecotourism destinations are found in underdeveloped and developing countries.
The modern day tourists are gradually becoming more and more adventurous.
Tourists now visit remote places and are participating in activities that have positive impact on nature, the host communities and on themselves.
The ecotourism industry has some of its most successful locations in Central America, the Caribbean, Africa and Nepal.
Africa’s tourism industry especially ecotourism is growing tremendously.
The most popular activity in Africa’s ecotourism is the Safari tours.
These tours offer the tourists the opportunity to see wildlife like elephants, gazelles, lions, tigers, buffaloes, cheetahs and many others.
Among the important destinations for safari tours is Kenya.
The rich rain forests of Rwanda and Zaire are other important ecotourism destinations.
These rain forests are home to several endangered primates, like the mountain gorillas.
Ecotourism is also becoming popular in Southeast Asia.
Places like Malaysia, Thailand and the Philippines are developing tourism programmes that are based on environmental conservation and protection.
Just like regions covered by rainforests, Southeast Asia is home to wild flora and fauna (Buchholz, 1998, P.11).
3.3 Ecotourism and Sustainable Development There have been concerns about ecotourism, and these concerns and interest in ecotourism have resulted in many conferences.
These conferences are held to inform the general public, tourism professionals and ecologists about the advantages of ecotourism.
These conferences are avenues for providing advice and suggestions on how to run a successful ecotourism attraction.
For example, a resolution of the UN General Assembly in 1989 led to the UN Conference on Environment and Development (UNED) popularly known as the Earth Summit which was held at Rio de Janeiro, Brazil in 1992.
This summit focused on the environment and development, with tourism being the key to accomplishing 79 sustainable development throughout.
The summit produced Agenda 21.
This agenda addresses issues that were relevant to the environment and sustainable development (see Steiguer, 2005, P.9).
At this summit, the importance of conserving the environment and its resources was stressed by the then Prime Minister of Norway, Gro Harlem Brundtland, when he said “progress in many fields, too little progress in most fields, and no progress at all in some fields”.
There was another world conference on sustainable Tourism, held in Spain in 1995.
This conference was specifically to deal with tourism and it resulted in the Charter of sustainable Tourism.
It recognized the objective of developing a tourism industry that meets economic expectations and environmental requirements.
This objective also respects the social and physical structure of the location and even the local population.
The conference also emphasizes that environmentally and culturally vulnerable spaces, both now and in the future should be given special priority.
Sustainable tourism, especially ecotourism, can be a main source of worldwide promotion of sustainable development geared toward tourists and communities in all countries (Farguharson, 1992, p.10).
The trends in tourism and travel will be discussed in this segment.
These trends are that ecotourism, sustainable tourism and heritage tourism will continue to grow in importance.
Globally, the number of tourist arrivals will continue to increase by about 8 percent per year, topping one billion by 2010.
There will be an increase in government recognition on the importance of tourism, not only as an economic force, but also as a social, cultural force of increasing significance (see also Grossman and Krueger, 1995, p.12; Anthony, 1996, p.9).
Now there are more bilateral treaties that are being signed.
These treaties will make it easier for tourists to obtain visas to visit other countries.
Promotion and development of tourism is gradually changing hands from the public sector to the private sector.
Marketing partnerships and corporate alliances will continue to increase and employment prospects will continue to improve.
4.0 CONCLUSION Ecotourism, also known as adventure tourism or nature travel, has been in existence for about two decades.
Ecotourism has been described as responsible travel to natural areas, that conserve the environment as well as sustains the well being of the local people.
Most of the most popular ecotourism destinations are located in underdeveloped and developing countries.
Vacationers are now becoming more adventurous and are visiting more remote places.
Some of the most successful examples of ecotourism can be found in Central America, the Caribbean, Africa and Nepal.
In Africa, ecotourism is growing at a tremendous 80 rate.
The most popular activities are the safari tours.
These tours give visitors the opportunity to see wildlife like elephants, gazelles, lions, tigers and buffaloes at a close range.
World conferences have also been provided to advice and suggest ways of running successful ecotourism attractions.
An example of such conference held, was the conference on sustainable Tourism, held in Spain in 1995.
5.0 SUMMARY Ecotourism is a key tool in achieving sustainable development which implies meeting the needs of the present without comprising the ability of the future generations to meet their own needs.
Ecotourism provides tourists with new knowledge about a certain natural area and the culture that is found within that area.
Ecotourism helps improve the local economy and the conservative efforts of that locally.
Examples of the most successful ecotourism destinations around the world are found in, Central America, the Caribbean, Africa and Nepal.
Mass tourism has proven to be destructive to ecotourism, that is why ecotourism projects are developed on a small scale, and world conferences are held regarding issues on the environment and sustainable development.
6.0 Tutor – Marked Assignment 1.
What is ecotourism?
2.
Discuss the positive and negative details that mass tourism can have on a country in consideration of tourism pollution and ecotourism.
3.
What do you understand by sustainable tourism?
SELF-ASSESSMENT EXERCISE 10: Question: Why is Ecotourism regarded as the latest trend of tourism?
81 7.0 References/Further Readings Depiah, k. a.
(1996), “Race, culture, identity misunderstood connections”.
In K. Anthough Apiah Amy Gutmann, eds Colour consciousness: The political morality of Race.
Princeton: Princeton University Press.
Barbier, E. B.
(1997); The concept of sustainable Economic Development.
Environment Conservation, 14(2), 101-10.
Costanza, R., Daly, H. E. and Bartholomew, J.
A.
(1991) Goals, agenda and policy recommendations for ecological economics.
In R. Costanza (ed).
Ecological Economics.
The Science and Management of Sustainability.
New York: Columbia University Press.
Daily, G. (ed) (1997).
Natures services-societal dependence on Natural Ecosystems, Washington DC: Island Press Desteigguer, J. E. (1997).
The Age of Environmentalism, New York: McGraw Hill.
Grossman, G. M and Krueger, A.
B.
(1995); Economic Growth and environment.
Quarterly Journal of Economics, 112-78.
Muthin, D. and Satteredwaite, D. (1990); Human Settlements and Sustainable Development Nairobi UN Centre for Human settlements (habitat).
UNEP (1995); Major International Environmental Relevant to industry 1972-1995.
Industry and Environment.
18(4), December, 1995 82 TSM 403: CULTURAL TOURISM UNIT 11: Tourism Attractions in Africa (A Case Study of Nigeria and Kenya) 1.0 INTRODUCTION Nigeria is the largest of the West African coast states.
Its population of over 140 million people is the largest in Africa.
With an area of about 923,77 square kilometers, it is the 13th largest state on the continent.
It is bordered on the south by the Gulf of Guinea, on the west by the Republic of Benin on the North by the Republic of Niger and on the East by the Republics of Chad and Cameroon.
Nigeria is on the lower part of the great African continental Plateau, which slopes slowly downward from south and east to northwest.
Nigeria itself consists of several eroded surfaces, occurring as Plateaus at elevation of 2,000 feet, 3,000 feet and 4,000 feet above sea level.
The coastal areas, including the Niger Delta, are covered with young solf rocks, commonly found in the Lake Chad Basin, and the western Parts of Sokoto region.
Gently undulating plains which become water logged during the rainy season, are found in these areas.
In most part of the western states, and in the central part of the northern states the underlying rocks are old and hard rocks.
The characteristic landforms in the central part of the northern states consist of high plains with broad shallow valleys, dotted with numerous hills or inselbergs.
Prominent relief forms include the Jos Plateau and the Biu Plateau, both of which are dotted with many extinct volcanic cones.
One of the best tourist attractions in Africa and indeed the world is found in Kenya.
Kenya has one of the best Safari and is also among the best destinations for ecotourism.
As a country, Kenya derives a good part of its revenue from tourism.
Kenya is known for its abundant wild life.
The beauty and variety of the landscape, which include snowcapped mountains, grassy plains, and gently rolling hills, exert the compelling attractions for the cinema screen or in the pages of literature.
Kenya is situated in East Africa.
It is bordered on the North by Ethiopia and Sudan, on the west by Uganda, on the South by Tanzania and on the east by the Indian Ocean and Somali Democratic Republic.
It has a total area of 582,646 square kilometers.
Africa is the second largest continent in the world, being only smaller than Asia.
It is about three times the size of Europe and covers about one fifth of the total land surface of the world.
The continent is bounded on the north by the Mediterranean 83 Sea, on the west by the Atlantic Ocean, on the east by the Red sea and on the south by the mingling waters of the Atlantic and Indian Oceans.
The whole of Africa can be considered as a vast Plateau rising steeply from narrow coastal strips and consisting of very ancient crystalline rocks.
The continent has a number of volcanoes which include Mount Kenya.
African vegetation develops in direct response to the interacting effects of rainfall.
Africa is the richest in large ungulates (hoofed animals) and fresh water fish.
There are about 90 species of ungulates and 60 of the species are carnivorous.
Some of the animals are now endemic (i.e.
peculiar to a locality).
The primates include some 45 species of old world monkeys as well as the world’s largest ape.
South of the Sahara the bird life includes some 1,480 resident species, to which must be added another 275 species that are migrants.
These total perhaps 2,000,000,000.
2.0 OBJECTIVES At the end of this unit, the student should be able to • Understand the importance of geographical topography, vegetation and animal life to culture tourism • Know some tourism destinations in Africa.
• discuss the tourism potentials of Africa 3.0 MAIN CONTENT 3.1 Assop Falls Assop Falls is a very good and exciting tourist destination in Nigeria.
It is located in Jos, Plateau State in the North central part of Nigeria.
Plateau State is a rocky place and it also has the highest peak in Nigeria.
The rocky topography is part of what makes the state a great tourism destination.
The rocky topography also makes it possible for the falls in the state which include the Kwa Falls, Kura Falls and Assop falls just to mention a few.
The peaks and highplanes on the Plateau are important water catchment areas, providing water to the falls.
Assop falls is a few kilometers from Jos, the capital city of Plateau state.
The road that goes past the entrance of the café, leads to Abuja, the city capital of Nigeria, which is about two and a half hours drive from Jos.
The Assop falls resort has a couple of adjoining picnic roundels and from there, the sound of the falls can be heard.
From the top of the falls one can admire the beauty and views of the Jos Plateau, and also the amazing falls below.
At the lower level one can see the full force of the water cascading out over the rocks.
The gorge created by the water is lined with boulders overgrown with green fed by the constant mist of the falls.
Water shoots out from the precipice and plunges down into the valley below.
The sound of the water tumbling down is like a constant roar and it forms a kind of mist.
The resort is a 84 very good place for picnics; it offers a very serene atmosphere and breathe taking views.
It also provides a good terrain for people who love hiking, but it is usually advisable for hikers to bring foot wears suitable for rocky shore time.
The resort is also an excellent place to swim.
Items that one may need at the resort should include a swim suit as well as a towel.
The resort also offers restaurant facilities for people who might have come without food for picnics (http://www.nigerianfield.org/abuja_files/assoptalls, 2005.htm) 3.1.1 Obudu Mountain Resort The Obudu cattle Ranch now known as the Obudu Mountain Resort is found in the Obaniku local government area of the northern part of Cross River State.
It is an area where the wonderful work of nature can be appreciated with its awesome and almost indescribable views.
It is about 30 minutes drive from town and is about 332km, an equivalent of about five hours drive, from Calabar.
The Obudu Mountain Resort also has provision for access by air with its small airstrip and presidential helipad.
The airstrip now attracts flights from Lagos, Abuja and Port- Harcourt via Calabar to the strip during peak periods.
Available is a cable car m which brings guests from the resort entrance to the bottom of the mountain to the ranch at the hill top.
It is claimed to be one of the longest cable car facilities in the world.
At the ranch is located a breath taking water park with facilities for swimming and for water slides for tourists.
Other attractions include cattle on the ranch which are bred on the Ranch for their fresh milk, butter, meat and cheese.
Therefore, horses, water fall, golf course, canopy wall, organized bonfires and beautiful views of mountains and the country – side.
There is also a honey and yoghurt factory and the Tinapa Resort can also be a part of the package for conference centres, as well as bungalows and chalets of varying sizes and styles to accommodate a tourist budget.
The presence of well rated restaurants also ensures that tourists get quality meals while at the ranch.
The ranch community further offers a medical facility, night club, school, police post for the security of tourists’ lives and properties, and also a staff quarters for their staff.
If you are looking for a place to go with a special person, a business – oriented retreat, family holiday or just a need to take time off your busy schedule, Obudu Cattle Ranch is the perfect place (htt://www.obuducatleranch.imf).
3.2 Yankari Game Reserves The Yankari National Park is the premier game reserve in Nigeria.
Yankari Park and Wikki Warm Springs are located around the Gagi River, approximately 11/ 2 hours by road south east of Bauchi town.
The beauty and size of the Yankari 85 Game Reserve make it the most popular reserve in Nigeria.
It was set up in 1956 and opened to the public in 1962, the main game viewing areas of the reserve are open all year round.
Japanese, Western Europeans, Americans and Southeast Asian tourists visit this park in abundance.
The reserve covers 2.058sq km of savanna woodland and is well – stocked with elephants, baboons, water bucks, bushbucks, oribi, crocodiles, hypopotamus, roan antelopes, buffalos and various types of monkeys Lions are occasionally spotted as well, despite their natural camouflage.
The best time to visit is between November and May, when tourists are likely to see more game since the dense vegetation has dried out and the animals congregate around the rivers.
The Wikki Warm spring is one of the best features of the game reserves.
Flood – lit at night, it is wonderful after a hot day’s game viewing to relax in the warm water.
The spring gushes out from under a cliff where the water is at least 6ft deep.
The water has bathing area that extends for 600 ft. to an open area.
The park is inhabited by a variety of birds, including the huge saddlebill stork, goliath heron, baterleur eagle, vultures, kingfish and bee eaters (file://E:/yankari_game_reserve.htm) .
3.2.1 Mount Kenya National Park Mount Kenya is an imposing extinct volcano dominating the landscape of the Kenya highlands, east of the rift valley.
Mount Kenya lies about 140km north, north east of Nairobi with its flanks across the equator.
The mountain has two peaks, the peaks are Batian which is 5200m and Nelion 5188 metres high.
The mountain slopes are cloaked in forest, bamboo, scrub and Moorland, giving way on the high central peaks to rocks, ice and snow.
Mount Kenya is an important water catchment area, supplying the Tana and the northern emaso Ngiro systems.
The park includes a variety of habitats ranging from higher forest, bamboo, alpinje moorlands, glaciers, turns and morains.
The park was inscribed by UNESCO as a world Heritage site in 1997 and is also a Biosphere Reserve.
It covers 715km2.
The park has peaks consisting of all the ground above 3200m with two small salients extending lower down to 2450m along the Sirimon and Naro Mora tracks.
Surrounding the park is mount Kenya National Reserve with an area of approximately 2095 km2 (http://www.mbunisafaris.com/date/attractions/specific/mount-le) The common vegetation varies with altitude and rainfall and there is a rich alpine and sub-alpine flora.
The vegetation is mainly dry upland forest comprising of croton associations.
Plants like juniperus procera and podocarpus spp.
are predominant in the drier parts of the lower zone (below 2,50m0m).
The lower part also has rainfall between 875 and 1400mm.
Higher altitudes have a peak of about 2,500m to 3000m with rainfall of over 2000mm/per year.
This high altitudes are 86 dominated by a dense belt of bamboo arundinaria alpine on south-eastern slopes.
There are mosaic of bamboo and podocarpus milapiamis with bamboo at intermediate elevations and podocarpus at higher and lower elavions.
Towards the west and north of the mountain, it becomes progressively smaller and less dominant.
There are also areas in zones of maximum rainfall with up to 2,4000mm a year.
Above 3,000m temperatures are cold and become a more important factor, tree stature declines and podocarpus is replaced by Hypericum spp.
A more open canopy here results in a more developed understory.
Many of the trees are festooned with mosses.
Grassy glades are common especially on ridges.
Higher altitudes between 3,000m and 3500m are characterized by shrubs with small leaves like African sage, protea and Helicrsum 3.3 Nairobi National Park The Nairobi National park is unique by being the only protected area in the world with a variety of animals and birds close to a capital city.
The park is a principal attraction for visitors to Nairobi.
The park also serves many residents and citizens living in the city.
The park has a diversity of environments with characteristic fauna and flora.
Open grass plains with scattered acacia bush are predominant.
The western side has a highland dry forest and a permanent river with a riverine forest in the south.
In addition, there are stretches of broken bush country and deep, rocky valleys and gorges with scrub and long grass.
Man-made dams have also added a further habitat, favourable to certain species of birds and other aquatic biota(life forms).
The dams also attract water dependent herbivopres during the dry season.
The park has a rich and diverse birdlife with 400 species recorded.
However all species are not always present and some are seasonal.
Northern migrants pass through the park primarily during late march through April Nairobi National Park is one of the most successful in Kenya’s rhino sanctuaries that is already generating a stock for reintroduction in the species former range and other upcoming sanctuaries.
Because of this success, it has become one of the few parks where visitors can be certain of seeing a black rhino in its natural habitat.
To the south of the park are where the famous Athi-Kapiti plains and the kitengela migration and dispersal area.
These are vital areas for herbivores dispersal during the rains.
Major attractions in the park include, animal wild beast and zebra migration in July/August, black rhinoceros, diverse bird life, large predators like lions, leopard, hyena and cheetah.
There are aggregations of large herbivores like eland, buffalo, zebra and the wild beast.
Other major attractions are the walking trails at the hippo pools, and the Nairobi Safari walk and the orphanage.
Although there are no accommodation facilities in the park, there are well developed accommodation 87 facilties available in the city and the closest accommodation facilities are the masai lodge (http://www.mbunisafaris.com/data/attractions/specific /Nairobi).
Aberdaves National Park The aberdares are an isolated volcanic range that forms the eastern wall of the rift valley.
It runs roughly 100km north south between Nairobi and Thomson’s falls.
The soils are red and of volcanic origin, but also rich in organic matter.
There are two main peaks, the 00 Donyo Lesatima, which is about 3,999m high and the Kinangop that is about 3,906m high.
These two peaks are separated by a long saddle of alpine moorland.
The topography is diverse with deep ravines that cut through the forested streams and waterfalls in the region.
The aberdares are an important water catchment area providing water to the Tana an Athi rivers and part of the central rift and northern drainage basins.
The National Park lies mainly above the tree line running along the 10,000ft contour with some forest and scrub at lower attitude in the salient area near Nyeri with the boundary running down to the 7000ft contour.
The unusual vegetation, rugged terrain, streams and waterfalls combine to create an area of great scenic beauty in the park.
The climate is usually misty and rainy throughout much of the year, with precipitation varying from around 100mm yearly on the north western slopes to as much as 3000mm in the south east.
Heavy rainfall occurs through most of the year (http://www.mbunesafaris.com.dataattractions/specific /aberdare).
The park is readily accessible on tarmac from Nyeri and Nairo Moru on the eastern side (160kms from Nairobi).
A road crosses the park to connect with another from Naivasha and north kinangop on the West.
The park is also accessible by mweiga airstrip next to the park headquarters or`1 Nyeri airstrip which is 12 km from Mweiga headquarters.
Major attractions include lesatima peak, kinangop peak, waterfalls, walks in the moorlands, twin hills, elephant hills and table mountains.
It also has elephants and the second largest population of black rhinos.
In addition to tourism destinations discussed in this unit, it is also relevant to learn more about some facts about landmarks in Africa and also know some tourism sites that have become synonymous with the global or worldwide tourism.
For instance, among the greatest natural wonders of the world, is the pyramid of Egypt, located in North Africa.
The pyramids of Egypt have been existing for centuries and are still very much around.
These pyramids attract tourists, scholars, historians and most importantly archeologists from all over the world.
The mount Kilimanjaro located in Tanzania is the highest point on the continent, with a peak of 19,340 feet above sea level.
The lake Victoria is the largest of all the lakes in Africa.
It occupies a shallow depression on a Plateau 3,720 feet above sea level between the major branches of the rift valley its greatest 88 depth is only about 270 feet but its area of 26,828 square miles makes it the third largest of the world’s great lakes.
It is also among the largest falls in Africa.
Also, the African continent has the largest desert in the world -the Sahara desert.
The desert cuts across about seven or eight countries in North Africa.
Sometimes tourists interested in ecotourism visit some parts of it.
Another desert found in Africa, though relatively small is the Kalahari desert located in southwestern Botswana.
Its ecological balance is relatively unaltered.
It shows close adaption to topography, soil type and drainage.
Thus, there is a response to climatic and other influences.
The fluctuation and varying extent of African vegetation types have led both to the diversification of and the emergence of distinct species of native plants and animals.
At the same time, such variations have largely controlled or affected the activities of man.
4.0 CONCLUSION Africa is the second largest continent in the world and consists of about one fifth of the total land surface of the world.
The Mediterranean sea is on the north side of the continent while the Red sea is on the east.
The Atlantic ocean is on the west side while on the south is the mingling waters of the Atlantic and Indian Ocean.
Vegetations are divided into zones.
They include the tropical rain forest, mountain forest, woodland, wooded grassland, thornbush, sub-desert and desert zone.
Animal life is very rich in Africa and this also draws a lot of tourism activities in the country.
The country is the richest when it comes to ungyulates, with about 90 species and also the riches continent in freshwater fish.
The birdlife is also very rich with about 1,480 resident species and migrants from paleartic migrants totaling about 2000,000,000.
5.0 SUMMARY As the second largest continent in the world, Africa offers a lot of tourism attractions.
Because of its vast land different land farms and topography, and also various vegetations, it has influenced tourists, especially ecotourism.
The continent is also blessed with a very rich animal life.
It has the largest collection of ungulates, i.e.
hoofed mammals.
It is also the richest continent with freshwater fish.
The birdlife has about 1,480 resident species and migrant birds totalling about 2000,000,000.
89 6.0 Tutor-Marked Assignment 1.
List the tourism attractions that have been outlined in this unit.
2.
What importance does the geographical topography play on tourism in Africa?
3.
What are the unique types of animals found in Africa and what roles do they play in tourism in Africa.
SELF-ASSESSMENT EXERCISE 11: Question: Give an example of a safari located in Africa and discuss its features and majored attractions 7.0 References/Further Readings -http://www.mbunisafris.com/data attractions.vrt http://www.mbunisafaris.com/data/attractions/specific/mount_ke http://www.mbunisafaris.com/data./attractions/specific/Aberdare http://www.mbunisafaris.com/data/attractions/specific/Nairobi_N - File://E:/yankari_game_reserve.htm http://www.nigerianfield.org/abuja_files/AssopFalls2005htm 90 TSM 403: CULTURAL TOURISM UNIT 12: Passenger Transportation 1.0 INTRODUCTION Societies generally suffer from many problems and a variety of these problems share one common characteristic, which is the movement of people and goods.
Specifically, passenger transportation affects the society than does any other single problem.
It is indeed an important integrated part of rural, urban, national and international problem.
Here, examples of these considerations are important.
One, passenger transportation is a critically important part of the whole transportation problems of a country and it affects basically almost every aspect of transportation.
To illustrate this point, the example of the advent of mass transit system in Nigeria, which solved most of the problems of rural – urban transportation, intra-and inter-inter-city transportation as well as the problem of airline fares coupled with performance problems as a result of delays and passenger frustration.
Two, passenger, transportation is a vary important aspect of the society’s environmental problems.
For example, highway and street congestions, noise pollution, air and water pollution are both directly and indirectly related to the movement of people (Donohoe, 2006, Pp.
111-11112).
Three, passenger transportation is important because of its sociological impact on the society, for instance, mobility and/or the lack of it affects social groups adversely.
This is because interaction between and among groups has a direct bearing and ratio to the means and ways of people’s movement, particularly in terms of character and structure of neighbourhoods, localities and regions.
Furthermore, passenger transportation is one of the constraints to all facets of and development; planning local, urban, regional and national development.
It is also at the same time one of the most useful means of development.
This is because it is considered as part of the social overhead capital that is extremely important for growth and development.
Five, passenger transportation is one of the most important challenges faced by the urban, regional and national planners, engineers, geographers and public administrators.
Six, passenger transport is an important part of energy crisis because it consumes a substantial amount of petroleum sources of energy and also energy from all sources that are involved in transportation.
Finally, the study of passenger transportation can be approach from the prospective of about seven different academic disciplines.
These are business and economics, civil engineering, administration, geography, sociology, architecture and technology.
91 2.0 OBJECTIVES After studying this unit you will: • Explain the importance of passenger transportation • Enumerate the problems of passenger transportation.
• Analyse the future of passenger transportation 3.0 MAIN CONTENT 3.1 Systems of Passenger Transportation From time immemorial, mankind has always travelled.
And many journeys are usually made with a specific purpose in mind such as traveling to work, to school, for trips, to sports and games, to religious sites and centres, and visits to relatives.
But the propensity to travel is largely to experience the unknown, to see people, new places and things of interest.
However, passenger transportation or people travel has always been on the lead followed closely by the transportation of goods or freight which is extremely important.
Transportation whether for business, economic, military, engineering and political view points, has always pioneered the development of routes and also led to the development of technology.
As contained in their book.
Transportation and politics, Kiphing and Wolf (1993, P. 136) noted that “transportation is civilization: and that civilization after civilization has either prospered or failed due to its transportation policies and the existence of geographic “barriers and corridors”.
Bray (1989, P.145) pointed out that while spreading ideas; the interchange of cultures, the knowledge of new and previous unknown peoples, customers, and tribes, passenger transportation is indeed the key element.
This assertion points to the reason why passenger transportation is a pivotal ingredient to the development and enhancement of tourism.
Passenger transportation has also played a major role for military operations and location of cities and regions.
Within a region for instance, passenger transportation has provided the unifying force that “ties and binds”.
Furthermore, communication and interchange, and cultural and economic interchange between and among people are all unifying forces of all regions and indeed the world over.
These have been made possible by passenger transportation.
Passenger transportation is important as a unifying factor and force particularly in regional alliances, especially where the association and grouping of countries is based on transportation links.
Excellent examples of this are the Economic Community of West African States (ECOWAS), the European Union, the former Communist bloc alliance and the North Atlantic Treaty Organizations, (NATO) 92 whose existence is based on closely knit transportation of several modes.
Finally, passenger transportation uses quite a large amount of natural resources, especially energy sources.
The energy crisis of the 1970s reminds us of the importance of the automobile mode of transportation when airlines were faced with the problem of aviation fuel resulting to unusual frequency of air services between and among cities.
This was particularly noticeable in developed countries.
Based on the importance of passenger transportation it is evidently clear that urban development has been spurred by the trend of the public transportation systems where large populations of people congregate and live.
Lagos, Abuja, Kano, Ibadan are good examples.
3.2 Problems of Passenger Transportation The problems of passenger transportation can be categorized into four broad areas.
These are marketing, urban transportation and social benefits versus social costs.
Passenger transportation marketing can be understood as a total but integrated system of activities with a view to achieving an effective relationship between the needs of the present and the potential services available by the carriers.
As pointed out by Farris and Harding (2005, P. 151) the relationship between carriers and markets can be achieved through an efficient mix of service.
These are the promotional and distribution plans and strategies including the utilization of the available pricing alternatives under conditions regulation.
Here, the marketing is significant because of its relevance to both the private firms and public agencies that are responsible for providing passenger transportation services.
In recent times, marketing has become critically significant to the planners and developers of passenger transportation for several reasons.
One, marketing is the main revenue source of all business concerns.
Two, there has been a substantial pressure exerted on both profits and operating costs mainly because of the energy crisis of the 1970s as well as the cost of labour and capital.
Three, the enormous task of marketing research work that needs to be carried out in order to provide the current and useful information that can facilitate communication between the providers of transportation service and their marketers.
Finally, the need for the marketing function to continuously provide the necessary link between the transportation services providers and the potential markets as can be dictated by the dynamics of market conditions (Harcock and Robert, 2003, P. 184).
93 Figure 12.1: The dynamics of a typical market process CARRIER OBJECTIVES MARKETING OBJECTIVES MARKET SEGMENTATION MARKET AND SELECTION OF OVERALL KNOWLEDGE TARGET MARKETS MARKETING STRATEGY The Processes Begins Here The Market for passenger Transportation (constantly changing) Market Research External Environmental Feedback Source: Adapted From Harcock and Robert, 2003 Figure 3 depicts a typical market process drawn and presented in such a way and manner that relate to the various operational subsystems to the functioning of the entire marketing system.
Historically there has been a direct and intimate link between man’s ability to create an effective urban environment and the availability of transportation facilities.
The availability of transportation facilities has contributed immensely to the development of the urban areas by stimulating trade and commerce between and among various urban areas, thus creating employment and generating income.
In addition, there was an attraction of population to the urban areas which created more demand in the domestic sector and led to the growth of businesses that provided quite a variety of goods and services (Berry et al, 2003, 18).
However, urbanization has resulted to a complex array of transportation problems particularly as they relate to the movement of people.
Such problems have included the growth of the urban population, metropolitan 94 areas, scarce urban land as it has been consumed by roads and parking spaces, and the health of urban residents that is being threatened by the pollution of the atmosphere.
Given the problems of mass transportation, a number of potential solutions have been proffered.
These include thorough fare congestion in which many mass- transit systems use their own rights of way and not competing with automobiles for spaces.
Also, the availability of mass or public transportation facilities means increased occupational and recreational opportunities, thus enhancing the tourist industry.
With regard to the social benefits and social costs, the former can be understood as those direct and indirect gains realized by the general public as a result of private economic activities.
For example, the transportation network anywhere in the world leads to rapid and sometimes inexpensive movement of people and goods within and between geographic regions.
Such gains are usually referred to as “externalities” by economists.
On the other hand, social costs would include such a range of direct and indirect losses incurred by the general public due to private economic activity.
These include air, and water pollution, damage to health, databasement of property value, deterioration of the environment that can lead to chronic, and severe poverty, especially in developing countries such as Nigeria.
3.3 The Future of Passenger Transportation and Policy Problems Policy problems are usually inherent in every societal system of course including the passenger transportation system.
Passenger transportation policy can be understood as specific goals and objectives that deal with operational patterns e.g.
the policy of over hauling requires a mass transit buses after every 150,000 kilometres.
Another example is to consider the general goals and objectives that deal with the overall concepts and systems based on policies such as: i) a national policy that would create a reliable passenger transportation system at a least cost; ii) an urban policy that would create adequate and efficient transportation system for the present and the future; and, iii)a social policy that can sustain an effective and efficient passenger transportation system that would be capable of giving consumers maximum satisfaction.
These operational policy proposals though may not necessarily be mutually exclusive but they seem to complement and/or supplement each other.
In sum, the future of passenger transportation and future problems can be regarded as the need 95 for national goals, budget goals and above all, the use of long-term planning and implementation.
All of these should be holistic in nature and to a certain extent mandatory.
4.0 CONCLUSION This unit identifies that passenger transportation affects the society more than any single problem.
Five important considerations of the passenger transportation are highlighted.
In terms of travels by man, it shows that man has been travelling from time immemorial through the passenger transportation system for specific reasons which have included work, travel to games and leisure.
Also, passenger transportation has led to the transportation of other things such as freight and others.
Passenger transportation has been instrumental to the development and enhancement of civilization, businesses, technology, the interchange of cultures and also as a unifying factor and force in regional alliance.
The unit also highlights the importance of the future of the passenger transportation and its problems indicating that change is sometimes distasteful and always uncertain, nevertheless society must always learn to live with the future as future means change.
And learning to live with change is a major task involved in transportation and certainly a problem of passenger transportation policy.
5.0 SUMMARY The unit has highlighted the fact that passenger transportation is very important to human society as it has been responsible for the development of man in all his ramifications.
The unit has also shown that the importances of marketing to those providing passenger transportation services which have always been rendered through a system of integrated activities are unquestionable.
But the future of the passenger transportation can only be guaranteed through operational policies that would include national goals, budget goals and long-term planning and implementation.
6.0 TUTOR-MARKED ASSIGNMENT 1. why is passenger transportation important to society?
2.
Identify the problems of passenger transportation 3. what is the future of passenger transportation and the tourist industry?
96 SELF-ASSESSMENT EXERCISE 12: Question: State the various interconnected and interacting systems of passenger transportation.
7.0 References/Further Readings Berry, D. S. and Shuldiner, P. W., Blomme, G. W. and Jones, J. H. (2003).
The technology of Urban Transportation, Evanston, Illinois: worthwestern University Press.
Bray, W. P. (2003); Transport and Communications, London: Weidenfeld & Nicholson, LTD. Donohoe, M. (2006); Causes and health consequences of environmental degradation and social justice: Social Sciences 1(1111) 111 – 112 Holloway, R. J. Hancock, R. S. (2003) Marketing in a change environment, New York; John Willey and Sons.
Kiphing, N. and Wolf, R. I.
(2003).
Transportation and Politics, New York: D. Van Nostrand Company Inc. 97 TSM 403: CULTURAL TOURISM UNIT 13: Air Travel 1.0 INTRODUCTION On both the Atlantic and pacific, the growth of travel has been entirely on air travel.
Steamships that accounted for about 30 percent of the passenger, arriving the Caribbean in the 1950s and 1960s accounted for about 1 percent.
In the hinter land, the airplane has successfully captured the long-travel passengers market from the railroads in many places.
People usually leave their cars to avoid driving several hours and also in order to save time.
In some of the less developed parts of the world where rail and in some cases road network and facilities have been inadequate, the transportation shift has been directly monopolized by air travel.
Travel by air has a lot of advantages that have captured the attention of travellers and tourists.
These advantages includes speed, comfort and convenience.
The speed of air travel has increased the number of tourists and the cost per kilometers has also done the same, thereby forcing the tourist industry to evaluate its innovation to meet the growing demand and population of tourists.
The world scheduled air transportation industry has achieved a rapid growth.
It has grown from an estimate of nine million passengers in 1945 to about several billions a few years back.
The same thing applies to the volume of freight which is up from a few thousand tones in 1945 to about millions of thousand tones today, and about 40 percent of the world manufactured exports are flown by air.
The air transport industry has produced about twenty eight million jobs as far back as in 1998.
Now the average air traveller pays about 70 percent less than what he or she was paying twenty years ago, due to competition and deregulation.
2.0 OBJECTIVES After reading and studying this unit, you should be able to: i. outline the importance and advantages of air travel.
ii.
discuss the impact air travel has on the hospitality and tourism industry.
iii.
analyse the development of air travel through the years 98 3.0 MAIN CONTENT 3.1 The Invention of the airplane and development of air travel The airplane was invented by the Wright brothers, who had enjoyed gliding as a hobby.
They decided to develop their gliders by fitting a light engine to one of the gliders, and by 1903, they tested their first air craft that lasted about twelve seconds and covered a distance of 120 feet.
About six years later, that was around 1909, through more developments an airplane was able to go across the English Channel.
The development of the aircraft continued with each passing day with man intent on conquering the sky, and in 1919 the first passenger service on air began shuttling from London to Paris (Economic Research highlights from World Tourism and Travel Council http://www.wttc.org Before the invention of the airplane the ship was the only means of travel between two continents and this was a very slow way to travel as travellers spent weeks and sometimes months on water before getting to their destinations.
With the invention of the airplane, the growth of travel both on the Atlantic and the pacific has been entirely on air travel and in present times almost all the transoceanic passenger travel is done by air.
There has been a rapid development in air travel and currently airlines assume a major role in travel marketing.
There has also been a lot of advertising on the part of airlines that exceed other travel industries.
3.2 The Impact of Air Travel on the Hospitality and Tourism Industry The impact the air travel had and is still having on the hospitality and travel industry has been really tremendous.
One of the major impacts is the amount of unbelievable speed with some aircrafts travel.
An example can be found in the first supersonic aircraft; the Concorde, which is believed to travel with the speed of light.
The airplane is so fast and can carry a lot of people and cargo at the same time that it became the most convenient means of transportation and most suitable for business men.
The first Boeing 707 that came into service in 1954 had a capacity to carry one hundred and eleven passengers over a range of about six thousand (6,000) miles at a cruising speed of about six hundred (600) miles per hour, while the Concorde had a cruising speed of one thousand four hundred and fifty (1,450) miles per hour, thereby greatly reducing time.
An example is a comparison between the departure time and the arrival time from London to New York between the Boeing 747 and the Concorde.
A 747 flight leaving at 11am London time will arrive at 1.40pm New York time.
While on a Concorde a flight leaving at 11:am London 99 time will arrive at 9:50am.
New York time.
This unbelievable speed in air travel has had a lot of impact in the travel business and has also thrown out challenges to the other sectors of the industry.
That is why the train/rail system introduced the bullet train with the speed of about 250 miles per hour which is nowhere compared to a Boeing 707 of 1954.
As noted in the concluding part of 3.1, there has been no sector in the travel industry that has assumed the role in which the air line has assumed in terms of travel marketing and travel advertising.
The air transport has invested a lot in daily papers, billboards, internet, magazines and the electronic media.
These investments in advertising and public relations exceed that of any travel institution (Mayo and Javis, 2001, P.11).
3.3 The Importance and Advantages of Air Travel Air travel has enhanced almost all spheres of human activities in a lot of positive ways.
It has also promoted a lot of activities from the hospitality industry, transport industry, education, careers and any kind of business entity one can think about.
Also, transport has reduced the cost per kilometer travel compared to what one would pay for the same kilometer on other modes of transport and this has enabled millions of people to become tourists.
The impact of the growing number of tourists has affected the growth of the hospitality industry, thus hotels, restaurants, and other recreational attractions keep expanding to keep up with the demand of these tourists, see Ayear, (1998, P.28).
Speed, comfort, efficiency and convenience have over the years been the major assets of air travel.
These assets have attracted conglomerates, chief executives and the average businessman and woman to patronize air travel.
It has also made their businesses easier and more profitable.
The speed of air travel enables businessmen and women to embark on inter-continental trips for overnight business meetings, conferences and seminars without much ado.
It has also made imports and exports easier and faster, and thus has made technology reach even the remotest parts of the world (McDonald, 2003, P.30).
3.3.1 Air Travel and Safety In air travel, it is important to know some facts that might seem unimportant but are still relevant to the development of air travel and its safety.
In 1944, an international conference was held in Chicago, United States of America to establish international air routes and services.
American and European delegates disagreed about how much to restrict competition.
The Americans pushed for the unrestricted competition.
However, seventy airlines from forty nations rectified an 100 important agreement of transportation rates which led to the creation of the internal Air Transportation Association (IATA) as the major trade association of the world’s airlines.
Through international agreements on financial, legal, technical and traffic matters, the worldwide system of our travel became possible.
In the year 1946, American and European representatives met again in Bermuda to work out a compromise.
The Bermuda agreement by which countries changed benefits, was to later become a model for bilateral negotiations.
The six freedom of the air, agreed upon in Bermuda were as follows: • The right to fly across another nation’s territory; • The right to land in another country for noncommercial purposes; • The right to pick up passengers and cargo destined for the carriers’ home country from a foreign country; • The right to transport passengers and cargo from one foreign country to another; and • The right of an airplane to carry traffic from a foreign country to the home nation of that airline and beyond to another foreign nation.
4.0 CONCLUSION Air travel has transcended any other mode of transportation in the transport industry.
It has enhanced the growth and profit margins of other business ventures, from conglomerates to entrepreneurs.
It has also had an impact on tourists and hotels.
Tourists have the opportunity to now travel to different destinations in shorter times, farther distances and at less cost per kilometer, thus not giving the hospitality industry any choice than to expand its business with better innovations that will accommodate the growing number of tourists.
Currently, airlines assume a major role in travel marketing.
The money invested by the airline on travel advertisement exceeds that of any other institution in the travel industry.
Magazines, television, billboards, radio, newspapers and direct mails are among advertising methods employed.
5.0 SUMMARY Air travel has brought a great change in the activities of the transport business.
Tourism as the world’s largest industry and employer of labour has greatly been affected positively by air travel.
Air travel has also revolutionalized the hospitality and tourist industry by providing rapid, comfortable and economic transportation.
It has also opened an avenue for long distances and international travels to the masses thereby enabling more people to patronize more tourist destinations.
Through expanded use of group tours and chattered flights, this trend will continue to be innovative and will record successful achievements.
101 6.0 Tutor – Marked Assignment 1.
Explain why people are motivated to travel by air.
2.
What is the impact of air travel on the hotel and tourism industry?
SELF-ASSESSMENT EXERCISE 13: Question: Trace the development of air travel and the main trade association of the world’s airline.
7.0 References/Further Readings Aryear, G. (1998); The Travel Agent: Dealer in Dreams, 5th ed.
Englewood Cliffs, New Jersey: Prentice Hall.
Economic Research Highlights from World Travel and Tourism Council.
http://www.wttc.org.
Mayo, E. J. and Javis, L P. (2001).
The Psychology of Leisure Travel: Effective Marketing and Selling of Travel Services.
Bostons: CBI Publishing Company.
McDonald, M. (2003) “USAIR’s Lagow: BA Links Strategic Partnership” Travel Week, August 30, P.30 102 TSM 403: CULTURAL TOURISM Unit 14: Vacation Ownership Tourism 1.0 INTRODUCTION Vacation ownership tourism has become one of the fastest growing segments of the travel and tourism industry, increasing in popularity at the rate of nearly 16 percent each year since 1993.
Vacation ownership tourism can be seen politically as time – share.
Essentially, vacation ownership tourism means a person purchases the use of a unit similar to a condominium for blocks of time, sometimes for weeks.
Time share or vacation ownership can be seen as a two bedroom suite that is owned, rather than a hotel room that is rented for transient nights.
A vacation club, is a travel-and-use” product.
Consumers do not buy a fixed week, unit-size, season, resort, or a number of days to vacation each year.
Points are purchased.
These points represent currency, which is used to access the club’s vacation benefits.
An important advantage to this is the product’s flexibility, especially when tied to a point system.
It is very important to note that vacation clubs are not involved with real-estate ownership in any way, thus the point system ties in well with the hotel marketing programmes, such as those that reward frequent flyers.
Time-share resort developers today include many of the world’s leading hoteliers, publicly held corporations, and independent companies.
Properties that combine vacation ownership resorts with hotels, adventure resorts, and gaming resorts, are among the emerging time-share trends.
The reasons for purchasing most frequently cited by current time-share owners are the high standards of quality accommodations and service at the resorts where they own and exchange, the flexibility offered through the vacation exchange opportunities, and the cost effectiveness of vacation ownership tourism.
Nearly one-third of vacation owners purchase additional intervals after experiencing ownership.
2.0 OBJECTIVES After going through this unit, the student should be able to • discuss the vacation ownership tourism • elaborate on maintenance fees of condominiums • enumerate some advantages of vacation ownership 103 3.0 MAIN CONTENT 3.1 The Growth of vacation Ownership Tourism Vacation ownership tourism offers consumers the opportunity of having fully furnished vacation accommodations in a variety of form, such as weekly intervals or points in points-based systems, for a percentage of the cost of full ownership.
For a one-time purchase price and payment of a yearly maintenance fee, buyers purchase their vacation in perpetuity, i.e.
the property will be there until the day they decide to make use of it.
Buyers can also purchase their vacation for a predetermined number of years.
Vacation owners share both the use and costs of upkeep of their units and the common grounds of the resort property.
Vacation ownership purchases are typically financed through consumer loans of five to ten years duration, with terms dependent upon the purchase price and the amount of the buyer’s down payment.
The world tourism organization has said time-share is one of the fastest growing sectors of the travel, hospitality, and tourism industry.
Hospitality companies have started adding brand power to the concept with corporations like Marriot Vacation Club International, the Walt Disney Company (World) in Miami Florida, USA, Hilton Hotels, Hyatt Hotels, and other top hospitality organizations are participating in an industry that has grown nearly 900 percent from the late 19870s till date.
Wolchuk (2001, P. 10) in his article “World largest Hotels” stressed the importance of those major hotels in the promotion of vacation ownership tourism.
Today, more than 3 million households own vacation intervals at nearly 4,500 resorts located in more than a hundred countries.
Vacationers around the world are turning to vacation ownership resorts as their preferred travel destinations, with vacation owners or time-share owners coming from more than 174 countries.
Time-share resorts are found around the globe in popular vacation areas near rivers, lakes, and mountains.
By being able to purchase a vacation today for a future use, vacation ownership tourism helps ensure future vacations at today’s prices (Parets, 1997, P. 18).
3.2 Maintenance Fees Condominiums of a vacation ownership resort are divided into intervals, either by the week or by points equivalent, which are sold separately.
Once a majority or other preset percentage is sold to vacation owners, the management of the resort is usually turned over to a Resort Property Owners Association (POA), or Homeowner Association (HOA).
The vacation owners elect officers that take control of expenses, upkeep, and the future of their resort property, including the 104 selection of a management company.
Yearly maintenance fees are paid each year to a Home Owner Association (HOA) for the malignance of the resort.
Just like taking care of a home, resort maintenance fees help maintain the quality and future value of the resort property.
Maintenance costs are shared by all owners.
They pay for on-site management, unit upkeep and refurbishing, amenities, such as pools, tennis courts, and golf courses.
Residential condominium owners determine the fees through their HOA board of directors.
The amount of the yearly maintenance fees typically depend on the size, location, and amenities of the resort.
Maintenance fees are assessed and paid annually by each vacation owner (Baily, 2001, P. 60) There are several types of time-share programmes from which to choose.
This enables consumers purchase the type of vacation ownership that suits their lifestyle.
Time-sharing or vacation ownership describes a method of use and ownership.
It denotes the exclusive use of accommodations for a particular number of days each year.
The purchase of a time-share interval can take various legal forms.
It can be under a fixed unit, a fixed – week deeded agreement, the purchase receives a deed allowing the use of a specific condominium or unit at a particular time every year for a life time, just like buying a house.
Benefits may include the tax advantages of ownership, plus a voice in the management of the resort.
Under this agreement, the owner may rent, sell, exchange or bequeath the vacation intervals.
3.3 Advantages of Time-Share Vacation Unlike the hotel room or rental cottage that requires payment for each use, with rates that usually increase each year, ownership at a time-share property enables vacationers to enjoy a resort, year after year, for the duration of their ownership for only a one-time purchase price.
Time-share ownership offers vacationers an opportunity to save on the escalating costs of vacation accommodations over the long term, while enjoying all the comforts of a home in a resort setting.
Truly a home away from home, vacation ownership provides the space and flexibility to meet the needs of any family size or group.
Most vacation ownership condominiums have two bedrooms and two baths, but there are unit sizes that range from studios of three, or more bedrooms.
Unlike hotel rooms, there are no charges for additional quests.
Most units also include a fully equipped kitchen with a dining area, which cannot be found in a hotel.
Also, most units have washer and dryer, and more.
Time-share resort amenities rival those of other top-rated resort properties.
For example, a large golf course, boating and surfing, ski lifts and horse facilities.
105 Most time-share resorts offer a full schedule of on-site or nearby sporting, recreational, and social activities for adults and children.
The resorts are staffed with well-trained hospitality professionals, with many resorts offering concierge services for assistance in visiting the local area attractions.
Vacation ownership offers unparalleled flexibility and the opportunity for affordable worldwide travel through vacation ownership exchange.
Through the international vacation exchange networks, owners can trade their time-share intervals for vacation time at comparable resorts around the world.
Most resorts are affiliated with an exchange company that administers the exchange service for its members.
To exchange, the owner places his or her interval into the exchange company’s pool of resorts and weeks available for exchange and in turn, choose an available resort and week from that pool (Justus, 2001, P. 40).
The exchange companies charge an exchange fee, in addition to an annual membership fee, to complete an exchange.
Exchange companies and resorts frequently offer their members the additional benefit of savings or banking vacation time in a reserve programme for use in a different year.
3.3.1 Trends in Vacation Ownership Tourism There are quite a number of factors that have influenced the vacation Ownership Tourism some of which are discussed below: • Capacity control.
This enables vacationers to enjoy a resort, year after year for the duration of their ownership for only a one-time purchase price and the payment of yearly maintenance fees.
• Safety and security: Most of these time-shared tourism destinations are located in less populated and remote areas and islands.
This makes these locations less vulnerable to terrorism, the growing disparity between the “haves” “have nots”, infrastructure problems and health issues.
• Technology: An example of the growing use of “expert systems” (Computer Reservation Systems), make standard operating procedures available on-line, twenty –four hours a day and also establishing yield management systems designed to make pricing decisions.
Satellite television and G.P.R.S.
telephones also make these remote destinations reachable to the world.
• New Management: As a result of the complex forces of capacity control, safety and security, capital movement, and technology issues will require a future management cadre that is able to adapt to rapid-paced change across all the traditional functions of management.
• Consolidation: This has seen a maturing industry being either acquired or being merged with each other.
The rapid growth in vacation ownerships which is the fastest growing segment of the lodging industry is likely to 106 continue growing.
An increase in the number of spas and the treatments offered; is increasing demand as guests seek release from the stresses of faced-passed lifestyle.
Lastly, there is an increasing number of resorts and time-shared tourism destinations that are related to the gaming industry like skiing, golf, boating and equestrian facilities (horse riding facilities).
4.0 CONCLUSION By locking in the purchase price of accommodations, vacation ownership tourism helps ensure future vacations at today’s prices.
Today, more than 3 million households own vacation intervals at nearly 4,500 resorts located in more than eighty one countries.
Time share resort developers today include many of the world’s leading hoteliers, publicly held corporations and independent companies.
Yearly maintenance fees are paid each year to a Homeowners’ Association (HOA) for maintenance of the resort.
The maintenance costs are shared by all owners of the vacation ownership resort.
Each condominium or unit of a vacation ownership resort is divided into intervals, either by the week or by points equivalent.
Unlike hotels that require payment for each use, with prices that usually increase each year, time share properties enable vacationers to enjoy a resort for the duration of their ownership and for only a one-time purchase price.
5.0 SUMMARY Vacation ownership tourism which is also known as time-share is when a person purchases the use of a unit similar to a condominium for blocks of time.
An important advantage to this is the flexibility of the product.
Vacation ownership tourism offers its users the opportunity to buy fully furnished vacation accommodations in a variety of forms.
Vacation ownership tourism provides the space and flexibility to meet needs of families of any size.
Unlike hotel rooms, there are no extra charges for additional guests.
Also, most units include equipped kitchens with dining areas.
6.0 Tutor-Marked Assignment 4.
What are yearly malignance fees?
5.
What is another name for vacation ownership?
6.
List 5 advantages of vacation ownership 7.
Name two associations responsible for governing the activities of vacation ownership.
107 SELF-ASSESSMENT EXERCISE 14: Question: Why has vacation ownership tourism become popular in recent years?
7.0 References/Further Readings Baily, M. (2001) “Travel Business: Rooms at the Top”, Asia Business, 27, 9 September, 2001, P. 60.
Justus, G. R. (2001) “Microhotel: How “simple” Translates into success”, The Cornell Hotel and Restaurant Administration Quarterly,35, 8 December, 2001 Parets, R. T. (1997), “Getting their share”, Lodging, Vol.
44, No., 12, December, 1997, P. 40.
Wolchuk, S. (2001) “Worlds Largest Hotels,” Hotels, August 2001, P. 7.
108 TM 403: CULTURAL TOURISM UNIT 15: Strategic Planning and the Tourism Industry 1.0 INTRODUCTION Every organization is exactly what it is an organization.
Such is held together and projected by a set of systems.
These systems are the guiding principles on which the organization functions and thrives, and therein lies the essence of strategic planning.
Over the years, strategic planning has been known by different names; however, the principle has remained the same – the ultimate survival of a business organization.
Strategic planning can be said to be the soul of, or reason for the existence of an organization.
For it is the basis on which predictions and assessments about the organization are made.
It is one important tool that determines what goals are set, what policies are made and how they are achieved, at the same time avoiding conflicting interests within the system.
An organization’s survival is of course anchored on its success when properly utilized and well administered.
On the contrary when such is ignored, failure is certain.
The success stories of major hotel chains, for example, is a testimony of their well articulated, utilized and implemented strategic planning.
Furthermore, strategic planning can be understood as the goals and mission of a business organization which takes into consideration its strengths, weaknesses, opportunities and threats (SWOT) analysis very seriously.
Accordingly, one of the major features of strategic planning is its focus on assessing a changing environment or destination and its facilities as it is applicable to the hospitality and travel industry being perhaps the world’s largest industry and where competition is very stiff.
2.0 OBJECTIVES When you complete this unit you should be able to: • explain and discuss the concept and importance of strategic planning.
• discuss the components of strategic planning and their roles in the tourism industry.
• Explain the various processes involved in budgeting and planning.
109 3.0 MAIN CONTENT 3.1 The Concept and Importance of Strategic Planning The concept of strategic planning simply implies an adventure into the future of a business organization in terms of its success or failure which takes the form of current decisions that will impact on the future of the organization, particularly in terms of the nature of its business and in the face of competition.
Strategic planning is about the goals and/or objectives of the organization.
It is a process that provides the framework on which all decisions affecting the direction of the organization are made.
It is the basis on which an organization’s decisions are predicted upon; decisions such as people as market segments, product, pricing, package, promotion, capital allocation, human resources and performance in the face of competition (Coffman and Reckinage, 2001, P.19).
A well thought out strategic planning ensures that decisions made and taken can move the organization toward a common set of objectives.
Without the guidance of strategic planning, the affairs and direction of an organization can be uncoordinated and in conflict with other departments’ decision.
Consequently, failure to provide a strategic framework for decisions can be disastrous to an organization now and in the future.
As pointed out by Ross and Kamie (1993, P. 280), the importance of a strategy for an organization cannot be over emphasized when they stated that: We can say beyond any reasonable doubt that a well-directed effort by the top management of an organization can make it at a rate faster than the competitive firms in the industry: the real basis for this effort by top management.
Without it, failure is a matter of time.
However, for strategies and objectives to be effective, especially in the management of a hospitality and tourism business, a set of control measures must be in place.
This is the subject of the next sub-topic.
3.2 Components of Strategic Planning 3.2.1 Goals and Business Mission Every economic and/or business concern such as the tourist industry must have reasons and incentives for being in existence.
This calls for goal setting which is an important step in strategic planning.
It takes the form of a statement that points to the direction in which an organization should go, and a purpose, at which it 110 should work towards achieving.
A goal could be an answer to such questions as what products should be produced?
For whom should they be produced?
How should they be distributed?
It is a statement that communicates the salient points of an organization’s purposes the reason why the business is in business (Brown, 1999, P. 28).
A business mission on the other hand is a statement being the second fundamental step in strategic planning.
It is a description of the identity and underlying design or thrust of a business in clear terms, and usually, long-term in nature.
Often times, any business without a mission statement is subject to drift into other ventures not initially planned for.
This development can create distractions and divergence or conflict within the organization thus leading to failure.
Lane and Hartsesvelt (1993, P.285) have suggested a mission statement that is appropriate to a hotel with a travel business as follows: “To be recognized as the industry leader in quality hotel development, ownership, and operations by providing first class accommodations that present prestige and value to the up-scape business and pleasure-travel markets throughout …” A good mission statement presents a clear picture of what a business is involved in, a clear idea of its products and market thrust.
This is what has given rise to the success stories of major hotel chains such as Holiday Inn, Hilton and Sheraton, (see Coffman and Recknage, 2001, P.111).
3.2.2 Objectives The objectives of a business organization are simply the results that it seeks to achieve in the process of doing business.
Here, two cardinal elements top any objective setting which are critical.
These are: a number and a date.
These imply that objectives are measurable and rightly so because it is only through measures that there could be a basis or yardstick for a comparison between the desired objective and the achieved objective, which could simply be translated into success or failure.
For example, a marketing manager for a traveling agency can have the objective of increasing his market share by 10 percent within 12 months.
By setting such an objective it implies that the manager’s performance can be measured in terms of success or failure.
Objectives are necessary in every organizational structure.
These structures or areas are commonly referred to as key result areas – marketing, innovation, human organization, financial resources, physical resources, productivity, social responsibility and profit requirement.
Objectives can be set earlier in the planning process or developed later on, through research as the organization progresses (Brown, 1999, P. 26).
111 3.3.3 Budgeting, Monitoring and the Planning Process Budgeting can be understood as a detailed analysis of functions or activities that are to be performed by a business organization, with associated costs involved in executing the organizations various tasks.
In preparing a budget, a business organization considers the following steps: i. marketing which defines specific market share increases and the associated pricing considerations, ii.
income budget: This consists of a combination of the sales projections and associated costs; iii.
capital budget which defines investment needs, iv.
non-financial objectives: Those identify specific accomplishments that will be completed which are necessary to carry out the long-term strategies; v. cost reduction analysis which is a continuous review and improvement of the application of resources in operation including staff departments; and vi.
Contingency plans that consider proposed reaction steps to possible changes in the environment and its facilities, particularly in the face of stiff competition Monitoring of the activities of a business organization is the confirmation that all plans are progressing accordingly, as expected.
For example, if things are not working as they should, then either the programme or tactic is not appropriate and should be re-thought.
Or operational changes must be effected to correct the situation.
A critical aspect of monitoring is timely accounting and operations analysis reports.
Equally important to consider are the assumptions that form the basis of the plans in terms of their validity or faultiness in the planning process.
This is an orderly process in which relevant facts are collated and then organized into options from which few strategic decisions can be made for a long-term consideration.
However, the actual planning process takes the form of an in-depth look at the business, its environment and the future.
As aptly pointed out by Jones (2002), “A number of contemporary issues, including those related to health, environment and ecological matters, are in the ascendancy which the tourism industry will have to confront in future”.
By implication, this means that those who ignore these will do so at their own risk – if not from a social perspective the obviously from a commercial one.
The planning process seeks to answer the primary questions: where are we; and where do we want to go?
Will we need to make operating changes in response to a changing environment?
What are the strategic choices that will get us where we want to go and be?
112 4.0 CONCLUSION The history of the tourism industry whose success is anchored on destination and/or environment and the sustainability of its facilities has excellent examples of how proper planning linked with effective and efficient implementation has resulted in success stories of hotel chains such as Holiday Inn, Hilton and Sheraton.
Overtime and throughout the world, strategic planning has proved to be a very essential part of establishing and running businesses.
It has been the reason behind success stories of both small and large businesses.
Conversely, a lack of it has led to even multinational companies file for bankruptcy.
This is because strategic planning does not guarantee that a business will grow and prosper; however, it significantly increases the odds of success.
5.0 SUMMARY Strategy planning is critically significant to all business organizations including the tourism industry.
Although its concept varies from one business organization to another, the objective is the same – adventure in predicating the future of the organization while taking into cognizance its strengths, weaknesses, opportunities threats (SWOT) analysis vis-à-vis competitors.
6.0 Tutor-Marked Assignment 1.
Why is strategic planning critical to the survival or failure of a business organization?
2.
Discuss, by giving examples, of the success stories of two major hotels in Nigeria.
SELF-ASSESSMENT EXERCISE 15: Question: What is the importance of strategic planning in an industry such as tourism?
113 7.0 Reference/Further Readings Coffman, C. D. and Recknage, H. J.
(2001), Marketing for a Full House, Ithaca, New York: Cornell University Press.
Brown, J. K. (1999); This Business of Issues: Coping with the Company’s Environments, New York: The Conference Board, Inc. Drucker, P. F. (1999); Management: Tasks Responsibility; Practices.
New York: Harper & Row.
Jones, P. (2002); Introduction to Hospitality Operations: An indispensable guide to the Industry London; Continuum.
Lane, H. E. and Hartesvelt, M. (2003) Englewood Cliffs New Jersey: Prentice Hall Ross, J. E. and Kamie, M. J.
(2005) “Strategic Thinking: Key to Corporate Survival”.
Management Review, February, 20655, P.9 Ross, J. E. and Kamie, M. J.
(1993) “Towards the formalization of Strategic Planning: A conceptual framework” Sloane school of Management technical Report 7 Boston December, 1993.
114 BLURB TSM 403: CULTURAL TOURISM TSM 403 Cultural Tourism is a 2 credit course to be taken in the fourth year of the undergraduate degree Tourism programme at the National Open University of Nigeria.
It will be available to all learners as a core course in the programme.
The course is made up of fifteen study units and a courses guide.
It introduces learners to the basics of cultural tourism and the various levels in which culture has continued to have an impact on tourism through ecotourism, cultural and heritage preservation and also through museums and so on.
115 REFERENCES/FURTHER READINGS In addition to the main text, you will find the underlisted References/Further Readings and internet websites useful for your studies.
It is therefore advisable that you make the best use of them.
Anderson, J. R. L. (2002) the Ulysses factor New York: Harcourt Brace Jovanovich Arizpe, L. (2000) “Cultural Heritage and Globalization”.
In Avrani E., Mason, R and Torre, M. D. eds.
Values and Heritage Conservation.
Loss Angeles: Getty conservation Institute.
Aryear, G. (1998); The Travel Agent: Dealer in Dreams, 5th ed.
Englewood Cliffs, New Jersey: Prentice Hall.
Atherton, T. C. (1991); Regulation of tourism destination planning, development and management including a critique of the systems and practice in Australia, (unpublished) M.Sc.
dissertation, University of Surrey.
Avrani, E., Mason R. and Torre, M. D. (2000).
Values and Heritage Conservation.
Loss Angeles: Getty conservation institute.
Baily, M. (2001) “Travel Business: Rooms at the Top”, Asia Business, 27, 9 September, 2001, P. 60.
Barbier, E. B.
(1997); The concept of sustainable Economic Development.
Environment Conservation, 14(2), 101-10.
Basu, A.
(2002); Culture, the Status of Women and Demographic Behaviour.
Oxford: Clarendon Press.
Berry, D. S. and Shuldiner, P. W., Blomme, G. W. and Jones, J. H. (2003).
The technology of Urban Transportation, Evanston, Illinois: worthwestern University Press.
Blau, J.
(2003); Social Contracts and Economic Markets.
New York: Plenum Bray, W. P. (2003); Transport and Communications, London: Weidenfeld & Nicholson, LTD. 116 Brotherton, R. (2002, P.18); An introduction to the UK Hospitality Industry: A comparative Approach, Oxford: Butterworth Heinemann.
Brown, J. K. (1999); This Business of Issues: Coping with the Company’s Environments, New York: The Conference Board, Inc. Bwagwati, J.
(2003)“Borders Beyond Control”.
Foreign Affairs 82(1):98-104 Chambers, R. (1993), Rural Development: Putting the last first.
New York: Longman Scientific & Technical.
Coffman, C. D. and Recknage, H. J.
(2001), Marketing for a Full House, Ithaca, New York: Cornell University Press.
Costanza, R., Daly, H. E. and Bartholomew, J.
A.
(1991) Goals, agenda and policy recommendations for ecological economics.
In R. Costanza (ed).
Ecological Economics.
The Science and Management of Sustainability.
New York: Columbia University Press.
Daily, G. (ed) (1997).
Natures services-societal dependence on Natural Ecosystems, Washington DC: Island Press Davidson, R. (1999).
Tourism, London: Pitman Publishing Depiah, k. a.
(1996), “Race, culture, identity misunderstood connections”.
In K. Anthough Apiah Amy Gutmann, eds Colour consciousness: The political morality of Race.
Princeton: Princeton University Press.
Desteigguer, J. E. (1997).
The Age of Environmentalism, New York: McGraw Hill.
Dogget, R. and O’Mahoney, R. (1994).
The Leisure Environment Donohoe, M. (2006); Causes and health consequences of environmental degradation and social justice: Social Sciences 1(1111) 111 – 112 Drucker, P. F. (1999); Management: Tasks Responsibility; Practices.
New York: Harper & Row.
Economic Research Highlights from World Travel and Tourism Council.
http://www.wttc.org.
117 Ellis, J.
(1993), Why people play.
Englewood Cliffs, New Jersey: Prentice Hall.
Explore the following websites: Financial Times, 2004, “French film makers fear for L’Exception culturelle”.
9 January.
Forero, J.
(2003), “Seeking Balance Growth vs. culture in Amazon”.
The New York Times 10 December.
Gamst, F. C. and Norbeek, E. (1996).
Ideas of culture: sources and uses.
New York: Holt Reinhart and Winston.
Grief, A.
(2004), Cultural Beliefs and organization of Society.
A Historical and Theoretical Reflection on Collective and Individualistic Societies.
Journal of Political Economy 102 – 912 – 20.
Grossman, G. M and Krueger, A.
B.
(1995); Economic Growth and environment.
Quarterly Journal of Economics, 112-78.
Haffajee, F. (1999) “South Africa: Blending Tradition and Change” UNESCO Courier.
November.
(htt://www.unesco.org/courier/1999_11/uk/dossier/Ext 23htm).
Harrison, L. E. and Hunington, S. P. (eds) 200) Culture Matters.
How values shape human progress, New York: Basic Books Harrison, L. E., Huntington, S. P. (eds) 2000.
Culture Matters: How Values Shape Human.
Progress: New York Basic Books.
Holloway, R. J. Hancock, R. S. (2003) Marketing in a change environment, New York; John Willey and Sons.
http://www.mbunisafaris.com/data./attractions/specific/Aberdare http://www.mbunisafaris.com/data/attractions/specific/mount_ke http://www.mbunisafaris.com/data/attractions/specific/Nairobi_N- File://E:/yankari_game_reserve.htm -http://www.mbunisafris.com/data attractions.vrt http://www.nigerianfield.org/abuja_files/AssopFalls2005htm 118 Indigenous Australia (2003).
“What is Cultural Heritage” [htt://www.dreamtime.net.au/indigeneous/culture.cfm] February, 2004.
Inglehart, R. and Baker, W. (2000) “Modernization, Cultural change and the Persistence of Traditional Values, American Sociological Review 65:19-51.
Jafari J.
(1997); Tourism models: The socio-cultural aspects; Tourism Management.
Vol.
8 no.
2, Pp.
151-9 Jomo, K. S. and Hui, W. C. (2004).
“Affirmative Action and Exclusion in Malaysia: Ethnic and regional Inequalities in a Multicultural Society”.
Jones, P. (2002); Introduction to Hospitality Operations: An indispensable guide to the Industry London; Continuum.
Justus, G. R. (2001) “Microhotel: How “simple” Translates into success”, The Cornell Hotel and Restaurant Administration Quarterly,35, 8 December, 2001 Kaplan, M. (1995) Leisure: Theory and Policy, New York: John Wiley & Sons, Inc. Kiphing, N. and Wolf, R. I.
(2003).
Transportation and Politics, New York: D. Van Nostrand Company Inc. Lane, H. E. and Hartesvelt, M. (2003) Englewood Cliffs New Jersey: Prentice Hall Ross, J. E. and Kamie, M. J.
(2005) “Strategic Thinking: Key to Corporate Survival”.
Management Review, February, 20655, P.9 Lumberg, D. E. and Lumberg, C., B.
(1995, Pp.
3-8); International Travel and Tourism, second edition.
New York: John Wiley & sons.
Mayo, E. J. and Javis, L P. (2001).
The Psychology of Leisure Travel: Effective Marketing and Selling of Travel Services.
Bostons: CBI Publishing Company.
McDonald, M. (2003) “USAIR’s Lagow: BA Links Strategic Partnership” Travel Week, August 30, P.30 Murphy, P. E. (1995); Tourism: A community Approach, New York: Methuen.
119 Muthin, D. and Satteredwaite, D. (1990); Human Settlements and Sustainable Development Nairobi UN Centre for Human settlements (habitat).
Parets, R. T. (1997), “Getting their share”, Lodging, Vol.
44, No., 12, December, 1997, P. 40.
Patterson, T. C. and Susser, I.
(eds) (2001).
Cultural Diversity in the United States.
A critical Reader, Oxford: Blackwell.
Putman, R. (1993) “The Prosperous Community: Social Capital and Public Life” American Prospect 13.35.
Rodolfa, S. (2004).
”Indigenous Peoples in Comparative Perspective”.
In UNDP Human Development Report, (2004) Ross, J. E. and Kamie, M. J.
(1993) “Towards the formalization of Strategic Planning: A conceptual framework” Sloane school of Management technical Report 7 Boston December, 1993.
Sen, A.
(2004) “Cultural Freedom and Human Development”.
Sen, A.
(2004).
“Cultural Freedom and Human Development”.
Sen, A.
(2004a) “Cultural Freedom and Human Development .
Seth, P. W. and Bhat, S. S. (2005: P.55).An Introduction to Travel and Tourism, New Delhi: Sterling Publishers Private Limited.
Seyla, B.
(2002).
The Claims of Culture: Equality and Diversity in the Global Era.
Princeton: Princeton University Press.
Smith, V. L. (1999); Hosts and Guests: The Anthropology of Tourism, 2nd ed.
Philadelphia, Pa: University of Pannsylvanice Press Spencer, J. E. and Thomas, W. L. (1998, P.47).
Introducing Cultural Geography, New York: John Wiley and Sons.
UNDP: Human Development Report, (2006:p.46) New York: Oxford University Press 120 UNEP (1995); Major International Environmental Relevant to industry 1972-1995.
Industry and Environment.
18(4), December, 1995 Veutzel, R. A.
(2001, P. 898) “Leaders of the Hospitality Industry or Hospitality Management” An Introduction to the Industry, 6th ed.
Dubuque, Iowa, Xendall/Hunt.
Wahab, S., Crampton, L. J. and Rothfield, L. M. (1993: P.10).
Tourism Marketing Fourth edition, London: Tourism International Press; Wolchuk, S. (2001) “Worlds Largest Hotels,” Hotels, August 2001, P. 7.
World Commission for Culture and Development (1995) “Our Creative Diversity; Report of the World Commission on Culture and Development; Paris.
World Tourism Organization (WTO) www.world-tourism .org.
World Tourism Organization (WTO).www.world tourism.org.
World Values Survey (2004) “World Values Survey” [http://www.worldvaluessurvey.org] February 2004.
• www.24hourmuseum .org.uk • www.artscouncil.org.uk • www.museums .gov.uk 121
