NATIONAL OPEN UNIVERSITY OF NIGERIA SCHOOL OF SCIENCE AND TECHNOLOGY COURSE CODE: HCM 333 COURSE TITLE: FOOD AND BEVERAGE SERVICES IIIHCM 333 FOOD AND BEVERAGE SERVICES III COURSE GUIDE HCM 333 FOOD AND BEVERAGE SERVICES III Course Developer/Writer Adesuyan, A.J.
Programme Leader Dr. O.J.
Onwe National Open University of Nigeria Course Coordinator Martha Oruku National Open University of Nigeria NATIONAL OPEN UNIVERSITY OF NIGERIA iiHCM 333 FOOD AND BEVERAGE SERVICES III National Open University of Nigeria Headquarters 14/16 Ahmadu Bello Way Victoria Island Lagos Abuja Office No.
5 Dar es Salaam Street Off Aminu Kano Crescent Wuse II, Abuja Nigeria e-mail: centralinfo@nou.edu.ng URL: www.nou.edu.ng Published by National Open University of Nigeria Printed 2009 ISBN: 978-058-211-8 All Rights Reserved iiiHCM 333 FOOD AND BEVERAGE SERVICES III CONTENTS PAGE Introduction …………………….………………………………….
1 Course Contents………………………………………………….... 1 Course Aims……………………………………………….…….… 1 Course Objectives……………………………………….……….… 2 Course Materials…………………………………………………… 2 Study Units………………………………………………..…….….
2 Tutor-Marked Assignment…………………..…………………….. 4 Introduction HCM 333 Food and Beverage Services, is a semester work of 4-credit hours.
It is available to all students, taking BSC programme in the School of Business and Human Resource Management.
The course consists of 11 units involving both theory and practical.
Students are expected to do practical at the study centre and also visit hotels to be conversant with the experience they need to have for their future career.
The Course Guide tells you what HCM 333 is all about, the materials you will be using and how to make use of the materials to ensure adequate success.
Other information that are contained in the course ivHCM 333 FOOD AND BEVERAGE SERVICES III include how to make use of your time, information on Tutor-Marked Assignment.
Course Contents The course contents consist of professional skills, basic principles of cookery with different methods of food preparation to suit the need of customer.
It also provides recipe for the essential knowledge for the successful career in professional cookery that will allow learners to gain employment in Nigeria and across the continents.
Course Aims The aims of this course are to further expose you to the practise of food production, principles of cookery and various approaches to food production.
The aims will be achieved by: • Learning the principle of cake making • Preparation of eggs, grains and farinaceous dishes • Preparation of pastries, puddings and sweets • Preparation of flavours, sandwiches and beverages • Process involved in preparation of non-alcoholic drinks • Learn the different cuts, quality, grades, portion, size and uses • Common uses of poultry • Preparation and cooking of fish and sea foods • Utilisation of local food commodities in the internationally acceptable Nigerian dishes • Sequence of work schedules and production analysis in menu planning Course Objectives By the end of the course, you should be able to: 1. understand how to make cake 2.
You should know how prepare to eggs grains and farinaceous dishes 3. prepare pastries, puddings and sweet 4. prepare flavours, sandwiches and beverages 5. process involved in preparation of non – alcoholic drinks 6. learn the different cuts, quality grades, portion size and uses 7. learn the common uses of poultry 8. prepare and cook fish and sea foods vHCM 333 FOOD AND BEVERAGE SERVICES III 9. utilise local food commodities in the internationally acceptable Nigerian dishes.
Course Materials The main components of the course are: 1.
Course Guide 2.
Study Units 3.
References/Further Readings 4.
Assignment File Study Units Module 1 Unit 1 Principles of Making Cake Unit 2 Preparation of Eggs, Grains and Farinaceous Dishes Module 2 Unit 1 Commodities for Pastry Production Puddings: Fat, Flours, Sweets Unit 2 Freezing Techniques, Chilled and Iced Confectioneries Module 3 Unit 1 Preparation of Non- Alcoholic Drinks Unit 2 Types of Catering Services Unit 3 Types of Catering Services – Garnishing Flavouring, Stuffing for Poultry Game Module 4 Unit 1 Types of Catering Service: Fish and Sea Foods Unit 2 Types of Catering Service: Utilization of Local Commodities, in Internationally Acceptable Nigerian Dishes Unit 3 Menu Planning Unit 4 Purchasing: Use and Maintaining Kitchen Equipment Each study unit will take at least two hours and it includes the introduction, objectives, main content, exercises, conclusion/summary and references.
Others are tutor-marked question and practice guide.
viHCM 333 FOOD AND BEVERAGE SERVICES III You are expected to study the material, reflect and do the exercises.
Some of the exercises will necessitate your visiting hotels and study centres for practical.
You are advised to do so in order to observe the practice of management There are textbooks, under reference for further reading.
They are to give you additional information.
Practice the tutor-marked question for a better understanding.
By doing so, the stated learning objectives will be achieved.
The first two units in Module 1 concentrate on the materials used in preparing cake, farinaceous dishes, use of egg in food production, garnishes, and grains used in cooking.
Units one and two of Module 2 consist of fats, flours and other commodities, hot and cold sweets, freezing techniques, chilled and iced confectioneries, while the next two units are concerned with products: hot and cold savours, use of fillings and toppings.
Units one and two of Module 3 deal with poultry for cooking, portion control in food production and service of poultry games, fish and sea foods.
Unit three of Module 3 and Unit one of Module 4 deal with the conditions required in pastry and confectionary, development of Nigeria dishes and ingredients used to improve upon method of cooking Nigerian dishes, uses of vegetable and fruit in seasoning.
Units two and three of Module 4 discuss various Nigerian dishes, planning work schedule, importance of hygiene to food handlers, and types of wine used in various dishes.
They also discuss some management principles in decision making in food production, importance of hygiene to food, obtaining capital from financial institutions, types of wine used in various dishes and explanation of the term recipe.
You are expected to study the materials and do the exercises.
Some of the exercises will necessitate your visiting some hotels.
Please do so in order to observe the practices of management.
There are also textbooks, under references for further reading.
They are to give you additional information for better understanding.
The Modules The course is divided into 4 modules.
The first consist of two units, the second module have two units, while the third has three units and the viiHCM 333 FOOD AND BEVERAGE SERVICES III last four units.
The first module treats preparation of cake, use of egg in production, farinaceous dishes, garnishing sauces and accompaniment and ends with grain used in cookery.
The second module is on fats, flours, hot and cold sweet, freezing technique and ends with various sauces for sweet presentation.
The third module includes commodities for non-alcoholic beverages, for sweets, and poultry and portion control production.
The fourth module is of four units which includes fish and sea foods, pastry and confectioneries.
Others include preparation of cake, use of egg, farinaceous dishes, and grains used in cooking.
Others include: fats, flour, hot and cold sweet, freezing technique, sauces for sweet presentation, and commodity for non- alcoholic beverages.
Finally, the other items are poultry and portion control, fish and sea foods, pastry and confectioneries, the different Nigerian dishes, basic ingredients for Nigerian dishes, vegetable and fruits, planning work schedule, importance of hygiene to food handlers, types of wine and lastly the meaning of the term recipe.
Tutor-Marked Assignment In your tutor-marked assignments, you are expected to apply what you have learnt in the contents of the study units.
These assignments which are 5 in number are expected to be returned to your tutor for grading.
They constitute 30% of the total score.
viiiHCM 333 FOOD AND BEVERAGE SERVICES III Course Code HCM 333 Course Title Food and Beverage Services III Course Developer/Writer Adesuyan, A.J.
Programme Leader Dr. O.J.
Onwe National Open University of Nigeria Course Coordinator Martha Oruku National Open University of Nigeria NATIONAL OPEN UNIVERSITY OF NIGERIA ixHCM 333 FOOD AND BEVERAGE SERVICES III National Open University of Nigeria Headquarters 14/16 Ahmadu Bello Way Victoria Island Lagos Abuja Office No.
5 Dar es Salaam Street Off Aminu Kano Crescent Wuse II, Abuja Nigeria e-mail: centralinfo@nou.edu.ng URL: www.nou.edu.ng Published by National Open University of Nigeria Printed 2009 ISBN: 978-058-211-8 All Rights Reserved Printed by: xHCM 333 FOOD AND BEVERAGE SERVICES III CONTENTS PAGE Module 1 …………………………………………………….... 1 Unit 1 Principles of Making Cake………………………… 1 Unit 2 Preparation of Eggs, Grains and Farinaceous Dishes……………………………………………… 13 Module 2 …………………………………………………….... 23 Unit 1 Fat Flours, Commodities for Pastry Production Puddings, Sweets………………………………….. 23 Unit 2 Freezing Techniques, Chilled and Iced Confectioneries……………………………….
32 Module 3 …………………………………………………….... 41 Unit 1 Preparation of Non- Alcoholic Drinks……………... 41 Unit 2 Types of Catering Services……………………....… 47 Unit 3 Types of Catering Services – Garnishing Flavourings, Stuffing for Poultry Game…………….. 60 Module 4 …………………………………………………….... 67 Unit 1 Types of Catering Service: Fish and Sea Foods …….
67 Unit 2 Types of Catering Service: Utilization of Local Commodities, In the Internationally Acceptable for Nigerian Dishes ……………………………..….. 76 Unit 3 Menu Planning……………………………………….
87 Unit 4 Purchasing, Use and Maintaining Kitchen Equipment 93 xiHCM 333 MODULE 1 MODULE 1 Unit 1 Principles of Making Cake Unit 2 Preparation of Eggs, Grains and Farinaceous Dishes UNIT 1 PRINCIPLES OF MAKING CAKE CONTENTS 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objectives 3.0 Main Content 3.1 Principles of Cake Making 3.2 Materials in Making Cake 3.3 Methods of Making Cake 3.4 Sugar 3.5 Different Faults in Making Cake and How to Remedy Them 3.5.1 Curdling or Uncooked Cake Mixture 3.5.2 Sunk Cake 3.5.3 Cracked Cake 3.5.4 Heavy Texture Cake 3.5.5 Coarse, Open Texture 3.5.6 Unevenly Risen 3.5.7 Hard sugary Crust 3.5.8 Dry Cake 3.5.9 Fruit Sunking in Fruit Cake 36 Types of Things in Cake Decorations 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutor-Marked Assignment 7.0 References/Further Readings 1.0 INTRODUCTION In the last course which is on food and beverages production, we made a remark on how to make cake.
As a result of this, we would be continuing at a deeper level with some of the issues raised in our second course in addition to taking new ones.
The first unit of this course treats the principles and theories.
It would be recalled that in the first course we tried to classify cake making into two, the ingredients of cake making and different types of cake.
In the same manner we shall examine the rules and principles guiding how to make cake.
Since cake making is one of the methods of cooking, it is essential that students know the principles of making cake.
12HCM 333 MODULE 1 2.0 OBJECTIVES By the end of this unit, you should be able to: • explain the materials used in cake making • explain the different methods of making cake • explain different faults in cake making and how to remedy them • explain how to decorate cake using different types of things.
3.0 MAIN CONTENT 3.1 Principles of Cake Making The principle for cake making is derived through practical and related principles from theory.
Here, you will learn the food materials you will need in making cake and to identify all possible faults that may possible occur while preparing or making cake.
3.2 Materials in Making Cake Have different materials in making cake which comprises of flour, fat, margarine, eggs, sugar, flavour, raising agent.
Flour There are three types of flour used in making cake: • Whole meal flour this consist 100% extraction and all the components of the original grain.
The colour is brown.
• Wheat meal flour is 85% extractor rate of the original grain, 15% is discarded as bran but it is still brown due to the remaining bran.
• White flour contains 78% of the original grain, most of the bran, germ, fat and minerals have been removed.
The three types of flour have advantages and disadvantages.
Advantage of Whole Meal Flour • It retains the nutrient content • The bran provides a valuable source of fiber • It gives a pleasant flavour to baked items Disadvantages of Whole Meal Flour 13HCM 333 MODULE 1 • It does not keep long as white flour due to the fat content in it that can become rancid relatively quickly • It does not have good baking quality as white flour for items like pastry and cake.
Advantage of White Flour • It has good baking qualities and provides fine textures in cake, bread, pastry etc • Contains less phytic acid • Contains less fat, it doesn’t become rancid easily Disadvantages of White Flour • It contains less fibre • Contains less calcium and iron, • Contain less protein and vitamins Wheat flour is not very good at making cake but is very good at making bread, the reason is because of the high protein content in the wheat flour.
Types of Flour • Weak or soft flour is best for cake making because it contains small amount of glisten- forming proteins, it helps gluten in cake to coagulate when cakes are baked.
Self Raising Flour • Use this for plain cakes with fat.
For richer cakes, the amount of baking power self-raising flour is too high, so it is better to use plain flour with various amounts of baking power Fats Fats are added to cake mixtures so as: • To trap air with sugar during creaming • To provide ‘softness’ to the cake mixture • To add colour and flavour to cake mixture Types of Fat for Making Cake 14HCM 333 MODULE 1 • Margarine: more economical.
It provides colour and flavour but it is not suitable for rubbed in mixtures • Butter: is a very good flavour and colour to the mixture but can be mixed with other types of fat • White cooking fats: Do not have good flavour and colour but can also be creamed with sugar but with strongly flavoured mixtures 3.3 Methods of Making Cake There are basically two methods of making cake: • Rubbed in cakes • Creamed method Rubbed in Method Ingredients for rubbed in cake: • Flour • Fat • Sugar • Egg • Baking powder • Flavouring • Milk Methods • Sieve the flour and baking powder, are flavoured to ensure even distribution and lightness by trapping air • Cut up the fat, to coat the flour particles with a layer of fat to produce crumb texture use the finger tip to do this • Rub in the mixture till it resembles bread crumbs and no lumps of fat left.
Do not over rub as the fat will melt and the cake will have a gose, heavy texture • Stil in the sugar and other dry ingredients • Beat the eggs until well mixed • Add the eggs and other liquid at once and mix quickly to ensure a smooth texture.
Do not over beat the egg as this may lead to uneven texture • The mixture must be of “soft dropping” in consistency • Place the mixture in the appropriate baking tin or pan and bake at recommended temperatures.
Temperature for large cakes 1800c or 3500F for 1hour for small cakes 1900c or 3750F for 12-15minutes • Make sure it is risen, set, an even brown colour and no bubbing.
15HCM 333 MODULE 1 Use of Rub in cake: Rock cakes, large cakes, coconut cakes, butterfly cakes, jam buns, chocolate cake and lemon cakes.
Creamed Method • Sugar • Fat / Butter • Egg • Flour • Flavouring • Milk • Baking powder • Method Methods • Cream the fat and sugar with a wooden spoon until light and fluffy in texture.
This helps to trap air in the form of tiny bubbles to act as a raising agent • Beat the eggs until well mixed, add a little at a time to the fat and sugar beating well until each fat becomes emulsified by the egg yolk and prevented from curdling or separating out • Sieve the flour, to trap air, and the baking powder and add gently into the mixture a little at a time • Fold the liquid in gently with other ingredients e.g.
fruits until a soft dropping consistency is benched • Bake at appropriate temperature and time until well risen, an even brown colour and set • Lard is suitable for most cake but does not cream well and has a distinctive flavour which is not very good for cake • Oil can be used for some mixtures where there is additional raising agent 3.4 Sugar Sugar is added to cake mixture in order to: • Add flavour • Help trap air with fats so that the cake rises • Helps the texture • Contribute to colour of cake (carneralizing on explosive to dry heat of the oven.
Types of Sugar 16HCM 333 MODULE 1 • Castor sugar • Granulated sugar • Soft brown sugar Eggs Eggs are added to most cake mixtures in order: • To trap air during mixture • To help set the cake once it has risen during baking, it coagulates the protein • To add colour and nutritional value • To emulsify the fat in creamed mixtures Flavourings • Flavouring such as citrus fat rind, or dried fruit, help to contribute towards the keeping qualities of a cake.
3.5 Different Faults in Making Cake and How to Remedy Them 3.5.1 Curdling or Uncooked Cake Mixture Cause • If the egg is very cold, the fat is cooled by it, fat globules become surrounded by water from the egg, making emulsification of the fat by the yolk very difficult.
The mixture will therefore less air.
• This may also result if too much egg is added Remedy Add a little flour to absorb some of the water from the egg and help the fat to be emulsified.
3.5.2 Sunk Cake Cause • Too much sugar or syrup is added causing gluttein to be over- softened and to collapse • Too much raising agent Causing the mixture to collapse 17HCM 333 MODULE 1 • Under-cooking, or uncooked caused by wrong temperature or cooking time • Opening the oven door before the glutten has set; air passage to the oven makes it to sink.
Remark • Avoid opening oven door before gluten get cooked.
3.5.3 Cracked Cake Causes • Oven temperature too high causing the mixture to rise rapidly to a peak and then over cook.
• Too much mixture for the size of tin • Placing the cake on too high a shelf in the oven.
Remedy • Lower the oven temperature • Do not put too much mixture in the baking tin • Place the cake in a moderate shelf in the oven 3.5.4 Heavy Texture Cake Causes • Too much liquid in the mixture • Too little raising agent or incoporated during creaming or whisking • Mixture has curdled and does not hold sufficient air.
• Oven temperature too low, or cake not cooked enough.
• Over beating, when adding flour, causing loss of air • Over beating after adding a liquid.
3.5.5 Coarse, Open Texture Causes • Too much raising agent has been used, causing large pockets of gas to be produced.
• Flour has hot been mixed in, sufficiently.
3.5.6 Unevenly Risen 18HCM 333 MODULE 1 • Oven shelf is not level due to the floor on which it stands.
• Cake mixture was placed too near the source of heat, which has caused it to rise quickly on one side.
3.5.7 Hard Sugary Crust Causes • Sugar too coarse for the mixture and may not dissolve in time • Too much sugar has been used Remedy • Allow sugar to dissolve to time.
• Do not use too much sugar 3.5.8 Dry Cake Causes • Too much chemical i.e.
raising agent has been used • Too little liquid has been used • Over cooked cake 3.5.9 Fruit Sunking in Fruit Cake Causes • Mixture is too wet and the heavy fruit cannot be held evenly throughout.
• Fruit is wet and the therefore adds too much liquid to the cake.
• Too much sugar or raising agent has been used, causing the structure to collapse and the fruit to sink.
SELF ASSESSMENT EXERCISE 1 Prepare a rich creaming method cake use as follows: 1.
100gm flour, 250gm fat 100gm sugar bake the cake at 230 fat 100gm sugar bake the cake at 230 for 15minutes.
2.
Check the appearance of the crust 3.
Check the texture of the cake 3.6 Types of Things in Cake Decorations 19HCM 333 MODULE 1 Cakes are iced in order to beautify it and make it look more attractive and appealing while some are iced to suit the occasion, some are decorated to also suit the occasion.
Types 1.
Almond paste (marzipan) 2.
Royal 3.
Butter 4.
Glace 5.
Sugar paste 6.
Chocolate frosting Almond Pate (Marzipan) This type of king decoration is applied to rich fruit cakes before they are iced, to act as a barrier between the cake and the king.
It also forms an airtight seal over the cake to prevent it from drying out.
Recipe • 225g ground almonds • 100g caster sugar • 100g icing sugar • egg • Few drops of almond essence • 1 Tablespoon lemon juice • Few drops of vanilla essence.
Methods 1.
Sieve the sugar and almonds 2.
Add the flavorings, and gradually add the beaten egg and mix to a smooth paste.
3.
Knead until completely smooth.
4.
Store temporarily in a plastic bag.
Royal Icing This king can be poured or spread over a cake to form a smooth coating, or if made slightly stiffer can be used for piping decorations on to the cake.
Recipe 20HCM 333 MODULE 1 • 450g King sugar • 3 teaspoon glycenne • 2-3 egg whites • 4 teaspoon lemon juice (for a hand brittle king) Methods • Sieve the king sugar • Whisk line egg whites until foaming but not stiff • Gradually add the icing sugar, beaten well in between to produce a soft white icing.
• For pouring over a cake, the icing should coat the back of the spoon and pour slowly • For king the king should stand in soft peaks.
Glace King The king can be used to decorate creamed or rubbed in cakes or sponges.
Recipe: • 225g king sugar • 1-11/2 tablespoon water • Flavoring • Coloring Method • Sieve the icing sugar • Gradually add the water and beat well in between to form a smooth icing of the required consistency • Do not add too much water as it is very rapidly absorbed and will produce too thin an icing.
• Add colouring drop by drop until the required shade or colour is reached.
Add the flavouring the same way.
Butter King • 30g butter or soft margarine • 100g king sugar Methods 21HCM 333 MODULE 1 • Sieve the king sugar • Soften the butter or margarine by creaming it in a bowl • Gradually add the king sugar, beaten well to produce a smooth king.
• Add I teaspoon warn water to soften the king or more if required.
• Colour and flavour as required if flavoured with coffee or cocoa, dissolve these in hot water first to avoid a speckle the appearance in the finished king.
Sugar Paste Recipe • 450g king sugar • 1 tablespoon liquid glucose syrup • 1 egg white Method • Sieve the king sugar into a bowl • Mix the egg white and the glucose syrup and gradually, work in the king sugar, beaten well in between • When the king becomes too stiff to mix with a spoon, knead gently with one hand and work in the rest of the sugar until a smooth paste is formed.
Rollout to the size required and cover the cake, using the fingers dusted with corn flour to smooth it down.
Chocolate Frosting • 175g king sugar • 50g plain chocolate • 2 tablespoon hot water • 12.5g butter or margarine few drops vanilla essence Method • Sieve the king sugar • Put chocolate, water and butter into a pan and warm gently until the chocolate has melted Beat well until smooth and cool slightly • Add the vanilla essence and king sugar and beat until smooth • Use at once to coat the cake Cake Decorations The following decorations can be used for small or large cakes: 22HCM 333 MODULE 1 1.
Crystallized violets or fruits 2.
Chocolate curls or flakes 3.
Small jelly sweets 4.
Flaked or chopped almonds 5.
Walnuts (shelled) 6.
Coarsely grated coconut 7.
Angelica 8.
Glace fruits 9.
Small silver or gold balls 10.
Sugar strands 11.
Roasted chopped nuts SELF ASSESSMENT EXERCISE 2 List the different types of kind and their methods of preparation.
4.0 CONCLUSION This is unit one of this course and we have dealt vary essentially on cake making, possible faults in cake, king and cake decoration.
5.0 SUMMARY In this unit you have been greatly expose to the different types of cake making, method of preparing the types of cake possible faults in cake with different types of king and cake decorations 6.0 TUTOR-MARKED ASSIGNMENT 1.
Explain the materials used in cake making 2.
Explain different faults in cake making 7.0 REFERENCES/FURTHER READINGS Anita, Tull.
(2000).
Food and Nutrition: Oxford University Press.
Betty, Letch (2001).
Cake Decoration: Orbits Publishing Griffin House London.
David, Foskett, Victor Ceseran, and Ronal Kinton (2004).
Practical Cooking: Tentnedition Book Power with Hotter and Stoughton in Cooperation with the British Council.
Vincent, Naccarato (1991).
Cake Decorating: U.S.A. UNIT 2 PREPARATION OF EGGS, GRAINS AND FARINACEOUS DISHES 23HCM 333 MODULE 1 CONTENTS 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objectives 3.0 Main Content 3.1 Preparation of Egg Dishes 3.1.1 Points to Consider When Buying Eggs 3.1.2 Quality of Eggs 3.1.3 Food Value of Eggs 3.1.4 Egg Dishes 3.1.5 Eggs in Cocotte 3.1.6 Boiled Egg 3.1.7 Soft – Boiled Eggs 3.1.8 Hard – Boiled Eggs 3.1.9 Fried Eggs 3.1.10 Poached Eggs 3.1.11 Omelette 3.2 Farinaceous Dishes 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutor-Marked Assignment 7.0 References/Further Readings 1.0 INTRODUCTION In the last unit, we discussed about egg dishes, difference types of grains and farinaceous dishes.
As a result of this we will highlight deeper on this topic some of the issues raised in the last course will be treated while new ones will be added.
The first unit of this course treats the use of eggs in food production, foods classified as farinaceous dishes, garnishes, Accompaniments to farinaceous dishes and the varieties of grain used in cooking.
2.0 OBJECTIVES By the end of this unit, you should be able to: • explain the uses of egg in food production • explain egg dishes applying garnishes and suitable accompaniments • explain farinaceous products • explain how to make farinaceous dishes • explain how to apply garnishes and accompaniments to farinaceous dishes • explain various grains used in cooking.
24HCM 333 MODULE 1 3.0 MAIN CONTENT Preparation of egg dishes, farinaceous dishes and use of grains in cooking.
This principle will be derived through practical, notes and related text books to give the basic knowledge.
Students are expected to visit the market to get conversant with this food items and also make use of it.
3.1 Preparation of Egg Dishes Different types of eggs are used for cooking but the most commonly used is the Hen’s egg.
Other types of eggs are: Turkey, geese, ducks, guinea fowl quail and gulls are all thee edible types of eggs.
Quails eggs are used in a variety of ways.
They can be used as a garnish to many hot and cold salads dishes and may also be used as a starter to main course such as a salad of assorted leaves with hot wild mushrooms and poached quail eggs, tartlet of quail eggs on chopped mushrooms coated with hollandaise sauce.
Eggs are graded into four sizes, small, medium large and very large.
They are tasted for quality then weighed and graded.
3.1.1 Points to Consider When Buying Eggs Egg shell must be clean, well shaped, strong and slightly rough.
3.1.2 Quality of Egg • When eggs are broken there should be a high proportion of thin white if an egg is kept, the thin white gradually changes into the white and water passes from the white into the Yolk.
• The Yolk should be firm, round (not flattened) and of a good even colour.
When eggs are kept long, the yolk will begin to flatten; water evaporates from the egg and is replaced by air.
3.1.3 Food Value of Egg Eggs are useful as a main dish as they provide energy, fat, minerals and vitamins needed for growth and repair of the body.
The fat in the egg yolk is high in saturated fat while the egg white is made of protein and water.
3.1.4 Egg Dishes 25HCM 333 MODULE 1 Egg can be prepared in various ways such as scrambled, poached, omelets, boiled, fried etc for breakfast dishes may be served for lunch, high teas, super and snacks Scrambled Egg Recipe • Egg:- 6-8 for 4 portions • Milk:- 2 table spoon • Salt:- to taste • Pepper:- to taste • Butter or oil:- 50gm Method 1.
Break the egg in a basin, add milk and lightly season with salt and pepper, whisk and thoroughly mix 2.
Melt 25g butter in a thick – bottomed pan, add the eggs and cook over a gentle heat stirring continuously until the eggs are lightly cooked 3.
Remove from the heat, correct the seasoning and mix the remaining 25g butter.
4.
Serve in individual egg dishes.
Scrambled egg can be served on a slice of freshly buttered toast with the crust removed Caution If scrambled eggs are cooked too quickly or for too long the protein will toughen, the eggs will dis-colour because of the iron and sulphur compounds being released and water being separated from the egg making it pleasant to eat.
3.1.5 Eggs in Cocotte Recipe • Butter 25gm for 4 portion • Salt, pepper to taste • Eggs 4 Method 26HCM 333 MODULE 1 1.
Butter in four egg cocotte container 2.
Break an egg in each carefully 3.
Place the cocottes in a sauté pan of about 1cm 4.
Cover with a tight-fitting lip, place on a serious heat so that the water boils rapidly 5.
Cook for 2-3 minutes until the eggs are lightly set and serve.
3.1.6 Boiled Egg Method Place the eggs in cold water, bring to the boil simmer for 2 minutes, remove from the water and serve at once in an egg cup.
You can also boil the eggs for 4-5minute.
Always serve the egg with the shell.
3.1.7 Soft Boiled Eggs Method Plunge the eggs into boiling water, reboil and simmer for 5minutes, refresh immediately.
Remove the shells carefully, reheat when required for 30seconds in hot salted water.
3.1.8 Hard Boiled Eggs Plunge the eggs into a pan of boiling water Reboil and simmer for 8-10 minutes Refresh until cold under running water.
Caution If long cooking time is used, iron in the yolk and sulphur compounds in the white are released to form an unsightly blackish ring around the yolk.
State eggs will also show a black ring round the yolk.
3.1.9 Fried Eggs 1 egg or 2 proportion depending on the size of the egg.
Method 1.
Allow 1 egg portion 2.
Melt a little butter in a frying pan, add the eggs 3.
Cook gently until lightly set.
Serve on a plate or flat dish.
27HCM 333 MODULE 1 To prepare an excellent fried egg.
It is essential to use a fresh high quality egg, to maintain a controlled low heat and use a high quality fat.
3.1.10 Poached Eggs High quality eggs should be used for poaching because the have a large amount of thick white and consequently have less tendency to spread in the simmering water but low quality eggs have large amount of thin white which have high tendency of spreading in the simmering water.
Little use of vinegar to discolor and give the eggs a strong vinegar flavour.
Method 1.
Carefully break the eggs one by one into a shallow pan containing at least 8cm gently boiling water to which a little vinegar has been added.
(1 litre of water to 1 tablespoon of vinegar.)
2.
Simmer until lightly set for approximately 21/2-3 minutes 3.
Remove carefully with a perforated spoon into a bowl of cold water.
4.
Trim the white if necessary 5.
Reheat when required in hot salted water for 1 minute 6.
Remove carefully from the water also using a perforated spoon 7.
Draw on a clean cloth and use as required.
3.1.11 Omelets 1.
Cook 2-3 proportion 2.
Break the eggs into a basin, season lightly with salt and pepper.
3.
Beat well with a fork or whisk yolks and white are thoroughly combined.
4.
Heat the omelets pan, wipe thoroughly clean with a day cloth 5.
Add 10g butter, heat until foaming but not brown 6.
Add the eggs and cook quickly, moving the mixture continuously with a fork until lightly set, remove from the heat.
7.
Half fold the mixture over at right-angles to the handle 8.
Tap the bottom of the pan to bring up the edge of the omelets 9.
Tilt the pan completely over so as to allow the omelets to fall carefully into the centre of the dish or plate.
10.
Neaten the shape if necessary and serve immediately.
3.2 Farinaceous Dishes 28HCM 333 MODULE 1 Farinaceous dishes are Italian pastes like (spaghetti, macaroni, etc) Noodles and gnocchi usually served for luncheon as a separate course and also used as garnishes.
They are also meals prepared from grounded flour, cereal, potatoes, grains, nuts, beans etc.
General points for preparing farinaceous dishes: 1.
Always cook in plenty of gently boiling salted water 2.
Stir to boil and do not over cook 3.
If not used immediately, refresh and reheat carefully in hot salted water when required 4.
Drain well in a colander 5.
With most pastes, grated cheese should be served separated Examples of farinaceous dishes: Spaghettis with Tomato sauce (a) 100g spaghetti (b) 25g grated cheese Examples of Spaghetti • 25g butter • 250ml tomato sauce • 100g tomato concase • Salt • Chopped onion paper • Tomatoes Method 1.
Phinge the spaghetti into a saucepan in a boiling salted water 2.
Allow to boil gently 3.
Stir occasionally with a wooden spoon 4.
Cook 12-15 minute 5.
Drain well in a colander 6.
Return to a clean dry pan 7.
Mix in the butter and add to the major sauce 8.
Correct the seasoning 9.
Add the tomato concase 29HCM 333 MODULE 1 10.
Serve in an earthen dish on a flat plate cook tomatoes concasse, cook the finely chopped onion in the butter without colour add the chopped tomatoes and cook for a few minutes.
Season with salt and pepper.
Spaghetti Bolognaise • 100g spaghetti • 25g grated cheese s • 100g minced beef • 25g butter • 125ml demi glace • Salt • pepper Prepare the bolognaise sauce, place the butter in a sauce add the chopped onion and cook for 5 minute, add the veal and cook, colouring lightly Add the demi glace simmer till tender, correct the seasoning mean while cooking the spaghetti in plenty of boiling water, allow to boil gently.
Stir occasionally with a wooden spoon cook for 12-15 minute drain in a colander Return to a clean pan of 10g butter, correct the seasoning, and serve in an earthen ware dish serve with grated cheese separately.
Noodles with Butter • 100g noodles • 50g butter • Salt • Pepper • Grated nut meg Method Cook noodles in plenty of gently boiling water, draw well in a colander, Return to the pan add the seasoning and butter.
Toss carefully until mixed; correct the seasoning serve in an earthen ware dish on a silver flat Noodles may also be used as a garnishing e.g.
with braised beef Braised Rice • 100g rice • 185ml white stock 30HCM 333 MODULE 1 • 25g chopped onion • 50g butter • Salt • Pepper Method 1.
Place 25g butter in a small sauternes 2.
Add the onion 3.
Cook gently without colouring 2-3 minutes 4.
Add the rice 5.
Cook gently without colouring 2-3 minutes 6.
Add twice the amount of stock to rice seasoning, cover with a butter paper and boil, place in a hot oven 230-250 and cook for 15 minutes.
7.
Remove immediately into a cool Santee; carefully mix in the remaining butter correct the seasoning serve in air earthen ware dish on a silver flat.
Risotto • 100g rice short grain • 185ml white stock • 25g chopped onions • 50g butter • Salt • Pepper • 25g grated cheese Method 10.Melt the butter in a small sauce pan 11.Add the chopped onion 12.Cook gently without colour for 3 minutes 13.Add the stock and season lightly 14.Cover the lid 15.Allow to simmer on the side of the cooker 16.Stir frequently if necessary add more stock until rice is cooked.
17.Finally mix in the cheese with a fork and serve.
Grains Used in Cookery Grains are vegetables, which when cooked are turned soft and becomes more soluble and easier to eat.
E.g.
potato, yam, apple, carrot, cucumber, rice, beans, Gari, semovita etc.
Croquette Potato 31HCM 333 MODULE 1 Cut the potato to duchess style cylinder shape 4x2cm pass through flour, egg wash and bread crumbs.
Reshape with a palette knife and deep fry in hot deep fat 185 in a frying basket when golden in colour, drain well and serve on a dish paper.
Lorette Potato • Cut the potato in a dauphine mixture • Shape like short cigar • Deep fry in a hot fat • Serve on a dish paper.
Steamed Potato Jacket • Select even sized potato scrub well • Cook in a steamer or boil in salted water • Serve unpeeled on a sernette or on a silver dish.
Fried Rice • 400g rice • 2 spring onions • 1 egg • Pinch of salt • 2tsp Soya sauce • Separate rice grains as much as possible • Separate the white and green parts of onion and cut into small rounds.
• Heat a wok • Add the oil and white spring onions for 40 seconds • Beat the egg with oil and salt and pour into the wok, leave for 6-8 seconds • Until the egg sets on the bottom.
• Add the parboiled rice, turn and mix continuously for 3-4 minutes.
• Mix in the Soya sauce, add little stock and stir if rice is hard for a few seconds • Add the green spring onion and serve.
How to Apply Garnishes to Grins and Faun a Cegue Dish 32HCM 333 MODULE 1 Garnishes are eggs and vegetables used to finish a food prepared.
It could, be in form of sliced onions, sliced tomatoes, poached egg, buttered ham, side-salad, hordoeuvrres carrots, lettuce, etc.
SELF ASSESSMENT EXERCISE 1.
Explain egg dishes 2.
List the various grains used in cookery 4.0 CONCLUSION This unit has generally discussed egg dishes, farinaceous dishes, grains and garnishes used in cooking.
We have highlighted on the various uses of eggs, application of garnishes and accompaniments to different farinaceous dishes.
5.0 SUMMARY This unit treats egg and the use of egg in food production, what farinaceous dishes are; application of garnishes and accompaniment and also grains used in cookery.
Students are expected to practice all they have learnt from time to time to be able to prepare such dishes.
6.0 TUTOR-MARKED ASSIGNMENT 1.
Prepare 1 type of egg preparation and enter your result 2.
What are the points to consider when buying eggs?
7.0 REFERENCES/FURTHER READINGS Ceserani and Kinton.
(1980).
Practical Cookery.
Edward Arnold Publishers Ltd: Bedford Square, London.
MODULE 2 33HCM 333 MODULE 1 Unit 1 Fat Flours, Commodities for Pastry Production Puddings, Sweets Unit 2 Freezing Techniques, Chilled and Iced Confectioneries UNIT 1 FAT FLOURS, COMMODITIES FOR PASTRY PRODUCTION, PUDDINGS AND SWEETS CONTENTS 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objectives 3.0 Main Content 3.1 Fats and flours 3.1.1 Different Types of Fats 3.1.2 Types of Flour 3.1.3 Other Commodities Used for Pastry 3.1.4 Raising Agents Contd.
3.1.5 Types of Pastries, Batters, Dough 3.1.6 Uses Chocolate Éclairs, Cream Burns, etc.
3.2 Hot Sweets 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutor-Marked Assignment 7.0 References/Further Readings 1.0 INTRODUCTION In the last unit, we discussed about the use of eggs and farinaceous dishes, in addition to the grains used in cooking.
Here, we will be discussing on fats, flours, and commodities for pastry production, puddings and sweets.
The first unit deals with fats, flours and commodities used in food production so that you will be able to identify fats, flours and other commodities and be able to prepare them into pastries, puddings and sweets.
2.0 OBJECTIVES By the end of this unit, you should be able to: • identify fats, flours and other commodities used for pastry, pudding and sweets • prepare pastries, puddings and sweets • identify different types of paste, dough • select materials for production of hot and cold sweets.
34HCM 333 MODULE 1 3.0 MAIN CONTENT 3.1 Fats and Flours They are sources of energy, Fats are solid at room temperature in the diet.
They are used for: • Spreading on bread e.g.
butter, margarine • Creaming for cakes e.g.
butter, margarine • Shortening for pastry e.g.
laid, vegetable fat • Frying deep and shallow e.g.
laid, vegetable oil, butter, margarine • Oiling baking tins • Salad creams • Ice creams.
3.1.1 Different Types of Fats • Butter: This is made from cream which has to be separated from milk.
It contains at least 82% after separation from milk.
It is pasteurized, the bad odour is removed then it is held to harden, the fat globules for some hours, and then churned.
• Lard is produced from pigs; its quality depends on where it is on the body.
Uses: for deep and shallow frying.
• Margarine: made from vegetable oil like sun flower, Soya oil, pastry making for creaming if softened.
3.1.2 Types of Flour Wheat is a main cereal which is usually grounded into flour before it is used for food.
• Whole meal flour: brown flour which is 100% extraction rate.
• Wheat meal flour: brown in colour contains 85% extraction rate and 15% discarded as bran.
• White flour: white in colour contains 70% of the original grain with most of the bran, germ, fat, minerals removed.
3.1.3 Other Commodities Used For Pastry 35HCM 333 MODULE 1 • Sugar: sugar is made from either sugar cane which is grown in tropical countries.
It is an important source of energy to the body, so also it is always used in sweet pastries like cake, bread, dough nuts etc.
• Eggs: Egg contains 3 main parts: the shell, the white and the yolk.
• Uses: Cake making, meat pie, croquets, for coating, glazing, added to sauces, garnishing, mayonnaise, batters, puddings, biscuits, salads, etc.
• Raising agents: This is used in order to make flour mixture e.g.
cake bread to rise and have a light pleasant texture.
Examples 1.
Baking powder consists of bicarbonate of soda, acid, sodium pyrophosphate acid calcium phosphate, starch.
It is useful for plain cake mixtures, pastries, biscuits.
2.
Yeast: is a microscopic living agent naturally found on the skins of some fruits and in the air.
3.1.4 Raising Agents [Contd] Uses of yeast: It is used for bread making doughnut • colourings: are chemicals produced from plants and animals this is • added to icing sugar to decorate cake, biscuits etc.
• flavours and solvent: food flavours used are from herbs (root), fruits (seeds), berries (barks).
These are used in pastry and baking to enrich the taste and smell of food commodities.
E.g.
vanilla flavour, banana flavour, pineapple, strawberry etc.
3.1.5 Types of Pastries, Butters, Dough A. Pastries 1.
Short pastry 2.
Puff pastry 3.
Rough puff pastry 4.
Sugar pastry 5.
Suet pastry 6.
Hot water paste 7.
Chou paste 1.
Short Pastry • 200g flour • 50g lard 36HCM 333 MODULE 1 • 50g margarine • pinch of salt • Sieve the flour and salt • Rub in the fat to a sandy texture • Make a well in the centre • Add sufficient water to make a firm paste • Handle as little as possible These are used for meat pie, sausage rolls etc 2 Puff Pastry • 200g flour • 125ml ice-cold water • 200g butter • Lemon salt • Sieve the flour and salt • Rub in 50g margarine or butter • Make a well in the centre • Add the water and lemon juice and knead well into a smooth dough in the shape of a ball • Relax the dough in a cool place for 30 minutes • Cut across half-way through the dough and pull out the corners to form a star shape • Roll out the point of the star square leaving the centre thick • Knead the remaining 150g of margarine or butter to the same texture as the dough • Place the margarine on the centre four times thicker than the flaps • Fold over the flaps • Roll out 30 x 15cm cover with a cloth to rest for 5-10 minutes in a cool place • Allow to rest in a cool place for 20 minutes • Half turn the paste to the right or to the left • Give one more double turn, allow to rest for 20 minutes • Give two double turns and allow to rest in between each before using Uses: meat pies, sausage rolls, jam puffs 3.
Rough Puff Pastry • 200g flour • 125ml water • 150g margarine salt 37HCM 333 MODULE 1 • Sieve the flour and salt • Cut the fat into 10 pieces and mix them into the flour without rubbing in • Make a well in the centre • Add the water and mix to a fairly stiff dough • Turn on to a floured table and roll into an oblong strips of about 30 cm • Give one double turn as for puff pastry • Allow to rest in a cool place covered with a cloth for 30 minutes • Give three more double turn, resting between each • Allow to rest before using.
4.
Sugar Pastry • 200g flour • 50g sugar • 125ml butter • egg • Pinch of salt.
Method 1 • Cream egg and sugar but do not allow to over soften • Add the margarine and mixture a few seconds • Gradually in corporate the sieved flour and salt • Mix lightly until smooth • Allow to rest in a cool place before using Method 2 • Serve the flour and salt • Lightly rub in the margarine to a sandy texture • Make a well in the centre • Add the sugar and beaten egg • Mix the sugar and egg until dissolved • Gradually in corporate the flour and margarine and lightly • Mix to a smooth Parle.
Uses: for flans, fruit tartlets etc.
5 Suet Paste • 200g flour • 10g baking powder • 125ml water 38HCM 333 MODULE 1 • 100g chopped beef • Pinch of salt • Serve flour, baking powder and salt • Mix in the suet • Make a well • Add the water • Mix lightly to a fairly stiff paste • Break the beef into pieces, sprinkle with flour and • Chop with a chopping knife.
Uses: steamed puddings, jam rolls, steamed meat puddings.
6.
Hot Water Paste • 100g flour • 125ml water • 50g laid • Serve the flour and salt into a warm basin, make a well in the centre.
• Boil the laid in the water • Pour into the middle of the flour • Mix quickly with a wooden spoon • Knead with hands while warm until smooth Uses: raised pork pies, real pies and ham pies 7.
Choux Paste • 1/ litre water 2 • 125g flour • Pinch of salt • 100g margarine • eggs • Pinch of sugar • Bring the water, sugar and fat to boil in a sauce pan.
• Remove from heat • Add sieved flour and salt and mix with a wooden spoon • Return to a moderate heat and stir continuously until the mixture leaves the sides of the pan.
• Remove from the heat and allow to cool • Gradually add the beaten eggs, mix very well and allow the paste to drop consistency.
3.1.6 Uses: Chocolate Éclairs, Cream Burns etc Hot Sweets 39HCM 333 MODULE 1 1.
Victorian sandwich 2.
Genoese sponge 3.
Steamed fruit puddings 4.
Vanilla soufflé.
3.2 Hot Sweets 1.
Victorian Sandwich • 100g castor sugar • 100g flour • 100g butter • 2 eggs • ½ spoon baking powder • Cream the fat and sugar until soft and fluffy • Gradually add the beaten eggs • Lightly mix in the sieved flour and baking powder • Divide into two 14cm 7 in g • Reused sponge tins • Bake in a hot oven 2300c for 15 minutes • Turn out on a wire rack to cool • Spread one half with jam, place the other half on top • Dust with king sugar • Serve on a doily on a silver flat 2.
Genoese Sponge • eggs • 100g sugar • 100g flour • 50g butter • Whisk the eggs and sugar with a balloon whisk in a boul over a pan of hot water • Continue until the mixture is light, creamy, double in bulk • Remove from the heat and whisk until cold and thick.
• Fold in the melted butter very gently • Place in a greased butter gently • Bake in a moderately hot oven 2000c-2300c for 30 minutes 3.
Steamed Fruit Pudding • 200g flour • 350g fruit 40HCM 333 MODULE 1 • 100g sugar • 2 + able spoon water • Grease the basin • Line, using three quarter of the paste • Add prepared and washed fruit and sugar.
Adding 1-2 cloves in an apple pudding • Add two table spoon of water • Moisten the edge of the paste • Cover the remaining quarter of the paste and seal firmly • Steam for 1 ½ hour • Clean the basin and wrap a folder serviette • And pour on it a custard sauce 4.
Vanilla Soufflé • 125ml milk • 10g flour • 10g butter • 50g sugar • eggs • Vanilla • Coat the inside of a soufflé dish with fresh butter as thinly as possible • Coat the butter in the soufflé case with sugar • Boil the milk and vanilla in a thick bottom pan • Mix 2 egg yolks, 10g flour, 50g sugar to a smooth • Consistency in a basin • Add boiling milk to the mixture, stir vigorously • Until completely mixed • Return the mixture to a clean thick bottomed pan and stir • Continuously with a wooden spoon over gentle heat until the • Mixture thickens then remove from heat • Allow to cool slightly.
• Add 2 eggs, 15g butter and mix thoroughly • Stiffly whip the 4 egg whites and carefully fold into the • Mixture which should be just warm • Place mixture into the prepared mould; level it off with a palette knife • Place on a baking sheet and cook in a moderately hot oven • Pass through a fine strainer into a bowl • Freeze in an ice-cream machine, gradually adding the cream SELF ASSESSMENT EXERCISE 41HCM 333 MODULE 1 1.
List the types of pastries 2.
Prepare 1 pastry and 1 sweet 4.0 CONCLUSION Now, you should be able to identify fats, flours and other commodities used in pastry, and sweets and also to identify the different types of pastes in pastry making.
5.0 SUMMARY You have studied extensively on the various types of pastries, fats, flour and other commodities used in pastry and should be able to prepare various sweets, both hot and cold.
6.0 TUTOR-MARKED ASSIGNMENT 1.
Explain the different commodities used in pastry 2.
What kind of pastries can be used for meat pie?
7.0 REFERENCES/FURTHER READINGS Anita, Tull (2000).
Food and Nutrition: Oxford University Press.
Betty, Letch (2001).
Cake Decoration: Orbits Publishing; Griffin House London.
David Foskett, Victor Ceseran and Ronal Kinton (2004).
Practical Cooking,: Tentnedition Book Power with Hotter and Stoughton in Cooperation with the British Council.
UNIT 2 FREEZING TECHNIQUES, CHILLED AND ICED CONFECTIONERIES CONTENTS 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objectives 3.0 Main Content 3.1 Use of Chilling and Freezing Techniques 42HCM 333 MODULE 1 3.2 Examples of Food Suitable For Chilling 3.2.1 Chilling Technique 3.2.2 Freezing 3.2.3 Freezing Processes 3.2.4 Techniques for Freezing 3.2.5 Sweet Using Fish and Processed Fruits 3.3 Convenience Food 3.3.1 Examples of Convenience Food 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutor-Marked Assignment 7.0 References/Further Readings 1.0 INTRODUCTION In HCM 205, you studied the different types of techniques in preserving food of which chilling and freezing is one.
You will be studying it extensively by knowing the use of chilling and freezing techniques, how to make sweet, using fruit, the use and preparations of convenience products like processed fruits.
The first section of this unit treats the chilling and freezing techniques while the second one shows how to make use of sweet using fresh fruit, and followed by convenience products like processed fruits, sauce for sweets.
2.0 OBJECTIVES By the end of this unit, you should be able to: • identify chilling and freezing techniques • identify various sweets from fresh and processed fruits • describe various sauces for sweet for presentation • demonstrate how to cook and present convenience products.
3.0 MAIN CONTENT 3.1 Use of Chilling and Freezing Techniques Chilling is a catering system based on normal preparation and cooking of food, followed by rapid chilling storage in controlled low – temperature conditions above freezing point 0- 30c and subsequently reheating immediately before consumption.
Almost any food can be chilled provided that the correct methods are used during preparation.
43HCM 333 MODULE 1 3.2 Examples of Food Suitable for Chilling Meats All meats, poultry, game and offal can be cooked, chilled, sliced like strip loin of beef, and rapidly cooked, chilled, sliced and packaged for storage at 700c.
• Fish: all pre-cooked fish dishes are suitable for chilling • Egg Dishes: egg dishes like omelets and scrambled eggs are chilled and used in air lines.
Soups and sauces: most soups and sauces can now be successfully chilled.
• Desserts: large number of deserts are chilled well especially, the cold variety.
• Purpose of Chilling Food: the purpose of chilling food is to prolong its storage life and also prevent it from getting spoilt by bacteria and other micro-organism.
Process of Chilling: i.e.
chilling technique: 1.
Food should be cooked sufficiently.
2.
Chilling process must begin as soon as possible after completion of the cooking, portioning processes within 30 minutes of leaving the cooker and chilled to bellows and thus storage time cannot be more than five days.
3.
Food should be stored at 0 -30c.
4.
Chilled food should be distributed under such controlled conditions that any rise in temperature of the food during food distribution is kept to a minimum.
5.
Heat immediately removed from regeneration and raise the temperature to a level of at least 700c 6.
Chilled heated food should be consumed as soon as possible and not more than 2 hours after reheating.
7.
Discard any unconsumed, chilled, and reheated food immediately 3.2.1 Chilling Technique 1.
Time and temperature are crucial 2.
Food should not wait longer than 30 minutes to be chilled 3.
Food should not be above 30c at end of chilling time 4.
Food should not be stored beyond its use by date 5.
Temperature of food rising above 30c chilling transportation due to long journey in un-refrigerated transport or the refrigerated van not operating correctly.
44HCM 333 MODULE 1 3.2.2 Freezing Freezing is a specialised food production and distribution system that allows caterers to take advantage of longer life through freezing at 18 to 200c and stored at same temperature until is required for resale or consumption for up to 3- 6 months.
This process is similar to chilling but the recipes used have to be modified so that on reheating the food / sauces does not separate.
3.2.3 Freezing Processes 1.
Food ordered with high quality 2.
Food delivered cooked and prevented from spoiling before being processed.
3.
Menu must be cooked to high standards, rigidity to quality control and hygiene.
4.
Cooked food must be portioned before freezing 5.
Frozen foods must be at 180c 6.
Transport, in insulated containers 7.
Outdoor use should be transported in refrigerated transport.
8.
There must be standard set time for the regeneration of various types of dishes.
3.2.4 Techniques for Freezing 1.
Freezing should be done immediately after cooking 2.
Food must be frozen at –50c within 90 days 3.
Allow 2cm air space between layers of containers in the freezer.
4.
Food must be transported immediately after freezing to deep - freeze storage.
5.
Store at - 200c 6.
Monitor temperature at all times 8.
Store food in accepted manner on shelves, racks above the floor away from the door with enough space around to allow the cold air to circulate.
9.
Wear protective clothing when entering deep – freeze store.
10.
Destroy any food that has passed use by date.
11.
Monitor and record food temperatures regularly to prevent contamination from in correct storage conditions 12.
Maintain flavour and texture of food 13.
Use older stock before new stock 45HCM 333 MODULE 1 14.
Prevent unnecessary opening to store doors which would destabilise the temperature.
3.2.5 Using Fish and Processed Fruits Fish Sweets 1.
Fish cake 2.
Fish pie 3.
Fish in batter 1.
Fish Cake • 200g of fish (remove bone and skin) • 200g potatoes mar shed • Salt & pepper • 1 egg • 50g breadcrumbs • Fat • Combine the fish potatoes and egg and season.
• Divide into 4 mould into balls • Pass through the coating of flour, egg and bread crumbs • Flatten slightly, neaten with a palette knife • Deep fry in hot fat at 1850c for 3 minutes.
2.
Fish Pie • 250ml béchamel • 200g cooked fish • 50g cooked clicked mushroom • 1 hard boil eggs • Chopped parsley • 200g mashed duchess potatoes • Boil the béchamel • Add the fish, mushroom, egg and parsley and correct the seasoning • Place in a pie dish • Place or pipe potato on top and brush with egg wash or milk • Brown in a hot oven 3.
Fish in Batter • 200g flour • Salt • 10g yeast 46HCM 333 MODULE 1 • 250ml water or milk • 1 egg • 2001g fish • Sieve the flour make a well and add egg and liquid • Gradually in corporate the flour, beat to a smooth mixture • Pass the prepared wash and well dried fish through flour • Shake off the surplus and pass through the batter.
• Place carefully away from you to the hot oil and deep fry at 1700c • Until it turns a golden brown remove and drain well.
• Sieve with either lemon quarters or tart are sauce 3.3 Convenience Food Convenience food is a wide range of part prepared food which means that certain stages or steps in the process have been eliminated, this lessons labours required in their preparation.
Convenience food can be categorized into fresh, dried, canned, bottled, frozen, chilled, vacuum packed and portion controlled food e.g.
butter portions, jam portions convenience can also be categorized into full convenience, pre- service convenience, pre- cooking convenience pre- assembly convenience and basic convenience.
Type Package items Beverages Packaged items where where food is food is not cooked or cooked or fully prepared prepared Full Butter portions, Fruit juice Frozen fruit convenience jam portions, sliced bread, potted shrimps, gateaux salad dressing 47HCM 333 MODULE 1 Preserve Ice cream, caned Tea bag Frozen fruit convenience fruit canned meat, liquid canned soup fruit coffee piles.
Pre-cooking Canned steak - Uncooked frozen pies convenience dehydrated soup pastries, bread crumbs sausage rolls fish scamp scallops fingers coquilles portioned meat Pre– Canned steak , Ground Sponge mixes pastry assembly frozen pastry, coffee mixes unfrozen scamp, convenience fruit pie fillings, fish fillers, and pastry produces portioned meat.
Basic - Coffee Peeled vegetable dried convenience beans (to fruit ointments minced be around) meat, sausages.
3.3.1 Examples of Convenience Food 1.
Fried ham 2.
Pizza 3.
Cocktail canapés 4.
Crab cakes 5.
Potato wedges with tomato chill salsa 6.
Honey prawns 7.
Deep-fried pork noodles.
1.
Fried Ham and Cheese Savoury • 4 Slices of cooked ham • 8 Slices ciruyere cheese • 8 Slices thin toast • 50g Caulfield butter Method • Place each slice of ham between two slices of cheese then put between two slice of lightly toasted bread cut out with a round cutter.
• Gently fry on both sides in clarified butter and serve.
2.
Pizza is a flat bread which originated from Italy.
• 200g flour • punch of salt 48HCM 333 MODULE 1 • 12g margarine • 5g yeast • 125ml water or milk • 5g castor sugar • 100g onions • 2 cloves garlic • 60ml sun flower oil • 200g caned plum tomatoes • 3g ogre • 3g basu • 10g sugar • 10g corn flour • 100g mozzarella cheese Method • Sieve the flour and salt, rub in the margarine • Disperse the yeast in the warm allkor water add the castor sugar to the flour.
• Mix well, knead to a smooth dough place in a basin covered with a damp cloth and allow to prove until doubled in size.
• Knock back, divide into two and roll into two 18cm.
Place on a lightly greased baking sheet.
• Sweat the finely chopped onions and garlic in the oil until cooked.
• Add the roughly chopped tomatoes, tomato purées, ogre and basel and sugar and bring to boil and simmer for 5 minutes • Dilute the corn flour in a little water, stir into the tomato mixture and bring back to the boil • Take the discs of pizza dough and spread 125g of filling on each one.
• Sprinkle with grated mozzarella cheese or lay the slices of cheese on top • Bake in a moderately hot oven at 180oC for 10 minutes 3.
Cock Tail Canapés (a) Hot savoury pastry patties, botches of lobsters, chicken, crab, salmon, mushroom, etc small pizzas hamburger, brochettes.
(b) Hot sausages with various filling, like chicken livers prawns, mush rooms, tomatoes, gherkins etc wrapped in bacon and skewered and cooked under the salamander.
(c) Game chip, gail frette potatoes, fried fish balls, celery stalks spread with cheese.
4.
Crab Cakes • 350g crab meat 49HCM 333 MODULE 1 • 650g uncooked prawns • 1 tablespoon red curry paste • 1 egg • 2 spring onions • 2 tablespoon chopped fresh colanders • 2 tablespoon lemon grass • 1 red chili • 2 tablespoon vegetable oil • 2 tablespoon lime juice • 2tablespoon water • 2 tablespoon fish sauce • 2 tablespoon sugar • 1 kaffir lime Method • Place crab in a food processor, curry paste, egg onion, colanders, lemongrass • Chili grill until all mixed together.
• Shape into small cakes • Heat oil in shallow pan and fry on both sides until golden brown.
Drain + serve with • Suitable sauce.
50g 5.
Potato Wedge with Tomato Chilli Salsa • large potatoes • 1 teaspoon coarse black pepper • 1 teaspoon sea salt • Tomato salsa • 1 large beef tomatoes peeled, seeded, finely chopped • 1 red onion • 1 tablespoon lime juice • 1 tablespoon of chopped fresh basil leaves Method • Wash the potatoes, cut into wedges • Heat, sprinkle with salt and pepper in a suitable tray • Bake in a hot oven until brown • Prepare salsa: place all ingredients into a suitable bowl and mix well 50HCM 333 MODULE 1 • Place the cooked potatoes on a serving platter arrange around a bowl of sour cream and a bowl of the salsa.
4.0 CONCLUSION So far, chilling and freezing techniques have been dealt with extensively.
You should be able to know the techniques of chilling and freezing food and the different types of convenience foods.
5.0 SUMMARY Examples of suitable chilling and frozen foods have been given and convenience foods classified into 5 categories.
Examples of such food have also been given.
You are expected to know how to chill food, freeze food, and cook some convenience foods.
6.0 TUTOR-MARKED ASSIGNMENT 1 List the technique of chilling Food 2 State the 5 categories of convenience Food 7.0 REFERENCES/FURTHER READINGS Anita, Tull (1980).
Food and Nutrition: Oxford University Press.
Ceserani and Kinton (1980).
Practical Cookery.
Edward Arnold Publishers Ltd: Bedford Square, London.
MODULE 3 Unit 1 Preparation of Non-Alcoholic Drinks Unit 2 Types of Catering Services Unit 3 Types of Catering Services–Garnishing, Flavorings, Stuffing for Poultry Game UNIT 1 PREPARATION OF NON-ALCOHOLIC DRINKS CONTENTS 51HCM 333 MODULE 1 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objectives 3.0 Main Content 3.1 Types of Tea 3.2 Coffee 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutor-Marked Assignment 7.0 References/Further Readings 1.0 INTRODUCTION In the last unit, we discussed about savouries, sandwiches and beverages.
In this unit we shall discuss how to prepare Non- alcoholic drinks.
In the hospitality industry, non–alcoholic drink is very essential as guest will always request for such and it demand immediate preparation and service.
Therefore, it is your responsibility to know how to do this.
It can be served in the main restaurant, coffee shop bar or swimming pool bar.
2.0 OBJECTIVES By the end of this unit, you should be able to: • prepare Tea (China, India, Lemon, Iced Tea) • prepare coffee (instant, pot, ground, Iced coffee) • prepare Hot beverages • prepare Fruit Drink • prepare milk shakes • prepare various types of drinks like Ginger, Paw-paw, Lemon, Pineapple etc.
3.0 MAIN CONTENT Tea: is one of the non-alcoholic beverages.
It can be used for breakfast, lunch in the country where such is prepared e.g.
China tea, India tea, or lemon.
Although it is a very popular, how it is made is a matter of personal taste.
When preparing tea, the pot should be rinsed with boiling water before the tea is added.
Boiling water should be poured onto the tea and left to infuse for three to five minutes.
Strain the tea when serving and serve with white sugar and cold milk.
3.1 Types of Tea 52HCM 333 MODULE 1 1.
Lemon Tea Lemon tea is served with sugar and wedges of lemon or slices of lemon.
2.
Russian or Lemon Tea It is made in the normal way but usually served with sliced lemon in the tea and few slices inside plate.
It can be served separately with a small fork, serve sugar also separately.
3.
China Tea This is made with a special blend of tea, which is more delicate in flavour and aroma than any other tea.
China tea is normally drunk on its own, but may be improved upon by adding slice of lemon in a side plate with a small fork.
It is rarely served with milk although sugar may be offered 4.
India Tea Otherwise called Ceylon tea is served inside metal or china pots.
It is served with milk and the sugar, offered separately.
5.
Iced Tea Make a strong tea and chill well.
It may then be strained, stored and chilled until required and served in a tumbler or glass cup with a teaspoon a slice of lemon may be placed in the glass and some lemon.
Serve separately like the Russian tea.
6.
Herbal Tea This is a combination of certain herbs and grasses used for medicinal purposes.
They do not contain caffeine, mint, and sienna.
They should always be made in China pots in order to preserve without milk or any other additions.
Tea is an evergreen plant of the camellia family, which is kept in bush for easy plucking, and only the two top leaves and bud are plucked.
There are more than 1,500 blends of tea grown in more than 3 countries 7.
Coffee 53HCM 333 MODULE 1 Instant coffee in the form of a powder or granules is very popular today, particularly as it tends to be cheaper than grounded-coffee made from fresh roasted coffee beans.
Grounded coffee has more flavour but it should be bought in small quantities as it loses its flavour when stored for a long period.
Keeping coffee in a refrigerator helps to keep it fresh.
Method of Preparation • Put the coffee into the perforated holder.
It should come only half way up to allow the coffee to swell and the water to percolate through it.
• Measure the water into the pot and place coffee holder in the pot.
Heat slowly until the coffee can be seen percolating gently through the glass or cover.
• Boil till it is rich brown colour for ten minutes.
Remove the coffee holder and serve.
• Do not reboil, as this tends to spoil the flavour of the coffee.
Other Methods • Rinse the coffee jug, measure coffee inside.
• Add boiling water and allow to infuse for three to five minutes stirring occasionally, leave to stand for a minute allow to settle.
• Pour out carefully from the jug.
• Serve either hot or cold with or without sugar.
Cold Drinks These are easy to make drinks that are refreshing, most especially with fresh fruit.
1.
Milk Shakes • Use ice- cold milk or cold milk and natural yoghurt and mix fruit purėė like strawberry, banana, and vanilla etc, which is available in syrup and bottled.
• Add sugar to taste.
• You can serve with chopped fruits, whole pieces of fruit, grated chocolate.
54HCM 333 MODULE 1 2.
Lemon Drink • 2 Lemon juice • Grated lemon rings • Iced cold water • Add sugar 3.
Fresh fruit juice • Squeeze the fruit from any citrus fruit and sweeten to taste if required.
• Combination of juices adds variety e.g.
grape and orange.
• Lemon and orange.
To Serve the Fruit Juice • Dip the rim of the glass in egg white or water and then put in sugar before filling.
• Cut a thin slice of lemon or orange and slit it halfway then arrange it on the glass rim.
• Place the fresh mint leaves on the surface of the drink and serve with ice cubes.
1.
Ginger Drink • Wash the Ginger very well and grate or blend.
Allow dry ginger to soak till it is soft and ready to ground.
• Sieve and add sugar to taste and a little cloven.
Serve cold 2.
Paw-paw Drink • Wash the pack of paw-paw.
• Remove the pawpaw, sieve and add sugar if required.
Serve cold.
3.
Pin-Apple Drink • Remove the back of pineapple, cut into smaller portion, blend and extract the juice.
Add water and sugar to taste.
Serve cold.
4.
Chocolate Shake 55HCM 333 MODULE 1 • Use ice cold water chocolate, add egg white, milk, sugar and whisked or mix together.
Serve cold.
(Keep refrigerated before use).
3.2 Coffee Coffee is produced from the beans of the coffee tree and is grown and exported from South – America, Arabia, India, West Indies, Africa, and Sumatra.
Varieties of coffee are named after the areas where they are grown such as Kenya, Brazil.
Coffee has no food value but the milk and sugar served with it has value.
Types of Coffee (1) Express o: steam under pressure is forced through powdered coffee.
(2) Cappuccino: strong-filtered coffee with whisked hot milk added.
(3) French: contains chicory, the root is washed; dried, roasted and ground chicory gives additional flavour and appearance to the coffee.
(4) Coffee Essence: concentrated form of liquid, which may contain chicory.
(5) Instant Coffee: liquid in dried powder form.
(6) Decaffeinated coffee has almost all caffeine removed and is therefore, less of a stimulant.
Coffee is used mainly as beverages served with milk and sugar or as a flavour for cakes, icing and ice- cream 4.0 CONCLUSION To be acquainted with no alcoholic drinks you must practice the aforementioned drinks at your private time and your study centre since it is a means of supplying water in the diet and also add variety and interest to all.
Tea is an evergreen plant of the Camellia family, which is kept to bush size for easy plucking and only the two top leaves and bud are plucked.
There are more than 1,500 blends of tea grown in more than 31 countries.
5.0 SUMMARY Non–alcoholic beverage is very important to serve with meals.
Since this is served throughout the day because of its importance of supplying water in the diet, it is easy to make and not time consuming.
It adds 56HCM 333 MODULE 1 variety and interest to the people; hence it is very important to know how to make it.
6.0 TUTOR-MARKED ASSIGNMENT 1.
List the types of beverages.
2.
How do you prepare Russian Lemon Tea?
7.0 REFERENCES/FURTHER READINGS Anital, Tull (2003).
Food & Nutrition: Tata McGraw–Hill Publishing Company Limited 4/12 Asaf Alli Road New – Delhi 110002.
Fosket, David, Ceserani, Victor, and Kinton Ronald, (2003).
The Theory of Catering, 10th Edition.
Book Point Limited; 130 Milton Park Abingolon Oxon ox 14 45 B.
UNIT 2 TYPES OF CATERING SERVICES CONTENTS 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objectives 3.0 Main Content 3.1 Healthy Wholesome Birds 3.2 Method of Cleaning 3.3 How to Prepare Chicken 3.3.1 Roast Chicken 3.3.2 Roast Stuffed Chicken 3.3.3 Grilled Chicken 3.3.4 Sauté of Chicken 57HCM 333 MODULE 1 3.3.5 Chicken sauté with Mushroom or Potatoes 3.3.6 Chicken a la King 3.3.7 Chicken Galantine 3.3.8 Chicken Volauvent 3.3.9 Chicken Cutlets 3.3.10 Chicken Pancakes 3.3.11 Fricassee of Chicken 3.3.12 Chicken Pie 3.3.13 Chicken in Casserole 3.3.14 Chicken Salad 3.3.15 Curried Chicken 3.3.16 Chicken Mayonnaise 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutor-Marked Assignment 7.0 References/Further Readings 1.0 INTRODUCTION The term poultry is generally used to refer to all domestic fowls kept for breeding, which includes Turkey, Geese, Ducks, Hens, Chicken, Pigeon’s etc.
These days, poultry is being referred to as chicken and are classified according to its size and feeding like single baby chicken, double baby chicken, medium, large and old.
No matter the size they are used for the same purpose.
2.0 OBJECTIVES By the end of this unit, you should be able to: • understand healthy and whole some birds • understand how to dress poultry • understand how to prepare chicken for cooking.
3.0 MAIN CONTENT 3.1 Healthy Wholesome Birds The signs of a healthy bird can be derived from: 58HCM 333 MODULE 1 (1) Plump breast (2) Pliable breast bone (3) Flesh firm (4) Skin white, unbroken and with a faint blush tint.
Healthy chicken usually have plump breast the breast bone should be pliable, the flesh should be firm not sticky and the skin white it should not have faded colour or have pinkish colour with a faint bluish t 3.2 Method of Cleaning 1.
Pick out any pen or down, using a small knife.
2.
Singe in order to remove any hairs, take care not to scorch the skin.
3.
Split the neck by gripping firmly and making a lengthwise incision on the underside, cut off the neck as close to the body as possible.
4.
Cut off the head.
5.
Remove the crop and loosen intestines and lungs with fore finger.
6.
Cut out vent and wipe clean.
7.
Loosen intestines with fore finger.
8.
Draw out the innards being careful not to break the gall bladder.
9.
Wipe vent if necessary.
10.Split and clean the gizzard 11.Cut off the gall bladder from the liver.
12.Keep the neck and heart.
3.3How to Prepare Chicken There are different methods of preparing chicken but we should be discussing about the following: (1) Roast chicken (2) Roast stuffed chicken (3) Grilled chicken (4) Sauté of chicken (5) Chicken sauté with mushroom or potatoes (6) Chicken à la king (7) Chicken Galantine.
(8) Chicken volauvent (9) Chicken cutlets (10) Chicken pancakes (11) Fricassee of chicken 59HCM 333 MODULE 1 (12) Chicken pie.
(13) Chicken in casserole (14) Chicken salad.
(15) Curried chicken (16) Chicken mayonnaise.
3.3.1 Roasted Chicken – for 4 1.5 kg Chicken 125 ml Bread sauce 25g Game chips 50g Dripping 125 ml Brown stock 1 Bunch water Preparation • Season the chicken inside and out with salt • Place on its side in a roasting tin • Cover with the dripping • Place in hot oven for about 20- 25 minutes • Turn on to the other leg • Cook for a further 20 – 25 minutes • Baste frequently • To test if cooked pierce with a fork between the drumstick and thigh and hold over a plate • The juice issuing from the chicken should not show any signs of Blood • Prepare roast gravy with the stock and sediment in the roasting tray • Serve on a flat silver dish with game chips in front and the water crest at the back of the bud 3.3.2 Roasted Stuffed Chicken – for 4 Some methods of roasting chicken.
But before trussing stuff with the following: • 25g Chopped onions • 50g White bread crumbs • Chopped chicken liver • 50g good dripping oil • Salt • Pepper Preparation 60HCM 333 MODULE 1 • Gently cook the onion the dripping without colour • Add the seasoning, herbs and crumbs mixed in the liver with correct seasoning 3.3.3 Grilled Chicken • Season the chicken prepared for grilling, add salt and mill pepper.
• Brush frequently with oil or melted fat during cooking and allow for approximately 15-20 minutes each side.
• Test if cooked by piercing the drumstick with a skewer or trussing needle, there should be no sign of blood issuing from the leg.
• Serve on a silver flat dish, garnish with picked watercress and over a suitable sauce separately e.g.
poulet grill, sauce diable.
3.3.4 Sauté of Chicken: 4 Portions 1.5 kg Chicken 250 ml Demi glace Salt Pepper Chopped-parsley 50 g Butter Preparation • To prepare the chicken for sauté, remove the feet at the first joint.
• Remove the legs from the carcass • Cut each leg in two at the joint • Remove the wishbone • Remove winglets and trim • Remove the wings carefully, leaving two equal portion • Remove the breast and cut into two • Trim the carcass and cut into three pieces • Place the butter in a sauté pan or a fairly low heat or stove season the pieces of chicken and place in the pan in the following order: - drumsticks, things, carcass, wings wing lets, and breast.
• Cook to golden on both sides • Cover with a lid and cook on the stove or in the oven until tender.
• Dress neatly in an entrée dish • Drain off all fat from the sauté pan • Return to the heat and add the demi-glace • Simmer for 3-4 minutes • Correct the seasoning and skin • Pass through a fine strainer on to the chicken 61HCM 333 MODULE 1 • Sprinkle with chopped parsley and serve.
3.3.5 Chicken Sauté 4 portions 1.5 kg Chicken cut for sauté 250 ml Demi-glace 10g Chopped shallots 50g Butter 60 ml White wine 100g Button mushroom Chopped parsley Salt Pepper Preparation • Place the butter in a sauté pan on a family hot stove • Season on the pieces of chicken and place in the pan in the following order: drumstick, thighs, carcass, wings, wing lets and breast.
• Cook to a golden brown on both sides.
• Cover with a lid and cook on the stove or in the oven until tender.
Dress neatly in an entrée dish • Add the shallots to the sauté pan, cover with a lid, and cook on a gentle heat for 1-2 minutes without colour.
• Add the washed sliced mushroom, cover with a lid, cook gently • Pour off the fat • Add the white wine • Reduce by half.
• Add the demi-glace • Simmer for 5 minutes • Pour over the pieces of chicken • Sprinkle with chopped parsley.
3.3.5b Chicken Sauté with Potatoes: 4 Portions 1.5 kg Chicken cut for sauté 250 ml Demi-glace 200g Potatoes 50 g Butter Chopped-Pastry Salt Pepper Preparation 62HCM 333 MODULE 1 • Cook and dress chicken as for sauté • Pour off the fat.
• Add wine and reduce by half • Add the demi-glace • Simmer for 5 minutes • Pass through fine strainer over the chicken breast meanwhile peel and wash the potatoes cut into 1 cm dice • Wash well, drain and shallow fry to a golden brown in hot fat in a frying pan • Drain, season and sprinkle with chopped parsley and serve.
3.3.6 Chicken a la King 400g Cooked or boiled chicken 50g Red pimento 100g Button mushroom 30 ml Sherry 125 ml Cream 25g Butter Preparation • Wash peel and slice the mushrooms • Cook without colour in the butter • If using raw pimento, discard the seeds, cut the pimento into dice and cook with the mushrooms • Cut the chicken in escallops • Add the sherry • Add the veloute, bring to the boil • Finish with the cream and correct with small strips of cooked pimento 1 or 2 egg yolks may be used to form liaison with the cream mixed into the boiling mixture at the last possible moment and immediately removed from the heat.
Chicken a la king may be served in a border of golden brown duchess potato or rice.
3.3.7 Chicken Galantine – And Portions This is a basic recipe which may be garnished with strips of tongue, truffle, fat pork and pistachio nuts.
2.5 kg Chicken ¼ Lithe-cream 2 Egg white Salt Pepper 63HCM 333 MODULE 1 Preparation • Bone out the chicken whole, taking care to leave the skin unbroken.
• Remove all the flesh from the bone and pass the flesh two or three times through the mince.
• Place in pan in a bowl of ice water using a wooden spoon, beat in the egg white and season.
• Gradually beat in the ice-cold cream.
• Spread out the chicken skin • Lay on the prepared mixture • Mould into a neat roll.
• Roll securely in a cloth • Tie at each end and in the centre • Simmer gently in chicken stock, made from the bones, for approximately 1-1-½ hours.
• When thoroughly cold remove clothe.
• Cut in slices serve on silver flat dish and garnish with salad.
3.3.8 Chicken Volauvent – 8 Portions 2 kg Boiled chicken ½ litre Chicken veloute 400g Puff paste Tablespoon cream.
Preparation • Prepare the puff pastry using ½ kg flour and ½ kg margarine and ¼ litre water.
• Roll out sufficiently to cut eight rounds 6cm in diameter.
• Turn upside down on a lightly greased, dampened baking sheet.
• Using a smaller plain cutter, make incisions halfway through each leaving approximately ½ cm border.
• Egg wash and take in a hot oven (2300-2500c) 15-20 minutes.
• When cool, remove the lids carefully.
• Empty out the raw pastry from the centre.
• Cook the chicken as for boiled chicken • Make a veloutė and cook out, correct seasoning and pass through a fine strainer, finish it with cream.
• Remove skin and bore from the chicken • Cut into neat pieces, mix with the sauce • Fill the warm puff pastries to overflowing serve on a silver dish.
• Add the lids and garnish with picked parsley 64HCM 333 MODULE 1 3.3.9 Chicken Cutlets – 4 Portions 200g cooked chicken free from bones and skin 1 egg yolk 125 ml thick béchamel or chicken veloutė For Coating 1 Egg 25g Flour 50g White crumbs Preparation • Cut the chicken into 2mm dice • Boil the béchamel in a thick –bottom pan • Add the chicken and mix with a wooden • Spoon • Boil and season • Add the egg yolk, mix very well • Correct the seasoning, and remove from fire • Turn out on to a buttered tray.
• Cover with a greased paper and allow getting cold.
• Pass through flour, egg and breadcrumbs • Insert a small piece of macaroni, to golden brown • Drain and serve on a dish paper on a silver dish • Garnish with fried or picked parsley 3.3.10Chicken Pancakes – 4 Portions 100g Flour ¼ Liter milk 50g Land 10g Melted butter 200g Boiled chicken free from bone and skin 125 ml Thick béchamel or chicken veloute Salt Pepper Chopped Preparation • Sieve flour into a bowl and make a well in the centre.
• Add the egg salt, pepper, parsley and milk.
• Gradually incorporate the flour from the sides of the bowl and whisk to a smooth batter • Heat the pancake pan, clean thoroughly.
65HCM 333 MODULE 1 • Add 5g lard and heat until smoking.
• Cook for a few seconds until lightly brown.
• Turn on to a plate.
• Wipe pan clean if necessary and make a total 8 small or 4 large pancakes.
• Prepared the filling by boiling the sauce.
• Cut the chicken in neat small pieces and add to the sauce • Mix with correct the seasoning.
• Divide the mixture between the pancakes, roll up each one and place in an earthenware dish.
• Re-heat in a hot oven and place on a silver flat dish and serve.
3.3.11 Fricassee of Chicken – 4 Portions 1.
5 kg chicken 35g flour 50g butter ½ litre chicken stock 1.2 egg yolk Chopped parsley Preparation • Cut the chicken as for sauté and season with salt and pepper • Place the butter in a sauté pan and heat gently.
• Cover with a lid, cook gently on both sides without colouring • Mix the flour.
• Cook out carefully without colouring • Gradually mix in the stock • Bring to the boil and skim • Allow to simmer gently till cooked.
• Mix yolks and cream in a basin • Pick out the chicken into a clean pan.
• Pour a little of the boiling sauce on to the yolks and cream mixing very well • Pour all the black into the sauce, combine thoroughly correct the seasoning • Pour over the chicken, re-heat without boiling.
• Dress in a entrée dish • Sprinkle with chopped parsley.
3.3.12Chicken Pie – 4 Portions 1.5 kg Chicken 100g button mushroom 66HCM 333 MODULE 1 1 chopped onion ¼ litre chicken stock 100g streaky bacon 200g puff paste Punch of chopped parsley Preparation • Cut the chicken as for sauté or bone –out completely and cut into pieces 3x1 cm.
• Season with salt and pepper • Place in a pie dish.
• Add the washed sliced mushrooms • Add remainder of the ingredients • Cover and cook as for steak pie 1- ½ hours • Serve on an oval silver flat dish with a pie collar.
3.3.13 Chicken in Casserole – 4 Portions 1 ½ kg chicken 50g Onion 50g carrot ¼ litre demiglace 50g butter 50g celery Bouquet garnish Chopped parsley Preparation • Prepare the chicken and truss for entrée • Slice the onion, carrot and celery, place in the bottom of the casserole with bouquet garnish.
• Spread the butter on the bird.
• Cover with a lid and place in a hot oven (2300-2500c) • Baste occasionally, and cook for ¼ - 1 hour remove when cooked.
• Pour off the fat from the casserole, remove the bouquet garnish.
• Deglazed the casserole with the demiglace • Pour the sauce into a sautés, boil, skin and correct the seasoning and consistency.
• Clean the casserole, remove the string from the birds and place in the casserole.
• Pass the sauce thoroughly in a fine strainer on to the bird.
• Sprinkle with chopped parsley • Place the casserole with the lid on a silver flat dish and serve.
3.3.14 Chicken Salad – 4 Portions 67HCM 333 MODULE 1 400g cooked chicken free from bone and skin 2 tomatoes 10g anchovies 5g capers 1 lettuce 1 hard boil egg 10g olives 4 spoon vinaigrettes.
Preparation • Remove the heat from the lettuce • Shred the remainder • Place in a glass salad bowl • Cut the chicken in neat pieces band place on the lettuce • Decorate with quarters of tomato, hard-boiled egg, anchovies, and olives, heat of lettuce and capers.
• Serve on a doily on a silver flat dish, 3.3.15 Curried Chicken – 4 Portions 1.5 kg chicken 1 clove garlic 10g curry powder 10 g tomato puree 10g s sultanas 25g chopped chutney 50g fat 200g onion 10g flour 5g desiccated coconut ¼ litre chicken stock 50g chopped apple.
Preparation • Cut the chicken as for sauté, season with salt • Heat the fat in a saucepan, add the chicken.
• Lightly brown on both sides • Add the chopped onion and garlic • Mix in the tomato puree powder • Moisturise with stock • Boil and skin • Add the remainder of the ingredients 68HCM 333 MODULE 1 • Simmer till cooked • Finish the sauce with 30 ml cream • Serve in an entrée dish.
3.3.16 Chicken Mayonnaise • Use same method as chick salad but instead of vinaigrette use mayonnaise • Remove heat from lettuce • Shred the remainder • Place in a glass of salad bowl • Cut the chicken in neat pieces and place on the lettuce • Decorate with quarters of tomato, hard-boiled egg, anchorites’ olives, heat of lettuce and capers.
• Serve on a silver flat dish mayonnaise separately 4.0 CONCLUSION So far, you should be able to prepare varieties of chicken dish which could be served either alone or along with other food like fried rice, boiled potato, potato chips etc.
You can also prepare turkey or any other kind of bird in the same manner with the examples given to you above e.g.
Turkey mayonnaise etc 5.0 SUMMARY Varieties of dishes give the producer more experience and make the customer have interest in eating.
Since a particular style can be monotonous, the different kinds of dishes, how to dress them, and the quality of the chicken can encourage people to eat such dishes 6.0 TUTOR-MARKED ASSIGNMENT How can you determine a healthy bird?
7.0 REFERENCES/FURTHER READINGS Anita Tull (2000).
Food and Nutrition.
Oxford University Press.
Ceserani and Kinton (1980).
Practical Cookery: 4th Edition.
Hong Kong: Wing King Tong Co. Ltd. 69HCM 333 MODULE 1 UNIT 3 TYPES OF CATERING SERVICES: GARNISHING, FLAVOURINGS, STUFFING FOR POULTRY GAME CONTENTS 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objectives 3.0 Main Content 3.1 Roasting Chicken 3.2 Boiling and Pot Roasting 3.2.1 Cutting for Sauté, Fricassee Pies etc.
3.2.2 Preparation for Grilling 3.2.3 Preparation for Supremes 3.2.4 Preparation for balloting 3.2.5 Cutting of cooked Chicken 3.3 Portion Production in Poultry Games 3.3.1 Carving and Boning 3.3.2 Different Types of Cutting 3.3.3 Dressing Poultry 3.3.4 Coronation Chicken 3.3.5 Yoghurt in Stead of Mayonnaise 70HCM 333 MODULE 1 3.4 Garnishes for Poultry 3.4.1 Stuffing’s for Poultry 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutor-Marked Assignment 7.0 References/Further Readings 1.0 INTRODUCTION This unit will attempt to clearly explain the following; garnishing, flavouring, and stuffing for poultry game.
In the last unit, we discussed about healthy games, and methods of cooking game i.e.
poultry game which could be in Chicken, Turkey, Geese, Birds etc.
In this unit you are expected to know what you will use for garnishing etc.
2.0 OBJECTIVES By the end of this unit, you should be able to: • understand how to prepare poultry and games • explain portion production in poultry games • learn how to poultry • understand cutting and boning • learn the types of cutting.
3.0 MAIN CONTENT 3.1 Roasting Chicken • Clean the legs by dipping in boiling water for a few seconds, and remove the scales with a cloth.
• Cut off the outside claws leaving the centre ones; trim these to half their length.
To facilitate carving, remove the wishbone.
• Place the bird on its back.
• Hold the legs back firmly • Insert the trusting needle through the bird, mid-way between the leg joints • Turn on to its side.
• Pierce the winglet, the skin of the neck, the skin of the carcass and the other winglet.
• Tie the ends of string securely • Secure the legs by inserting the needle through the carcass and over the legs, taking care not to pierce the breast.
3.2 Boiling and Pot Roasting • Proceed as for roasting 71HCM 333 MODULE 1 • Cut the leg sinew just below the point • Bend back the legs so that they lie parallel to the breast and secure when trussing or insert the legs through incisors made in the skin at the rear end of the bird and secure when trussing.
3.2.1 Cutting for Sauté, Fricassee Pies etc.
• Remove the feet at the first joint • Remove the legs from the carcass • Cut each leg in two at the joint.
• Remove the wishbone.
• Remove the winglets and trim.
• Remove the wings carefully, leaving two equal portions on the breast.
• Remove the breast and cut in two.
• Trim the carcass and cut into three pieces.
3.2.2 Preparation for Grilling • Remove the wishbone • Cut off the claws at the first joint.
• Place the bird on its back.
• Insert a large knife through the neck – end and out of the vent.
• Cut through the backbone and open out.
• Remove the back and rib bones.
3.2.3 Preparation for Supremes A supreme is the wing and half the breast of a chicken, with the trimmed wing bone attached.
The white meat of one chicken yields two Supremes.
• Use a chicken weighing 1.5 kg • Cut off both the legs from the chicken • Remove the skin from the breast.
• Remove the wishbone.
• Scrape the wing bone bare adjoining the breasts.
• Cut off the winglets near the joints, leaving 1½ cm of bones bare bone attached to the breasts.
• Cut the breasts close to the breastbone and follow the bone down to the wing joint.
• Cut through the joint.
• Lay the chicken on its side and pull the supreme off, assisting with the knife.
72HCM 333 MODULE 1 • Lift the fillets from the supreme open and place the fillets inside.
• Close tightly, flatten with a bat moistened with water and trim if necessary.
3.2.4 Preparation for Balloting A balloting is a boned stuffed leg of bird.
• Using a small sharp knife remove the thighbone.
• Scrape the flesh off the bone of the drumstick towards the claw joint.
• Sever the drumstick bone leaving approximately 2 – 3 cm at the claw joint end.
• Fill the cavities in both the drumstick and thigh with savoury stuffing.
• Neaten the shape and secure with string using a trussing needle Balloting of chicken may be cooked and served using any of the recipes for chicken sauté.
3.2.5 Cutting of Cooked Chicken • Remove the legs and cut in two (drumstick and thigh).
• Remove the wings.
• Separate the breast from the carcass and divide in two.
• Serve a drumstick with a wing and the thigh with the breast 3.3 Portion Production in Poultry Games Poultry games can be portioned into: • Whole chicken.
This is the whole chicken but without head and legs and the intestines.
• Half portion: This consists of one leg and one arm.
• Quarter portion: This is made of either a leg, or an arm portion of the chicken.
• This can be cube shape.
3.3.1 Carving and Boning • Carving is when a chicken or turkey has been boned i.e.
bone removed completely from the meat part.
Rolled and tied before roasting.
73HCM 333 MODULE 1 • Boning: when the bone in the chicken or turkey is removed or separated from the meat.
3.3.2 Different Types of Cutting (1) Drumstick (2) Thigh (3) Wing (4) Breast (5) Winglet (6) Carcass.
3.3.3 Dressing Poultry Chicken supreme with asparagus and truffle: - Supreme chicken in cream sauce: 4 portions 50 g butter or margarine 25 g flour 4 chickens 30 ml.
Sherry or white wine 125 ml.
Double milk Salt Cayenne pepper Preparation • Heat the butter in a sauté pan and lightly flour the Supremes.
• Cook the supreme gently on both sides (7–9 minutes) with the minimum of colour.
• Place the supreme in an earthenware serving dish, cover to keep warm.
• Drain off the fat from the pan.
• Deglaze the pan with the sherry or white wine.
• Add the cream, bring to the boil and season.
• Allow to reduce to lightly thickened consistency, correct the seasoning.
• Pass through a fine strainer on to the Supreme serve.
• Dress with Asparagus and truffle.
3.3.4 Coronation Chicken This is a popular dish usually served on buffets and sandwich filler.
It consists of pieces of cooked chicken bound with curry flavoured mayonnaise.
There are a number of variations, a dice of fresh pineapple and sultanas may be added to the chicken.
The curried mayonnaise may be finished with lightly whipped cream.
74HCM 333 MODULE 1 Yoghurt 800 g dice chicken 100 g fresh pineapple 250 ml mayonnaise 1 tsp curry paste or curry powder 2 tsp olive oil 50 g chopped onion Preparation • Either mix any of the paste in mayonnaise or sweet onion in olive oil.
Add the curry powder and sweet for 2 – 3 minutes.
Allow to cool, add the mayonnaise.
• Add the pineapple to the chicken, bind with the curried mayonnaise.
Serve on fresh lettuce leaves Garnish with strips of fresh in pimento • Alternatively, decorate with flakes of fresh coconut.
You can also use Yoghurt instead of mayonnaise.
3.3.5 Ducking with Orange Sauce: 4 – Portions 50 g Butter 1 Duckling 50 g Carrot 25 g Celery 1 Bay Leaf 1 Small Spring Thyme 10 g Arrow Root 2 Oranges 1 Lemon 2 Ibs Vinegar 25 g Sugar Preparation • Clean and truss the duck, use a fifth of the butter to grease a deep pan.
Add the mirepoix (vegetable and herbs) • Season the duck.
Add the mix pox • Coat the duck with a tight fitting cover.
• Place the pan in oven at 200 – 230oc • Baste occasionally, cook for approximately 1 hour.
• Remove the cover and continue cooking the duck baking frequently until tender for 30 minutes.
75HCM 333 MODULE 1 • Remove the duck, cut out the string and keep the duck in a warm place.
Drain off all the fat from the pan.
• Deglaze with the stock, boil and simmer for a few minutes.
• Thicken by adding the arrowroot diluted in a little cold water.
• Re-boil, correct the seasoning, degrease and pass through a fine strainer.
• Thinly remove the zest from one orange and lemon and cut into fine julienne.
• Blanch the julienne of zest for 3 – 4 minutes and refresh.
• Place the vinegar and sugar in a small sautés and cook to a light caramel stage.
• Add the juice of the oranges and lemon.
• Add the sauce and boil.
• Correct the seasoning and pass through a strainer.
• Remove the legs from the duck, bone cut and cut in thin slices.
• Carve the duck breast into thin slices and neatly dress.
• Coat with the sauce and serve.
3.4Garnishes for Poultry • Tomatoes • Onions • Shallots • Carrots • Pimento • Sherry • Oranges • Red pepper • Cucumber • Egg • Ketchup 3.4.1 Stuffing’s for Poultry (1) Tomatoes (2) Onion (3) Egg yolk (4) Red pepper 4.0 CONCLUSION 76HCM 333 MODULE 1 Generally, garnishing, stuffing, carving, boning and dressing are very essential in making poultry products.
They make food more attractive, presentable and palatable.
5.0 SUMMARY In this unit, you have been greatly exposed to different types of garnishing, and stuffing and how to bone poultry and poultry preparations.
6.0 TUTOR-MARKED ASSIGNMENT 1.
List the different types of garnishing used for poultry products.
2.
List the different types of cuttings.
7.0 REFERENCES/FURTHER READINGS Anita, Tull (2000).
Food and Nutrition.
Oxford University Press.
Ceserani and Kinton (1980).
Practical Cookery: 4th Edition.
Hong Kong: Wing King Tong Co. Ltd. MODULE 4 Unit 1 Types of Catering Service: Fish and Sea Foods Unit 2 Types of Catering Service: Utilization of Local Commodities for Internationally Acceptable Nigerian Dishes Unit 3 Menu Planning Unit 4 Purchasing Use and Maintaining Kitchen Equipment UNIT 1 TYPES OF CATERING SERVICE: FISH AND SEA FOODS CONTENTS 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objectives 3.0 Main Content 3.1 Fish and Sea Foods 3.1.1 Classification of Fish 3.1.2 Composition and Structure 3.2 Preservation of Fish 3.3 Nutritive Value of Fish 3.3.1 Vitamins 77HCM 333 MODULE 1 3.3.2 Methods of Preparation 3.3.3 Care of Fish 3.3.4 Filleting of Fish 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutor-Marked Assignment 7.0 References/Further Readings 1.0 INTRODUCTION This unit deals with fish and sea foods.
In the last unit, we discussed about garnishing, stuffing etc in game poultry.
It is not every human being that likes eating meat or poultry game.
Some prefer fish and sea foods.
Fish and sea foods also have its own delicacy so, it is very important that you know the types and how to prepare it.
2.0 OBJECTIVES By the end of this unit, you should be able to: • understand know how to classify fish and sea foods • understand how to clean, preserve and store fish and sea foods • understand the food value and effect of cooking fish • understand how to cook and present various kinds of fishes and sea foods • explain how to fillet fish • understand how to cut fish • explain the characteristics of fish.
3.0 MAIN CONTENT 3.1 Fish and Sea Foods There are great many varieties of fish and at one time they were profusely available.
However, since the Second World War, there has been a great increase in fishing (partly to feed human directly and partly to feed animals reared for food), and thus has given rise to much concern about the dwindling of supplies of some varieties.
Some countries have imposed fishing limits around their shores to regulate the amount of fish being caught.
At sea, fish is gutted, cleaned and frozen on board special boats, before it reaches the shore, as it deteriorates very rapidly once caught.
3.1.1 Classification of Fish Fish is classified according to origin i.e.
fresh water fish e.g.
salmon, trout, and sea water fish which is further divided into: 78HCM 333 MODULE 1 • Pelagic Fish: This type of fish swims near the surface e.g.
herring, pilchard, mackerel.
• Demurrals Fish: This type of fish swims near the bottom e.g.
Plaice, Cod, hake.
Fish is also classified according to their fat content and type.
These are: • Oily Fish: Has more than 5% fat in their flesh, which is why they are quite dark.
Example are mackerel, herrings, sprat, sardine, salmon • White Fish: Has less than 5% fat in their flesh which is liver.
Examples are halibut, cod, whiting Cooley, plaice, haddock, sole.
Shell fish: These are divided into: • Molluses – (small, soft-bodied sea animals which are covered by a hard protective (crust) or external skeleton).
Examples are lobster crab, shrimp.
3.1.2 Composition and Structure Fish has a muscle composition similar to that of meat, but there is far less connective tissues.
Therefore it is much easier to tenderize and quicker to cook.
It is important not to overcook fish, as the protein easily becomes tough and the flesh dry.
The muscle is formed into flakes, which separates on cooking.
Unlike meat, there is a lot of wastage with fish i.e.
the bones, head, fins and often the skin.
The only internal organ that is eaten is the roe of some species, where the eggs are found.
Cod and herring roe are often eaten and the roe of the sturgeon fish is a prized delicacy and is very expensive.
3.2 Preservation of Fish (1) Freezing: Fish is preserved either by being frozen at sea or as soon as possible after reaching the port.
It should be thawed before cooking.
Plaice, halibut, turbot, haddock, sole, cod, trout, salmon whiting, scampi, smoked haddock and kippers are very good for frozen.
Frozen fish should be checked for: (i) No evidence of freezer burn (ii) Undamaged packing 79HCM 333 MODULE 1 (iii) Minimum fluid loss during thawing (iv) Flesh still feeling firm after thawing (2) Storage: It should be stored at 180c (0of).
Never refreeze frozen fish once it has thawed as this could constitute a major health hazard.
(3) Canning: The oily fish are usually canned; sardines, salmon anchovies, pilchard, tuna, herring and herring roe are canned in their own juice or in oil or tomato sauce.
(4) Salting: Salting fish is usually accompanied with smoking process.
• Cured herrings are packed in salt.
• Caviar, the slightly salted roe of the sturgeon is sieved, tinned and refrigerated.
(5) Picking: Herrings picked in vinegar are filtered, rolled and skewered and are known as roll mops.
(6) Smoking: Fish to be smoked may be gutted or left whole.
It is then soaked in a strong salt solution (brine) and in some cases a dye is added to improve colour.
After this, it is drained and hung on racks in a kiln and exposed to smoke for 5 or 6 hours.
Cold smoking takes place at a temperature of not more than 33oc.
This is to avoid cooking the flesh.
Therefore all cold smoked fish is raw and is usually cooked before being eaten with the exception of smoked salmon.
Hot smoking is aired at a temperature between 70 – 80oc in order to cook the flesh and does not require further cooking.
How to Choose a Fish (1) Choose a pleasant smell (2) With a bright glossy look (3) Firm flesh.
Storage of Fish: 1.
Store fresh in containers with ice if in refrigerator and change daily at a temperature of 1-20c 2.
Avoid contamination by storing in a separate refrigerator away from other foods.
Cooked and raw fish are kept separate.
3.
Frozen fish should be stored in a deep freezer at 180c.
When required, frozen food is removed from the freezer and left uncovered in the kitchen, there is the danger of contamination.
4.
Smoked fish should be kept in a refrigerator 5.
Use correct colour code boards for preparing raw fish and different ones for cooked fish.
Keep the boards clean with fresh disposable wiping clothe 6.
Use equipment reserved for raw fish.
If this is not possible wash and sanitise equipment before and immediately after each use.
80HCM 333 MODULE 1 7.
Unhygienic equipment, utensils and preparation areas increase the risk of cross-contamination and danger to health.
8.
Fish offal and bones are a high risk for contamination and must not be mixed, or stored with raw prepared fish.
9.
Wash equipment, knives and hands regularly using a bactericide detergent, or sanitising agent to kill germs 10.Dispose of all wiping clothes immediately after use.
Re-used cloths may cause contamination 3.3Nutritive Value of Fish For some people fish is a major source of protein.
Like meat, fish is of high biological value.
Fish is digested and absorbed with little waste.
White fish in particular is more easily digested than meat and is a useful food for people with digestive dis-orders.
Unlike meat, the fat in fish consists mostly of oils containing unsaturated fatty acids, which is of benefit to those following the dietary goals Approximate Nutritive of fish: Oily fish White fish Shell fish Protein 19.0% 17.5% 15% Fat 15.0% 0.9% Water 67.5% 80.0% 8.5% Carbohydrate None None Trace Minerals 2.5% 1.2% 1.4% 3.3.1 Vitamins Fat-soluble oily fish contains useful amounts of vitamins A and D in its flesh.
Canned oily fish contains the most vitamin D. White fish contains vitamin A and D in its liver not in its flesh.
Shell fish is not a good source of these vitamins, as it has a low fat content.
Water soluble fish does not contain any vitamin C. Most fish does not contain any vitamin C while a lot many contain all amounts of the B-group vitamins.
Mineral Elements • Calcium: most calcium in fish is found in the bones.
The bones of canned fish, which have been softened are eaten, they provide a useful sources of calcium • Iodine: Seawater fish are good sources • Iron: Fish are not good sources of iron • Fluoride: Seawater fish are found in all fish.
Also, potassium and phosphorous are found in all fish.
81HCM 333 MODULE 1 3.3.2 Methods of Preparation Fish can be used in many dishes.
In the UK fish is fried in batter and served with potato chips.
Overcooking tends to lead to dryness and breaking up of the flesh.
Fish Uses and preparation White Steamed, poached, grilled, fried, or baked.
Serve in a roux sauce or in pastry e.g.
Russian fish pie, curry fish with sweet and sour sauce etc Oily Baked, fried, grilled, poached, and serve with a sharp sauce e.g tartars.
Fry in oat meal, stuff with bread-crumbs, herbs, orange etc and bake Shell Serve as a starter e.g.
prawn cock tail, or in soups, salads, fried in batter, with ice etc 3.3.3 Care of Fish • All fish should be washed under running cold water before and after preparation.
• Whole fish are trimmed to remove the scales, fins and head using fish scissors and a knife.
Different Fish Cuts (1) Steaks: Thick slices of fish on or off the bone steaks of round fish are called dames.
Steaks of flat fish on the bone are be called troncons (2) Fillets: Cut fish free from bone.
A round fish yields two fillets while a flat fish yields four fillets (3) Supremes: Prime cuts of fish without bone and skin e.g.
salmon, turbot, brills etc.
(4) Goujons: Filleted fish cut into strips approximately 8x0.5 cm (5) Paupiettes: Filleting of fish spread with a stuffing and rolled e.g sole, plaice, whiting.
(6) Plaited: Also known as entrees, sole fillets cut into three even pieces of about 1 cm of the top and neatly plaited Characteristic of Fish 1.
Bright eye not sunken 2.
Plump, firm flesh 3.
Plenty of bright scales, firmly attached to the skin 4.
Moist skin 82HCM 333 MODULE 1 5.
A fresh sea smell 6.
Bright red gills not sunken For Gutted Fish 1) Cut from the vent the two thirds along the fish.
2) Draw out the intestines with the fingers or in the case of a large fish use the hook handle of a utensil such as a ladle.
3) Ensure that the body lying along the main bone is removed then wash and strain thoroughly.
4) If the fish is to be stuffed then it may be gutted by removing the innards through the slits gills, thus leaving the stomach, skin intact, forming a pouch in which to put the stuffing.
When this method is used, care must be taken to ensure that the inside of the fish is clear from all traces of blood.
Filleting of Fish Use a filleting knife; make an incision from the head to tail down the line of backbone.
Remove each fillet, holding the knife almost parallel to the work surface and keeping the knife close to the bone.
Hold the fillet firmly at the tail end and cut the flesh as close to the tail as possible Keep the knife parallel to the work surface, grip the skin firmly and move the knife from side to side to remove the skin.
4.0 CONCLUSION This Unit has been concerned with fish and sea foods.
It also discusses the classifications, food value, how to cook, different cuts and characteristic of fish.
5.0 SUMMARY In this unit you have been greatly exposed to the different types of fish and sea foods, methods of cooking and other vital points to know concerning fish.
6.0 TUTOR-MARKED ASSIGNMENT 1.
Attempt a classification of the fishes known to you 83HCM 333 MODULE 1 2.
How do we preserve fish?
7.0 REFERENCES/FURTHER READINGS Anital, Tull (2003).
Food & Nutrition: Tate McGraw–Hill Publishing Company Limited 4/12 Asaf Alli Road New – Delhi 110002.
Fosket, David, Ceserani, Victor, and Kinton Ronald, (2003).
The Theory of Catering, 10th Edition.
Book Point Limited; 130 Milton Park Abingolon Oxon ox 14 45 B.
UNIT 2 TYPES OF CATERING SERVICES AND UTILIZATION OF LOCAL COMMODITIES IN INTERNATIONALLY ACCEPTABLE NIGERIAN DISHES CONTENTS 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objectives 3.0 Main Content 3.1 Local Food Commodities in the Northern Nigeria 3.1.1 Food Commodities in the Southern Nigeria 3.1.2 Local Food Commodities in the Western Nigeria 3.2 How to Use the Local Food Commodities 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutor-Marked Assignment 7.0 References/Further Readings 1.0 INTRODUCTION By local food commodities, we mean the types of food found in Nigeria.
These foods are grown in different parts of the country and can be accepted internationally.
2.0 OBJECTIVES By the end of this unit, you should be able to: 84HCM 333 MODULE 1 • explain types of local food commodities • demonstrate how to use local food commodities • cite examples of food made from local commodities.
3.0 MAIN CONTENT 3.1 Local Food Commodities in the Northern Nigeria Some of the food commodities found in the Northern part of Nigeria are: • Wake in English known as Bean • Dawa - Sorghum • Gero - Millet • Tuwo massara - Maize/corn • Alubasa - Onion • Tafawanu - Garlic • Tatasai - Pepper • Dakali - Sweet potato • Kalane - Water Melon • Ayaba - Banana • Doya - Yam • Rogo - Cassava • Lemu - Sweet orange • Tuwo chikafa - Rice • Gwande - Paw-paw • Rake - Sugar cane • Abaiba - Pineapple • Kubewa - Okro • Jadan - Groundnut • Kwakwa - Coconut • Yalo - Garden Egg • Alkama - Wheat • Kifi - Fish • Nama - Meat • Koi - Egg • monsa - Corin • Shai - Tea • Akamu - Ogi • Millet - Furadenunu • Millet - Kunnu • Tuo-dawa - Millet 3.1.1 Food Commodities in the Southern Part of Nigeria 85HCM 333 MODULE 1 Some of the food commodities found in the Southern part of Nigeria with particular reference to Cross River State are: • Ugu - Pumpkin leaf • Water leaf • Atarodo • Dry fish • Stock fish • Cray fish • Periwinkles • Palm oil • Snail • Meat • Cassava • Afang leave • Cocoyam • Etere Afang • Edikang ikong • Itororo • Efere • Ekpang Nkukwo • Afia-Efere • Usung udia • Efere Edi-tan • Udot Efere • Efere ibaba 3.1.2 Local Food Commodities in the Western Part of Nigeria Some of the food commodities found in the Western part of Nigeria are: • Ofada rice • Gari • Palm oil • Fish (fresh) • Fish (Dried) • Elubo • Cowpeas • Cloves • Coconut • Eko • Ewedu • Gbegiri • Efo 86HCM 333 MODULE 1 • Yam for – pounded yam and dundu oniyeri • Plantain – ipekere • Ojojo • Efo varieties • Igba (garden egg) • Koko (Cocoyam • Beans for Akara /moinmoin • Fufu • Asaro • Sapala • Igbin Snail • Gari • Ila (okro) • Wara (cheese) • Amala dudu/funfun • Pounded yam • Ekuru • Dodo 1.
Mia Kuka Wash the meat and dry fish Boil the meat and dry fish and keep separately Add little potash in water and dadawa, boil for about five minutes and add the kuka.
After about three minutes add pepper, boiled meat, dry fish and boil for another five minutes.
Note: These can be used for main dish.
2.
Tuwo masara mia kubewa with giwa Ruwa • Maize • Okro • Fresh fish • Pepper • Tomatoes • Onion • Salt • Maggi • Palmoil • Dadawa • Snail • Cow skin - ponmo 87HCM 333 MODULE 1 • Lafun - cassava flour • Orange • Banana.
3.2 How to Use the Local Food Commodities Some of the local food commodities can be used for starter or appetizer and many can be used for main dish and Dessert or sweet.
This means that if well prepared, it can be used internationally to promote Nigeria dishes and culture.
Examples of food made from local commodities North (1) Tuwo shinkafa de mia kuka • Rice • Salt • Meat • Kuka • Palmoil • Dry fish • Potash • Maggi • Madawa (2) For tuwo masara, cut and grate the okro • Wash the giwan ruwa i.e fresh fish • Add dadawa into water and boil for five minutes.
Add the okro and correct the seasoning for another five minutes • Wash the pepper, tomatoes, onion etc and ground.
Then cook by adding palm oil and maggi and seasoning to taste.
Cook for about thirty-five minutes, add the fish and cook for about ten minutes.
Serve with the okro and tuwo masara.
(3) Kunnu 88HCM 333 MODULE 1 • Millet • Sugar • Cloves • Ginger Preparation • Wash the millet /maize and soak overnight.
• Mill the millet/maize ginger and cloves and sieve • Divide the milled and sieved millet maize into two.
• Boil water and cook one half, allow to cool and then mix with the one half-uncooked.
Allow to cool before serving (4) Wena da mia Taushe • Rice • Alefo (spinach) • Pumpkin • atarubu (pepper) • Dadawa locust bean • Alubosa • Palm oil • Maggi • Salt • Agusi Preparation • Soak the rice overnight.
• Mill the rice and sieve • Mix with water and shallow fry in wena pan • Cut the Alefo, steam in hot water grind the pepper and onion, boil by adding the palm oil and maggi.
Add the dadawa and cook for fifteen minutes, add the Agusi and cook for ten minutes then add another ten minutes season.
• Serve by pouring the taushe soup on top of the wena.
From the South (5) Afia-Efere 89HCM 333 MODULE 1 • Grounded pepper or fresh pepper • Pounded yam • Salt to taste • Maggi • Water • Fish • Goat meat • Crayfish • Smoked fish Preparation • Boil water for 5-10 minutes.
Add the properly pounded yam to thicken the soup • Add spice, pepper and crayfish.
After 2 minutes add the goat meat and fish season and cook for fifteen minutes • Add salt to taste, serve with pounded yam (6) Afang soup • Mfi (Periwinkle) • Dry fish • Fresh fish • Dry meat • Fresh meat • Crayfish • Onion • Salt • Palm oil • Maggi • Water leaf • Afang vegetable Preparation • Cut the periwinkle and wash it very well.
Leave in a bowl of salted water.
• Slice the Afang vegetable into small size and pound.
Slice Water-leaf and blend the pepper, crayfish and onion together.
Wash the fish, meat and pour them in a neat pot.
• Put it on the fire, pour the blended pepper and crayfish into the pot and steam for 30 minutes • Add oil, maggi and salt to taste • Pour the prepared water leaf first, after 3 minutes pour the pounded Afang vegetable.
Allow it to boil for 5 minutes and bring it down then serve.
90HCM 333 MODULE 1 (7) Edikang ikong • Goat meat • Stockfish • Dry fish • Snail • Periwinkle • Fresh water leaf • Fresh ugu leaf • Red oil • Fresh grounded pepper • Salt and maggi to taste • Chopped onions • Crayfish • Pomo-sliced Preparation • Heat the oil and fry the onion • Add the fresh ugu and stir well to prevent burnt.
• When the leaves are tender, add the stock fish, fillet, snail and Periwinkle, stir well to avoid being burnt.
Add the crayfish and stir well.
Add pepper and the meat • Add salt and maggi to taste stir • Reduce heat and allow to simmer for 5 to 6 minutes • Correct the seasoning • Remove from heat and serve with pounded yam or Fufu or Gari (8) Fresh Fish Pepper Soup • Wash the fish thoroughly.
• Prepare the pepper soup with spices and boil for 20 minutes.
Add salt and maggi to taste.
Boil for another 5 minutes, add the fresh fish and cook for 10 minutes.
Serve hot.
• Efere Afang • Afang leare • Crayfish • Meat • Dry fish • Stock fish • Ponmo • Periwinkle • Fresh pepper 91HCM 333 MODULE 1 • Maggi • Cow leg • Water leaf • Onion • Palm oil • Salt Preparation • Steam the meat, fish, stockfish, cow leg, and ‘ponmo’ together.
• Add the crayfish, pepper and palm oil with maggi.
Allow to boil for 15 minutes • Add the water leaf for 2 minutes.
Serve with Garri (9) Orange Juice • Squeez the orange • Remove the seed • Add sugar if necessary • Serve cold Local food commodities from Western Nigeria (10) Ofada Rice • Ofada rice • Offals • Fresh Tomatoes • Fresh red pepper • Onions • Pimento • Cow skin (ponmo) • Maggi • Palm oil • Salt • Leaves Preparation • Pick the stone from the rice.
• Wash in water and sieve to remove remaining stones.
Wash very well again.
• Boil water and pour in the washed rice and allow to boil 92HCM 333 MODULE 1 • Add enough water to boil the rice.
After boiling pour in a strainer to remove water • Wash the leaves and put in a strainer to drain its water.
• Put the rice into the leaves and wrap.
• Blend the pepper, onion, tomatoes and pimato • Cut the offals and cow skin into small pieces, wash very well.
Boil to extract fact and dirt and add seasonings.
• Put palm oil in a clean pot on fire and heat very well, pour in the blended pepper and stir.
• Add seasonings and salt • Allow to cook very well • Pour in the diced offals and cow skin • Serve on top of the rice.
(11) Imoyo Eba • Gari finely sifted • Margarine • Palm oil • Stock fish Preparation • Boil the stock, margarine and salt.
Pour in the gari little by little, stirring occasionally.
Cook for 2 minutes turning constantly • Allow the consistency to be firm and not too sticky.
(12) Frejon • Clean cowpeas • Coconut • Water • Cloves • Sugar Preparation • Boil the cowpeas until very soft using low heat to avoid scorching • Mash into a smooth paste with a wooden spoon and sieves to a puree or use blender prepare the coconut milk.
Add the coconut milk and cloves to the cowpeas.
• Boil uncovered until very thick stirring frequently for about 1½ hour.
• Add a little sugar and a very little salt to taste 93HCM 333 MODULE 1 • The consistency should be like thick cream.
It is served with fish stew and dry garri (13) Amala with Ewedu /Gbegiri Soup Preparation • Boil water then stir the yam flour.
Add water if too thick and stir well until fluffy.
Keep inside leaves or nylon.
• Ewedu: Boil water add potassium and locust bean.
Boil for 10 minutes, add the ewedu leaves.
Use broom to patch it until the leaves are divided into blended particles, add salt to taste.
• Gbegiri: Wash beans, peel the back and cook for 45 minutes.
Use broom to patch it to make a beans paste.
Add water, dry pepper onion, locust bean maggi and palm oil.
Cook for another 10 minutes.
• Serve the Amala ewedu/gbegiri with stew of choice.
4.0 CONCLUSION It can be concluded from the discussion in this Unit that Nigerian local food commodities can be standardized, if well prepared and served internationally 5.0 SUMMARY Local food commodities if well prepared can be used to entertain people of different background since most of these commodities have high nutritional value and also help to promote Nigerian culture.
6.0 TUTOR-MARKED ASSIGNMENT Mention 5 local food commodities.
7.0 REFERENCES/FURTHER READINGS Anital, Tull (2003).
Food & Nutrition: Tate McGraw–Hill Publishing Company Limited 4/12 Asaf Alli Road New – Delhi 110002.
Kunton (1984).
Practical Cookery 10th Edition Sourced from www goggle.
Com.
94HCM 333 MODULE 1 UNIT 3 MENU PLANNING CONTENTS 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objectives 3.0 Main Content 3.1 Menu Planning 3.1.1 Factors to Consider When Planning a Menu 3.1.2 Planning the Menu 3.1.3 Types of Menu 3.2 Managing a Function 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutor-Marked Assignment 7.0 References/Further Readings 1.0 INTRODUCTION Planning the menu is very essential in the hospitality industry.
It is important to know the type of people that is going to eat a particular menu in terms of age, health, profession, nationality and the type of food that is available in the market at a particular time and the trend in market the income of individual etc.
For an industry to maximise profit it is very important that the menu should be planned before being presented to the guest/customer.
Also certain things have to be considered when planning a meal or menu.
Such as location, time, seasonality, trend, availability of suppliers, space and equipment, competition etc.
All these are put into consideration so that the aim of the industry is achieved.
2.0 OBJECTIVES 95HCM 333 MODULE 1 By the end of this unit, you should be able to: • understand menu planning • identify factors to be considered in menu planning • plan a menu • explain the types of menu • manage a function • understand the advantages and disadvantages of menu planning.
3.0 MAIN CONTENT 3.1 Menu Planning Initially, menus were regarded as the lists of food, in seemingly random fashion with the food being raw, prepared or cooked.
Individual menus came into use early in the 19th century and courses began to be formulated.
For special occasions, seven or so courses might be served e.g.
hors oeuvres soup, fish, entrée, sorbet, roast, sweet, savoury.
As the 20th century advanced and more people moved and settled from country to country, so began the introduction of styles of food and services from a wide variety of nations, resulting in the high number of ethnic dishes and ethnic restaurants which abound today.
Eating at work, at school, in hospitals and institutions led to the need for healthy, budget conscious food.
3.1.1 Factors to Consider When Planning a Menu Certain points are considered to make menu planning effective such as: 1.
Competition: You should be aware of any competition in the locality, including prices and quality.
As a result it may be wiser to produce a menu quite different and unique.
2.
Location: There is need to study the area in which your establishment is situated and the potential target market of customers.
3.
Analyse: Analyse the type of people you are planning to cater for.
For instance, office workers in the city requires quick service 4.
Outdoor Catering: Do you have the opportunities for outdoor catering or take away, because many function may demand for take away 5.
Estimated Customer Spending Per Head: This is very important when catering.
For example.
for hospital staff and patients, children 96HCM 333 MODULE 1 in school, workers in industry.
Whatever level of catering a golden rule should be “offer value for money”.
6.
Modern trends in food should be considered alongside popular traditional dishes.
From time to time trend changes, therefore there is the need to know the current trend in the market.
7.
Type of dish should also be considered in order to plan ahead for the materials to use for the cooking.
8.
Price of dish must be put into consideration and also if it is going to be 3 or 2 course menu or a la carte.
9.
Space and Equipment in the kitchen will influence the composition of the menu.
For example, overloading, use of deep frying pan, salamanders and steamers 10.
Number and Capability of Staff: If a staff is over stretched it can easily reduce the standard of production envisaged.
11.
Availability of Supplies and Reliability of Suppliers: Seasonal foods and storage space should be considered before planning a menu since only certain food can be available at a particular time.
12.
Cost: Cost of food is very important because it is crucial if an establishment is to make profit.
Thus, costing is essential for success.
13.
Food Allergies: Some people are allergic to some particular food so it is very important to note the kind of food to prepare.
3.1.2 Planning the Menu Planning the menu is the main thing in catering services.
Therefore, there is a need to consider: 1.
Type and Size of Establishment: It can be a school, hospital, restaurant etc.
2.
Customer Profile: Different kinds of people, children, diabetic patients, hypertensive patients etc.
Some people have their likes and dislikes.
3.
Special Requirement: Vegetarians,, Muslim kosher etc.
4.
Time of the year: Certain dishes that are acceptable in summer may not be acceptable in winter 5.
Foods in Season: are usually in good supply and reasonable in price 6.
Special Days: Like Christmas, Eidel- kabir, Easter, Valentine day should be considered 7.
Time of the Day: breakfast, brunch, lunch, tea, high tea, dinner supper, snack, special function.
8.
Price Range: charge a fair price and ensure good value for money.
Customer satisfaction can lead to recommendation and repeat business.
9.
Number of courses 97HCM 333 MODULE 1 10.
Sequence of courses 11.Use menu languages easily understood by customers.
12.Sensible nutritional balance.
13.Avoid repetition of ingredients from dish to dish 14.No unnecessary repetition of flavour and colours.
3.1.3 Types of Menu (A) A la Carte: This is an individually priced menu giving the customer the opportunity of compiling his own menu.
It is cooked to order.
(B) Table d’hôte or set price menu.
This is a menu usually of two or three courses at a set price.
A choice of dishes may be offered at all courses.
(C) Specialty party or function menu: These are menu for banquets or special functions like cocktails, wedding birthday, Christmas, Sallah etc (D) Ethnic menu are specialised foods like Chinese, Indian, kosher, African, Caribbean, Greek, or specialty like steak, fish, pasta vegetation etc.
(E) Hospital Menus: It is a form of menu card given to patients day before service so that his or her preferences can be ticked.
(F) Menu for the Working Class: These are menu served to people at work which varies in standard and extent from one employer to another due to company policy on the welfare of their staff and work force.
(G) Children Menu: Emphasis is on healthy eating in schools and a balanced diet, particularly in boarding schools (H) Cyclical Menus: This covers a given period of time.
This consists of a number of set menu for a particular establishment such as industrial catering restaurant, cafeteria, and director’s dinning room, hospital or college refectory.
At the end of each period the menu can be used again.
The length of the menu is determined by the management policy, time of the year and foods available.
It needs serious monitoring in order to take account of changes in customer requirements and variation in weather conditions 3.2 Managing a Function A function is a service of food and drink at a specific time and place, for a given number of people at a known price.
98HCM 333 MODULE 1 This could be: (1) Social function:- Weddings, Anniversaries (2) Business functions:- Conferences, Meetings, Lunching, Working dinners (3) Social and Business functions: - Corporate variety functions like entertaining conference, reception.
Some establishment is mainly for special functions while some use it as part of the product range e.g.
Hotels offer accommodation, restaurants, conference facilities and banqueting facilities.
Availability of these facilities will determine the level of market for which it is catering for.
Advantages of Managing a Function a. Pre-planned menu enables the caterer to ensure that good menu planning is practised.
b.
Before selecting dishes that guest prefers, the caterer should consider what the customer likes, and the effect of these dishes upon the meal as a whole.
c. Menu which are planned and costed in advance allow banqueting managers to quote prices instantly to a customer d. Menu can be planned taking into account the availability of kitchen and service equipment, without placing unnecessary strain upon such equipment e. The quality of food is likely to be higher if the kitchen staffs are preparing dishes that they are familiar with and have prepared a number of times before.
Disadvantages of Managing a Function a. Pre-planned menu may be too limited to appeal to a wide range of customers b.
They may reduce job satisfaction for staff who have to prepare the same menu repetitively.
c. They may limit the chef’s creativity and originality.
4.0 CONCLUSION It is very important to plan menu in the catering industry because it will allow the caterer to plan ahead, make the job easy and also help to maximise profit.
It also helps to know the type of menu to prepare, the foods in season, the type of equipment and space in the kitchen The preparation for special function is also important since the caterer must plan ahead of such with serious preparations so that the establishment will not run at a loss.
99HCM 333 MODULE 1 5.0 SUMMARY This Unit has been able to establish that caterers should plan their menu, know the various types of menu and advantages of menu in order to maximise profit and get more customers.
6.0 TUTOR-MARKED ASSIGNMENT Describe the various types of menu known to you.
7.0 REFERENCES/FURTHER READINGS David Foskett, Victor Caesarean, and Ronald Kinton.
(2003).
The Theory of Catering, (.
10-th Edition), Book Point Ltd: 130 Milton Park, Abingdon.
100HCM 333 MODULE 1 UNIT 4 PURCHASING, USE AND MAINTAINING KITCHEN EQUIPMENT CONTENTS 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objectives 3.0 Main Content 3.1 Purchasing Use and Maintaining Kitchen Equipment 3.2 Food Processing Equipment 3.3 Planning and Layout of Cooking Area 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutor-Marked Assignment 7.0 References/Further Readings 1.0 INTRODUCTION Without the necessary equipment, catering operation will be very difficult.
Therefore there is need to know how to purchase, use and maintain the kitchen equipment.
Purchasing could be direct from the manufacturers or from the secondary source, the main market.
Using kitchen equipment demands skills and technicality since some of the equipment are operated with electricity, some with gas while some are operated manually.
There is need for the user to know how to operate it, the time allowed and instructions needed to operate it.
Maintenance is very important because well-maintained equipment will last longer, will not easily spoil and will not cause danger to the user.
Therefore it is pertinent to know the purchasing procedure, use and maintenance of kitchen equipment.
2.0 OBJECTIVES By the end of this unit, you should be able to: 101HCM 333 MODULE 1 • identify large, mechanical and small equipment • understand the tools and utensils used in large kitchen • explain the criteria for planning and layout of cooking area • use kitchen equipment • clean and maintain kitchen equipment • understand the necessary precautions when using the equipment.
3.0 MAIN CONTENT 3.1 Purchasing, Use and Maintaining Kitchen Equipment Equipment for cooking provides the backbone of any good catering operation.
It is the key to catering success and quality.
In terms of food safety, it controls the most critical step in the food production process.
Kitchen equipment is expensive so initial selection is important.
Large equipment: (A) Ranges and Ovens: Large varieties of ranges are available and operated by gas, electricity solid fuel, oil, and microwave.
Uses • Oven doors should not be slammed, as this is liable to cause damage.
• Unnecessary or premature lighting of ovens can cause wastage of fuel which is expensive (B) Convectional Ovens: These are ovens in which a circulating current of hot air is rapidly forced around the inside of the oven by a motorised fan or blower, which results in even and constant temperature which does the cooking of food successfully in any part of the oven.
Uses • Easily programmed to produce exact cooking time.
• Saves time or reduce cooking time.
• Easy to cook.
• Do not slam oven doors.
• Easy to clean.
• Produce food in less space.
• Fully automatic – enables desired browning level and exact core temperature to be achieved.
• Energy efficiency 102HCM 333 MODULE 1 (C)Microwave Oven: Is a method of cooking and heating food by using high frequency power.
The energy used is the same as that which carries the television signal from the transmitter to the receiver at a high frequency.
Uses • Do not use metal as the microwave reflects it.
• Do not cook fatty foods or water.
• Use glass, earthenware, plastic or paper container before being put in the microwave oven.
(D)Steamers: There are 3 basic types of steaming ovens.
(1) Atmospheric (2) Pressure (3) Pressureless Uses • Steamers are used for steaming, stewing, poaching, braising, roasting, baking, vacuum cooking, blanching and defrosting.
(E) Boiling Pan or Boilers: available in different metals, aluminum, stainless steel and in various sizes and may be heated by gas or electricity.
Uses • For boiling, stewing large quantity of food.
• After use, wash thoroughly the boiling pan with mild detergent and rinse well.
• Grease the filting apparatus occasionally.
• Check the gas jets and pilot to ensure correct working.
(F) Pasta Cooker: Fitted with water delivery and drain taps.
Uses • For cooking several types of pasta simultaneously.
It is electrically operated.
(G) Deep Fat Fryers: heated by gas or electricity and incorporate a thermostatic control in order to save fuel and prevent overheating.
103HCM 333 MODULE 1 (H) Hot Cupboards: used for heating plates and serving dishes and for keeping food hot.
Care should be taken to see that the amount of heat fed into the hot cupboard is controlled at a reasonable temperature.
It is heated by steam, gas or electricity.
Uses • The door should slide easily.
• Occasional greasing is necessary • Top of most cupboards are used as serving counters so must be heated to a higher temperature than the inside.
• Top should be cleaned thoroughly after each service (I) Bain – Marie: Available in many designs.
It is an open well of water used for keeping foods hot and is incorporated to hot cupboards.
Uses • Heated by steam, gas or electricity.
• Sufficient heat to boil the water must be available.
• Other equipment are: Grills, salamanders, fry plates, barbecues, sinks, tables, butchers or chopping block, storage racks.
Mechanical Equipment (A) Power Driven Machines • Worm – type mincing machines • Rotary knife bowl – type chopping machines • Dough mixers • Food mixing machines when used with attachments for mincing, slicing, chipping and any other cutting operation, or for crumbling.
• Pie and tart making machines • Vegetable slicing machines Potato – Peelers • Potato should be free of earth and stones before loading into the machine.
• Water plates should be turned on and the abrasive plate set in motion before the potato is loaded.
• The interior should be cleaned out daily and the abrasive plate removed to ensure that small particles are not lodged below.
104HCM 333 MODULE 1 • The peel trap should be emptied as frequently as required.
• The waste outlet should be kept free from obstruction (B) Power Driven Machines • Circular knife slicing machine used for cutting bacon and other foods.
• Potato chipping machines.
3.2 Food Processing Equipment (A) Food Mixer: it is labour saving, electrically operated and used for many purposes like mixing pastry, cakes, mashing potatoes, beating egg whites, mayonnaise, cream, mincing or chopping meat and vegetables.
Care and uses • It should be lubricated frequently in accordance with manufacturer’s instructions.
• The motor should not be overloaded as it can cause obstruction to the rotary components.
For example, if dried bread is being passed through the mixer attachment without sufficient care, the rotary cog can become so clogged with the bread that it is unable to move and if the motor is allowed to run it can cause damage to the machine.
• All components as well as the main machine should be thoroughly washed and dried.
Care should be taken to see that no rust occurs on any part.
The mixer attachment, knife and plates will rust if not given sufficient care.
(B) Liquidiser or Blender: labour saving piece of kitchen machinery using a high speed motor to drive specially designed stainless blades to chop, puree or blend foods efficiently and very quickly.
They are also useful for making breadcrumbs.
As a safety precaution, food must be cooled before being liquidised.
(C) Food Slicers: Obtained both manually and electrically operated.
They are labour saving devices but can be dangerous if not used with care, so working instructions should be placed in a prominent position near the machine.
105HCM 333 MODULE 1 Uses • Care should be taken that no material likely to damage the blades is included in the food to be sliced.
It is easy for a careless worker to overlook a piece of bone which if allowed to come into contact with the cutting blade, could cause severe damage.
• Each section in contact with food should be cleaned and carefully dried after use.
• The blade or blades should be sharpened regularly.
• Moving parts should be lubricated but oils must not come into contact with the food.
• Extra care must be taken when blades are exposed (D) Electric Macher: It has removable section, the main machine should be washed and dried after use, and extra care should be taken overt those parts which cone into contact with food.
(E) Ice Cream Makers, Juice and Mixers: These are available from 1 litre capacity and helps to produce home made ice cream, using fresh fruit during seasons or frozen and canned fruits at all times of the year.
Juicers and vegetable juices, milk shakes and cocktails are also used.
Boilers (A) There are two main groups of bulk boilers from which boiling water can only be drawn when all contents have boiled.
The automatic boiler provides a continuous flow of boiling water.
Other boilers include coffee and tea heaters.
Care should be taken with the pilot light to see that it is working efficiently on the gas type.
Regular inspection and gas fitters company should carry out maintenance.
Storage chamber for coffee heaters are thoroughly cleaned with hot water and after each use and then left full of clean cold water.
.Draw up taps should be cleaned regularly.
Refrigerators, cold rooms, chill rooms and deep freezer cabinets and compartments: Adequate ventilation is vital, there is need to locate the refrigerator in a well-ventilated room away from • Intense heat, of cookers, ovens, radiators, boilers etc.
• Direct sunlight from window or sky lights • Barriers to adequate air circulation 106HCM 333 MODULE 1 Therefore it is necessary to have refrigerated space at different temperatures.
Cold rooms may be divided into separate rooms: • One at a chill temperature for strong salads, fruits, and certain cheese.
• Another for meats, poultry, game and tinned food which have to be refrigerated • Others for deep-frozen foods.
Refrigerated cabinets are used in large larders.
• Deep freeze cabinets are used where walk in, deep-freeze section is not required and are maintained at 1800c.
This requires defrosting twice a year.
• Close all refrigerator doors as quickly as possible to contain the cold air Dish Washing Machine • For hygienic washing, generally recognised requirements are a good supply of hot water at a temperature of 600c for general cleansing followed by a sterilising rinse at 820c for at least one minute.
• Dish washing machine takes over an arduous job and save a lot of time and labour, thereby ensuring that a good supply of clean, sterilised crockery is available.
There are Three Types of Dish Washing Machines 1.
Spray Types Pass: the dishes are placed in racks which slide into the machines where they are subjected to a spray of hot detergent water at 48-600c The racks then move on to the next section where they are rinsed by a fresh hot shower at 820c, where they are sterilised and on passing out into the air they dry off quickly.
2.
Brush-Type: this uses revolving brushes for the scrubbing of each article in hot detergent water, the articles are then rinsed and sterilised in another compartment.
3.
Agitator Water Machines: - baskets of dishes are immersed in deep tanks and the cleaning is performed by the mechanical agitation of the hot detergent water.
The loaded baskets are then given a sterilising rinse in another compartment.
107HCM 333 MODULE 1 Small Equipment and Utensils • These are made from variety of materials • Such as non-stick-coated metal, iron, steel, copper, aluminum, wood.
A) Iron: heavy black and wrought iron are used for frying pans.
For instance omelets pans, oval fish frying pans, frying pans, pancake pans.
B) Wrought Steel: used for baking sheets C) Tinned Steel: used for conical strainer, colander, and vegetable reheating container, soup machine, and sieves.
D) Aluminum: for saucepans, stockpots, sautés, sauté pans, braising pans, fish kettles, and deep pan dishes.
E) Stainless Steel: stainless steel pans, and small equipment.
F) Non-Stick Metal: for sauce pans, frying pans backing and roasting tins G) Cutting boards used to protect table and edges of cutting knives H) Wooden Chopping Boards: Also into cut food materials in the kitchen and to protect the table and edges of cutting knives.
I) Rolling Pins, Wooden Spoons and Spatulas: used to roll pastries, stir food etc.
J) Wooden Sieves and Mandolins: used for sieving and straining.
K) China and Earthenware: used for serving and also for microwave dishes L) Materials: used for kitchen clothes, for straining soups and sauce, tea towel, oven cloths etc.
(M) Papers: for lining cake tins, making piping bags, wrapping easy greasy items of food for disposable, for drying hands, for wiping and drying equipment, foils for wrapping sandwiches, snacks, hot and cold foods, metal foil for wrapping and covering foods, for protecting oven roasted joints during cooking.
3.3 Planning and Layout of Cooking Area Kitchen equipment is very expensive so the following points should be considered when planning a layout of cooking area.
1) Overall Dimension: In relation to space available.
2) Weight: Can the floor support the weight?
3) Fuel Supply: Can the existing fuels supply sufficient to take the increase?
4) Drainage: Adequate facilities for drainage 5) Water: Is water available where necessary.
6) Use: Does the food to be produced justify good use?
108HCM 333 MODULE 1 7) Capacity: Can it cook quantities of food required efficiently?
8) Time: Can it cook the given quantities of food in the time available?
9) Ease: Is it easy for staff to handle, control and use properly?
10) Maintenance: Is it easy for staff to clean and maintain?
11) Attachments: Is it necessary to use additional equipment or attachments?
12) Extraction: Does it require facilities for fumes or steam?
13) Noise: Does it have an acceptable noise level?
14) Construction: Is it will made, safe, hygienic and energy efficient, and are all handles, knobs and switches sturdy and heat resistance?
15) Appearance: If equipment is to be on view to customers, does it look good and fit in with the over all design.
16) Are there spare parts are they easily obtainable 4.0 CONCLUSION In this Unit, we have noted that there are 3 major types of kitchen equipment and it is very important to know how to use the equipment for ease.
The Unit also discussed the uses of the equipment, the length of use as this will make the job very easy, saves time and smooth operation 5.0 SUMMARY So far you should be able to identify large equipment tools and utensils used in a large kitchen area, the uses of kitchen equipment, cleaning and maintenance and the necessary precautions when using the equipment.
6.0 TUTOR-MARKED ASSIGNMENT List the types of kitchen equipment and give two examples of each.
7.0 REFERENCES/FURTHER READINGS Fosket, David, Ceserani, Victor, and Kinton Ronald, (2003).
The Theory of Catering, (10th Edition).
Book Point Limited; 130 Milton Park Abingolon Oxon ox 14 45 B.
109
