 S NATIONAL OPEN UNIVERSITY OF NIGERIA SCHOOL OF MANAGMENT SCIENCES COURSE CODE: HCM 303 COURSE TITLE: FOOD SERVICE AND PROFESSIONALISM 1  COURSE GUIDE HCM 303 FOOD SERVICE AND PROFESSIONALISM Course Developer / Writer Mrs. Elizabeth I. Babagbale National Open University of Nigeria Programme Leader National Open University of Nigeria Course Coordinator National Open University of Nigeria NATIONAL OPEN UNIVERSITY OF NIGERIA HCM 303 COURSE GUIDE 2  National Open University of Nigeria Headquarters 14/16 Ahmadu Bello Way Victoria Island Lagos Abuja Office No 5 Dar es Salam Street Off Aminu Kano Crescent Wuse II, Abuja Nigeria e-mail: centralinfo@nou.edu.ng URL: w w w.nou.edu.ng Published by National Open University of Nigeria Printed 2008 ISBN: 978-058-713-6 All Rights Reserved Printed by: Lucky Star Printing Ent.
HCM 303 COURSE GUIDE CONTENTS PAGE Introduction………………………………………………………….. 3  What You will Learn in this Course………………………………….
Course Aim…………………………………………………………… Course Objectives……………………………………………………..
Course Materials…………………………………………………….
Study Units………………………………………………………… .
The Assignment File………………………………………………… Tutor-Marked Assignment…………………………………………..
Final Examination and Grading……………………………………... Summary…………………………………………………………….. HCM 303 COURSE GUIDE Introduction HCM 303: Food Service and Professionalism is a semester course work of two credit units.
It will be available to all students, taking the B.Sc Programme in the School of Business and Human Resource Management.
This course of 11 units involves Food Service and Professionalism as an aspect of Hospitality degree programme.
It is necessary the hotel, restaurant, 4  pub houses etc reasons to circumvent management problems, incompetence in the product presentation and service delivery treating guest as king thereby reducing complaints.
The course guide tells you what the course HCM 303 is all about, the materials you will be using and how to make the best use of the materials to ensure success.
Other information that contained in the course includes how to make use of your time and the information on the tutor marked assignment.
There will be tutorial classes.
Full details concerning the tutorial classes will be conveyed to you at the appropriate time.
What you will learn in this Course The course contents consist of the objectives, benefit and challenges facing Food Service and Professionalism.
It analyses the various service procedures for different occasions and the equipment used in the Food Service industry.
It also discussed the environmental analysis, purchase and storage of items required in the industry.
Course Aims The aim of this course is to further expose you to food service and professionalism, menu planning and service procedures as well as budget preparation.
The course will help you to appreciate Food Service and Professionalism.
It is important to all the service industry at national and international levels.
As you will see in some of the units you will learn how to achieve the fqoulaloliwtast:i v e product and service delivery, meeting guest ever- growing needs, wants and desires while reducing complaints.
You will also be exposed to how to achieve good response from your guests, increase productivity and profitability.
HCM 303 COURSE GUIDE The aim will be achieved by • Explaining what Food and Profession stands for • Identifying the importance of employing professionalism • Understanding Menu and different styles of service for different occasions and different customers.
• Understand the significance of staff and their attitude in the food service organizations 5  Course Objectives By the end of this course, you should be able to: The objectives of this course are to expose you to hospitality sales and marketing.
By the end of this course you should be able to: • Understand the meaning of Food service and professionalism.
• Explain the importance of rendering food service operation in the hospitality industry • Learn to know the various sectors that deal with food service operation in the hospitality industry.
• Have the understanding of what factors constitute good service quality in the food service sector • Assess performance and construct alternative approaches for the future for the continuous survival of the industry.
Materials The Course Guide Study Units Textbooks The Assignment File HCM 303 COURSE GUIDE Study Units There are 11 units of this course which you should study carefully: Module 1………………………………………………………………….. Unit 1 Introduction to food service and professionalism Unit 2: Purchasing, Selection and Storage of Food Service items Unit 3: Environmental Analysis: Factors affecting food service operation Unit 4: Measuring Service Quality in the hospitality industry Module 2…………………………………………………………….. 6  Unit 1: Menu & Classification of Service Unit 2: Planning and Service procedure Unit 3: Food Service Equipment Unit 4: Role of Human Resources Management in the Food service Organisation Module 3………………………………………………………….. Unit 1: Food Service Marketing Unit 2: Finance, Budgeting and Cost control for the Food Service business Unit 3: Modern trends affecting the hospitality industry and the future of Food Service organisations The first four units are tailored to deal with and explain the concept of Food Service and Professionalism; the nature of service industry and how it affects the hospitality sector.
The environmental analysis is also discussed.
The fifth to eighth units discusses menu planning, classification of service, importance of equipment and human resource management.
The last three units discuss marketing and the importance of budgeting and cost control in the food service industry.
It finally makes recommendation of how to keep abreast with the ever- growing demands of the clientele.
HCM 303 COURSE GUIDE Each study will take at least two hours and it includes the introduction, objectives, main content, exercise, conclusion, summary and references.
Others are tutor marked questions.
You are expected to study the materials and do all exercises.
Some of the exercises will necessitate your visiting some organizations such as: hotels, restaurants, fast food restaurants, pubs, coffee shops etc.
You are advised to do so in order to observe and appreciate this course and find out what techniques are adopted by different organizations for successful operation.
There are also textbooks, under references and further readings.
They will provide you with additional information.
Practice the tutor-marked questions for additional practice and greater understanding.
By so doing you will achieve the stated learning objectives.
The Assignment File 7  There will be an assignment in each unit.
The exercises are tailored to help you have a full understanding of the course.
Practice these assignments carefully, it will help you assess the course critically consequently increasing your knowledge of the course.
Tutor-Marked Assignment In doing the tutor-marked assignments, you should apply what you have learnt in the content of the study units.
These assignments are expected to be turned in to your tutor for grading.
They constitute 30% of the total score.
Final Examination and Grading At the end of the course, you will write an examination.
It will attract the remaining 70%.
This makes the total final score to be 100%.
Summary HCM 303: This course, Food Service and Professionalism further shows you the challenges, objectives and benefits of the hospitality industry.
It defines food service and analyses how to meet and exceed the needs of customers by rendering professional service.
Finally, the importance of cost control and budgeting is also explained.
At the successful completion of this course, you would have learnt how to render qualitative service delivery and giving customer good value for their money.
Good luck.
.
8  Course Code HCM 303 Course Title Food Service and Professionalism Course Developer/Writer Mrs Elizabeth I. Babagbale Programme Leader National Open University of Nigeria Course Coordinator National Open University of Nigeria NATIONAL OPEN UNIVERSITY OF NIGERIA HCM 303 FOOD SERVICE PROFESSIONALISM 9  National Open University of Nigeria Headquarters 14/16 Ahmadu Bello Way Victoria Island Lagos Abuja Office No 5 Dar es Salam Street Off Aminu Kano Crescent Wuse II, Abuja Nigeria e-mail: centralinfo@nou.edu.ng URL: w w w.nou.edu.ng Published by National Open University of Nigeria Printed 2008 ISBN: 978-058-713-6 All Rights Reserved Printed by: Lucky Star Printing Ent.
HCM 303 HOSPITALITY SALES AND MARKETING 10  CONTENTS P A G E Module 1………………………………………………………………….. Unit 1 Introduction to food service and professionalism Unit 2: Purchasing, Selection and Storage of Food Service items Unit 3: Environmental Analysis: Factors affecting food service operation Unit 4: Measuring Service Quality in the hospitality industry Module 2…………………………………………………………….. Unit 1: Menu & Classification of Service Unit 2: Planning and Service procedure Unit3: Food Service Equipment Unit 4: Role of Human Resources Management in the Food service Organisation Module 3………………………………………………………….. Unit 1: Food Service Marketing Unit 2: Finance, Budgeting and Cost control for the Food Service business Unit 3: Modern trends affecting the hospitality industry and the future of Food Service organisations HCM 303 FOOD SERVICE PROFESSIONALISM 11  Module 1………………………………………………………………….. Unit 1 Introduction to food service and professionalism Unit 2: Purchasing, Selection and Storage of Food Service items Unit 3: Environmental Analysis: Factors affecting food service operation Unit 4: Measuring Service Quality in the hospitality industry UNIT 1: INTRODUCTION TO FOOD SERVICE AND PROFESSION CONTENTS 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objectives 3.0 Main Content 3.1 Characteristics of Hospitality Industr y: 3.1.1 Foodservice Organization in relation to the Hotel industry 3.2 Origin of Food Service operation 3.2.1 Organization Chart of a 4 or 5 star hotel 3.3 Food Service Typology 3.31 Commercial Typology 3.3.2 Non – Commercial Typology 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 TMA (Tutor Marked Assignment) 7.0 References and further Readings 1.0 Introduction You are welcome to this particular unit on Food Service and Professionalism.
This course consists of 11 units involving food service to the guest as it affects the hospitality organisations.
The course covers service industry specially those in the profit sector of the hospitality organisations such as hotels, club houses, pubs, fast food restaurants etc.
This is to expose you to the various service procedures and all that is involved to render qualitative service to the guests at a profit.
This course, Food Service and Professionalism, examines and explains the meaning of food service as it relates to the hospitality organisations.
It discusses briefly the importance of professionalism in the food service sectors and analyses the rationale behind food service operation in the processes of food operation.
It goes further to itemise the various organisations that render food service operation, their characteristics and challenges.
12  2.0 Objectives: By the end of this unit, you should be able to: • Understand the meaning of Food service and professionalism.
• Explain the importance of rendering food service operation in the hospitality industry • Learn to know the various sectors that deal with food service operation in the hospitality industr y. , 3.0 Main Content 3.1 Characteristics of Hospitality Industry In defining hospitality industr y, the historical background and development of the industry are described.
Prior to identifying the current size and scale of the industry in the mid 1990s, different service organizations were identified and their roles discussed.
This led into an explanation of what is meant by food service operation and what trends have influenced the design of food service operation in the hospitality industry.
The hospitality industry is identified by its output of products which satisfy need for accommodation, food, and beverages.
These are the essential core products of the industry.
There are other products such as: conference and recreational facilities etc.
A hospitality marketer combines these 3 core products to meet the demand of customers.
These products are enhanced and made more attractive to satisfy the demands of specific sources of custom.
The environment and atmosphere can be of equal importance to the 3 core products in attracting customers and providing satisfaction.
Hospitality industry is otherwise known as a service industry.
This covers all firms or a company whose final output is intangible or ephemeral commodity whose final commodities are not material goods.
The benefits of service products cannot be stored for instance.
The benefit is an experience.
Food service operations cover the following areas: Hotel Restaurant, Coffee shop, Specialty restaurant, Room service, restaurant, coffee shop and Snack Bar.
Food service management operations involve menu planning, developing the product specifications and arranging the purchasing contracts.
Food production and presentation involve also gallery, design, development of service procedures and equipment logistics.
This unit also explains the meaning of food service and professionalism.
In order to describe, discuss and analyze food service and professionalism, it is necessary first to define the industry.
This is not as simple as at it might be thought.
Different sources, such as government agencies, market intelligence consultants and other experts use different criteria for defining the industry.
A 13  good starting point is the standard Industry Classification since it is the official government source of data about the industry.
The Standard Industrial Classification attempted to provide statistical records of industrial growth and activity.
It defined the hotel and catering industry, under the 1968 classification, as ‘Establishments (whether or not licensed for the sale of intoxicating liquors) providing meals, light refreshments, drink or accommodation’.
The classification was subsequently revised in 1980.
That the hospitality industr y comprises of divisions made up of groups of economic activity.
Within each division, individual industries are known as classes which are then subdivided into sectors.
Sectors can further be subdivided by the activities performed.
The hospitality industry is therefore classified according to sectors and service rendered.
3.1.1 Foodservice Organization in relation to the Hotel industry The internal organization of food service in a hotel will depend upon the size, style and turnover of the unit, which as we have seen can var y quite widely from one hotel to another.
It will also be greatly influenced by the management policy of the hotel company’s directors.
In a small hotel, the director may well also be the manager and the management structure may be relatively simple.
In effect, control and direction is in the hands of one person, with supervising staff reporting directly to that person.
In a big hotel the management structure is more complex and various grades of managers and supervisors can be identified.
Within such a hierarchy, the role of food and beverage managers varies widely, and in many hotels, he or she will have two distinct functions.
In some hotels, the manager will be responsible for carrying out, rather than instigating, policies with regard to the provision of food and drink.
This will cover all aspects of food service-monitoring suppliers and food stuffs received, monitoring standards of cuisine and service, staffing the restaurants and bars, promoting food and drink sales, liaising with the customers themselves, appraising costs and turnover and most importantly, ensuring that a satisfactory gross profit margin is maintained.
In this respect, a food and beverage manager is no different from managers in other sectors of the catering industry.
As a member of the management team, the food and beverage manager will be placed on call, usually during a day or evening shift, to be responsible for all the activities of the hotel’s operations.
In addition to routine duty management tasks such as checking security, supervising staff, guest complaints and so on.
Thus, a food and beverage manager in a hotel needs knowledge and skills to succeed.
At the same time, within the larger hotels, he or she is supported by other staff such as personnel and training managers.
The food and beverage manager in a hotel is very much a part of the management team within the hotel; in industrial and institutional catering, the manager is usually in sole charge of the unit.
14  3.1.2 Organization Chart of a 4 or 5 star hotel General Manager Personal Assistant Food & Beverages Human Resources Chief Sales & Front Office Chief Manager Manager Accountant Marketing Manager Engineer Manager Asst.
Food officer Forema Trainin Wages Manager nnn g officer Clerk Chief de Cuisine CREDIT Maintenance Chef Assist.& F oBoedv e rage Billing Store CONTROL Team Manager Officer officer Purchasing OFICER Officer Sous chef Restaurant Room Banquet Purchase Store Manager Service Manager Clerk Manager Clerk CASHIERS Reservation Reception Switch Head Officer officer board Aboyeur Cooks Officer Reservation Clerk Receptionists Cooks Telex Telephonist Kitchen Assistants Porters Commissioners Figure 1 15  3.2 Origin of Food service operation Provision of food service dates back to the 19th C. when overnight accommodation was first introduced.
An overnight guest would require breakfast in the morning and possibly lunch or dinner.
This resulted in extension of historical hotel’s services and the demand for room- service crept in to satisfy guest need or indulgence.
In many respect the difficulty in analyzing this sector lies in the origin of restaurants.
Before the second world war the most common route for restaurateurs was to acquire a place when acting as a head waiter elsewhere and then to set up their own shingle’.
Then restaurant tend to be owned and operated by individuals and individualist.
There is no neat formula for opening and operating a successful establishment.
However, some firms have deliberately set out to create a chain of units which depends for their success on mass appeal, so that two groups of restaurant can be identified, namely popular catering units and speciality restaurants.
The restaurant sector has also been significantly influenced by ideas developed in the USA.
This can refer to the introduction of US cuisine (hamburger fried chickens or exotic ice creams) and its significant influence over the last twenty years on the British foodservice operations.
Food service is one of the components that make up the hospitality products.
Food service allies with drinks to constitute an essential ancillary service in the hospitality industry and enhances revenue generation in order to offset some fixed costs of the hotel and other facilities.
Compared to other products namely; accommodation and beverages, food service is more technical and complex.
It is time- consuming, labour intensive and not very profitable.
By the nature of food provision, in other to keep abreast with the time the product must be periodically reviewed and developed in line with customer preferences.
Food service in the hospitality industry is concerned with provision of food ready for immediate consumption excluding the retail and food manufacturing.
Food service is provision of processed food for consumption and the reason may be to satisfy need, indulgence or pleasure.
Food consumption can be made in various environments such as: home, beach, restaurant, room- service, on the train or canteen etc.
Provision of Food service can be to satisfy need for breakfast, lunch or dinner.
Aside from the basic service period, food service is also done on specified occasions like cocktail parties, conferences, banquets or other functions.
The three main meals afore- mentioned can be augmented by morning coffee, afternoon tea, bed time tea as these ones are usually accompanied with snacks.
Guest satisfaction from food is assessed by the quality of the product and service rendered.
Food service in the hotel industry can be divided into four areas such as: Restaurants, Banqueting, Room service and Bar / Lounge though the major part of food sales comes from the restaurant.
In the light of stiff competition and increased guest expectations, it has become difficult to satisfy customer demands.
Most food service companies place emphasis on professionalism, display food and dress their staff 16  attractively to stimulate purchases.
Many companies use market research and introduction of new products to entice customs.
Food service organisations need to offer high degree of service sophistication compared with others.
Workers face challenges because guests are not always predictable.
Some customers eat out due to poor service.
This might result in dwindling sales that bring about high labour cost.
The management has to adopt strategy for customers’ retention and sales increase on continuous basis.
However, food service marketing would be discussed in the 9th unit.
STUDENT ASS ESSMENT EXERCISE How would you define food service in relation to the hospitality industry?
3.3 Food Service Typology This part of unit 1 focuses on different segments of food service operation.
Food service was originally likened to rendering service to family members.
It is now clear that the term ‘food service’ covers many different kinds of organisations.
For the purpose of this study, we shall use the word typology to assist us in describing them.
Food service organisations will be classified into two major segments.
The first, commercial typology suggests the profit- making sectors and the second one, non- commercial typology is the second one which suggests that the businesses are operated on breakeven basis.
3.31 Commercial Typology The commercial typology comprises of profit- oriented companies which must strive to provide food sales attractively to customers and sell at a profit.
These include: Restaurants, Hotels with food services, Pubs, Fast-food outlets, Snack bar, Motel with food services, Taverns, Commercial cafeterias, Family restaurant, Steakhouses, Social caterers, Mobile caterers, Outdoor catering, Clubs, Vending machine companies, Buffets, In – transit feeding operations, Contract feeding service operations in factories, Office buildings, Schools, Sports centers, Recreation or Health care facilities.
a) Restaurant A restaurant can be defined as a place where meals may be bought and eaten.
Restaurant typology is a process of classifying the different restaurant types using different criteria such as: the menu, service style and price.
Other factors considered are the innovations and sophistication of the system adopted.
Restaurant classification was first developed in the US A.
Five types 17  of restaurants have been proposed using menu characteristics and operational features viz: • Quick service offering - low price, speed and consistency • Mid-scale restaurants - based around menu choice, value and comfort • Moderate up-scale – delivering ambience, flexibility and • Upscale outlets - deliver experience, style and ambience • Business distinctive menu - strategic focus and operational imperatives A hotel may have one or more restaurants depending on the size, location and level of patronage.
The restaurant caters for the hotel guests and general public.
Due to increased patronage, many restaurants are springing up especially, snack bar, take- away and eat- in restaurants.
Fast food grew up to satisfy the need for a high value, quick service meals.
A restaurant is run by the restaurant manager.
Some of the responsibilities of the restaurant manager include:- • Meeting and exceeding guest expectations • Recruiting, training and development of employees • Setting and maintaining quality standards • Presenting and forecasting sales and preparing budget • Marketing Food service in the hotels goes beyond the restaurant.
It includes room service, conference, banquet and bar operations.
b) Room service Room service, otherwise known as ‘in-room dinning’ is service to hotel guest in the rooms such as eating experience of food brought to the room.
Room service is not exactly the same as restaurant service.
Some challenges of food service are as follows: • Dealing with guest order in time e. g. early morning breakfast • Meeting up customers many complaints • Forecasting demand • High overhead costs • Marketing room service products The hotel room service runs for between 16 and 24 hours a day.
Room service is very necessary to satisfy guest needs but it is not completely profitable.
The importance of speedy and accurate communication in room service cannot be overemphasised as this makes the guest happy.
The staff in the room service must be well- trained and competent.
They must be polite, effective and courteous in the use of telephone.
Through training they must become sales persons and make suggestive selling.
This will consequently increase the average guest checks and patronage.
18  The challenges facing room service are many.
One of them is forecasting and how to meet the demands of the guests.
Room service manager uses house count and guest mix to forecast demand.
These forecasts would include the number of covers expected for each meal i. e. breakfast, lunch or dinner as well as the number of delegates attending a conference or convention can substantially reduce the number of room service breakfast orders.
Demands for room service fluctuate between weekdays and weekends.
Some hotels especially those at the city centres attract families who order room service at various times while guests in holiday resort hotels are more relaxed and less likely to require twenty hours room service.
Room service needs to be carefully planned especially in the area of staffing to ensure maximum efficiency.
The room service menu also requires careful planning.
The food must be well presented and have longevity.
Part of the room service menu could be selected from restaurant menu to avoid too much additional preparation.
Value for money is important as too high price can discourage guest from ordering.
The level of service and menu prices will vary from hotel to hotel.
Some have butler service for all guest rooms without additional charge; this has become the trademark of the hotel.
In a well organised setting, organisational challenge of room service management consists of mis en place, arranging everything like the trays, cutlery etc in correct place and ready for action.
Room service ordering systems are in two ways.
It is either by telephone or by doorknob hangers for breakfast orders.
The room service head waiter or order taker takes the order and writes the bill, gives one copy to the kitchen and one to the waiters.
During the quiet period, the room service waiters set up the trays and carts.
To avoid late delivery of service, big hotels use elevators particularly during the peak periods.
Some hotels avoid the costs of operating room service by providing vending machines on every floor which gives the guests a wider selection of food at lower costs without waiting.
c) Airlines Competitive factor has become a major factor in the food service sector both in profit and non- profit sectors, more especially in the former.
One important point about food service on the aircraft is that the food must look appealing, tasty, and be fit for the limited space available.
Food that needs to be served hot must be able to rethermalize well on the plate.
Food must be served on time and correctly.
Food service in the air is different from food service on the land like restaurant, room service etc.
Food is produced in large quantities for service and consumption within specific times.
Airlines may either produce food from their own factory close to airport or service provided by a contractor.
The food and beverage are served packaged on the plane by the flight attendants to the passengers.
d) Outdoor Catering Outdoor catering covers food, drinks, confectionery, snacks etc.
Like other catering functions, it must be planned in detail for successful operation.
The team in charge must be pro-active, decisive, smart, have team spirit, quick 19  thinking; and the leader must be able to command effectively.
Most of the staff are casual.
The organisation must be thorough to avoid mistakes.
Any items not packed on the transport have to be gone without and could be detrimental to the function and result in inefficiency and loss of repeat business.
The following points must be considered in planning outdoor catering: • Types and Date of Function • Site and Distance from the depot with transport arrangement.
• Commodity to purchase • Staff required • Layout of site • No of people to attend • Availability of water, gas, electricity, refuge disposal • Spending power of the people.
• Provision of mobile unit for cold and hot food.
• Time allowed for setting and dismantling e) Automatic vending machine Vending machine came into effective operation in the 1950s about 82 different goods and services can be vended by machines but only 3 of them are related to hotel and catering.
Vending machines are flexibility, accessibility, easily controlled and labour saving.
If well maintained, it can provide services for 24hrs.
They are unmanned except service maintained and computer staff.
Vending machines are found in cafeteria, hospitals, offices, factories, hotel corridors, schools, student common rooms, clubs, pubs, etc.
The types of machine will depend on product to be vended.
Disadvantages: It lacks personal contact hence can be vandalised.
Where speed is needed several machines would be required and it will be cost ineffective.
f) Commercial Institutional Catering: The colleges, universities and student unions offer a variety of managed services that meet the needs of a diverse student body.
Among the services offered are cafeteria food-service, branded quick-service restaurants and take-out food service.
The cafeteria foodservice operation is often the “happening” place in the student union where students meet to socialize as well as to eat and drink.
The cafeteria is generally open for breakfast, lunch and dinner.
Depending on the volume of business, the cafeteria may be closed during the vacation periods and weekends.
The cafeteria menu may or may not be the same as the residence foodservice facility.
Offering a menu with a good price value is crucial to the successful operation of a campus cafeteria.
g) Take –away fast food: Home delivery is a development from a takeaway, instead of customers having to visit the shop in person; all they need to do is telephone their order 20  and the meal will be delivered to their home.
Drive- ins have been slow to develop in the UK, partly due to its different climate and car pack necessity.
However, in the countries that experience favourable weather almost all the year round, eat- in fast food owners are making brisk business.
Convenience stores provide self food and drink facility in retail outlet, while food course operate several catering concepts in one location, sharing the seating capacity.
They are found at rail, air terminals and in shopping malls.
h) Meals on the wheel: It was the first type of home delivery food service.
Food is delivered well- packaged at the correct temp with adequate nutritional value and portion size especially to the elderly or the sick.
Time required for delivery usually is normally 30 minutes.
Example is Pizza.
Dietary needed of consumers are considered during preparation or service such as: those who require low salt, low sugar, sugar free or ethnic origin such as halal etc.
3.3.2 Non – Commercial Typology The non- commercial typology is also referred to as the welfare sector.
Their function is to maximise customers’ satisfaction within the constraint of the budget.
As they work hard to present acceptable quality products or services to the customers their reward is the professional reputation of the team of staff and management.
It is however expected of them to breakeven.
The following types of operations are generally classified as non profit oriented in the food service organisations:- Employee feeding operations, Public schools elementary/secondary food service, College food services, Hospitals, community centers, Camp, Public institutions, Adult communities, Military facilities, Religious facilities, Extended care facilities such as Health care services or Prisons.
Industrial The customers are always eating once a day on the premises or on daily basis as long as they report for duty.
The method of service will be described in unit 6 Institutional food service Many concerns currently face school foodservice.
One major challenge is to balance sell ability with good nutrition.
Innovation and taste, as well as healthfulness, were the main criteria used to evaluate the winning entry e.g.
turkey taco salad, sausage pizza bagel, and stuffed potatoes.
Chefs have to work with the Food service manager to develop healthful recipes and menus with increased appeal but without an increase in cost.
College and University food service operations are complex and diverse.
Among the various constituents of foodservice management are halls of residence, cafeterias, student unions, faculty clubs, convenience stores, administrative catering, and outside catering.
On-campus dining is a challenge for foodservice managers because the clientele lives on campus and eats most of its meals at the campus dining facility.
21  School catering The students are fed three times a day at specified times.
The volume is consistent which makes it easier to predict the number of meals and portion size to cater for.
It is easier to plan, organise, produce and serve meals.
Weekend is less busy than week days.
College foodservice operations now offer a variety of meal plans for students.
Under the old board plan, when students paid one fee for all meals each day, whether they ate them or not, the foodservice operator literally made a profit from the students who did not actually eat the meals they had paid for.
More typically now, students match their payments to the number of meals eaten: Monday-Friday, breakfast, lunch, dinner only.
Prepaid credit cards that allow student to use the card at any campus outlet and have the value of the food and beverage items deducted from his or her credit balance.
Health care foodservice Health care food service operations are remarkably complex because of the necessity of meeting the diverse needs of a delicate clientele.
Health care managed services are provided to hospital patients, long-term care and assisted-living residents, visitors, and employees.
The service is given by tray, cafeteria, dinning room, coffee shop, catering or vending.
The challenge of health care managed services is to provide special meal requirements to patients with ver y specific dietary requirements.
In contrast, several hospitals are entering the pizza-delivery business.
They hook up phone and fax ordering lines, and they hire part-time employees to deliver pizzas made on the premises.
Patients’ meals now feature “comfort foods,” based on the concept that the simpler the food is better.
However, the resurgence of meat loaf, pot pies, meat and potatoes, and tuna salad, which contributes to customer satisfaction, and make them feel at home and comfortable.
4.0 Conclusion The meaning of food service relative to the hospitality industry has been discussed.
The two major typologies of the food service sector that is: commercial and non – commercial were also described.
The merits and challenges of the examples given were also discussed.
5.0 Summary This unit treated the introduction of the Food Service and Professionalism in the hospitality industry.
The several facets of the hospitality industry were taken into consideration.
Now that the background has been laid, we shall be discussing Purchasing, Selection and Storage of the food service items in the second unit.
22  6.0 TUTOR MARKED ASSIGNMENT Describe the two major typologies of the food service organisations with their characteristics?
7.0 Reference and Further Reading 6.1 Buttle, F. (1986) Hotel and Food Service Marketing: A Managerial Approach.
Holt, Rinehart and Winston, East Sussex.
Jones, P. (2002) 2nd edn: Introduction to Hospitality Operations.
Thomson, London.
Walkers, J. R. (1999): Introduction to Hospitality.
Prentice Hall, Califonia 23  UNIT 2: PURCHASING, SELECTION AND STORAGE OF FOOD SERVICE ITEMS Contents 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objectives 3.0 Main Content 3.1 Food Cycles 3.1.1 How Purchasing is done in the hospitality industry?
3.2 Purchase Specification 3.2.1 Selection 3.2.2 Job Order Procedures 3.3 Source of Purchase 3.3.1 Cash and Carr y 3.3.2 Local Shop 3.3.3 Market 3.3.2 Wholesalers 3.4 Other Purchasing factors 3.4.1 Receiving 3.4.2 Storing /Issuing 3.4.3 Stock control procedure 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 TMA (Tutor Marked Assignment) 7.0 References and Further Readings 24  1.0 Introduction Two main ‘back-of-the-house’ facilities, the kitchen and the stores serve the hotel food and beverage sales facilities – restaurants, bars, room service and functions.
A major distinction in kitchen facilities in hotels arises from the extent to which they are centralized and serve all the food outlets of the hotel where there is more than one, or whether separate kitchens are provided to serve each restaurant, room service and functions.
The scale and diversity of the food operation usually the main determining factors but much depends on the operating preferences and philosophies of hotel management.
The technical considerations of various food production arrangements, their organization and methods are outside the scope of this work.
You are advised to consult the numerous texts, which deal with the subject, several of which are listed at the end of this unit.
Food commodities enter into meals and refreshments served in different stages from their purchase to their sale respectively in altered form or the same to the customer.
Food operation may be viewed as a cycle, which consists of several stages viz-a-viz: Purchasing, Selecting, Receiving, Storing and Issuing before the final stage of preparing prior to Selling.
The stages represent a clear sequence through which food passes according to the size and diversity of the food service typology from the supplier to the customer.
These processes are described in this unit as the food cycles.
2.0 Objectives: By the end of this unit, you should be able to: • Understand the importance of purchasing in the running a food service business • Understand the various stages of food cycles 3.0 Main Content 3.1 Food Cycles Activities of food cycles which include purchasing, receiving, storing, issuing and food preparation before service normally take place at the back of the house.
One of the most important aspects to running a successful food service operation is having a strong back of the house operation, particularly in the store and kitchen.
Effective storage conditions to be ensured throughout especially for the fresh produce since poor storage can affect the quality and taste of product life.
Some food items e. g. fruits, vegetables fish and meat should be used quickly because they have short shelf life.
25  Purchase of fish, meat and fresh produce are perhaps the most difficult purchasing task faced by the hospitality industry.
The importance of adequate storage conditions cannot be overemphasized.
3.1.1 How Purchasing is done in the hospitality industry?
Purchasing is the beginning of the food cycle.
In a large hotel, one person has a designated responsibility for food purchases – a purchasing officer, the food and beverage manager or one of the assistant managers in a medium-size hotel while in the smaller hotel purchasing may be undertaken by the owner/manager or chef.
The items used by the Food service organizations are of two major types viz:- consumable and non- consumable.
The consumable items can be perishable and non- perishable foods.
Non- consumables items are generally known to be capital intensive.
This will be discussed further in the next unit.
The purchasing of food commodities calls for skill and knowledge especially when buying fresh or natural food products, several variations within the same product line can appear daily.
The purchasing function extends from identifying best sources of supply, making arrangements with suppliers and placing orders, to close liaison with the kitchen and other user departments regarding requirements, yield and quality, and with the accounts department regarding payment.
For foods bought in large enough quantities, purchasing is greatly facilitated by standard purchase specifications, which define quality, size and other features of the required items.
Purchasing for food service operation involves procuring the products and services that are needed in order to serve the guests.
The purchasing system is set up to determine the following: • Standards for each item (product specification) • Systems that minimize effort, control wastage and pilferage.
• The amount of each item that should be on hand • Who will do the buying and keep up the purchasing system • Who will be in charge of receiving, storage and issuing of items It is desirable for the food service organisations to establish standards for each product, called purchase specification.
When ordering meat, for example the cut, weight, size, percentage of fat content and number of days aged are all factors specified by the purchaser.
Purchase specification will be discussed in this unit.
3.2 Purchasing Specification 3.2.1 Selection The supplier usually specifies the quality levels of food items desired.
The buyer normally carries out these specifications, as much as possible.
Usually consider one or more of the following selection factors when determining the quality standards as well as the preferred supplier: 26  • The intended use must be ascertained as this could save money in the long run.
• All items should be very attractive and a premium price paid for the best appearance.
• The brand must be indicated in a particular packing process and the consistency should be a hallmark of packers’ brand.
• The brand name must be registered with the state’s department of agriculture or the standard food organisation.
3.2.2 Job Order Procedures Commercial foodservice typologies that are part of a chain or group may have the menu items and order specifications determined at the corporate office.
This saves the manager from having to order individually, specialists at the corporate office cannot only develop the menu but also the specifications for the ingredients are determined to ensure consistency.
Both chain and independent foodservice operators use similar pre- purchase functions: • Plan menus • Determine quality and quantity needed to produce menus • Determine inventory stock levels • Identify items to purchase by subtracting stock levels from the quantity required A purchase order comes as a result of the product specification.
A purchase order is an order to purchase a certain quantity of item at a specific price.
Many food service operators develop purchase orders for items they need on a regular basis.
These are sent to suppliers for quotations and samples are sent in for products evaluation.
For example canned items have varying amounts of liquid.
Normally, it is the drained weight of the products that matters to the company.
After comparing samples from several vendors, the operator can choose the supplier that best suits the needs.
3.3 Source of Purchase Patterns will change as a business grows but initially all shopping will probably be done as the orders come in.
Gradually, as orders increase in regularity and size, it will make sense to bulk buy basics such as flour, sugar, tinned foods, cooking fat and oils.
The choice of outlet is fairly wide.
To start with, it is probably best to use a combination of supermarkets, cash and carries and small local shops.
Supermarkets offer ver y competitive prices for branded goods in standard domestic package sizes.
A number offer their own brands which will be a little bit cheaper than the well-known brands, but the quality must be carefully tested before buying the stocks.
However, supermarket fruit and vegetables are generally more expensive than those in the specialist greengrocers and quality may not be so good.
27  3.3.1 Cash and Carry Cash and carries can be excellent as they sell goods in larger catering sizes as well as domestic packs.
They are also better geared to shoppers buying in quantity: their trolleys are heavy duty to take large loads, pay out desks have large conveyor belt to ease the unloading and loading of trolleys, and car pack are conveniently placed so shoppers merely wheel their trolleys out of the building to the car or van.
Cash and carries run their own special offer promotions like supermarkets and, provided storage space is not a problem, large savings can be made on these.
Remember, however, to compare their prices for all goods carefully with the local supermarket prices.
The name ‘cash and carry’ implies substantial discounts, but often price can be the same as, if not higher than, those in the high Street supermarkets.
Another point to bear in mind is that cash and carries normally sited on the outskirts of town or in the country and it may be more cost effective to buy in the High Street than to spend an hour longer making a round trip to the cash and carry.
3.3.2 Local Shops While their prices tend to be higher, there are occasions when it makes more sense to buy from small or local shops.
For instance, if an order comes in at very short notice for a small lunch or dinner party the following day, it can be better to save time and pop round the corner to the shops rather than drive to the supermarket.
Similarly, if a function falls just after a bank / public holiday, some of the perishable ingredients, such as cream probably have to be bought from local shop at the last moment there won’t be time to shop anywhere else.
3.3.3 Market Markets are good place to shop where for small business, medium and large firm will probably find it worth while to buy from the whole sale markets.
Local markets are geared to the housewife and are open normal shopping hours though some may only open for half a day or on certain days of the week.
The ranges of goods available differ widely – some markets sell only fruit and vegetables while others deal with dairy produce, meat, and fish as well.
The large wholesale markets open in the small hours and are usually closed by midday.
In large cities, they may specialize in a particular type of produce.
It will be important to weigh up the merits of the large discounts that can be obtained from these markets against the cost of detailing two or three members of staff to different market at anti-social hour of the morning.
Unlike super-markets, there is no overall quality control.
It is therefore vital to do a good deal of research and shop only from stalls whose quality can be relied upon.
It pays dividends to build up a good relationship with the stallholders you use, letting them know that, while you are happy to buy from them exclusively, you will have no hesitation in switching should quality drop or prices rise unreasonably.
28  3.3.4 Wholesalers An alternative to markets is to buy direct from wholesalers or, if turnover warrants it, direct from the manufacturer.
In these circumstances, the supplier will normally insist on some assurance that orders will not only be large but also frequent.
They will probably want some proof of the company’s creditworthiness and financial standing, too, if goods are bought on account.
In turn, you will want assurance that your orders will receive prompt attention and that the delivery service is flexible enough to meet to your needs.
If delivery is available on a daily basis, there are obviously no problems, but if it is weekly or larger, purchasing flexibility is lost.
On the plus side, orders can be placed at short notice by phone; goods will be delivered to the door in a week or so if credit is given.
3.4 Other Purchasing factors Cash flow will be a strong influence on a firm’s purchasing policy.
New business which has to lay out money in a variety of directions to get themselves going will obviously have a restricted amount of money to spend on food stocks.
Gradually, as more orders come in more funds can be allocated to bulk purchasing, thus reducing the unit cost of dishes.
Established companies will be familiar with the pattern of their cash flow and should be able to use this information to their best advantage.
There will, however always be certain times of the year when cash flow is tighter than usual.
For instance, August and January (for some advanced countries) while (January and December for some developing countries) are quiet months in trade and this will reflected in reduced receipts a month or two later.
It worth reiterating the importance of establishing right from the start what payment terms to adopt.
Once the policy has been set, clients should be made aware of the terms and controls set up to ensure that no payments get over-looked.
If accounts are not settled on time, profits start to dwindle.
Invoices should be sent out promptly and chased up as soon as payment becomes overdue.
STUDENT ASS ESSMENT EXERCISE Describe the purchasing procedure in the hospitality industry.
3.41 Receiving When placing an order, the food service operator specifies the day and time for example, (Friday, 10.00 am to 12:00 noon) for the delivery to be made.
This prevents deliveries from being made at inconvenient times.
Receiving entails ensuring that the company is being supplied with extra quantity of the order at the agreed price and its transfer to stores or directly to the user departments.
Receiving takes place by a comparison of delivery notes against orders and by a physical inspection of the deliveries.
Receiving is a point of control in the food service operation.
The purpose of receiving is to ensure that quality, quantity and price are exactly as ordered.
29  The quantity and quality relate to the order specification and the standardized recipe.
Depending on the typology of food service sector and the company’s policy, some perishable items are issued directly to the kitchen and most of the non-perishable items go into storage.
In large hotels there is often a receiving clerk; otherwise receiving may be the responsibility of the storeman.
In smaller hotels it may be undertaken by the chef as the principal staff from the user department.
3.4.2 Storing /Issuing Although purchasing and storage are two different areas of activity, they are closely related and it is therefore sensible to look at them together.
A shortage of space will restrict purchasing power.
On the other hand, the storage facilities may be dictated by the firm’s purchasing policy.
It may be decided the larger premises with more storage should be found so that the company undertake greater bulk purchasing.
Shelf life is an important consideration when planning your purchasing policy.
Modern technology has increased the life of numerous products with developments in preserving, canning and freezing techniques, but even so, there is a limit to the length of time any food can be stored.
Retail goods have ‘use by’ dates marked on them.
Catering packs and goods from wholesalers may not indicate this information, in which case you phone or write to the manufacturers asking what the shelf life is.
Being aware of the life of foods is not only a guard against food poisoning, it is also a means of minimizing stock wastage, which in turn means profit levels are more likely to be maintained.
Food that is in season for only a short while should be bought in bulk while prices are low provided, of course, that adequate storage facilities are available and that there is a demand for the goods.
Soft fruits and vegetables are obvious examples, but there will also be fluctuations in meat and fish prices which are worth capitalizing on.
If you are not sure of the freezer life of any goods, there are numerous freezer books which give detailed information on this point.
Whenever a film buys its supplies, it is vitally important that the person responsible for purchasing is experienced and competent in this field.
If your company is to trade profitably you must be sure that it is buying the right quality goods at the right price and at the right time, otherwise your profits will disappear down the drain in wasted food and unnecessary expenditure.
Control of the stores is often a problem.
Records must be kept of all items going in or out of the stores.
If more than one person has access to the stores, it is difficult to know where to attach responsibility in case of losses.
Establishing system that minimizes effort, wastage and theft may be done by computer or manually.
However, computerizing a system does not merely make it theft- proof.
Instead, employing honest workers is a top priority in order to prevent temptation.
30  Items should only be issued from the store on an authorized requisition signed by the appropriate person.
In private organisations, a restaurateur who has been in business for many years may issue items to the kitchen on a daily basis.
No inventory is kept in the production area.
There is no auxiliar y store like in the housekeeping department.
To some, this is considered to be the role of control department.
Storing and issuing consist of maintaining an adequate stock of food for the day-to-day requirements of the hotel, without loss through spoilage and pilferage and without capital being tied up unnecessarily through overstocking.
It also involves issues of food to user departments.
According to the size of the organisation and its requirements, food stores may be sub- divided, and there may be one or more storemen responsible for them.
Issues to the kitchen and other user departments are normally made at set times in the day against authorized requisitions.
Periodical stocking-taking takes place to ascertain the value of stocks held in order to determine the food costs for a given period and stock values for accounts purposes.
Stock taking helps to detect and prevent wastage through spoilage, overstocking and loss of items.
All items that enter the stores should have a date stamp are rotated using the FIFO; ‘first- in, first- out’ system, instead of LIFO.
LIFO, ‘last- in, first- out’ is not recommended to prevent spoilage through overstocking or long aged stocks.
First- in, First- out is a simple but effective system of ensuring stock rotation.
The first items brought in are issued first.
This is achieved by placing the most recent purchase, in rotation, behind previous purchases.
Failure to do this results in spoilage.
Food and beverage stores in hotels are three basic types: • food stores, usually sub-divided into dry stores, perishable stores, cold rooms; • beverage stores or ‘cellar’; • linen, china, glass and silver stores .
Storage arrangements in the food service organisations vary.
In some, the dry stores are the general stores of the hotel in which non-perishable foods, cleaning materials, stationery for guest supplies are kept.
The cellar is often used for storing not only minerals, beers, wines and spirits, but also cigars, cigarettes, and tobacco.
Sometimes the cellar is confined to wines, which call for special storage conditions, and other drinks are stored separately in the dry stores (Beverages service & storage is not within the scope of this programme) Table linen, cloth napkins used by the Food and beverage department are kept in the store attached in the user department with china, glass, and silver.
An effective system establishes a stock level that must be on hand at all times.
This is called a par stock.
If the stock on hand falls below a specified recorder point, the computer system automatically records a predetermined quantity of the item.
31  The amount of space that is needed for storage will obviously be related to the size of the business and the turnover, but whether a business is large or small, storage space is an expensive commodity.
It is, therefore, very important to make the most effective use of the existing space, even if this means a capital outlay to purchase additional shelving and storage units.
It is also vital to check storage cost on a regular basis.
Increase in rent, rates, electricity, gas and salaries are edging the cost up all the time and if this increase is not taken into account, a firm cannot hope to get its general costing accurate nor achieve its planned profit levels.
As the business grows, storage space will need to be increased.
This expansion should be carefully planned and calculated if it is to be cost effective.
3.4.3 Stock control procedure In large store-rooms, shelving and floor stresses have to be calculated to make sure they will bear the maximum loading.
There must be sufficient space between shelving and storage unit for wheeling trollies and loading goods.
Fridges and freezers should be on wheels so that they can be moved easily for cleaning.
Shelving cupboards should be designed for thorough and easy cleaning.
Plans will need to be made for foods that have to be stored separately.
Cooked and raw meats, for example, should never be stored in the same units.
Pungent foods such as fish, cheese and herbs should be stored separately so that they do not taint other items.
There must be adequate ventilation and temperature controls, possibly with booster cooling facilities for hot weather.
Stock will need to be dated and stored systematically to ensure that the oldest is always used first.
Stock control system should be set up to make recording a simple procedure, and a security system established to guard against pilfering.
You should also institute a pest control regime of regular cleaning.
Health officers from your local authority may have to inspect your premises from time to time and, if they are not satisfied with hygiene standards, they will insist on alteration being made.
4.0 Conclusion Precautions must be taking in planning purchasing and storage policies.
This will help in having a far better chance of building up a sound and healthy business.
5.0 Summary The importance of purchasing, selecting, receiving, issuing and storage to the hospitality industry has been exhaustively treated in this unit.
This next unit discusses the environmental factors that can affect the food service sector.
32  5.0 TUTOR MARKED ASSIGNMENT a) What are the objectives of storage management?
b) Explain the significance of LIFO & FIFO in store management?
7.0 Reference 7.1 Stefanelli, J.
(1985) 2nd edn: Purchasing: Selection and Procurement for the hospitality industry.
John Wiley & Sons, USA Peter, D. (1976) Planning Profits in the Food and Lodging Industry.
Bouston, Cashners Ridgway, J.
(1984) 2nd Running your own catering company.
British Publishing 33  UNIT 3: ENVIRONMENTAL ANALYSIS: FACTORS AFFECTING FOOD SERVICE OPERATION CONTENTS 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objectives 3.0 Main Content 3.1 Location 3.2 Atmosphere & Appearance 3.21 Cleanliness of environment and seating layout 3.22 Hygiene 3.23 Size and Shape of the room 3.24 Décor 3.25 Acoustics 3.3 Equipment /Furniture 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 TMA (Tutor Marked Assignment) 7.0 References and Further Readings 34  1.0 Introduction To be successful, a service organisation concept should be created with guest in mind.
The service industry provides a social gathering place where employees, guests, management meet and get the adrenaline flowing in positive ways.
Hospitality business is exiting and challenging.
With the right location, atmosphere and correct service, it is possible to attract the market and make a good return on investment.
The challenge is to create a restaurant concept and bring it into being.
A concept that fits a definite market, a concept better suited to its market than that presented by competing restaurants.
Every restaurant represents a concept and projects a total impression or an image.
The image appeals to concern market casual, formal, children, adults, ethnic and so on.
The concepts should fit the location and reach out to its target market.
The concept, location, menu and décor should intertwine.
2.0 Objectives By the end of this unit, you should be able to: • Understand why the environmental factors are important in the food service sector.
• Understand what it takes to have a successful food service experience.
3.0 Main Content 3.1 Location The hospitality concept must fit the location and the location must fit the concept.
The location should appeal to the large market (expected guests).
Other things being equal, prime location costs more, so operations must either charge more for their service or drive sufficient volume to keep the rent/ lease costs to between five and eight percent of sales.
Location has different interpretations to different businesses.
Some catering outfits and restaurants are sited in prime location.
Few are hidden in remote scenic areas.
Location could be the major strength of some that are in particular attractive locations and as a result adopted the charming names to reflect the characteristics of the location such as: Hill Top restaurant, Beach Dunes eat-in & take away, Riverside café etc.
Design is gradually replacing Location in the 21st Century.
The success of a hotel now depends on how it is designed and its look.
(This will be discussed further in the last unit).
Food service market concept can be influenced by a mix of some other factors such as: the size of the business, type of guests, standard or quality of service/menu, location price to charge, management style etc.
This is illustrated in Figure 2 below: 35  Qualit y Service Menu Concept Food Price And Market Location Atmosphere Management Figure 2 3.2 Atmosphere & Appearance The atmosphere created by the service industry has both immediate conscious and subconscious effects on guests.
The immediate conscious effect is how guests react to the ambience on entering the place – or even more importantly as an element in the decision-making process used in selecting a restaurant.
Is it noisy?
Are the tables too close?
The subconscious is affected by mood, lighting, furnishings, and music; these play an important role in leaving a subtle impression on guests.
Restaurant guests are placing a greater emphasis on atmospherics and the design used to create a special atmosphere.
Back in the 1970s, the majority of restaurants were quite plain.
Today, atmospherics are built with the restaurant concept, which has an immediate impact on customers.
Perhaps the most moderate atmospheric restaurants are those with a theme.
The theme will use colour, sound, lighting, décor texture and visual stimulation to create special effects for patrons.
The chain restaurants with the highest rating atmosphere are Planet Hollywood, Hard Rock Café and Chart House restaurants.
The main aspects which make up the physical environment and atmosphere of the restaurants and other eateries can be summarized as: • Cleanliness of environment and seating layout; • Hygiene; • Size and shape of the room; • Décor; • Acoustics; • Equipment and Furniture; 36  3.21 Cleanliness of environment and seating layout As most restaurants and food outlets have direct access onto the street and have a great deal of human traffic and out of them, they collect a lot of dirt and dust.
The operator must ensure that floor and wall surfaces are cleaned regularly and fittings such as pictures, prints and lights are dusted properly.
At this point one might reasonably presume that the next factor that influences the customer’s environment of a meal will be that indefinable factor- atmosphere.
Ask anyone why they go to a particular restaurant and they will probably say one of the three things – they like the food; it is good value for money; or they like the ‘atmosphere’.
But, if you ask someone to explain what ‘atmosphere’ is, they are not usually able to define what they mean.
They may say that they like the surroundings because it is decent, that the place smells nice, that the seats are comfortable, they like the music played there, the other customers or some other aspect of the operation, but usually they will not be very clear about it.
This is because so many of the factors that contribute towards creating an atmosphere are received by the customer on a subconscious level.
So rather than talk about atmosphere alone, we will look at other factors stated below that make up the atmosphere in some detail.
3.22 Hygiene In the USA, the preoccupation with hygiene was developed sooner than in Britain.
But with the influx of people in the hospitality- style operations, some ideas about cleanliness have been introduced.
As we shall see, disposables, which are probably the most hygienic means of serving food, have become more acceptable in the next one or two units.
The awareness of hygiene is having positive effect on eating out.
Already there is a growing movement towards the banning of cigarette smoking in public places and many places, including cinemas, canteens and public transport have segregated areas for smokers and non-smokers particularly in the developed world.
Whether justified or not, Britain does not have a very good reputation for cleanliness.
Tourists from abroad find our streets, parks, buses and public buildings dirty and litter-strewn in comparison with their own countries, and this attitude is extended towards the hotels and restaurants.
The caterer is aware that cleanliness and hygiene are selling points and that the regulations laid down are only a minimum standard to be met.
Poor hygiene is usually low on the list of the complaints.
3.23 Size and Shape of the room This factor will certainly affect the atmosphere of the eating environment by creating feelings of intimacy or spaciousness.
The operation can affect people’s reactions to the room by careful use of colour patterns and lighting unless the restaurant is purpose built.
Operators may have to resort to employing the skills of the interior designer to modify establishments where the ceiling is too high or too low, the room is too narrow, too small owrh a tever.
Many high-street sites, are designed with shops in mind and 37  therefore tend to be long and narrow, the use of mirrors help to create an illusion of width if it has to be converted to a restaurant.
3.24 Décor Interior design is obviously important to a restaurant’s success.
The response of an individual to atmosphere is personal and the individual’s reaction to any combination of the decor (which influence atmosphere) can only be determined or controlled by rudimentary principles.
The problem lies in the essential paradox that customers need to feel ‘at home’ in their surroundings, without feeling that they are at home.
Thus the décor of a food service area must be different without undermining the sense of security of customers.
It should provoke feelings of pleasure and relaxation rather than tension and anxiety.
Complaints about décor have decreased over the years.
The décor must also play an integral parting the whole surroundings, whereas if customers are paying a lot for a meal, then they will expect posh surroundings, whereas if customers want a quick, cheap meal, then they will expect functional rather than desperation décor.
Recently, interior design has been seen as an important feature of a restaurant concept.
3.25 Acoustics Restaurant is a noisy place.
They would lose business if care was not taken to reduce the level of noise.
In fact, reducing the level of noise and movement has to be the first step taken by restaurateurs who want to upgrade their premise.
Modern design which tends to have many surfaces for walls, few fabrics, wooden outlined floors.
Metal furniture and fixtures however seem to run counter this argument because they are noisy.
The most important joint to note with regard to levels of acceptable noise is that age group rather than social class is the determining factor, young people being able and willing to accept much higher levels.
There are three contributory factors to noise in a restaurant (apart from outside or extraneous noise that presumably could be avoided if necessary).
a) Voices: Customers need to communicate with each other and with the staff.
Therefore the general level of noise should not exceed that which makes ordinary conversation impossible.
Obviously, the more people in the room, the more noise there is, but as one can hardly request customers to talk more quietly, the caterer must reduce the general level of noise by reducing the input from the two other factors.
Operational Fasting and Serving food, there is also noise caused by movement.
Same floor surfaces are much nosier than others, for instance, thing as opposite to carpeting.
In addition, the décor can contribute.
Carpeting and curtains can reduce noise, while a textile wall fabric made in France called murk silence was credited with adducting noise from an adjacent room by up to a reasonable degree.
It was observed that if premises are carpeted, the electricity heating bill can be reduced by 12 percent, according to research conducted in Japan’.
38  b) Music: Most experts agree that music has a direct and strong effect on the customer’s mood.
It is used in many different environments; extensively in restaurants or hotels to speed up the flow of people, as ‘music while you work’ as background music.
It can achieve many things for caterers so long as they are aware of one essential point – that background music is forced upon the customer whether they like it or not and if they do not like it then trheest a urant loses customers.
Otherwise, music may be used to create an environment of bustle until the restaurant fills up and then be turned down to allow for conversation.
It can reinforce the particular image of the restaurant by playing appropriate music: rock music in Café, and chamber music in the hotel etc.
It has even been suggested that music can be used to overcome customers’ prevailing moods of depression on a wet, rainy day by playing bright and cheerful tunes.
A balance of light pop, film themes, musicals and any music that will have lasting popularity is recommended.
3.3 Equipment /Furniture Essentially there are three areas of concern to boost the foodservice operation: staff, equipment and environment.
Customers will notice if equipment is not clean since it is literally put under their ver y noses.
All table appointments, cutlery, crockery and so forth, must be clean and polished and not defective in any way, for instance, cups chipped, plates cracked or forks bent.
Furniture too must be well maintained.
Some customers will insist on sitting so that they are facing into the room, partly so that they have something other than a wall to look at and partly because they feel more secure with a wall behind them.
Finally, according to research by the Council for Industrial Design, women seem to have different sitting habits to men.
Men prefer can sit upright for longer periods without suffering the same amount of fatigue as women.
Obviously it is impractical to have two sorts of chairs, but if a restaurant wishe to encourage people to linger over their meal, it must provide chairs with areas STUDENT ASS ESSMENT EXERCISE a) Prime location is an important factor to consider in opening a restaurant.
b) What are the points that can influence the decision of a location?
39  4.0 Conclusion In this unit we have discussed the importance of environmental factors on location in the hospitality organisations with particular reference to the food service sector.
You have seen how the environmental factors can promote business, encourage repeat performance and attract new customers.
The impact of atmospheric condition on environment was discussed in conjunction with seating layout, hygiene, acoustics, equipment /furniture.
All these put together appropriately will bring up a befitting environment and complement the size and shape of the room.
5.0 Summary This unit has examined how the concept of a food service sector is affected by the environmental analysis and we have been able to consider many factors.
In Unit 4, measuring service quality in the hospitality industry will be discussed 6.0 TUTOR MARKED ASSIGNMENT Customers talk about atmosphere when they think of the choice of restaurant.
What are the other factors that make up the atmosphere?
Discuss in some detail.
7.0 Reference 7.1 Ball, S., Jones, P. Kirk, D. and Lockwood, A.
(2002) Hospitality Operating Systems, Continuum: London Jones, Peter, (2002) 2nd edn Introduction to Hospitality Operations, Thomson: London Lillicrap (1971)Food and Beverage Service, Edward Arnold : London 40  UNIT 4: M EASURING SERVICE QUALITY IN THE HOSPITALITY INDUSTRY Contents 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objectives 3.0 Main Content 3.1 Service/Staff Attitude 3.2 Presentation of food: 3.21 Aroma 3.2.2 Taste 3.3.3 Texture 3.3.4 Temperature 3.3 Exceeding customer expectations 3.3.1 The need for Quality service 3.3.2 What is Service Quality?
4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 TMA (Tutor Marked Assignment) 7.0 References and Further Reading 41  1.0 Introduction Services in the hospitality organisations are taking an increasing importance both domestically and internationally.
In today’s changing global environment, many businesses are facing intensifying competition and rapid deregulation, and in order to achieve competitive advantage and efficiency, business have to seek profitable ways to differentiate themselves.
Recent years have seen a proliferation of work on service quality and customer satisfaction.
These two phenomena are closely related.
Researchers have extensively investigated the nature of service quality or satisfaction and the relationship between the two.
There has been considerable research into the concept of service quality with many theories being espoused and consistent basis remain frustratingly elusive to many service providers.
This unit therefore aims to allow you to develop the ability to critically analyse criteria relevant to operational management in the hospitality industry, to develop operational management skills expertise in a range of food service situations, examine and evaluate the use of resources in contemporary service systems.
2.0 Objectives By the end of this unit, you should be able to: • Have the understanding of what factors constitute good service quality in the food service sector 3.0 Main Content 3.1 Service/Staff Att itude The management of hospitality services has become very demanding and complex.
The tastes of guests have become so varied as their cultural backgrounds and exposures.
Only the experienced hand can meet up such demands with satisfactory service delivery.
Customers are neither familiar with, nor care for the problems of providing service.
They are only concerned that the service has to meet their expectation.
If they are in a hurry then they will go to fast-food outlets that will provide a speedy meal.
Customers who are out to impress go to a sophisticated restaurant providing gueridon or full- silver service.
There are many differing styles of service each tailored to meet the particular needs of a certain type of client expectation.
(Styles of service will be discussed in detail in another unit) The sophistication of service and number of courses reflect the cost and value for money as much as an attitude but there is no doubt that the customers who are not used to full silver service or gueridon work feel uncomfortable in 42  those situation where it is provided.
ere are about four or five types of eating establishments can be summarized as follows:- • general café’ • fish and chip • hamburger bar • bacon-and-egg specialty restaurant • snack and sandwich bar.’ Whilst the way this is expressed is somewhat condescending in practice this mix of restaurants types is precisely what we find today at motorway service areas.
The expectations of some customers are much higher, with regards to the range of restaurants now available the variety of product range, and the improved standards reflected in fast-food and roadside catering compared with the popular catering outlets.
There does appear to be a trend for customers to complain more than in the past.
This is not necessarily because they have more to complain about, but they are becoming less reluctant to do so.
The male customers particularly frequently complain about slow and poor service.
The time taken to serve customers topped the list of complaints.
Complaints about service are not as serious as cases of rude staff and / or rushed for attentive service.
Most foodservice operations do encourage staff to wear a uniform as part of their overall image, identification and smartness.
Fast-food outlets and standard hotel restaurants are a good example of this.
However staff will be expected to be smart and clean.
People tend to ascribe cleanliness to particular aspects of appearance – clothes, which they expect to be well- pressed and stain free; hair, which should be clean and looked after well; nails, which should be clean and manicured; and body odour, which should be neutral, i.e.
neither sweaty nor overly perfumed.
3.2 Presentation of food The expression ‘looks good enough to eat’ has not become a cliché, by chance.
Food has to look good on the plate.
This is a factor that all the major catering firms are aware of.
They spend a great deal of time and effort in ensuring that their organisations sell products that look good.
A key feature of restaurant food in the 1990s was the development of plate service so that the food is served exactly as the chef designed it.
Other properties that facilitate the presentation of food are as follows: 3.21 Aroma The second thing that will affect customers’ reaction to the food, even before they eat it, is the smell.
For example: Dining out in an Indian restaurant or buying fish and chips would not be the same without their own particular aroma.
Some operators even exploit this factor by ensuring that the ventilation leads out onto the street in order to attract customers.
Although this may be effective for fresh bread shops and doughnut houses, not all cooking smells and desirable.
While eating food, much of the sensation is derived from the olfactory center of the nasal cavity, without which most of what we eat and 43  drink would sack its subtlety.
In drinking a vintage wine or a good brandy, much of the enjoyment is derived from its ‘nose’ and the same can be said of other gastronomic experiences.
Although people do eat for reasons other than simply to satisfy their hunger, food is what still the heart of the experience is.
It is extremely unlikely that we can change the consumer ideas about food.
The customer will likely choose from the menu those dishes that are most appealing.
All the various sensory impressions or sensations such as odour, taste, texture and variety complete the gastronomic experience throughout life.
The successful caterer is the one who ensures that appearance, aroma, taste, texture and temperature are all just as the customer expects them to be.
3.22 Taste The taste buds of the tongue are only able to detect four basic layouts.
These are sweet, sour, salt and bitter.
It is the many variations of these four that combine to create the unique flavour of a particular food.
For the consumers the combination of flavours is quite important and can be used to good elect in various dishes: sweet and sour pork, lamb with mint sauce, and so on son on relevant to the sequence of dishes since generally sweet items are left until the end of a meal lest they upset the palate.
3.23 Texture There are many textures of food namely; rough or smooth, hard or soft, fluid or solid, dry or moist, and tough or tender.
The consistency and shape properties of food are experienced by pressure and movement receptors in the mouth.
It is these that signal our dislike of food that is rubbery, slimy or tough and a customer’s choice of a rare, medium or well-done steak is partly derived from the influence of texture upon the palate.
3.24 Temperature Customers enjoy the variety that temperature can add to a meal, either a piping-hot stew or a cold ice cream for instance.
Wealthy Victorians ate sorbet in the middle of their long banquets in order to refresh their jaded palates as the citrus-based ice was refreshing.
Temperature not only provides variety, it affects flavour too.
The sweetness of a dish is accentuated when served hot, while the saltiness of a soup is reduced at a high temperature.
STUDENT ASS ESSMENT EXERCISE What is the significance of food presentation in measuring service quality?
3.3 Exceeding customer expectations 3.3.1 The need for Quality service The concept of service quality has been adopted as a strategic issue by many managers and been the subject of an increasing amount of academic and 44  practitioner literature.
The need to understand and measure service quality is related with the growing recognition that is more profitable to retain satisfied customers than continually seeking to recruit new customers to replace lapsed ones.
However, the large and continuous increase in the service business has created a keen competition in the hotel industry and has forced hotel owners and managers to search ways to differentiate themselves and gain a competition advantage.
It was suggested that what service providers should do in order to achieve economic success is to deliver high service quality.
In other words high service quality is what separates the industry leaders to all the rest and results in the economic growth of their companies.
It is notable to mention that even though marketers have started realizing the importance of quality during the last two decades a definition of quality does not exist.
On the contrary, marketers and researchers have approached the concept by different perspectives.
Quality defined as “conformance to specifications” or quality is “meeting or exceeding customers’ expectations.
Quality is becoming a big issue for the hospitality industry.
However, organizations that deliver service quality are more likely to enjoy high profitability for the mangers of the organizations and how this may be achieved is dependant on the nature of service quality.
3.3.2 What is Service Quality?
The concept of service quality however is very complex, to analyse this, it is essential to define separately the concepts of service and quality, to identify their characteristics and dimensions, and finally to describe the existent instruments for measuring service quality.
Service is any activity or benefit that one party can offer to another that is essentially intangible and does not result in the ownership of anything.
Consequently activities such as, renting a hotel room, eating in a restaurant, visiting the doctor or using the public transportation, can all be described as services provided by different sectors of the economy.
Additionally, services have three main characteristics, which differentiate them from goods on how they are produced, consumed, and evaluated.
Services are intangible, meaning that they are considered to be performances and not objects, heterogeneous, meaning that they may differ from time to time or among different suppliers, and finally the production and consumption process of services are inseparable.
Quality as a concept may be applied both to the service as well as to the goods sector.
However, as it has been already mentioned these two sectors differ one from another and therefore one should distinguish service quality from quality in the goods sector.
Quality can also be said to be meeting or exceeding customers’ expectations.
This constitutes one of the dominant quality definitions and has widely focused their interest exclusively on the concept of service quality.
45  The perceived quality service can be defined by comparing the performances that customers experience after receiving a service, and the expectations from service quality are: Technical Quality, which represents the outcome that a consumer receives after his interaction with the service industry: Functional Quality, which represents the process needed in order for the customer to experience the technical quality.
It can therefore be said that corporate image constitutes service quality dimension that derives from customers’ perceptions of the service industry and depends on both technical and functional quality.
Tangible: (RRAE) This refers to the physical products of the service company such as materials and equipment.
Reliability refers to the ability of the service company to deliver to its customers the promised service accurately.
Responsiveness involves the willingness of the personnel to assist customers and deliver them the desirable service.
Assurance represents the ability of the employees to inspire confidence and trust in customers through their knowledge and courtesy.
Empathy refers to the willingness of the employees to show personal attention to each one of their customers.
Service quality can be approached in different perspectives such as: the dimensions of physical quality, interaction quality and corporate quality.
It should be noted that customers evaluate service quality in the restaurant by measuring the expectations and evaluations of the customers in the restaurant.
The introduction of the service quality model, SERVQUAL revolutionized the discipline of service marketing.
The service gap concept examined the existence of service gaps on the service provider’s side, these gaps can impede the delivery of service that customers perceive to be of high quality.
Another approach, which is DINESERV, has helped to bring to light that the use of revised DINESERV model was to measure the gap between expectations and evaluations of customers in the service industry.
Due to high standard of service required of this course, you are expected to learn various types of services.
You will have further study on this in units 5 under the topic, ‘classification of service’ at different functions.
4.0 Conclusion In this unit, we have discussed the different service methods and how service methods can be measured.
We have seen that measuring service quality will have positive impact on guest response to the products and the level of patronage.
Other factors to consider in assessing service delivery to customers like staff attitude, food presentation were also discussed.
46  5.0 Summary It has been revealed that to achieve customer satisfaction, high quality service that exceeds customer expectation must be achieved.
The need to classify service for successful business in the food service sector cannot be over- emphasised.
This topic will be discussed in the next unit.
6.0 TUTOR MARKED ASSIGNMENT Describe characteristics of the service industry as compared with the manufacturing industr y.
7.0 Reference 7.1(Cadotte, Woodruff, and Jenkins, 1987; Churchill and surprenant, 1982; Oliver, 1980, 1996; Tse and Wilton, 198) Peter, D. (1976) Planning Profits in the Food and Lodging Industry.
Bouston, Cashners Ridgway, J.
(1984) 2nd Running your own catering company.
British Publishing 47  HCM 303 FOOD SERVICE PROFESSIONALISM Module 2…………………………………………………………….. Unit 1: Menu & Classification of Service Unit 2: Planning and Service procedure Unit3: Food Service Equipment Unit 4: Role of Human Resources Management in the Food service Organisation UNIT 1: MENU & CLASSIFICATION OF SERVICE Contents 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objectives 3.0 Main Content 3.1 Service systems 3.1.1 What is menu?
3.1.2 Styles of service 3.2 Origin of service 3.2.1 French service 3.2.2 Russian service 3.2.3 American service 3.3 Basic styles of Service 3.3.1 Waiter service 3.3.2 Family service 3.3.3 Silver service 3.3.4 Gueridon service 3.3.5 Cafeteria service 3.4 Other important areas of service 3.4.1 Hot Plate 3.4 Clearing Systems 3.5 Dish wash systems 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 TMA (Tutor Marked Assignment) 7.0 References and Further reading 48  1.0 Introduction For effective service there must be food service presentation system which will bring about attractive and improved service to clientele.
This can be achieved with a good knowledge of the day’s menu and introduction of varied methods of service.
Menu is the focus of food operation.
The information on menu needs to be clearly stated and set out in course so that the menu is easily understood.
Menu can create an image which reflects overall style of the restaurant.
The printed menu should match the décor of the restaurant and be attractive.
Some catering outfits use menu as a means of marketing to promote sales with the use of photographs of dishes of the day.
Occasions can determine the style of service to adopt for customer satisfaction.
Organisations and guests give employees incentives for exceptional personalised service.
This unit looks into Menu and the various styles of service as it affects the food service organisations.
2.0 Objectives By the time this unit is concluded, the students would have been familiar with Menu and different styles of service for different occasions and different customers.
3.0 Main Content 3.1 Service systems Selling is the final stage of the hotel food cycle.
It consists of the service of particular food by various categories of food service staff to the customer in a restaurant at particular prices.
The main aspects of the selling stage are, therefore, the menu, the form of service, the physical environment and atmosphere in which the sale takes place.
These are the four elements of the product which are reflected in the price.
The physical environment and atmosphere have been discussed in the previous unit.
Many factors are responsible for successful menu service such as: different occasions, types of customers, amount customers can afford, the class of restaurant, the type of menu to serve etc.
These and more will be discussed in details in this unit.
3.1.1 What is menu?
Menu is a means of communication which informs the customer what the caterer has to offer.
Menu compilation is one of the most important jobs in the service industr y such as restaurants aiming to make a profit.
Menu is also used in organisations working to a budget like hospitals and schools.
The primary functions of a menu are: a) To make the staff aware in advance of what is to be ordered, prepared and served to the customer.
49  b) To reveal to the customer of what food is available and the price.
Menu is sometimes referred to as ‘cover’.
A ‘cover’ means the number of customers served at a particular meal time.
There are traditionally two main types of menu viz; Table d’hote menu (table of the host) and A’la carte menu (from the card) The key difference between these two is that the a la carte menu has dishes separately priced whereas the table d’hote menu has an inclusive price either for the whole meal or for a specified number of courses, for example any two or any four courses.
There are however usually choices within each course.
Other menu term is called ‘carte du jour’ (card of the day) – which is usually a fixed meal with one or more courses for a set price.
The key characteristics of the table d’hote menu are: The menu has a fixed number of courses There is a limited choice within each course The selling price is fixed The food is usually available at a set time The key features of the a la carte menu are: The choice is generally more extensive Each dish is priced separately There may be longer waiting times as some dishes are cooked or finished to order STUDENT ASS ESSMENT EXERCISE What are the differences between A’ la Carte menu and Table d’hote menu?
3.1.2 Styles of Service About nine styles or types of service were identified.
They include gueridon, full silver, plate/silver, plate, family, counter (or cafeteria), snack bar, French, and Russian.
Of these, the last two – French and Russian styles – are hardly used in the industry today probably because of the high skill required.
Cafeteria service developed during the 1970s with several variations designed to increase speed of service throughput such as free-flow, scramble and carousel systems.
In addition, there is buffet service, tray systems, trolley service, and automatic vending.
Some of these will be explained in detail later in this unit All of these service styles can be categorized as follows: a) Table service: This is service to customers sitting at a laid cover.
Iint c ludes silver service, family service and plate service.
50  b) Assisted service: This is any combination of table service and self -service.
For instance, many restaurants have incorporated self-help salad bars into their operation.
c) Self-service: Customers select from either a single counter or several counters of food and drink items, often using a tray, and pay at a still point.
Alternative configurations of counters are known as free-flow, scramble and carousel.
d) Single point service: Customers are served at a single point and food may be consumed on the premises or taken away.
This includes take-aways, kiosks, vending, food courts and bars.
e) Specialized or in stow this refers largely to the service of served of food and drink to customers in places not primarily designed for foodservice consumption.
It includes tray serve systems, such as in hospitals or on airlines, trolley service, name deliver y, drive and hotel floor service.
3.2 Origin of service Styles of food service have been found to have originated from custom, culture of a particular environment or another.
This can be elicited by the following under- mentioned.
3.2.1 French service This form of service is generally reserved for the haute cuisine (elegant) restaurants and complements an elegant ambiance.
The food is attractively arranged on platter and presented to guests, after which the preparation of the food is completed on a gueridon table beside the guest’s seat.
A guerdon is a trolley like table with a gas burner for table side cooking.
This is the most impressive and expensive form of service.
French service is conducted by an elaborate and formal staff comprise of the following team: Maitre d’hotel: Restaurant manager Chef de rang: Station server in charge of service for approximately four tables.
Greets guests, describes and takes menu orders, supervises service, and completes the preparation of some dishes on the gueridon and carves slices or debones for guests.
Demi chef de rang: Assistant station server, assists the chef de rang, takes beverage orders and serves food.
Commis de rang: Food server in training.
Assists demi chef de rang with service of water, bread and butter, serving and clearing of plates, taking orders to the kitchen and bringing the food into the restaurants.
3.2.2 Russian service With Russian service the food is cooked in the kitchen, cut, placed onto a serving dish, and beautifully garnished.
The dish then is presented to the 51  guests and served individually by lifting the food onto the guest’s place with a serving spoon and fork.
Russian service can be used at a banquet or a dinner party, where the servers may wear white gloves.
3.2.3 American service This is a simplified version of Russian service techniques.
The prepared food is dished onto individual plates in the kitchen, carried into the dinning room and served to guests.
This method of service is more popular because it is quicker and guests receive the food hot and beautifully presented by the chef.
3.3 Basic Styles of Service This is more or less a continuation of 3.2 above.
Each style can easily be traced to the cultural background or the country of origin.
These are the basic styles of service that operate commonly in day to day food service either at home or in the restaurant can be classified as follows:- 3.3.1 Waiter Service This style of service has food item plated for each customer at the kitchen by the Aboyeur or Chef.
The food is handed over to the waiter who takes the food to the guest in the restaurant.
This service gives the chef opportunity to present the food artistically.
3.3.2 Family Service Food and the accompaniments are traditionally served in large dishes and people help themselves to small amount from one dish for individuals.
It is common in China, India and some African countries like Nigeria.
It can be said to be the practice of serving food in dishes from which customer are expected to help them.
It helps to maintain the link of tradition.
The style requires fewer staff than styles and less training skill is required.
For the food to maintain the correct temperature particularly hot food, the kitchen must ensure it is served in heated dishes and customers are given hot plates and the dishes are kept hot by lamps or hot plates.
3.3.3 Silver Service It is known to be the standard of service in hotels and restaurants.
Food is presented on flats (called serving trays) or dishes to customers and then served by the waiter with the help of serving fork and spoon to customer plate.
Silver Service of food enhances food presentation and appearance than family or plate service.
It helps in maintaining the temperature of food and provides customers a high degree of service.
Some restaurants tend to replace the silver with use of stainless steel because it is highly capital intensive.
The operating costs of maintaining the flats, silver trays etc., silver 52  service painting and staff need to acquire high skills of training to cope successfully with silver service methods.
3.3.4 Gueridon service Gueridon is a table or trolley placed beside the customer’s table at which the waiter prepares fillets of fish or carves meat.
Sometimes cooking of the dishes to be served is done in the presence of the customer.
This style requires personal attention and it is flamboyant.
It is used for menu dishes of duties are expensive.
This style of services is therefore restricted to high prices and can be charged to cover the operating costs.
The high prices are as a result of: - High labour intensive is required - Skilled and trained staff are required - The style service requires 1 Chef derange 2 common de rang to between 10 and 12 customers.
- Staff salary must be commensurable with the high level of skill.
- Few customers can be seated in a restaurant operating gueridon service than other styles of service due to the need of space for trolley.
- The equipment requires greater capital than other styles of service.
- The food is also served in silver plate which is capital intensive.
3.3.5 Cafeteria Service This is self service of customers.
The customers queue on the line, pick a tray and plate from the beginning of the counter and move to the hot cupboard or cold compartments of food.
There are 3 varieties of cafeteria system: in-line counter, free flow and carousel i) In-line cafeteria is a single counter along in customers pass to select food and beverage.
It is a fast method of service otherwise called a straight-line cafeteria.
It can serve up to 4-8 customers per minute.
Factors that can facilitate fast service are: • Speed of serve staff • Proficiency of the cashier • Order presents • Logical arrangements of the food restate main course, sweet and beverage in the correct sequence.
• The longer the counter, the slower the service will be length can be from between 20 and 50ft ii) Free – flow: otherwise called scramble system comprises of many counters each serving different meal item such as foods, sandwiches, salads, dements or beverages.
The advantage is that it allows for free-flow services and avoids queue.
It can serve as many as 15 customers per minute.
53  Customers prefer this service method because it is quicker since there’re different counters for different foods.
It also has advantage of flexibility.
At off- peak period, some counter may be closed.
iii) Carousel conventional service: was introduced but not very successful.
It has rotating arrangement of shelves on in food and drinks are presented.
The customers remain stationary as the carousel revolves every minute to enable them select items from it one half of the carousel counter is in the service area for customers to remove meal items.
The other side of shelve can be replenished behind the unit trays, cutler y napkin and beverages are separately available from dispenser to avoid congestion cashiers are situated between carousel and dinning room.
The disadvantages are that it is slow as it serves a customer for between 8 and 10 minutes.
Waiters must be quick and efficient for steady flow of customers.
It is less used where hot food is served because of problem in making the temperature and quality; they are good for display of cold dishes and sweets.
It is not popular.
3.4 Other important areas of service 3.4.1 Hot Plate The hot plate is a meeting point for the food service waiters and food production staff.
The two staff (kitchen & restaurant) must co-operate with each other to achieve a successful operation.
Correct order must be taken and brought by the waiter while the food is plated for the waiter.
The food must be served at correct temperature and order must be legibly written.
The Aboyeur is other wise called the banker or announcer, controls the hot cupboard during the service period.
He informs the waiter on availability of food and those that went available.
The hotplate is stocked up to china ready service e.g.
soup plates, joint plates, sweet plates consommé cups, platters, soup cups etc.
all the silver needed are placed on top of hotplate.
It can be operated by gas or electricity.
It is switched on well in advance of service for all necessary silver and china plates to be heated.
3.4.2 Clearing Systems The service system explains how meals are served to customers.
Clearing away of service equipment used by the customer cannot be trivialised such as dinner plates, side plates, cruet, cutlery sets etc.
This is done systematically at the end of each course.
For the A’ la Carte menu, the cutler y is relayed for the next course unlike table d’hote where everything has been laid before service commences.
Clearing of cutlery is done together with the plate.
The ‘golden rule’ about serving and clearing procedure in a standard restaurant is that food or plates should be served from the left and plates 54  cleared from the right while glasses and drinks are served and cleared from the right.
3.4.4 Dish Washing Wash Up is the first area the waiter enters from food service where he deposits all the dirty plates, crockery, stacking ready for washing correctly to prevent breaking all napkins while paper napkin and disposables must be thrown in separate bin.
The dirty china plates etc are placed into a tank of hot water containing soap detergent.
After washing, the plates are placed into wire racks and dipped with sterilising tank containing hot water at a temp 75oC (179oF) The racks will be left for 2 minutes then the china are drained out if the temp is high enough, until dry automatically.
A clean tea cloth is used to wipe them.
After drying, the china plates are piled according to sizes and placed on shelves.
4.0 Conclusion This unit has been able to discuss the various types of food service, style of service to adopt and the factors to consider for the method.
In the next unit, we shall look into how to plan for service in good detail.
5.0 Summary Classification and service of menu with the involvement of the service staff have been treated extensively.
The service procedure was also discussed 6.0 TUTOR MARKED ASSIGNMENT Describe the following and state the merits and demerits: i.
Family service ii.
Gueridon service ii.
The most commonly used Cafetaria service 7.0 Reference 7.1 Cousins and Lillicrap, 1999) Food and Beverage Service, Edward Arnold : London s Peter, D. (1976) Planning Profits in the Food and Lodging Industry.
Bouston, Cashners Ridgway, J.
(1984) 2nd Running your own catering company.
British Publishing 55  UNIT 2: PLANNING AND SERVICE PROCEDURE Contents 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objectives 3.0 Main Content 3.1 Principles of Menu Planning 3.1.1 Examples of Menu 3.2 Production S ystems 3.2.1 Mis- en- place 3.2.2 Procedure for table laying 3.3.3 Procedure for table laying II 3.3.4 Sequence of service 3.2.5 Post Service Procedure 3.2.6 Service of Cheese & Fruits 3.2.7 Use of under- plates 3.3 Movement of food 3.4.What are Accompaniments?
3.5 Classic menu sequence 3.5.1 European Classical Menu 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 TMA (Tutor Marked Assignment) 7.0 References 56  1.0 Introduction Food is generally offered to customers in two major different ways.
Some people call it order of service.
The first one is, ‘Self-service’, where the customer orders and collects his food from the counter or point of sale.
This is characterized by Counter/Cafeteria service or Vending machine The second is, ‘Table service’, where a waiter or waitress takes the order of the customer and serves the meal at the table.
Example of this is the hotel restaurant.
Although different types of foodservice operation have been identified and discussed in the previous units.
This unit will go further to identify and discuss how menu planning and food composition are tailored to meet the customer needs.
Other aspects relating to food service operation such as the advance preparation ‘Mis-en- place’ for service and post service procedure as well as the basic equipment required for service will also be discussed.
2.0 Objectives At the end of this unit, the students will be familiar with the essential rudiments involved in food service operation.
3.0 Main Content 3.1 Principles of Menu Planning The following points should be considered when planning when planning menu.
1.
Length: Number of dishes on the menu offered must not be long.
Fewer good and standard dishes are better than uninteresting long menu.
2.
Design: The design must complement the décor of restaurant.
Allow for changes on daily / weekly / monthly basis.
3.
Language: Must be easily understood and expressed in simple English which will help customers understand dish description easily.
4.
Presentation: Menu must be presented in a sensible and welcoming way so that customer is put at ease.
5.
Other Planning guidelines: - Type and size of establishment restaurant - Customer Profile - Special requirement.
- Time of the year – summer or winter - Foods in season – give reasonable price - Special days e g Christmas, Sallah etc - Time of day, e.g.
breakfast, lunch, or dinner etc.
- Price must be ‘good value for money’.
Customer satisfaction is important for repeat performance.
- No of courses - Use of menu language (that customers understand) - Nutritional balance 57  - Avoid repetition of ingredients from dish to dish - Avoid repetition of colour and flavour.
- 3.1.1 Examples of Menus Breakfast menus A breakfast menu can be complied from the following foods: 1 Fruit: Grapefruit, orange, melon, apple, etc.
Fruit juices: Grapefruit, orange, pineapple.
Stewed fruit: Prunes, figs, apple, pears, etc.
Yoghurt: A selection.
2 Cereals: Cornflakes, shredded wheat, porridge, etc.
3 Eggs: Fried, boiled, poached, scrambled; omelette with bacon (streaky, back or gammon) or tomatoes, mushrooms or sauté potatoes.
4 Fish: Grilled herrings, kippers or bloaters; fried sole, plaice or whiting; fish cakes, smoked haddock, kedgeree.
5 Meats (hot): Fred or grilled bacon (streaky, back or gammon), sausages, kidney, calves’ liver, with tomatoes, mushrooms or sauté potatoes, potato cakes or bubble and squeak.
6 Meats (cold): Ham, bacon, pressed beef with sauté potatoes.
7 Preserved: Marmalade (orange, lemon, grapefruit, ginger), jams, honey.
8 Fresh fruit: Apple, pear, peach, grapes, etc.
9 Beverages: Tea, coffee, chocolate.
10 Bread: Rolls, croissants, brioche, toast, pancakes, waffles.
A ‘LA CARTE FRUITS & JUICES Fresh Orange or Grapefruit Juice $.
.
.
.Large $.
.
.
.
When compiling Pai n ebarpepalkef,a Tsto mmeantou o rt hPer ufonlel oJwuiicneg $ .
p. o. i.nLtasr sgheo $u.l d. .b .e taken into cognisancCeh: i lled Melon $.
.
.
.
Stewed Prunes Juice $.
.
.
.Half Grapefruit $ .
.
.
i) It is usual to ofSfeterw therde eF iogfs t $h e. c. o. u r s e sF prereshv iforuusilty i nm seenatsioonn e$d.
.i n. .3 .1.1.
For example see menu belowB: REAKFAST FAVOURITES Porridge or Cereal $.
.
.
.
E g g s, a n y s t y l e : o n e $ .
.
.
.
F ru Tit,w Yoo $g.h .u .r .t , or Cereals Fish, Eggs, o rH Mamea,t Bacon, Chipolata Sausages or Grilled Tomato $.
.
.
.
Preserves, BreaOd,m Ceolfeftetee, oprl aTinea $ .
.
.
.
with Ham or Cheese $.
.
.
.
Grilled Gammon Ham $.
.
.
.
Breakfast Sirloin Steak $.
.
.
.
ii) It Ais bpeatitre r otof Kofifpepre ar sf e$w.
.
n. u. m b e r oSfm woeklel-d pHreapdadroecdk d wisihthe sa t phaona cah eladr gEeg g $.
.
.
.
number of hurriedPlya npcreapkaerse wd iothn eMs.a ple Syrup $.
.
.
.
iii) A choice of plain foodsF sRuOchM a sO bUoRile Bd AegKgEsR oYr p oached haddock should be Croissants or Breakfast Rolls$ .
.
.
Brioche $.
.
.
.
available foAr sthsoer cteuds tDomaneirs hw hPoa sdtroieess n$o.
t. r. e. q u i r eT foriaesdt b$r.
e. a.k .f ast.
BEVERAGES Tea, Coffee, Sank, Chocolate or Milk $ .
.
.
Service Charge 15% 58  Breakfast menus may be table d’hote or a la carte.
A topical continental breakfast would offer: rolls and butter, croissants, toast, preserves, tea or coffee.
A continental breakfast does not include any cooked dish.
Table 1 Luncheon or Dinner menu A luncheon or dinner table d’hote menu may offer a choice of dishes or may be a set meal with little or no choice, depending on the type of establishment.
If a special party luncheon menu required, three or four courses are usually offered.
Examples of which are given below: 30th June, 2… LUNCHEON MENU Cocktail of Melon and Exotic Fruits Streak, Kidney and Mushroom pudding Cream ed potatoes Fresh Market Vegetables Stilton and Cheddar Biscuit and Celery Coffee Petit Fours Thank you $3.00 Table 2 59  26t h April, 2… MENU Filet de Tuite de Riviera Fume Raifort Chantilly Fillet of Smoked Trout with Horseradish Mouse Consommé Julienne Beef Consommé with Vegetable Julienne Escalope de Veau a la Crème de Fenouil Veal Escalope in a Fennel Cream Sauce Legumes du Mache Seasonal Vegetable Riz Pilaf Pilaf Rice Salade de Fruits Frais Refraichis au Kirsch Crème Fraiche Fresh Fruit Salad with Kirsch and Cream Café Thank you $3.50 Table 3 30th Nov., 2….
DINNER MENU Cocktail de Crevettes et Avocat (Prawn and Avocado Cocktail) Consommé de Volaille en Surprise (Clear Chicken Soup cooked under a pastry Case) Tournedos Soufflé ‘Melton Mowbray’ (Fillet Steak topped with a Stilton Mousse) Prommes Nouvelles Rissolees (Roasted New Potatoes) Legumes du Marche (Fresh Market Vegetables) Mousse au Chocolat Noir et Blanc (Chocolate Mousse) Café Friandises Thank you £2.50 Table 4 60  An example of A’ la Carte Menu 30th June, 2… Served throughout 24 hours SANDWICH SELSCTIONS Club House: Sliced Turkey Breast, Bacon, Lettuces, Tomato and Mayonnaise £.
.
.
.
Ham and Swiss Cheese £.
.
.
.
Tuna Fish Salad £.
.
.
.
Cold Roast Beef £.
.
.
.
Turkey Breast £.
.
.
.
Chicken Breast £.
.
.
.
HOT SPECIALITIES The following are served with French Fried potatoes Grilled Chopped Steak on a toasted Bun £.
.
.
.
Grilled Chopped Steak accompanied by a Fried egg.
Bacon and a Grilled tomato £.
.
.
.
Café’s Liver and Bacon £.
.
.
.
Omelette’s to Choice £.
.
.
.
Vegetables and Side Salads to choice £.
.
.
.
BREADS, PASTRIES AND ICE CR EAMS Gateaux £.
.
.
.
Toast and Butter £.
.
.
.
Assorted Danish or French pastries £.
.
.
.
Brown Bread and Butter £.
.
.
.
Assorted Ice creams £.
.
.
.
Assorted Biscuits £.
.
.
.
Full Afternoon Tea £.
.
.
.
BEVERAGES Tea, Coffee, Sanka, Chocolate or Milk £.
.
.
.
Thank you Table 5 3.3 Production Systems Production systems vary according to the organisation’s policy and availability of raw materials for preparation.
Menu items may be prepared individually, usually in response to a customer order.
This is traditionally a la carte or calls order system.
Alternatively they may be prepared in bulk or prior to specific customer orders.
This is the tradition table d’hote system .
The styles of service have been discussed in the previous unit.
We shall now look into some preparations to undertake before proceeding on service and regulations to follow after service.
3.2.1 Mis- en- Place Mis- en- place’, which is French in simple English language means, the advance preparation for service.
Some of the procedures to follow are as follows: Check on numbers, function and layout of room.
Check room is clean and furniture required is available, present, clean and serviceable.
Place sideboards in position in eachbStation.
Arrange tables at each station, then place chairs to each cover.
Place clean linen or mats of correct size on the table.
61  At Silver dispense collect all silver on oblong tray.
At sideboard check cleanliness and polish all silver, service items, and reserve into sideboard drawers.
Collect miscellaneous such as: flowers, numbers, cruets (full), basket, etc.
Fig.
3 – Mis- en- place (procedure for laying table cloth) 3.2.2 Procedure for table laying: (see fig 4 below) Place mats to centre of each cover or lay table cloths.
On centre of cover place side plate, badge to top.
With use of circular tray lay silver cutlery, inside to out, bottom to top, Follow with serviettes, cruets, numbers, flowers, glasses, etc.
When each cover is complete and correct, move side plate to left of forks.
Collect hot plates, clean and position.
Light 15 minutes before service.
Obtain waiters check pads, menus, biros etc.
Ensure reserve equipment is available and en place.
62  Fig.
4 – ‘A typical table laying, cruet sets and flowers yet to be placed’ 3.2.3 Procedure for table laying II These activities are put in place immediately prior to service.
Collect butter and place on tables.
Place bread and iced water in the jug on sideboard.
Line –up to be conducted by the supervisor to ensure that the menu and its dishes, their constituent ingredient, methods of service, the portion size is explained to the waiters and commis waiters.
Carry out final check for the sideboard.
3.2.4 Sequence of Service In a big establishment, the Reception Head Waiter greets guests and escorts them to your table.
In others, the waiter greets them with “Good day, Sir/Madam”.
Greet the guests “Good day, Sir/Madam, your table is this way”.
Offer menus to host and guests.
Serve water from right, jug on service plate.
Refill (place on table).
Serve bread rolls by use of spoon and fork, from left.
Take orders for first course, main course and vegetables, only.
Remove unwanted silver (cutlery) if any, or add additional silver as is necessary using round tray or service plate.
Take the top check to kitchen, second to cashier, retain flimsy.
63  Serve first course, ladies before gentlemen, aged before others, host last; from left.
When all have finished, then clear covers from right.
Serve main course, vegetables and sauces, wait, clear.
On service tray, remove cruets and butter, unused silver.
Offer menu.
Remove side plate(s), knife(s) and debris on round tray.
Crumb down, bring down sweet cutlery.
Take sweet order, checks to kitchen and cashier.
If savoury, change cutlery, add sauces, salts, as required.
Serve wait, clear, plus unused items.
Remove water glasses (plus jug) from right.
Take order for coffee, obtain as required.
Take checks to Still Room and Cashier.
Place on coffee cup services.
Serve brown sugar according to house policy.
Serve, Coffee black or with milk or cream.
Serve coffee to all and then follow round with milk, cream.
Place brown sugar on table and ash tray if required.
Wait until host has almost finished then serve bill, on a side plate, folded over.
Take bill, side plate and money to cashier, Return change and receipt.
Thank customers as they leave, escort out of door.
F ig 5 - ‘Plate handling’ 64  Fig.
6 – ‘Use of spoon and fork for silver service’ 3.2.5 Post Service Procedure Using round tray, remove coffee and ash trays, used napkins, etc, Proceed and do a, b or c as applicable in case other customers are expected or if service has ended a. Crumb down and relay, b. Crumb down place on covers, side plate napkin, knife to centre of each cover.
c. Crumb down and clear away everything.
By use of tray remove dirty silver, cutlery and crockery to wash up.
Return clean items to stock.
Dispose of condiments, return waiter’s check pad to Maitre d’Hotel for control.
Clean up station and await further instruction.
3.2.
6 Service of Cheese & Fruits Take order, write out checks.
Place on cold (fish) plate and knife.
Serve food in question.
If fresh fruit, place on finger bowl, napkin and plate.
When customer has finished, remove and continue sequence.
3.2.7 Use of Under- plates Under- plates are used for four main reasons viz:- To improve presentation on the table 65  To make carrying of soup plates or bowl shaped dishes easier To isolate hands from hot dishes To allow cutler y and flatware to be carried along with the item Sometimes dollies or napkins are used on underplates to improve presentation, reduce noise and prevent dishes from slipping on the underplates.
3.3 Movement of food In traditional foodservice operation, the production area is adjacent to the dining area, so food is served hot directly from the kitchen to the customer.
With the table d’hote system, this food is usually kept hot in the bain marie hot cupboard during service period.
However, as identified in the previous unit, some operations are ‘decouple’.
Food is produced in a different place and at a different time to when it is served.
In these cases the cook-chill, cook-freeze or sous-vide system may be used to hold the food at as safe temperature.
In decouple systems, dishes and meals need to be transported in their chilled or frozen state from the kitchen to the dining area.
A variety of systems exist for doing this in hospitals, flight catering and other sectors adopting this approach.
Also in out-door catering service transportation is essential to move food, equipment and staff to the venue of the function .
3.4 What are Food Accompaniments?
Accompaniments are condiments offered to customers to add to and improve the flavour of the dishes.
There are a number of dishes where traditional accompaniments are served.
Here is a list of some of the dishes you will have to serve with tahcecior m paniments.
Dish Accompaniment Hors d’oeuvre Olive oil and vinegar Prawn cocktail Brown bread and butter, cayenne pepper, pepper mill Smoked salmon Brown bread and butter, cayenne pepper, pepper mill Melon Castor sugar and ground ginger Paste maison Hot toast Minestrone Grated Parmesan Cheese Cear turtle soup Cheese straws 66  Cold poached salmon Mayonnaise Deep fried bread crumbed fish Tartare sauce Roast leg on lamb Mint sauce or red currant jelly Roast gravy Roast beef Horseradish sauce English mustard Roast gravy Roast leg of mutton Redcurrant jelly or mint sauce Roast gravy Roast pork Apple sauce Roast gravy English mustard Grilled steaks English and French mustard Roast chicken Bread sauce Roast turkey Cranberry sauce Cheese and biscuits Celery, radish, spring onions etc Coffee Petit fours STUDENT ASSESSMENT EXERCISE a) Plan a 4- Course Menu with choices within the courses b) Give suitable accompaniment(s) for each of the menu 3.5 Classic menu sequence 3.5.1 European Classical Menu Over a centur y, the sequence of the European menu has taken on a classical format or order of dishes.
This format is used to lay out menus as well as to indicate the order of the various courses.
Although the actual number of courses on a menu and dishes within each course will depend on the size and class of the establishment.
The classic sequence must be followed.
This sequence is as follows: 1.Hors-d’ oeuvres Traditionally this course consisted of a variety of compound salads but now includes items such as pates, mousses, fruit, charcuterie and smoked fish.
2.
Soups (potages) Includes all soups, both hot and cold 3.
Egg dishes (oeufs) There a great number of egg dishes beyond the usual omelettes but these have not retained their popularity on modern menus.
67  5.Pasta and rice (farineux) Includes all pasta and rice dishes known as farinaceous dishes.
6.Fish (Poisson) This course consists of fish dishes, both not cold.
Fish dishes such as smoked salmon or seafood cocktail are mainly considered to be hors- d’ oeuvres dishes and therefore would be served earlier in a meal.
7,Entrée Entrees are generally small, well garnished dishes which come from the kitchen ready for service.
They are usually accompanied by a rich sauce or gravy.
Potatoes and vegetables are not usually served with this course if it is to be followed by a main meat course.
If this is the main meat sauce then it is usually by potatoes and vegetables to also be offered.
Examples of this type of dish are tournedos, noissettes, sweetbreads, garnished cutlets or filled volau-vent cases.
4 Sorbet Traditionally sorbet (sometimes now called granites) were served to give a pause thing a small meal, allowing the palate to be refreshed.
They are lightly frozen water ices, often based on un- sweetened fruit juice and may be served with a spirit, liqueur or even Champagne poured over.
Russian cigarettes also used to be offered at this stage of meal.
5 Releve This refers to main roasts or other larger points of meat, which would be served as potatoes or vegetables.
9 Roast (roti) This term traditionally refers to roasted game or poultr y dishes 10 vegetables (vegumes) Apart from vegetables served with the Releve or roast courses, certain vegetables (e.g.
asparagus and artichokes) may be served as a separate course, although this type of dishes are now more commonly served as starters.
11 Salad (salade) Often refers to a small plate of salad that is taken after a main course (or courses) and is quit often simply a green salad and dressing.
12 Cold Buffet (buffet froid) This course includes a variety of cold meat and fish, cheese and egg items together with a range of salads and dressings.
13 Cheese (fromage) Includes the range o f cheeses and various accompaniments, includes biscuits, breads, celery, grapes and apples.
This course can also be referred cheese based dishes such as soufflés.
14 Sweet (entremets) Refers to both hot and cold puddings 68  15 Savoury (savoureux) Sometimes simple savouries, such as welsh Rarebit or other items to toast, or in pastr y, or savoury soufflés, may be served at this stage.
16 Fruit (desert) Fresh fruit, nuts and sometimes candied fruits.
4.0 Conclusion The importance of planning and following the correct pattern of service cannot be over- emphasised.
These and menu service procedure with classification of menu have been discussed.
In the next unit we shall look into the essential equipment for service.
5.0 Summary The food service sector is an organised industry as a result some laid down rules on service procedure must be followed for successful operation.
This was responsible for the lengthening discussion on Planning and Service procedure.
Equipment can be seen as one of the tools by which food is conveyed to the customers.
Equipment is therefore discussed in the next unit.
6.0 TUTOR MARKED ASSIGNMENT What factors would you consider in planning menu?
7.0 Reference 7.1 Lillicrap (1971) Food and Beverage Service, Edward Arnold : London 7.2 Walker, R. (1999) 2nd edn Introduction to Hospitality, Prentice Hall: USA 69  UNIT 3: FOOD SERVICE EQUIPMENT Contents 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objectives 3.0 Contents 3.1 Importance of Tableware 3.1.1 Common China-ware & their uses 3.1.2 Common Silver-ware & their Uses 3.1.3 Purchasing service equipment 3.2 Other Service Equipment 3.2.1 Use of Disposables 3.2.2 Types of Disposals 3.3.3 Advantages of Disposables 3.3.4 Disadvantages of Disposables 3.3 Care of Service Equipment 3.3.1 Storage of Service Equipment 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 T MA (Tutor Marked Assignment) 7.0 References and Further Reading 70  1.0 Introduction Tableware is a term used for all types of equipment in the food service operation.
Examples of such items as: flatware, cutlery and hallow-ware.
The importance of equipment in the service sector cannot be over- emphasised.
It is used for storage, serving and presentation to mention but a few.
The major function is that it is a means of presenting prepared food to the customers.
This unit discusses the various types of equipment that can be found in different food establishments.
2.0 Objectives By the end of this exercise, the students would have been able • To know the various types of equipment in use for the food service operation.
• To understand what the equipment is used for and the advantages one type has over the other.
3.0 Main Content 3.1 Importance of Tableware Most food service areas use either plated silverware or stainless steel.
The stainless steel items come in different types.
Some of which are: o Flatware: this denotes all forms of spoon and fork o Cutlery: refers to knives and other cutting implements o Hallow-ware: consists of any item made from silver, apart from flatware and cutlery e.g teapots, milk jugs, sugar basins, oval flats.
3.1.1 Common China-ware & their uses Some light service equipment commonly used in the service organisations: TRADE MAIN USAGE STYLE APPROXIMATE SIZE NAME Side Bread items Round 16cm Plate Cheese (6 ½ ins) Small Savouries Underplate Entrée Hors d’Oeuvres Round 22 cm Plate Fish Dishes (8 ½ ins) (single) Desserts Fruit Underplate Dinner Plate Main meals Round 25 cm 71  (complete) (10 ins) Grill Plate Main meals Oval 30 cm Grill (12 ins) Specialties Whole fish Soup Plate Soup Round 23 cm (5 ins) Soup Bowl Soups Deep round 13 cm Cereals (5 ins) Desserts Dessert Plate Desserts Deep round 15 cm Cereals (6 ins) Soups Teacup Tea/Coffee 3 to pint 5 to a litre Demi-tasse Coffee 6 to pint 10 to litre Saucer Underplate to fit cSuppe cialist items: Cream jug or pot, milk jug Sugar basin, Cruets, Tea/coffee Pots, egg cups etc.
Table 6 3.1.2 Common Silver-ware & their Uses Equipment Uses 1.
Asparagus holder 1.
Used to hold asparagus spears when eating 2.
Pastry Slice 2.
Sweet trolley – serving portions of gateau 3.
Oyster fork 3.
Shellfish cocktail/oysters 4.
Pastry fork 4.
Afternoon tea 5.
Corn-on-the-cob holders 5.
One to pierce each end of the cob 6.
Lobster pick 6.
To extract the flesh from the claw 7.
Butter knife 7.
To serve butter portion 8.
Sauce ladle 8.
Service from sauce boat 9.
Fruit knife and fork 9.
Dessert - cover 10.
Nutcrackers 10.
Dessert – fruit basket 11.
Grape scissors 11.
To cut and hold a portion of grapes 12.
Grapefruit spoon 12.
Grapefruit halves 13.
Ice-cream spoon 13. for all ice-cream dishes served in 72  coupes 14.
Ice-cream spoon 14.
Ice-cream dish in a tall glass 15.
Sundae spoon 15. used to hold snail shell 16.
Snail tongs 16.
Dish is round with two ears, having six indentation To hold a portion (6) of s1n7a.
iSlsn a il fork 17.
Used to extract a snail from its shell Snail fork 18.
Cheese knife 18.
Cheese board 19.
Stilton scoop 19.
Service of stilton cheese 20.
Gourmet spoon 20.
Sauce spoon for cover 21.
Preserve spoon 21.
Used with jam dish 22.
Sugar tongs 22.
Required for cube sugar 3.1.3 Purchasing Service Equipment The durability is often quoted by the manufacturers.
It ranges between 20 and 30 years.
The lifespan of silver depends upon the weight of silver deposited.
The majority of food service areas use either plated silverware or stainless steel.
Plain cutlery and flatware are more popular than patterned for the simple reason that the former are cheaper and easier to keep clean.
Handles are an important factor in cutlery.
The best investment is knives with handles of hard soldered silver plate, nickel or good stainless steel.
The following points concerning purchase of equipment should be borne in mind when purchasing flatware and cutlery for a foodservice organisation: • The type of menu and service offered • The maximum and average seating capacity • The rush hour turn-over • The washing-up facilities and there turn-over Plastic materials, however, are cheaper and usually satisfactory.
It is worth noting that stainless steel resists scratching far more than other metal and it is more hygienic.
It neither tarnishes nor stains.
3.2 Other Service Equipment 3.2.1 Use of Disposables Disposables are sometimes referred to as throw-aways.
The growth in the use of disposables has been considerable.
Part of the reasons for the popularity is due to the emergence of the fast-food and take-away establishments.
It is the trend in many establishments to use disposables to help cut costs.
Other advantages are enumerated below.
At the same time, the disposable must be attractive, presentable and acceptable to the client and this helps to attract customers.
Some of the establishments that use disposables are: Outdoor Catering 73  Fast food Automatic vending 3.2.2 Types of disposables There are varieties of disposables available and they are used in various areas as summarised below: Storage and cooking purposes Service of food and beverages, e.g.
plates, knives, forks, cups Décor – napkins, tablecloths, slip cloths, banquet roll, place mats Hygiene – wipes Clothing, e.g.
aprons, chef hats, gloves Packaging – for marketing and presentation purposes.
3.2.3 Advant ages of disposables Equipment and labour disposables reduce the need for washing- up equipment, staff and materials Hygiene: usage improves the standard of hygiene in an establishment Time: disposables may speed up servic, e.g.
for fast food Properties: they have good hear retention and instulation properties Marketing: disposables can be used as a promotional aid Capital: usage reduces the amount of capital investment Carriage: they are easily transported Cost: disposables are cheaper than hiring conventional equipment 3.2.4 Disadvantages of disposables Acceptability: customer acceptability may be poor Cost: disposables can be more expensive than some conventional equipment Storage: back-up quantities are required Supply: there is heavy reliance on supply and delivery time STUDENT ASS ESSMENT EXERCISE What points you consider in purchasing service equipment?
74  3.3 Care of Service Equipment 3.3.1 Storage of Service Equipment Careful storage of cutlery and flatware is most important.
Ideally, there should be boxes or drawers for each specific item.
Each box or drawer being lined with baize to prevent the items concerned sliding about and becoming scratched and marked.
Other items of hollow-ware should be stored on shelve which are labelled showing where the deferent items go.
They must be stored at a convenient height for placing on and removing from the shelves.
All flatware, cutlery and hollow-ware should be stored in a room or cupboard which can be locked since they constitute a large part of the capital of the restaurant.
Cutlery and flatware may be stored in cutlery trolleys or trays of which there are a number now on the marked to suit all purposes.
There is an almost unlimited range of flatware, cutlery and hollow-ware in use in the catering industry today.
Some of the common equipment are listed in Figure 6 and Table 2 above.
They both contain brief notes of what they may be used for.
4.0 Conclusion The importance of service equipment and the various types have be discussed in this unit.
5.0 Summary The food service sector is an organised industry as a result some laid down rules must be followed for successful operation.
Service Equipment can be seen as one of the tools by which food is conveyed to the customers.
This salient issue has been tackled.
The next unit will look into the issues of staffing under the Human Resources Personnel.
6.0 TUTOR M ARKED ASSIGNMENT a) What type of equipment would you recommend for a Fast- food Restaurant sited on the highway b) Give the advantages and disadvantages of disposable equipment?
7.0 Reference Lillicrap (1971) Food and Beverage Service, Edward Arnold : London Kinton 75  UNIT 4: ROLE OF H UMAN RESOURCES MANAGEMENT IN THE FOOD SERVICE ORGANISATION Contents 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objectives 3.0 Content 3.1 Responsibilities of the Human Resources Manager 3.11 The HRM challenges in the Food Service organisation 3.2 Employment procedures 3.2.1 Job description 3.2.2 Recruitment and Selection 3.2.3 Orientation 3.2.4 Training 3.3 Employees’ Rewards & Motivation 3.3.1 Performance Appraisal 3.3.2 Compensation 3.3.3 E qual Employment Opportunity 3.3.4 Employees with Disabilities act 3.3.5 Harassment 3.4 Evaluating Employee Out-puts 3.4.1 Productivity Standards 3.5 Culture 3.6 Staff Duty Rotas 3.7 Other motivational factors 3.7.1 Security, Health and Safety at work 3.7.1 Work Place security 3.7.2 Personal & Environmental hygiene 3.7.3 The food Safety and Fire prevention 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 (TMA) Tutor Marked Assignment 7.0 References and Further Readings 76  1.0 Introduction Human Resources Management is the process of evaluating human resources needs, finding the people to fill the needs and getting the best work from each employee by providing good incentives and the right job environment.
Hospitality industry offers products and intangible services.
The industry is synonymous with qualitative service and professionalism for success.
The food and drink service is the second major activity of most food service organisations and particularly in the hotel industry.
This sector accounts for a larger proportion of employees than the provision of accommodation and related services.
This is why the management is critical about the issue of human resources management.
The provision of meals and refreshments has a relatively high labour content and two main factors are responsible for the large number of employees viz:- • In the hotels, meals and refreshments may be supplied to non- residents and resident guests.
• There are substantial sales from functions and conferences.
In this unit we shall be discussing the various human resources procedures and the role of employees in the food service organisations.
2.0 Objectives After have read this, you will have the • understanding of human resources management and development processes • Understand the significance of staff and their attitude in the food service organisations 3.0 Main Content 3.1 Responsibilities of the Human Resources Manager Responsibilities of the Human Resources Manager is about attracting, selecting, orienting, training, developing and evaluating the performance of the employees of and organisation.
Workers are the most important resource in the industry.
Other functions of the human resources management include job descriptions, job specifications, advertising, salaries & wages, disciplines and promotion.
The industry is complex for the fact that most of the employees are unskilled with little or no training.
There is also cultural diversity within the industr y.
3.11 The HRM challenges in the Food Service organisation Traditionally, hotels and restaurants are recognized for facilitating international career development.
The hospitality industry is reliant on an increasingly younger, internationally focused work force though faced with a transient pool of labour and a high proportion of managers aged under 40 years old.
77  About 80% of the hospital industry employees are engaged in the provision of foodservice and 70% were female employees.
The workers are seeking attractive compensation packages and career advancement to fulfil their lifestyle aspirations.
This makes retention a key challenge for the industry where over a third of staff are, within their first year of employment, looking to advance their career within, while nearly two thirds of the work force will be looking to move within two years of changing companies.
The industry is also faced with the decline in the number of ageing females.
There is stress due to the nature of work and sometimes odd hours of duty.
3.2 Employment procedures 3.2.1 Job description A job description is detailed description of the activities and outcomes expected of an employee performing the job.
The job description is important because it can become a legal document.
Some cases have come before the courts and administrative agencies in which employees who were dismissed have sued the former employer, claiming that they did not know or were not properly informed of the duties required.
Today, many companies have employees sign their job description to avoid any confusion or misunderstanding about their job and its responsibilities.
The job description specifies the knowledge, qualifications and skill necessary to do the job successfully.
It is used as good performance measurement tools.
3.2.2 Recruitment and Selection This is the process of finding the most suitable employee for the available position.
The process begins with announcing the vacancy; sometimes this is done first within the organization, then outside.
Applications are received from a variety of sources: • Internal promotion • Employee referrals • Applicant files • Transfers within the company • Advertising • Colleges and universities • Government sponsored employment service Application forms and resumes are accepted and screened by the human resource department.
Many companies require applicants to come and personally fill out the application forms.
The human resources department then reviews the application forms and resume for accuracy and to ensure that the prospective employee is legally entitled to work in the country.
Applicants are invited to attend an interview with the employm ent manager.
This is a general screening interview to determine that the applicant is suitable for employment in a general way.
Employment managers look for dress, mannerisms, attentiveness, attitude, and interest; they also ask questions that encourage the applicant to answer in some detail.
This 78  necessitates asking open ended questions such as “what did you like most and least about your last job?” Questions like this invite the applicant to open up.
The two-way exchange of information allows the prospective employee to ask or learn about the job and the corporation.
Assuming the applicant makes a favourable impression, she or he will be invited for a second interview with the candidate’s ability to do the job and his or her interpersonal suitability to join the department team.
Selection means to choose the most suitably qualified candidate for the available job.
Providing candidates meet the minimum requirements stated in the job specification, the best individual may be selected from the qualified applicants.
Part of the selection process might involve tests (personality, attitude, skill psychological) to ensure that candidates posses the requisite interpersonal skills or knowledge to do the job.
In addition, some companies, as a condition of employment, require new employees to take a drug- screening test.
If the reference and background checks are positive, a formal offer is made in writing to the prospective employee.
The offer outlines the terms and conditions of employment and has a date by which the offer must be accepted.
The medical examination is the last step in the recruitment and selection process.
It acts as a precaution for both the employee and the company.
3.2.3 Orientation During the first few days of employment, new employees are required to attend an orientation session.
At the orientation, new employees learn details about the company’s history, compensation and benefits.
Safety and fire prevention are introduced as well as the property’s service philosophy.
Department heads and the general manager usually introduce themselves to the new employees and wish them well in their new positions.
3.2.4 Training Training in many organizations is an on-going activity that is conducted by a training department, a training manager or by line management or specially selected individuals within each department depending on the policy of the HRM.
The first step in establishing a training program is to identify training needs and then set training objectives.
Training must be geared toward guest expectations; it often focuses on areas where current service falls short of guest expectations.
There are five main types of employee training: apprentice, simulation, certification, on-the-job and off-the-job.
These training methods help individuals to quickly learn the job and to improve their performance in doing the work.
a)Apprentice training is given to people who are new to a particular job.
It is specially designed to teach participants the correct way to do a particular task.
This often follows the “tell me, show me, let me do it” routine.
b) Simulation training simulates the actual workplace.
For example, there are specially prepared simulation exercise for some food service departments such as hotel room service, out-door catering service and airline catering service systems.
Once the trainees have reached the required level of proficiency, they are allowed to work on their own.
79  c) Certification training enables individuals to gain corporate or professional certification by attaining passing scores on practical or theoretical tests.
These tests are generally job specific and are helpful in motivating employees to develop in a professional manner.
Some Professional Institutions operate certification programmes viz- a- viz:- Culinary Federation of America, the National Restaurant Association, American Hotel and Motel Association as well as Instite of Hospitality formerly, HCIMA in UK.
d) On-the-job training (OJT) helps maintain standards by having managers, supervisors, trainers or fellow employee coach individuals the most effective way to do the required work.
OJT allows the trainee to quickly learn the best way to do the works based on the experienced of trial and error.
New waiters may work with an experienced employee for a few days to learn the preferred way to serve food.
e) Off-the-job training is done away from the workplace and is usually used for non-technical training, such as effective communications, team-building, motivation and leadership.
These topics often are handled by outside experts.
3.3 Employees’ Rewards & Motivation 3.3.1 Performance Appraisal The purpose of performance appraisal is to compare an employee’s actual performance to establish standards as described in the job description.
This has been viewed by the industry as positive as well as negative.
The positive attributes of performance appraisal include giving feedback to employees, building the appraisal into a personal development plan, establishing a rationale for promotion and wage.
Employee retention is the exact opposite of employee turnover.
Whether it is called retention or turnover, the subject is still a major concern for the hospitality industry, in general, and human resources direction, in particular.
It is frustrating for management to spend time and effort on employees who go through the employment process only to leave a short time later.
Retention is a key challenge for the industry where over a third of individuals are, within their first year of employment, looking to advance their career within a new employer.
Retention is expressed as a percentage; if a department has one hundred employees on January 1 and sixty- three stay through the year, then the retention rate is 63 percent.
This means that thirty-seven people left the organization and had to be replaced.
Experts estimate that the turnover of one hourly position per week costs between $150,000 and $213,000 per year.
3.3.2 Compensation Compensation is the term used to describe what most people call a pay- check.
The compensation package includes wages, salaries and benefits.
The term wages is generally used with hourly employees and the term salaries usually is used for employees who work for a set rate of pay.
Compensation goes beyond payment of wages or salaries in high class restaurants.
Exclusive service such as greeting and seating guests, suggestive selling, correct methods of service and guest relations to ensure a positive dining experience attractive handsome prize for the waiter.
A good 80  and efficient food waiter in a restaurant in many cities can earn more than the manager of a small hotel.
3.3.3 Equal Employment Opportunity (EEO) Equal employment opportunity is the legal right of all individuals to be considered for employment and promotion on the basis of their ability and merit.
The intent of this legislation is to prevent discrimination against applicants for the Civil Rights Act.
The EEOC is the organization that individuals may turn to if they feel that they have been discriminated against.
If it agrees, the commission will file charges against individuals or organizations.
3.3.4 Employees with Disabilities act (EDA) The EPA has two components: Employment and Public Accommodations.
The EDA prohibits discrimination against persons with disabilities and stipulates that employers must make “readily achievable” modifications to their premises and to the work practices and working conditions for the disabled.
Existing facilities need not be retrofitted to provide full accessibility.
However, barrier removal that is readily achievable and easily completed without significant difficulty or expenses is required in all exiting buildings.
3.3.6 Harassment Employers are responsible for creating and maintaining a working environment that is pleasant, and for avoiding hostile, offensive, intimidating, or discriminatory conduct or statements.
In other words, the workplace must be kept free from all forms of harassment, including those based on sex, race, religious choice, ethnic background and age.
An offensive environment also may be created by lewd jokes or comments, sexual favours, displaying explicit or sexually suggestive material, or hands-on behaviour.
3.4 Evaluating Employee Out-puts 3.4.1 Productivity Standards With today’s high labour costs, increasing employee productivity has become a major issue.
P roductivity standards may be established for each position within the organization.
They are determined by measuring or timing how long it takes to do a given task.
Each section in the food service department is staffed according to forecasted demand, whether restaurant covers or quantity of take- away meals sold.
Employee productivity is measured in monetary terms whether dollar, pound or any relevant currency by dividing sales by labour costs.
If sales totalled $46,325 and labour r cost were $9,265, productivity would be measured as a factor of five.
This means that for every dollar in labour costs, $5 in sales was 81  generated.
Another way of expressing employee productivity is to divide sales by the number of employees, to arrive at the sales generated per employee.
Other measures of productivity might be the number of covers served by a foodservice waiter.
3.4 Culture Culture is a learned behaviour.
Someone who lives in the United State learns from its culture a unique set of beliefs, values, attitudes, habits, customs, traditions, and other forms of behaviour.
Besides other cultures like African, Asian Latin, European, and American, there are cultural variations, such as African-American, Asian-American, Hispanic-American, European-American, and French-Canadian, for example.
These cultural variations are a blend of cultures.
Culture influences the way people behave, and there are many differences among the various cultures.
For instance, American culture is more individualistic than the African, Asia or Latin cultures.
Consider also the differences between the genders in these cultures.
America’s multicultural society gives us an opportunity to learn from one another instead of simply thinking “my way is best.” Cultural barriers in hospitality workplace do exist; therefore it is important to understand ethnic diversity, minorities and how to train ethnic groups in order to understand the various cultural aspects in our hospitality workplace.
3.5 Staff Duty Rotas In order that planning can be carried out satisfactorily, each sectional head in the Food Service department will draw up a very detailed duty roster for all the staff covering all the necessary areas against the extra time to be on duty.
When the number of staff has been calculated, the number of supervisors can be assessed depending on the quantity of service to berendered, the number of staff and the hours of coverage needed.
Staff rotas (telling staff the hours they are expected to work) and timetables (telling staff what they have to do during the hours they are at work) can be worked out from this information.
These procedures can ensure that service is provided at the minimum cost to the restaurant and other service areas.
STUDENT ASS ESSMENT EXERCISE Is it important to have human resources management department in the fast- food restaurant?
Discuss 3.7 Other motivational factors 3.7.1 Security, Health and Safety at work Both the Human resources manager and the head of department have the responsible for the safety of staff at work.
The latter trains the staff on the correct use of equipment, gives direct supervision and first aid in case of 82  accident before the case is referred to the human resources manager for further action 3.7.1 Work Place securit y Security is the prerogative of all staff.
Ever yone should be security minded and report anything of suspicious nature to protect staff and customers from such dangers as theft, bomb threat, fire or assault.
Security officers who run shift duties are usually engaged to guard the premises and they are expected to cover the 24 hours, 7 days a week.
In some organisations they are also responsible for safety precautions.
For security reason, the Food and Beverages Manager will on assumption of duty, ask the new staff for the names and addresses of their referees.
S taff care on health and safety at work can motivate them to be productive and give sense of belonging.
3.7.2 Personal & Environmental hygiene Food Service job demands acceptable standard of personal appearance as well as high standard of hygiene of the equipment and environment.
Food service must therefore be fastidious and fussy in preparing oneself for a function.
The staff must make sure they look nice and wear the company’s uniform with care.
It must be kept clean and well pressed and any minor repairs attended to immediately.
Other personal hygiene regulations to observe are as follows: • Keep teeth clean • Use deodorants moderately daily • Bath as often as possible • Change underclothes frequently • Change socks or stockings daily • Keep hair clean and tidy • Avoid excessive perfume or aftershave • Keep fingernails short and clean • Remove all traces of nicotine and avoid nail varnish • No unnecessary jewellery • White apron only • Wear comfortable clean shoes Hygiene and safety standards must be built into operation from the planning stage for the well- being of customers and employees.
The environmental health officers have powers to inspect and close premises if the hygiene standards are unacceptable.
Environmental hygiene covers safety and sanitary conditions of the food service area such as: floors, ceilings, walls etc.
The design of the equipment and installation also matter.
They have to be arranged clear of the wall with sufficient space so that the floor can be reached when cleaning.
Regular 83  maintenance of equipment is essential because breakdowns can be costly and possible accidents are avoided.
3.7.3 The food Safet y and Fire prevention The Food Hygiene regulations take in all aspects of the cleanliness of the premises and cover the structural make-up as well as the kitchen surfaces, ventilation, washing facilities, equipment, drainage, storage and refuse.
The Sale of Goods Act and legislation dealing with the hygiene of delivery vans will affect the business when the planning stages are over.
Fire is hazard in any organisation and the prevention is very importance.
While the management is responsible for prevention of accidents, the food and beverages manager should endeavour to see that the staff are safety conscious.
The act governing fire regulations in the food service operation must be taken into cognisance and strictly observed.
This act states that: • Management must maintain equipment and provide safe working practices • Management must provide correct storage, handling and transporting of articles and substances with maximum security • Management must provide information, instruction, training and supervision to ensure health and safety of employees • Management must provide good working environment with adequate facilities without risk to health • A written management policy must be displayed by employer with more than 5 employees and must be amended when necessary • First- aid box must be provided and made available to all staff.
The box must be checked regularly to ensure that they do not contain less than minimum items required by law • Fire fighting equipment must be provided in strategic areas while fire alarms may be automatically started by heat or smoke detectors in ceilings • Ashtrays must be provided on the restaurant table and service counter 84  4.0 Conclusion We have been able to discuss the various steps involved in the human resources management development.
Staff benefits, incentives and other staff motivating factors were also discussed.
The significance of human resources management in the food service industry was highlighted.
5.0 Summary This unit has been able to establish the importance of the human resource management in successful management of the food service operation.
6.0 TUTOR M ARKED ASSIGNMENT As a Management staff in a 4 –star high class Restaurant, what package would you consider attractive in the company’s condition of service?
85  7.0 Reference Nickels W, McHugh J and S McHugh (1999) 5th edn Understanding Business: Ir win McGraw- Hill USA Medlik S, (1986) The Business of Hotel, Heinemann: London Davis, B, Lockwood, A and S. Stone ( 2002) 3rd edn Food and Beverage Management: Butterworth, Britain Branson J and Lennox M (2005) 5th edn Hotel, Hostel and Hospital Housekeeping: BookPower, India 86  HCM 303 FOOD SERVICE AND PROFESSIONALISM Module 3………………………………………………………….. Unit 1: Food Service Marketing Unit 2: Finance, Budgeting and Cost control for the Food Service business Unit 3: Modern trends affecting the hospitality industry and the future of Food Service organisations UNIT 1: FOOD SERVICE MARKETING Contents 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objectives 3.0 Contents 3.1 What is food service marketing?
3.1.1 Welfare Sector 3.1.2 Profit Sector 3.2 Characteristic nature of service 3.2.1Customer behaviour & Suggestive selling 3.2.2 Merchandising 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 TMA (Tutor Marked Assignment) 7.0 References and Further Readings 87  1.0 Introduction Marketing is the business function that identifies current the unfulfilled needs and wants; it also defines and measures their magnitude.
It determines what target market the organization can best serve, decides and appropriates products, services and programmes to serve the identified market.
Thus marketing serves as the link between a society’s needs and its pattern of industrial response.
This unit deals decisively with food service marketing.
2.0 Objectives At the end of this study, you should be able to: • Define marketing as it as affects the food service organisations • Understand what to do to promote and enhance sales within the foodservice organisation.
3.0 Main Content The marketing concept has to evolve through various stages over time.
Particularly in the food service business, marketers have discovered that what puts them in business is not the capital they put together – land, labour, money and entrepreneurial skills, but the buyers that make repeat purchases.
If the customers refuse to patronize the business for just one year, organizations that will survive may be less than 10%.
Having acknowledged their importance, the business has to be adjusted to the consumers’ philosophy.
Everything now revolves around the consumers.
Hence, ‘the customers are always right’.
The target of business is to attract buyers and satisfy them to a point where they would become loyal customers.
3.1 What is food service marketing?
A Market in the context of food service operation can be defined as people with unsatisfied needs and wants of particular meal who have both the resources and willingness to buy.
In the food service sector, market can be of two different dimensions: 3.1.1 Welfare Sector In a Welfare Sector, Marketing main function is to maximise customers’ satisfaction within the constraint of the budget.
The customers may be patients in the hospital, prisoners, pupils in primar y schools, students in colleges or higher institution of learning; it may even be employees of a factory etc.
The marketing strategy is the quality of products or services rendered to the customers and reward is the professional reputation of the team of staff and management.
88  3.1.2 Profit Sector The Profit Sector focuses on people with unsatisfied needs and wants who have both the resources and willingness to buy.
Marketers must strive to provide covers of food for sales attractively to customers and sell at a profit.
Marketing and Sales are critically important to the success of service industry such as Hotel Restaurant, Coffee shop, Specialty restaurant, Bars, Room service, Fast food restaurant and Snack Bar.
Without guests there is no need for employees.
Everyone in the organisation is involved in marketing directly or indirectly.
Successful marketing is not just to create customers but to keep them coming back.
Creating a customer means finding a product or service that a number of people need or want e.g.
MacDonalds quick service met the need for food on the run so also Mr Biggs to mention a few.
3.2 Characteristic nature of service The service industry has a key role in delivering brand values to customers and this can only be achieved if the service providers understand the nature of service marketing and different segmentation of customers.
Services are different to products because they possess the following properties: Intangibility – They cannot be touched Heterogeneity - They are unique to customers Perishability - They cannot be stored Personal – The customer has to be present and service rendered to individual customer satisfaction.
For these reasons hospitality services are branded, the brand helps the customers in the food service such as restaurants to understand what they expect.
STUDENT ASS ESSMENT EXERCISE What are the characteristics of service in relation to marketing?
3.2.1 Customer Behaviors & Suggestive Selling One very important public which cuts across ethic, geo-political, socio-cultural divides of the world is customers.
Products are designed because of them.
Sellers and manufacturers are in business because of buyers.
If there was nobody to buy, there would be no production.
There would be no marketing process.
If buyers would buy once and never return, all factories, manufacturing plants and service providers would have grounded to a halt.
The need for buyers to become customers is the greatest challenge of marketing.
89  Selling is a technique or trick of getting people to exchange their cash for a product.
It is not concerned with the values of the product.
It does not view the business process as consisting of an integrated effort to discover, create, arouse and satisfy customers’ needs neither does it consider the characteristics of hospitality service stated above.
Suggestive selling can be a potent weapon in the effort to increase food sales.
Many food service organisations cannot think of a better, more effective and easier way to boost profit margins.
Waiters report that most guests are not offended or uncomfortable with suggestive selling techniques.
In fact, customers may feel special that the server is in tune with their needs and desires.
It may be that the server suggests something to the guest that he or she has never considered before.
The object here is to turn servers to sellers.
Guests will almost certainly be receptive to suggestions from competent servers.
Customers want to see these important factors in the service areas: • High standards of visibility- that the environment is safe and security guaranteed.
• Limited queuing- visual evidence that they will receive quick service and find a seat.
• High level of cleanliness throughout- within, in the toilets, outside, even at the car parks • Service style must be clearly communicated and consistent with customer need • Attractive external and internal décor to be complemented with flowers, plants, ample car parking etc.
On a hot day, for example, waiters can suggest ice cream or frozen margaritas before going on to describe the desserts.
Likewise, waiters who suggest a bottle of chilled white wine to complement a fish dish or a Mondovi Pinot Noir or Cabernet Sauvignon to go with red meat.
This strategy will likely increase the restaurant sales.
The followings are a few suggestions to food service staff towards improved business: • Must be capable of communicating food available all day and at different occasions e g breakfast, afternoon tea, lunch, dinner • Know nature of food, prices and ability to display clearly to customers • Have ability to deliver food quickly within the time targets e g 15 minutes of placing the order • Have good knowledge of menu • Possess good customer care skills & ability to relate with different customers • Work as commissioned salespeople • Must be provided incentives and opportunity for feedback • Be capable of recognising the unspoken suggestions • Be able to draw the line between sell and solicit.
90  Good waiters quickly learn to gauge the guest’s satisfaction levels and to be sensitive to guests’ needs for example, they check to ensure guests have everything they need as their entrée is placed before them.
Even better, they anticipate guest needs.
For example if the guest had used the entrée knife to eat the appetizers, then a clean one should automatically be placed to the guest’s right side.
In order words, the guest should not receive the entrée and then realize he or she needs another knife.
Another example of good service is when the waiter does not have to ask everyone at the table who is eating what.
The waiter should either remember or do a seating plan so that the correct dishes are automatically placed in front of guests.
In a chain- restaurants or fast-food chain such as: MacDonalds, Hilton International, marketing is controlled most often by head office with high proportions of bookings coming via central reservations services.
Skill requirements are therefore reduced from the traditional management provisions with emphasis on retiling and property management rather than interpersonal skills.
3.2.3 Merchandising The efficiency of merchandising can affect the level of demand for the consumption of food in the restaurant.
Menu is one of the most important sales tools of caterers.
It is important for menu to be legible, correct, with clear layout and content should be easily read.
Menu can be handwritten, duplicated, printed or laminated.
Printed menu is more common though the colour of paper is important.
It must match the entire décor of the restaurant.
The size is equally important.
Standard size ranges from A1 841mm by 595mm, A2 420mm by 594mm to A7 105mm by 74mm while the Long size is either 1/8 A4 210mm by 99mm or ¼ A4 210mm by 74mm.
Examples of menu for different occasions have been given in Unit 6 Printing and frequent reprinting of menu can be cost ineffective.
It can be printed in large quantity of stock to reduce cost per unit.
It should be noted that menu must be dated with the price indicated.
The type of menu and the time of service must also be stated.
4.0 Conclusion This unit has been able to discuss marketing as it as affects the food service organisations and the need to promote and enhance sales within the foodservice organisation.
5.0 Summary This unit explained the need to study customer behaviours and how to adopt suggestive selling to not only achieve customer expectations but also exceed them.
91  6.0 TUTOR M ARKED ASSIGNMENT As the Manager of the high street Restaurant, you observe that sales is dwindling, how would you educate the management and staff on correct selling skills and merchandising in order to improve sales.
7.0 Reference Davis, B, Lockwood, A and S. Stone ( 2002) 3rd edn Food and Beverage Management: Butterworth, Britain Medlik, S. and H. Ingram (2002) 4th edn The Business of Hotels: Butterworth Heinmann 92  UNIT 2: FINANCE, BUDGETING AND COST CONTROL FOR THE FOOD SERVICE BUSINESS Contents 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objectives 3.0 Contents 3.1 Finance 3.1.1 Financing the business 3.1.2 Bank loans 3.1.3 Private loans 3.2 Importance of Budget 3.2.1 Budget for the first six months of operation 3.2.2 Balance sheet 3.2.3 Cash flow forecast 3.2.4 Control system 3.3 Legal Aspect 3.3.1 Taxes 3.3.2 Insurance 3.3.3 Lease arrangement 3.4 Income Statements 3.4.1 Operating or income statement 3.4.2 Operating ratios 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 TMA (Tutor Marked Assignment) 7.0 References and Further Readings 93  1.0 Introduction Operating Food service business requires a greater investment than some other business.
The sums involved will depend upon the size of business operation one has in mind and the type of catering activities to concentrate on.
The budget will include a month-by- month or week-by-week estimate of income and expenditure, the latter being broken down into fixed and variable costs.
The longer the financial period the more difficult it is to forecast the requirements and relevant costs of the company.
The advantage of preparing budget is that it provides the opportunity to take a critical look at the cost of the organisation, review the past and present accomplishment and take appropriate steps to accomplish more in the coming financial year.
2.0 Objectives By the end of this study, the student will be able to: • Understand the importance of finance and budgeting in the food service organisation • Understand the need to put proper and workable control in place.
3.0 Main Content Typically, the monthly forecast for a food and beverage department is prepared between the twelfth and the fifteenth of every month; a budget and forecast for the upcoming year is prepared between July and September.
Every January, a planning meeting takes place with all the food and beverage department heads and the year’s special events are planned.
These events are important because they constitute the peak period of the business and they include Easter, Mother’s day, St. Valentine’s Day, St. Patrick’s Day, the summer program, Halloween, Thanksgiving, Christmas, New Year’s Eve, New Year’s Day and so on.
Budgeting costs fall into two categories: fixed and variable.
Fixed costs are constant no matter the volume of business.
Fixed costs are rent/lease payment, interest and depreciation.
Variable costs influence with the volume of business.
Variable costs include controllable expenses such as payroll, benefits, direct operating expenses, music and entertainment, marketing and promotion, energy and utility, administrative materials, repairs and maintenance.
Regardless of sales fluctuations, variable or controllable expenses vary in some controllable proportion to sales.
94  3.1 Finance 3.1.1 Financing the business In order to estimate the amount of money required, the following areas of expenditure need to be checked: Some costs will be incurred simply by starting up.
These could include stationery and office materials, menus and price-lists, packaging materials and bulk purchase of groceries.
Starring-up costs will also include new telephone installation charges, insurance on the business and its transport, legal fees and publicity as well as ever ything needed to be paid for before starting a business.
3.1.2 Bank loans The bank is the most likely source that can offer a lump sum of money towards any initial investment required.
It may offer an overdraft facility to help with the demands upon working capital.
This is the commonest form of bank help and it has the advantage that interest is paid only on the actual amount that might be overdrawn.
The disadvantage is that an overdraft can be withdrawn at any time, so it should be used only to cover short-term requirements.
The bank may ask for personal guarantees for the money they are prepared to lend.
3.1.3 Private loans Very often the difference between the total of own capital and that required to start up business can be found within the family or from friends or ex- business associates who are prepared to back the business ideas.
The best way to arrange this is for the bankers to guarantee a loan or overdraft on the basis that, if the recipient is unable to pay up, then the guarantor is liable for that amount.
The advantage of this kind of arrangement is that, in certain circumstances, the guarantor of a business loan can treat any losses incurred as capital losses which can be used to offset capital gains.
Sometimes private loans, and indeed those from other outside agencies such as finance houses and investment companies, are conditional on acquiring shares or the option to acquire them.
This means that part of the company will be given away which may not likely be got back.
3.2 Importance of Budget Management needs to consider the records, observations and evaluations of the past and present performances in order to plan for the future.
The manager should be preparing throughout the financial period for the presentation of the next budget by keeping records of relevant facts such as: usage of commodities, groceries, cost of repairs services, cost of cleaning etc.
In this way he or she is easily able to justify the cost of particular items.
95  3.2.1 Budget for the first six months of operation The budget will include a month-by- month or week-by-week estimate of income and expenditure, the latter being broken down into fixed and variable costs.
If business is seasonal, the budget may need to be projected for a year or longer.
Stock books and monthly consumption should be a guide when ordering consumable or perishable items so quantities used in a given period are known.
Standing orders are necessary to guide against over or under- stocking.
In purchasing, specifications must be drawn and firms asked for quotations.
Purchasing procedures had been discussed in Unit 2.
All items should be checked for quality and quantity and any complaint should be made for immediate attention.
3.2.2 Balance sheet A balance sheet for a restaurant reflects how the assets and liabilities relate to the owners’ equity at a particular moment in time.
The balance sheet is mainly used by owners and investors to verify the financial health of the organisation.
Financial health may be defined in several ways, for example, liquidity which means having a sufficient amount of cash available to pay bills when they are due and debt leverage, which is the percentage of a company’s assets owned by outside interests (liabilities).
Restaurants are one of the few, fortunate type of businesses to operate on a cash basis for income receivables.
There is no outstanding accounts receivable because all sales are in cash – even credit cash are treated as cash because of their prompt payment.
Normally, restaurants invest significant funds in assets such as : equipment, furniture, and building / rent.
The balance sheet will reflect how much of the cost of these assets has been paid for and is thus owned by the company (owner’s equity) and how much is still due for outsiders (liability).
Furthermore, the balance sheet will show the extent to which the company has depreciated these assets, thus providing owners investor with an indication of potential future costs to repair or replace existing assets.
• Rent and other Occupation Costs • Income before interest, depreciation and taxes • Interest • Depreciation • Net income before taxes • Taxes • National income 3.2.4 Cash flow forecast This will cover the same income and expenditure information contained in the budget, but instead of being averaged out over the entire period, the sums will 96  be shown as actual amounts in the months in which they fall.
Starting-up costs may be included in the first month.
3.2.5 Control system In practice this will mean setting up a control system and taking steps to ensure that the system is working.
The system must cover the costs of raw materials and ingredients as well as prepared food.
It must also include cost of cleanliness of premises and machinery and assurances from suppliers that they too have complied with the law.
Consumer complaints must also be built into system.
3.3 Legal Aspect 3.3.1 Taxes Income tax, corporation tax and value added tax will have to be paid.
If the employees are even only on part- time basis, the company will be liable for organizing their income tax deduction under the PAYE scheme and for National Insurance contributions both for all the workers.
3.3.2 Insurance This is an extremely important subject that often gets overlooked.
Some form of insurance may be a legal necessity.
Both the employees and customers need to be protected and it will be important to take out some form of public liability insurance in case of food poisoning or some other kind of injury to customers.
There is also need to cover the premises and transport.
Insurance is expensive though it is essential in that it is far better to be safe than sorry.
3.3.3 Lease arrangement Successful restaurant operators will ensure that the restaurant’s lease does not cost more than five to eight percent of sales.
Some chain restaurants may search for months or even years before they find the right location at the right price.
Most leases are triple net which mean the lessee must pay for all alterations, insurance, utility and commercial fees (e.g.
landscaping or parking upkeep, security etc).
The best lease is for the longest time period with options for renewal and a sublease clause.
The sublease clause is important because if the restaurant is not successful, the owner is still liable to pay the lease.
With the sublease clause the owner may sublease the space to another restaurant operator or any other business.
Once a lease contract is signed, it is very difficult to renegotiate even a part of it.
Only in dire circumstances is it possible to renegotiate lease contracts.
The governing factor in determining lease rates is the marketplace.
The 97  marketplace is the supply and demand.
If there is strong demand for space, then rates will increase.
However, with a high vacancy rate, rates will be driven down by the owners in an effort to rent space and gain income.
STUDENT ASS ESSMENT EXERCISE Mention and describe briefly the books of accounts to introduce at the start of the business for correct accountability.
3.4 Income Statements 3.4.1 Operating or income statement From an operational perspective, the most important financial document is the operating statement.
Once sales forecast has been compacted, the costs of servicing those sales are budgeted on an income statement.
The income statement, which is for a month or year, begins with the food sales.
From this total the cost of food deducted; the remaining total is gross profit.
To this amount any other income is added (e.g.
vending machines, outside catering and telephone income,).
The next is controllable expenses, which includes salaries, wages, employee benefits, direct operating expenses (telephone, insurance, accounting and legal fees, office supplies, paper, china, glass, cutlery, menus, landscaping and so on), music and entertainment, marketing, energy and utility, administrative and general, repairs and maintenance.
The total of this group is called total controllable expenses.
Rent and other occupation costs are then deducted from the total, leaving income before interest, depreciation, and taxes.
Interest and depreciation are deducted a total of net income before taxes.
From this amount income taxes are paid leaving the remainder as net income.
Managing the money to the bottom line requires careful scrutiny of all key results, beginning with the controllable items like labour costs, food costs and on down to related controllables.
Additionally, management may wish to compare several income statements representing operations over a number of different periods.
The ideal method for comparing is to compute every component of each income statement as a percentage of its total sales.
Then compare one period’s percentage to another to determine if any significant trends of total sales over several months or years to assess the impact of rising labour rates on the bottom line.
3.4.2 Operating ratios Operating ratios are industr y norms that are applicable to each segment of the industry.
Experienced restaurant operators rely on these operating ratios to indicate the restaurant’s degree of success.
Among the ratios are the following: • Food cost percentage • Contribution margin 98  • Labour cost percentage • Prime cost i) Food cost percentage The basic food cost percentage, for which the formula is cost/sales x 100 = the food cost percentage, is calculated on a daily, weekly, or monthly basis.
The procedure works in the following manner: An inventory is taken of all the food and the purchase price of that food.
This is called the opening inventor y.
The purchases are totalled for the period and added to the opening inventory.
The closing inventory (the inventory at the close of the week or period for which the food cost percentage is being calculated) and returns, spoilage, complimentary meals, and transfer to other departments are also deducted from the opening inventory plus purchases.
This figure is the cost of goods sold.
The cost of goods sold is divided by the total sales.
The resulting figure is the food cost percentage.
The following example illustrates the procedure: Food sales $3,000 Opening inventory 1,000 Add Purchases 500 1,500 Less spoilage and complimentary meals 100 Less closing inventory 500 Cost of Goods Sold $900 Food Cost ($900) x 100 Sales ($3,000) = 30 % Food Cost Percentage The food cost percentage calculations become slightly more complicated when the cost of staff meals, management meals and entertaining (complimentary meals), and guest food returned are all properly calculated.
Food cost percentage has long been used as a yardstick for measuring the skill of the chef, cooks, and management to achieve a predetermined food cost percentage – usually 28 to 32 percent for a full service restaurant and a little higher for a high-volume, fast food restaurant.
Controlling food costs begins with cost-effective purchasing systems, a controlled storage and issuing system and strict control of the food production and sales (Food cost control will probably be treated in detail under Food Production Practice which is a different course entirely).
ii) Contribution margin More recently, attention has focused not only on the food cost percentage but also on the contribution margin.
The contribution margin is the amount that a menu item contributes to the gross profit, or the difference between the cost of the item and its sales price.
Some menu items contribute more than others; therefore, restaurant operators focus more attention on the items that produce a higher contribution margin.
For illustration: 99  The cost of the chicken dish is $2.00 and its selling price is $9.95, which leaves a contribution margin of $7.95.
The fish, which costs a little more at %3.25 sells for $12.75 and leaves a contribution of $9.50.
The pasta cost price of $1.50 and selling price of $8.95 and leaves a contribution margin of $7.45.
Under this scenario it would be better for the restaurants to sell more fish because each plate will yield $1.55 more than if chicken were sold.
iii) Labour cost percentage Labour costs are the highest single cost factor in staffing a restaurant.
Fast- food restaurants have the lowest labour costs (about 16 to 18 percent) with family and ethnic restaurants at about 22 to 26 percent and upscale full- service restaurants at about 30 to 35 percent.
iii) Prime cost Combined food and labour costs are known as prime cost.
In order to allow for a reasonable return on investment, prime cost should not go above 60 to 65 percent of sales.
There are various methods of control, beginning with effective scheduling based on the expected volume of business.
In reality, because of the high cost of labour, today’s restaurateurs manage by the minute.
Once a rush is over, the effective manager thanks employees for doing a great job and looks forward to seeing them again.
This may appear to be micromanagement, but an analysis of restaurants operations does not leave any alternatives.
iv) Controllable expenses Controllable expenses are all the expenses over which management and ownership have control.
They include salaries and wages (payr oll) and related benefits; direct operating expenses such as music and entertainment; marketing, including sales, advertising, public relations, and promotions; heat, light, and power; administrative and general expenses; and repairs and maintenance.
The total of all controllable expenses is deducted from the gross profit.
Rent and other occupation costs are then deducted to arrive at the income before interest, depreciation, and taxes.
Once these are deducted, the net profit remains.
Successful restaurants operators are constantly monitoring their controllable expenses.
The largest controllable expense is payroll.
Because payroll is about 24 to 28 percent of a restaurant’s sales, managers constantly monitor their employees, not by the hour but by the minute.
The actual sales results are compared with the budgeted amounts – ideally with percentages – and variances investigated.
Most chain restaurant operators monitor the key results areas of sales and labour costs are also monitored closely, generally on a weekly basis.
v) Essentials of adequate Controls All money earned must be watched all the way to the bank, and every dollar or pound spent must be analyzed to see if it is really necessary.
Control provides information to management for operational decision-making purposes.
100  Industry experts describe the following losses resulting from a lack of controls: • The food service industry loses approximately $20 billion a year to theft and cash mishandling.
• One out of every three employees will steal if given the opportunity.
This includes theft of cash, merchandise, and time.
• Approximately five percent to eight percent of gross sales is lost to internal theft.
• Thirty-five percent of all restaurants fail because of theft.
• Seventy-five percent of all missing inventory is from theft.
• Seventy-three percent of job applications are falsified.
• The majority of employees caught stealing have worked for an operation for an average of five to seven years.
4.0 Conclusion Food and beverages operation is highly capital intensive and cannot take off without adequate finances.
Management has to forecast the future need and expenditures for successful operation.
The finances must be correctly utilised while the sales are well monitored to prevent loss of revenue.
To achieve these, this unit had discussed financing of food service business and the various control measures to put in place for successful operation.
5.0 Summary In this unit we have discussed the importance of finance, budgeting and the need to have proper and workable control system in the food service organisations.
Balance sheet, the legal aspect as well as income and expenditure records were explained.
Finally, possible loopholes to check for correct accountability and record keeping were also highlighted.
6.0 TUTOR MARKED ASSIGNMENT What various options are available for financing a fast- food business?
7.0 Reference and Further Reading Nickels W, McHugh J and S Mchugh (1999) 5th edn Understanding Business: Ir win McGraw- Hill USA Davis, B, Lockwood, A and S. Stone ( 2002) 3rd edn Food and Beverage Management: Butterworth, Britain 101  UNIT 3: MODERN TRENDS AFFECTING THE HOSPITALITY INDUSTRY AND THE FUTURE OF FOOD SERVICE ORGANIS ATIONS CONTENTS 1 Introduction 2.0 Objectives 3.0 Main Content 3.1 Modern trends in the Hospitality Industry 3.1.1 The value of v a l u e 3.1.2 Building loyalty is no easy task 3.1.3 Current Issues and Future Trends 3.1.4 Product offering 3.1.5 Maintaining Standard 3.2 Human Resources Management 3.2.1 Recruitment procedure 3.2.2 The Online option 3.2.3 Stay competitive 3.2.4 Deliver the promise 3.3 Staff / Marketing 3.3.1 Customer Loyalty Equals Higher P rofits - 3.3.2 Brand Differentiation 3.3.3 Visible Value 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 TMA (Tutor Marked Assignment) 7.0 References and Further Reading 102  1.0 Introduction The fundamental principle of restaurant operation is to reduce complexity because it adds to costs, threatens quality and causes inefficiency.
A modern trend in the hospitality industry has been to develop a system of operation that can reduce complexity by changing or reducing a number of systems within the operation.
The industry is highly dynamic and it is affected by on- going issues such as: legislation; outsourcing; health awareness; technology; supply chain management; political stability and industry concentration.
The issue of current and future trends is important because pattern changes, characteristics change, the needs and customers taste changes while competition increases.
The food service management must be up to date with the ever- changing market to remain relevant and run at a profit.
The issue of current / future trend as it affects the food service operation will be treated in this unit.
2.0 Objectives • Debate current industry issues and problems and formulate potential solutions • Assess and reflect upon performance and construct alternative approaches for the future.
3.1 Modern trends in the Hospitality Industry Restaurants are now recording low sales on food service.
The growth of health awareness tends towards more healthy diet.
Guests are more associated with light meals such as breakfasts and snacks.
Despite many challenges they face in the restaurants and in the increasingly competitive marketplace, restaurant operators are overwhelmingly optimistic about business conditions.
3.1.1 The value of value Recognizing that repeat customers is a major source of revenue, restaurant operators are trying to make repeat visits as simple and satisfying as possible.
One way to keep customers coming back is to maximize the value they receive for the price they pay.
Consequently, restaurant operators are placing great emphasis on delivering more value for the money.
3.1.2 Building loyalty is no easy task Despite the high level of customer satisfaction; the industry remains an extremely competitive arena.
Customers may seem generally satisfied with restaurants but keeping them that way and keeping them coming back for more is a significant challenge in the eyes of restaurant operators.
Restaurant 103  operators are finding it more difficult to maintain customer loyalty now especially at lower-average-check-size operations.
3.1.3 Current Issues and Future Trends Major trends in foodservice were more conceptualized and casualized dining rooms; standardizing menus and three-meal coffee shops; cutting prices; competitive pre-packaged, all-inclusive banquet meals and healthier menu items.
All of these can also be applied to the foodservice scene both in the developed and developing countries.
The top two challenges were to help restaurant managers develop an entrepreneurial style that customers have come to expect at independent restaurants and create marketing and promotional program to drive sales.
The restaurant operators have adopted four different approaches to this entrepreneurial challenge based around branding and/or joint ventures.
With regards to marketing and promotion, some trends emerge.
First, restaurants no longer just think of their guests, as their market.
They are segmenting their foodservice offering into different markets with promotions aimed at each.
So a restaurant located in a business area may target office workers and business people at lunchtimes through local advertising and promoting.
Many restaurants have successfully developed Sunday lunchtime trade by promoting family lunches or “brunch” aimed at local householders.
Second, there is an increase in ‘loyalty dinning cards’.
These are ‘smart’ cards that entitle the holder to a discount related to how frequently the customer uses the outlet.
Some hotels of international standard have all introduced this concept for their guests.
The restaurant’s concept is a special service style.
Four-or-five-star hotels also provide lounge service, room service and banqueting which in some properties can generate more revenue than the three other types of business put together.
The management structure in hotel foodservice is more complex than in other sectors.
3.1.4 Product offering Fast-food outlets sell a total consumption package or what is sometimes called the service package.
This defines the offer and consists of a mixture of elements.
The food, the burger and fries or the fish and chips, is only one part of this package.
In takeway food outlet, the service package consists of physical items or ‘tangible’ and service elements or ‘intangibles’ and that these two elements are about equal in proportion.
The success of modern fast-food operations greatly depends on their ability to meet the documented standards of operating procedures.
Menus can be redesigned to give the consumers the priority desired.
For example the introduction of assorted bread like wholemeal bread, salad bars, low- calorie, low- cholesterol and low- salt items with vegetarian options in the restaurant.
104  3.1.5 Maintaining Standard In franchised fast-food operations the franchisee is bound by the franchise agreement to operate the business according to the documented procedure and is trained accordingly.
The concept of inventory control is frequently used for auditing in both franchised and non-franchised fast-food chains.
For example, McDonalds, like many other chains, have area advisors and performance audit teams who regularly visit outlets to check operating performance against standards.
They are especially concerned with performance related to QSV and C: Quality, Service, Value and Cleanliness.
If a fast-food franchise is found consistently to be failing to meet standards the result can be that a manager is fined or the franchise removed.
STUDENT ASS ESSMENT EXERCISE Analyse the problems facing food service business today 3.2 Human Resources Management 3.2.1 Recruitment procedure Before starting the recruitment process for any required position it is of paramount importance to establish the exact skill set required.
Internal benchmarking exercises with current high performing members of the team are invaluable in identifying the behaviours and competencies that work well for the environment.
Using the objective information gained from such fact finding exercises, relevant job descriptions can then be designed and interviewing procedures put in place with clear focus on the competencies that should be measured during the process.
Think ‘bigger picture’.
A recruitment advertisement can also be a great way to raise the profile of the company.
Speak directly to the recruitment advertising sales team, they should be able to provide statistical data that will detail circulation figures and average response rates.
Ensure any material used is top quality and the content communicates effectively to the wider audience.
3.2.2 The Online option Online advertising has opened up channels which enable recruitment advertisements to reach a global candidate marketplace.
This can help to attract a wider variety of candidates and a higher volume of applications.
Job vacancies placed on the company’s own website are a popular method of recruiting.
105  3.2.3 Stay competitive The recruitment marketplace is highly competitive for Hospitality and restaurant business.
Competitor analysis can prove insightful; new ideas help contribute towards fresh initiatives to use in positioning a company as an employer of choice.
The depth of a piece of research of this nature can range from the basic gleaming of information from peers, right through to commissioning a consultancy to undertake a specific exercise focusing on the key areas of interest.
Invest time in staying aware of continuously changing expectations, particularly with regard to remuneration, training, development and on-going rewards and benefit schemes.
3.2.4 Deliver the promise By taking the time to create a robust interview process, this in itself will help to ensure that educated and considered decisions are made when employing new staff.
Make certain that the expectations established at the initial interview stages are managed and met once the candidate in on board.
3.3 Staff / Marketing 3.3.1 Customer Loyalty Equals Higher Profits There is an old adage in the service industry, ‘You don't get a second chance to make a good first impression.’ This saying is particularly true in the service industry, because employees are being challenged to deliver excellent customer service, a vital component in guest retention and particularly challenging for a franchise restaurant chain of independent owners.
The company must empower its staff to use initiative in ensuring customer satisfaction.
The word hospitality evokes images of friendly service where everything is in working order, and consistency of product, to mention a few.
However, when customer expectations are exceeded -in other words, provide beyond their basic needs- to create guest loyalty and a highly successful operation.
The management and the team should be able to render unique service capable of bringing added value to the guests.
This is one of the things that keep guests coming back, even if the competitors in the same area have brand new restaurants.
3.3.2 Brand Differentiation Product differentiation is a critical aspect of marketing plan.
It includes taking the time to greet guests with a smile and thanking them for their business.
In addition, providing consistently quick service and follow-up on response to any request will go a long way in adding value to your guest's stay.
Believe it 106  or not, ‘it's the little things that matter’.
As a general rule in any business, it takes up to ten times the cost and effort to gain a new customer as it does to keep one you already have.
There was a case where the captain positions himself at the ship's entrance to greet or bid farewell to every passenger.
A party was given tagged ‘captain's cocktail party’, where, in fact, many of the guests were identified by name, as the captain has made it a point to meet with guests throughout the cruise.
In my opinion, the same basic hospitality principles should be a common practice by the service operators.
3.3.3 Visible Value Visible value for your guests is important.
By offering unique services during the guest's stay at the hotel, it brings success in creating customer loyalty.
This is called brand differentiation.
It is extending to guests as something they won't see or get from the competitors.
Visible customer value generates repeat business and the cost to the hotel operator is minimal if anything.
The end result gives the guest nothing less than an outstanding service experience; in other words, hospitality.
The ability to create visible value isn't exclusive to one chain.
Anyone can do it.
4.0 Conclusion This unit has been able to discuss the current issues, problems and potential solutions to successful food service operation employing modern techniques.
Assess and reflect upon performance and construct alternative approaches for the future.
5.0 Summary This last unit has given an up- to-date successful food service management in spite of the ever- changing market.
The issue of continuing to remain relevant and running the business at a profit was also considered.
6.0 TUTOR M ARKED ASSIGNMENT What techniques would you consider as modern trends for sales appreciation and higher profitability?
7.0 Reference and Further Reading Davis, B, Lockwood, A and S. Stone ( 2002) 3rd edn Food and Beverage Management: Butterworth, Britain Jones P. (2002) Introduction to Hospitality Operations 2nd edn.
Thomson:USA Walker J.
(1999 ) Introductoion to Hospitality 2nd edn Prentice: USA 107  108
