 NATIONAL OPEN UNIVERSITY OF NIGERIA SCHOOL OF MANAGEMENT SCIENCES COURSE CODE: MKT 304 COURSE TITLE: MARKETING IN PRACTICE 11  MKT 304: MARKETING IN PRACTICE 11 GUIDE Programme Leader: Dr D.I IDRISU School of Management Sciences National Open University of Nigeria, Victoria Island, Lagos.
Course Coordinator: EUNICE ABIMBOLA ADEGBOLA School of Management Sciences National Open University of Nigeria, Victoria Island, Lagos.
INTRODUCTION MKT 304: Marketing in Practice 11, is a 2 credit unit course for B.Sc.
Marketing.
Each or group of student(s) will present a paper on a topic chosen from any branch of Marketing (Consumer behavior, Marketing of services and goods, Advertising Management, Promotion, Retail Management, Branding etc) .
Students will present their work within the time stipulated by a panel of facilitators with a sample of the product written on.
After each student has presented, marks would be awarded to them by facilitators.
The presentation will be conducted in a conducive environment.
OBJECTIVES At the end of the presentation, students are expected to:  Be familiar with the basic issues in Marketing.
 Be able to address practical issues and problem areas in the marketing of businesses, products (goods and services).
 Present a written paper on any marketing issue as it relates to management of businesses.
 Develop skills in writing academic papers and defend seminar presentations.
SEMINAR PAPER OUTLINE Students are expected to cover the following areas chronologically: 1.
Problem identification.
2.
Objectives of seminar inquiring.
3.
Introduction/ background of the topic.
4.
Literature review on the topic.
5.
Analysis of the information based on the objectives.
6.
Reports of findings.
7.
Conclusions and Recommendations.
8.
References.
AREAS FROM WHICH STUDENTS CAN CHOOSE A TOPIC These are the areas in which student can generate their presentation topic from: 1.
Branches of marketing: Direct marketing, Multi-level marketing , Services marketing.
2.
Sub disciplines & components of marketing: Consumer behavior, Distribution, Marketing management, Marketing research, Marketing strategy, Pricing, Product management, Promotion (marketing).
3.
Marketing paradigms: Relationship marketing, Network marketing, Diversity marketing, Evangelism marketing, Consumer Culture Theory (CCT).
4.
Customer experience management (CEM): Brand experience, Customer interface, CEM integration, CEM organization, Experiential innovation, Experiential marketing, Experiential platform, Experiential world.
5.
Marketing strategies: Market dominance strategies, Porter generic strategies, Mass customization, Vendor lock-in, Scenario planning.
Growth strategies and Growth Platforms: Aggressiveness strategies, Horizontal integration, Innovation, Innovation strategies, Profit impact on marketing strategy, Vertical integration.
Marketing warfare strategies: Defensive marketing warfare strategies, Flanking marketing warfare strategies, Guerrilla marketing warfare strategies, Guerrilla marketing, Offensive marketing warfare strategies.
SEMINAR PRESENTATION GUIDE The seminar presentations will take place at the end of the course.
Students will present a paper on approved topic in the presence of some facilitators and students, in form of a seminar.
Each student will get a 10 + 5 minute timeslot, 10 minutes for seminar presentation and 5 minutes for questions from the audience.
The seminar presentations will be in a conference like environment.
PREPARATION OF SEMINAR The seminar presentation is done on PowerPoint, which is commonly used nowadays.
Occasionally the use of blackboards or whiteboards can also be used.
Students are expected to gather all materials necessary for the presentation on time.
Electronic devices like laptops, projectors etc., should be in good working conditions at the time of each presentations.
