 NATIONAL OP EN UNIVERSITY OF NIGERIA SCHOOL OF MANAGEMENT SCIENCES COURSE CODE: PAD 308 CO URSE TITLE: NIGERIAN GOVERNMENT AND P OLITICS I  POL221 COURSE GUIDE COURSE GUIDE PO L221 NIGERIAN GOVERNMENT AND POLITICS I Course Team Abdul-Rahoof Adeba yo Bello (Developer/Writer) - NOUN Dr. Andrew Oronsaye (Editor) - UNIBEN Abdul-Rahoof Adeba yo Bello (Coordinator) - NOUN NATIONAL O PEN UNIVERSITY OF NIGERIA ii  PAD 308 COURSE GUIDE National Open University of Nigeria Headquarters 14/16 Ahmadu Bello Way Victoria Island Lagos Abuja Office No.
5 Dar es Salaam Street Off Aminu Kano Crescent Wuse II, Abuja Nigeria e-mail: centralinfo@nou.edu.ng URL: www.nou.edu.ng Published By: National Open University of Nigeria First Printed 2011 ISBN: 978-058-021-2 All Rights Reserved iii  CONTENTS PAGE Introduction ........ ..... 1 Course Aims .............. 1 Course Objectives .............. .
1 Working through this Course ................. 2 Course Materials ........... .......... 2 Study Units ................. ... 2 Textbooks and References ............... 3 Assessment .
...... ............. 3 Tutor-Marked Assignments (TMA) ........... ............... 3 Final Examination and Grading .
............ 4 Course Marking Scheme ............ 4 Course Overview/Presentation Schedule ... ................ 4 How to Get the Most from this Course .............. 5 Facilitators/Tutors and Tutorials ............ 7 Summary ........... ...... 7 iv  Introduction Welcome to PAD 308: Nigerian Government and Politics This course is a three-credit unit course for undergraduate students in Public Administration.
The materials have been developed with the Nigerian context in view.
This Course Guide gives you an overview of the course.
It also provides you with information on the organization and requirements of the course.
Course Aims The aims are to help you to understand the basis and foundation of the Nigerian nation and the politics before, during and after the colonial period.
These broad aims will be achieved by: i) Educating the student about the process of colonization of Nigeria, the unification of the diverse peoples and the constitutional developments.
(ii) Highlighting the prospects and challenges of the colonial policies and its implications on the Nigerian contemporary politics.
iii) Acquainting the student with the contribution of the early nationalist leaders in the attainment of independence.
iv) Analyzing the power game between the political and military class in the post-independence Nigeria.
Course Objectives To achieve the aims set out above, PAD 308 have overall objectives.
In addition, each unit also has specific objectives.
The unit objectives are at the beginning of each unit.
It is advisable that the student reads them before he/she starts working through the unit.
Reference may be made to them in the course of studying this unit as self-assessment exercises.
Here are the wider objectives for the course as a whole.
By meeting the objectives, the student should be regarded as having met the aims of the course.
On successful completion of the course, he/she should be able to: a) Discuss the British colonial administration in Nigeria b) Explain the reasons for the introduction of Indirect Rule c) Explain the underpinnings of the 1914 amalgamation policy d) Identify the essential features of the colonial constitutions from 1922 to 1963 e) Appreciate the strategies of the nationalist movements and their contributions f) Discuss the origin of and the nature of regionalism in Nigerian politics  g) Explain the origin and the nature of the concept of federalism in Nigeria h) Explain the causes and effects of military interventions in Nigerian politics i) Discuss the evolution of party politics in Nigeria j) Decipher the workings of democracy and the rule of law in Nigeria k) Evaluate the different transitional programmes under the military rule l) Appreciate the current attempt at civil rule in Nigeria Working through this Course To complete the course, the student is required to read the study units and other related materials.
It is also necessary to undertake practical exercises for which the student needs a pen, a note-book, and other materials that will, be listed in this guide.
The exercises are to aid the student in understanding the concepts being presented.
At the end of each unit, the student will be required to submit written assignments for assessment purposes.
At the end of the course, a final examination shall be written.
Course Materials The major materials needed for this course are: (i) Course Guide.
(ii) Study units.
(iii) Assignment file.
(iv) Relevant textbooks including the ones listed under each unit (v) Student may also need to listen to political programmes and news reports on electronic media.
(vi) In addition, the student also needs to read newspapers, newsmagazines, academic journals and interact with computers and Internet resources.
Module 1 Introduction to Nigerian Politics Unit 1 Background to British Administration (1861 - 1914) Unit 2 Sir Hugh Clifford s Constitution of 1922 Unit 3 The Rise of Nationalist Movements in Nigeria Unit 4 Sir Arthur Richard s Constitution of 1946 ii  Module 2 Towards Nigeria’s Independence Unit 1 McPherson s Constitution of 1951 Unit 2 Oliver Lyttleton s Constitution of 1954 Unit 3 The 1960 Independence Constitution Unit 4 1963 Republican Constitution Module 3 Po st-Co lonial Period Unit 1 The Theory of Federalism Unit 2 Evolution of Nigerian Federalism Unit 3 Nigerian Government & Politics (1966-1979) Unit 4 The Collapse of the First Republic Module 4 Military Leadership in Nigeria n Politics Unit 1 The Military Intervention In Nigerian Politics Unit 2 Towards Military Disengagement Unit 3 Achievements of Military Regime in Nigeria Textbooks and References Certain books have been recommended in the course.
The student may wish to purchase them for further reading.
Assessment File An assessment file and a marking scheme will be made available to the student.
In the assessment file, he/she will find details of the works that must be submitted to the tutor/facilitator for marking.
There are two aspects of the assessment of this course; the Tutor Marked Assignment and the written examination.
The marks obtained in these two areas will make up the final marks.
The assignment must be submitted to the Tutor for formal assessment in accordance with the deadline stated, in the presentation schedule and the Assignment file.
The work submitted to the Facilitator for assessment will count for 30% of the student s total score.
Tutor-Marked Assignments (TMAs) The student will have to submit a specified number of the TMAs.
Every unit in this course has a Tutor-Marked Assignment.
A student will be assessed on four of them but the best three performances from the TMAs will be used for his/her 30% grading.
When the student has completed each assignment, such should be sent together with a Tutor- iii  Marked Assignment Form, to his/her Tutor.
The student is advised to make sure that each assignment reaches his/her Tutor on or before the deadline for submissions.
If for any reason, he/she cannot complete the work on time, contact should be made with the Facilitator for a discussion on the possibility of an extension.
Extensions will not be granted after the due date unless under exceptional circumstances.
Final Examination and Grading The final examination will be a test of three hours.
All areas of the course will be examined.
The student should find time to read the unit all over before the examination.
The final examination will attract 70% of the total course grade.
The examination will consist of questions, which reflect the kinds of self assessment exercises and Tutor-Marked Assignment previously encountered.
And all aspects of the course will be assessed.
He/she should use the time between completing the last unit, and taking the examination to revise the entire course.
Course Marking Scheme The following table lays out how the actual course mark allocation is broken down.
Assessment Marks Assignments (BestThreeAssignmentsoutof Fourmarked) 30% FinalExamination 70% Tot al 100% Course Overview/Presentation Schedule The dates for submission of all assignment will be communicated to you.
You will also be told the date of completing the study units and dates for examinations.
Unit Title o f work Weeks Activity Course Guide Week 1 Assignment 1 Module 1 Intro duction to Nig erian Po litics 1 Background to British Week 1 Assignment 2 Administration in Nigeria (1861- 1914) 2 Sir Hugh Clifford s Constitution Week 2 Assignment 3 of 1922 3 The Rise of Nationalist Week 2 Assignment 4 Movements in Nigeria iv  4 Sir Arthur Richard s Constitution of 1946 Mo dule 2 Towards Nigeria s Independence 1 McPherson s Constitution of 1951 Week 3 Assignment 1 2 Oliver Lyttleton s Constitution of Week 3 Assignment 2 1954 3 The 1960 Independence Week 4 Assignment 3 Constitution 4 1963 Republican Constitution Week 5 Assignment 4 Mo dule 3 Post Colo nial Period 1 The Theory of Federalism Week 6 Assignment 1 2 Evolution of Nigerian Federalism Week 6 Assignment 2 3 Nigerian Government and Politics Week 7 Assignment 3 (1966-1979) 4 The Collapse of the First Republic Week 8 Assignment 4 Mo dule 4 Military Lea dership in Nig eria n Po litics 1 Operation Damissa of 1966 Week 9 Assignment 1 2 Towards Military Disengagement Week 9 Assignment 2 3 Achievements of the military Week 10 Assignment 3 Revision Week 11 Examination Week 12 To ta l Week 13 How to Get the Most from This Course In distance learning, the study units replace the university lecture.
This is one of the great advantages of distance learning; the student can read and work through specially designed study materials at his/her own pace, and at a time and place that suits him/her best.
Think of it as reading the lecture instead of listening to the lecturer.
In the same way a lecturer might give student some readings to do, the study units tell distance learner where to read, and which are his/her text materials or set books.
Distance learners are provided exercises to do at appropriate points, just as a lecturer might give the students an in-class exercise.
Each of the study units follows a common format.
The first item is an introduction to the subject matter of the unit, and how a particular unit is integrated with the other units and the course as a whole.
Next to this is a set of learning objectives.
These objectives let the student know what he/she should be able to do by the time the units have been completed.
These learning objectives are meant to guide the student in his/her study.
The moment a unit is finished, he/she must go back and check whether he/she has achieved the objectives.
If this is made a habit, then the student will significantly improve his/her chances of passing the course.
The main body of the unit guides the student through the required readings from other sources.
This will usually be either from the v  student s set books or from a reading section.
The following is a practical strategy for working through the course.
If the student runs into any trouble, he/she should telephone the tutor for assistance.
Remember that the Tutor s job is to provide such help.
The student should not hesitate to call and ask for such assistance when needed.
1.
Read this Course Guide thoroughly, it is your first assignment.
2.
Organize a Study Schedule.
Design a Course Overview to guide you through the course.
Note the time you are expected to spend on each unit and how the assignments relate to the units.
Whatever method you choose to use, you should decide on and write in your own dates and schedule of work for each unit.
3.
Once you have created your own study schedule, do everything to stay faithful to it.
The major reason why students fail is that they get behind with their course work.
If you get into difficulties with your schedule, please, let your tutor know before it is too late to help.
4.
Turn to Unit I, and read the introduction and the objectives for the unit.
5.
Assemble the study materials.
You will need your set books and the unit you are studying at any point in time.
As you work through the unit, you will know what sources to consult for further information.
6.
Keep in touch with your study centre.
Up-to-date course information will be continuously available there.
7.
Well before the relevant due dates (about 4 weeks before due dates) keep in mind that you will learn a lot by doing the assignment carefully.
They have been designed to help you meet the objectives of the course and, therefore, will help you pass the examination.
Submit all assignments not later than the due date.
8. Review the objectives for each study unit to confirm that you have achieved them.
If you feel unsure about any of the objectives, review the study materials or consult your tutor.
9.
When you are confident that you have achieved a unit s objectives, you can start on the next unit.
Proceed unit by unit through the course and try to pace your study so that you can keep yourself on schedule.
10.
When you have submitted an assignment to your tutor for marking, do not wait for its return before starting on the next unit.
Keep to your schedule.
When the assignment is returned, pay particular attention to your tutor s comments, both on the tutor- marked assignment form and also the written comments on the ordinary assignments.
11.
After completing the last unit, review the course and prepare yourself for the final examination.
Check that you have achieved vi  the unit objectives (listed at the beginning of each unit) and the course objectives (listed in the Course Guide).
Facilitators/Tutors and Tutorials Information relating to the tutorials will be provided at the appropriate time.
Your tutor will mark and comment on your assignments, keep a close watch on your progress and on any difficulties you might encounter and he will provide assistance to you during the course.
You must take your tutor-marked assignments to the study centre well before the due date (at least two working days are required).
They will be marked by your tutor and returned to you as soon as possible.
Do not hesitate to contact your tutor if you need help.
Contact your tutor if: • you do not understand any part of the study units or the assigned readings • you have difficulty with the exercises • you have a question or problem with an assignment or with your tutor s comments on an assignment or with the grading of an assignment.
You should try your best to attend the tutorials.
This is the only chance to have face-to-face contact with your tutor and ask questions which are answered instantly.
You can raise any problem encountered in the course of your study.
To gain the maximum benefit from course tutorials, prepare a question list before attending tutorials.
You will learn a lot from participating in discussions actively.
Summary The Course Guide gives you an overview of what to expect in the course of this study.
The course teaches about the attitude of the people, politics and Nigerian politicians.
It also acquaints you with the political configuration of Nigeria as constructed by the British colonial government.
vii  Course Code PAD 308 Course Title Nigerian Government and Politics I Course Team Abdul-Rahoof Adeba yo Bello (Developer/Writer) - NOUN Dr. Andrew Oronsaye (Editor) - UNIBEN Babatunde Osabiya (Coordinator) - NOUN NATIONAL O PEN UNIVERSITY OF NIGERIA viii  National Open Universit y of Nigeria Headquarters 14/16 Ahmadu Bello Way Victoria Island Lagos Abuja Office No.
5 Dar es Salaam Street Off Aminu Kano Crescent Wuse II, Abuja Nigeria e-mail: centralinfo@nou.edu.ng URL: www.nou.edu.ng Published By: National Open University of Nigeria First Printed 2011 ISBN: 978-058-021-2 All Rights Reserved ix  CONTENTS P AGE Module 1 Introduction to Nigerian Politics... .. .. ..................1.
.. .. ... Unit 1 Background to British Administration (1861 - 1914)... 1 Unit 2 Sir Hugh Clifford s Constitution of 1922 .................. 13 Unit 3 The Rise of Nationalist Movements in Nigeria .. .......... 19 Unit 4 Sir Arthur Richard s Constitution of 1946 ................ 26 Module 2 Towards Nigeria s Independence.. .. .. ................... ..3.2.
... Unit 1 McPherson s Constitution of 1951 ................ 32 Unit 2 Oliver Lyttleton s Constitution of 1954 ............... 39 Unit 3 The 1960 Independence Constitution ............... 45 Unit 4 1963 Republican Constitution .............. .... 51 Module 3 Post-Colonial Period....... ........ .... .. .. ................. .. ..5.6.
... Unit 1 The Theory of Federalism ............. ... 56 Unit 2 Evolution of Nigerian Federalism .............. ... 65 Unit 3 Nigerian Government and Politics (1966-1979) .
72 Unit 4 The Collapse of the First Republic .............. .
80 Module 4 Military Leadership in Nigerian Politics..... ... ........... 88 Unit 1 The Military Intervention in Nigerian Politics .
88 Unit 2 Towards Military Disengagement ..................104 Unit 3 Achievements of Military Regime in Nigeria ............. 102 x  MODULE 1 INTRODUCTIO N TO NIGERIAN POLITICS I Unit 1 Background to British Administration (1861 - 1914) Unit 2 Sir Hugh Clifford s Constitution of 1922 Unit 3 The Rise of Nationalist Movements in Nigeria Unit 4 Sir Arthur Richard s Constitution of 1946 UNIT 1 BACKGROUND TO BRITISH ADMINISTRATION (1861 1914) CONTENTS 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objectives 3.0 Main Content 3.1 Historical Background to Nigerian Politics 3.1.1 Clarification of Terms 3.1.2 Indirect Rule Policy 3.1.3 Assessment of Indirect Rule 3.1.4 Merits and Demerits of Indirect Rule 3.2 Towards Unification 3.3 Criticisms against Amalgamation 4.0 Summary 5.0 Conclusion 6.0 Tutor-Marked Assignment 7.0 References/Further Reading 1.0 INTRODUCTIO N One of the challenges facing Nigeria as a nation-state is political leadership which is a product of the nation s colonial antecedent spanning almost a century.
The political structure and the superstructure built and left behind as relics by the Colonial masters are often cited by scholars, as the source of the problems and prospects for the country.
Issues such as lopsidedness of the political geography, unification of people who are diverse in history, culture, anthropology and level of economic development are mentioned as defects in the colonial policy of the Nigerian nation.
Conversely, the unity in diversity, economies of large scale, large market and the psychological advantage of the strategic location of Nigeria in the international arena, are flash points in the amalgamation of the country.
1  2.0 OBJECTIVES The intention of this course is to take you through, the political and constitutional developments of Nigeria from 1900 through the period of independence 1960 to the first Republic which collapsed in 1966.
At the end of this unit, you should be able to: • explain pre and post colonial era as it affected the socio-political structure of Nigeria.
• describe how the problems inherent in the Nigerian Constitution since 1922 up to the current 1999 Constitution.
• identify the rise of nationalism, the role of the press and influence of some early Nationalists in the past, on contemporary political situation.
3.0 MAIN CONTENT 3.1 Historical Background to Nigerian Politics The process of the British colonial administration in what is now known as the Republic of Nigeria started with the annexation and proclamation of Lagos as, the Crown Settlement in 1861 (GABC 1892:14).
According to Okafor (1981:18), Lagos was not called a Colony until 1886 the British Settlement Act of 1843 enabled the British Government to establish a Crown Colony System of government there.
Before the coming of the British, different ethnic nationalities in the Northern and Southern Areas of River Niger were living in the world of their own.
The Yorubas, Hausa-Fulanis, Igbos, Ijaws and other minority groups were either, in an Empire, Emirates, Kingdoms, princedoms and all other forms of native administrative systems.
In 1851, Lagos was attacked by the British forces.
It was claimed to be in, consonance with the Crown Settlement Treaty.
King Kosoko was defeated and deposed but some scholars believed there were some political and economic underpinnings to it.
Ajayi (1961:32) opines: It is at best only a half-truth to say that, Lagos was bombarded in 1861 because it was a notorious slave depot .
The anxiety of Britain to intervene in Lagos was not just philanthropic desire, to destroy the slave trading activities of the Portuguese and Brazilians there, but also the economic desire to control the trade of Lagos from which they had, hitherto been excluded and from where they hoped to exploit the resources of the vast Country stretching to and beyond the Niger.
2  Effectively, the territory of Lagos became a British Colony on August 6, 1861 when King Docemo signed the Treaty of cession with the British authority.
Thus, marking the beginning of the British conques t of the area of geographical expression now called Nigeria.
While Lagos was a Colony, the other areas were Protectorates.
The Co lony of Lagos did not enjoy autonomy under a distinct Governor until 1886.
Hitherto, the territory was placed under the control of the West African Settlement then resident in Sierra Leone and later, between 1864 and 1866, the territory was administered from the Gold Coast (now Ghana).
3.1.1 Clarification of Terms a) Crown Colony These were territories that were acquired by the British either by settlement, by cession, by purchase or by conquest.
The British authority was unquestionable over the territories domestic or international affairs.
The Crown not only controlled the foreign relations of the protected state but its domestic affairs were left in the hands of its native rulers (Price 1967:14).
This was the status of Lagos and the areas surrounding Freetown and Bathurst (Wight 1947:8).
b) Protectorates These were the territories surrendered to the British by the traditional authorities through Treaties.
In many cases, they were administered as one, that is, as a contiguous colony (Wight 1947: 9).
c) Anglo phone This concept is the general term used to describe people of the territories colonized by the British who were know as Anglophones while their counterparts in the French territories are called francophone.
Wikipedia, the free encyclopaedia says: In a narrower sense, the notion of "Anglophone" reaches beyond the mere dictionary definition of "English-language speaker .
The term specifically refers to people whose cultural background is primarily associated with English language, regardless of ethnic and geographical differences.
The Anglophone culture is largely the legacy of the British colonial empire.
3.1.2 Indirect Rule P olic y Sir Frederick (later Lord) Lugard became the Governor-General of the Northern and Southern Nigeria in 1906 and he ruled the two Protectorates (the Colony and Protectorate of Southern Nigeria and the Protectorate of Northern Nigeria) separately until 1914 when they were 3  amalgamated by him (Post, Kenneth and Vickers, Michael 1973:1).
Before he assumed office, Lord Lugard had introduced the Indirect Rule Policy in the Northern Protectorate which was to be, later extended to the Western and Eastern parts of the country.
Indirect Rule was a colonial administrative system in which the local Chiefs were used by the colonial officers to control the colonized people.
Under the system, it appeared the native Chiefs/Obas/Emirs were ruling their people, but in the actual sense, it was the colonial masters who were actually ruling.
Lord Lugard defines Indirect Rule thus: Rule through the native Chiefs who are regarded as integral part of the machinery of Government, with well- defined powers and functions recognized by the government and by Law, and not dependent on the caprices of an Executive Officer (Kirk-Greene 1918:68).
The following reasons, among others, were advanced for introduction of the Indirect Rule Policy in Nigeria.
a) Administrative Convenience The size of the country was too large and diverse with a large and scattered population about which the Colonial ruler had little knowledge.
Lord Lugard met well-established traditional institutions, with a system of government in the Northern and Western parts of the country which made the decision to introduce the Indirect Rule more attractive.
He created Warrant Chiefs in the Eastern part of the country where the people were republican in nature and therefore had no traditional institution of leadership.
b) Eco no mic Facto r Another reason for the introduction of the Indirect Rule was the fact that direct administration would have cost the British Government a large sum of human and material resources.
This system came about the time Britain herself was facing acute shortage of skilled personnel at home.
Both money and manpower needed for her development at home would have had to be deployed to rule directly in Nigeria if the direct rule option was chosen.
c) Language Barrier By the time Lord Lugard came there was language problem because only a few Africans could understand and speak English Language.
4  Conversely, the British colonial masters could not speak African languages which made communication with the people very difficult.
Therefore, the best option opened to the colonialist was to rule the people through their native rulers.
d) Sustenance of African Culture The need to sustain African culture by the British was another factor for the introduction of Indirect Rule.
Unlike the French colonial policy of assimilation of her African subjects, the intention of the British s policy of association was to sustain and preserve African culture in her colonial territories.
Lastly, Laggard s past experience in the East and Central Africa where he had successfully established Indirect Rule also informed his decision to repeat the same in Nigeria.
3.1.3 Assessment of Indirect Rule The Indirect Rule was successful in the North and partially successful in the West but was a failure in the East.
The reason for the policy s failure in the East was largely due to lack of a central authority or recognized traditional institutions in that part of the Country.
The policy recorded a huge success in the North because of the existence of a centralized traditional system of government headed by the Emirs who enjoyed absolute and unquestionable loyalty from the people.
This was in contrast to the West where although, there was a centralized traditional system of government headed by the Obas, however the powers and authority of the Obas could be challenged by another traditional institution or directly by the people.
3.1.4 Merits and Demerits of Indirect Rule Although the Indirect Rule was a colonial invention which was criticized as an undue interruption of the African native traditional administrative system that had existed many centuries before the coming of the colonial masters, it was not without some advantages as-well-as some drawbacks worth mentioning in this regard.
1.
The introduction of the system brought about physical development hitherto alien to the people who engaged their energies in inter and intra-tribal wars.
2.
Through the taxes collected from the people, the British officials used part of the proceeds to provide and spread western education, roads, pipe-borne water and hospitals.
3.
It opened up many rural communities to economic activities resulting in the production of farm produce for export and local consumption.
5  4.
The system also taught the traditional rulers the arts of modern administration and accountabilit y of public fund.
For the first time, the native rulers accounted for the taxes and royalties collected from the people and explained how the public funds were used.
This minimized cases of corruption and embezzlement of public treasury.
5.
This period could be regarded as the zenith of relevance of the traditional institution because monarchs were made to play the roles of politicians and thus, became the pivot around which the decision-making processes revolved.
6.
Indirect Rule s ystem gave quasi-autonomy to the people in the art of self-government and made Africans to be alive to their civic obligations and also to be conscious of their civic rights by introducing a modern judicial system for adjudication and arbitration of disputes between individuals, communities and traditional institutions.
7.
It preserved the native customs, laws and traditions which made the British subjects think, talk and behave like Nigerians unlike their neighbouring Francophone Africans that had their culture subsumed by the French Policy of Assimilation.
The Demerits of Indirect Rule Conversely, there were arguments against the British Indirect Rule in Nigeria, among which were the followings.
1.
It was argued that the s ystem was shrouded in deceit and pretence by the British for making it appear that the native rulers were ruling but in the actual fact they took instructions from the colonial masters from the Governor-General through the Residents to the District Officers who, in most cases, turned the traditional rulers to puppets and stooges because they were stark illiterates.
The native rulers could not use their position to get what they thought was good for their people but were rather used by the British officials to implement their colonial policies.
2.
The deliberate alienation of African elites from the Indirect Rule system was another sour point against the sys tem.
The educated elites who were better placed to run the judicial system, the public service and manage the public treasury were excluded to the advantage of the illiterate native rulers who were susceptible to taking instructions from the colonial masters hook, line and sinker to the detriment of their people.
3.
The Indirect Rule was also criticized for giving too much powers to traditional rulers beyond what their communities accorded 6  them thus, the new status led to unhealthy rivalry among communities over supremacy and territorial jurisdiction to augment their aggregate revenue and consequently, their aggregate salaries.
4.
There were cases of arbitrary use of powers by the traditional rulers against their opponents either over wives, land or chieftaincy titles in their domain.
5.
It is also argued that the system had a negative toll on the myths and sacredness surrounding the traditional rulers in the context of African societ y.
For instance, in the Yorubaland Obas were rarely seen in public except when occasionally, they sat in judgment or had to perform traditional rites or declare annual festivals open.
Most of an Oba s functions were performed by the Chiefs.
In Ghana, the traditional rulers do not speak directly to the people but through a Palace interpreter.
With the Indirect Rule these traditional conventions became a thing of the past as Obas, Emirs, Obis became ubiquitous in the sense that they were seen everywhere in the community.
3.2 Towards Unification The amalgamation of 1914 became imperative against the background that the North could not find sufficient funds to maintain its own administration in spite of the annual grants from the Imperial Treasury and also from the Southern administration.
The financial situation of the Southern administration was buoyant because of the rapid development of trade.
Therefore, Ojiako (1981) posits that: amalgamation was aimed at relieving the Imperial Treasury of its annual contribution towards the upkeep of the North.
For the purpose of achieving that objective, Lord Lugard amalgamated the Lagos Colony and the Southern Protectorate and the Northern Protectorate in 1914 and he created a Central Legislature which he called The Nigerian Council as an advisory and deliberative body.
The Council was a creation of three Constitutional instruments: Order-in- Council (1912), the Letters Patent (1913), and the Nigerian Protectorate Order-in-Council (1913) (Report of constitutional conference 1995:43).
The composition of the Council was as follows: i) Official members 23 ii) Unofficial (European) members 7 iii) Unofficial (African) members 6 TOTAL 36 7  The constitutional instruments provided for six unofficial African members who were to be nominated by the Governor and the composition was as follows: Two Emirs from the North; the Alafin of Oyo; One member from Lagos to represent business interests; one from Calabar and one represented the Warri-Benin Area (Olawale 1980:44).
The official members were made up of the following officials: the Governor-General, the Executive Council members, Residents and Commissioners, the Secretaries for the Central Government and the Northern and Southern Provinces respectively, the Political Secretary to the Governor-General (if any), and any other official whom the British Government might appoint.
This could be regarded as the first attempt at Constitution making in Nigeria.
Although, the Constitution created the Legislative Council, only the Governor, who was also a member, possessed both Executive and Legislative powers which could only be checked by the Secretary to the Colony.
Another feature of the Council was that the Governor who stood for the whole territory maintained two different policies and concepts of administration for both the North and the South.
This is because while the Legislative Council could legislate on issues affecting the Southern part, the North was ruled directly by proclamation.
Also, the fact that Nigerians were neither consulted before the constitution of the Council nor were they involved in the governance coupled with the isolationist policy maintained against the Northern part made the Constitutional instruments a subject of criticism by the nationalists.
However, the Nigerian Council created by Lord Lugard fell short of his expectations.
Members (especially the nominated Africans) showed little or no interest about it as they hardly attended its meetings.
Lugard regarded the nominated Africans as not capable of or effective in representing their people.
There was also lack of interest on the part of the people themselves about the relevance of such Legislative Council with such limited influence and power under the colonial administration.
This led to the, agitation for constitutional representation by the African educated elite in the coastal areas, especially Lagos and Calabar who were later to find their voice in the National Congress of British West Africa (NCBWA) jointly formed by Messrs Caseley Hayford and Dr. Akinwande Savage - a Nigerian medical doctor practising in the Gold Coast (Okafor 1981:74).
3.3 Criticisms Against Amalgamation The unification policy introduced by Lord Lugard in 1914 was received by Africans in the North and South with mixed feelings.
Both sides seemed to have concluded that it would bring about a fundamental 8  change in the official outlook which some believed would not be a pleasant one (Okafor 1981:51).
The Lagos Press and a section of the educated elite were vocal in their criticisms of the new administrative structure introduced by Lugard.
In its editorial comment, The Lagos Standard had this to say: For the purpose of administration this vast territory of Nigeria is now divided into three areas, which are the Colony and the Northern and Southern Provinces.
This would be an excellent arrangement if the principle was also laid down that each division shall be autonomous.
Each area shall have within it a perfect machine for effective government, subject nevertheless to a central control.
This central authority should have the power of dealing with matters peculiar to each.
They would thereby become a federated State in which the Governor-General would be as it were a Foreman of works, but not the fountain from which all authority and power should emanate for them (see Lagos Standard).
The amalgamation of a diverse people who were at different levels of social, educational and economic development into a unified, powerful, and centralized authority was seen as lopsided and unthinkable by the educated elite.
They also condemned the over-concentration of powers in the Governor-General over a vast territory, over which he had little knowledge.
It is inconceivable how much authority can be effectively exercised by him, at any moment, in every part of the country.
The system was also criticized for alienating the progressive public opinion from the political processes of the country.
But in a tacit response to the criticisms, Lugard, in a write-up a year after the amalgamation, stated that he did not consider it as a geographical, political or more especially as a financial expression, rather a means whereby each part of Nigeria might be raised to the level of the highest plane attained by any particular part (See Confidential Letter from F D Lugard).
As regards the isolation of the North in Lugard s Nigerian Council, Sir Hugh Clifford who succeeded him saw, while on tour in the Northern Provinces, how the policy had kept that area (North) backward.
He made the observation while travelling from the North to Onitsha, in the South.
He submits: The presence of a detachment of Boy Scouts and a number of children from the neighbouring mission schools emphasized the fact that we had passed from the Northern to the Southern Provinces of Nigeria.
Until I reached Idah, which I have said,has only recently been transferred to the Northern Provinces, during my whole stay in the latter, I 9  had not seen a body of school children drawn up in order, singing God save the King and other patriotic songs, which is an ubiquitous feature of all public occasions in most parts of West Africa In a fashion, these contrasted results of the British occupation epitomized the rival systems and ideas prevailing in the two sets of Provinces (Okafor 1981:86).
SELF ASSESSM ENT EXER CISE How did the British penetrate what is now known as Nigeria?
4.0 CO NCLUSIO N In conclusion, the British colonial administration in Nigeria began with the policy of mercantilism in Europe under which the colonial powers used transnational companies trading in African territories as stepping stone towards achieving the territorial ambition.
In June 1885, the Royal Niger Company was charged by the British Government with the responsibility to control the administration of the Oil Rivers (Niger Coast) Protectorate and the Niger Territories.
The advent of the British colonialism in Nigeria could be traced to three major different but not mutually exclusive factors the British Traders; the British Missionaries and the International forces.
The British Traders were attracted to Nigeria and other African countries by the prospects of trade in Gold, Ivory, Guinea Pepper, etc.
With the growing need for cheap (slave) labour in the emerging industrial world, the British commercial interest became expanded to include the slave trade which was later to cascade to full-blown colonization in order to get raw material to feed her home industries.
The Nigerian political and constitutional developments began with Lugard s experiments with the amalgamation of the Southern and Northern Protectorates in 1914.
The perceived defects in the administrative structure laid for the country led to the agitation for reforms by African elites who operated under different nationalist movements until the attainment of independence in 1960.
The aftermath of the critiques shall be discussed in the subsequent Modules.
5.0 SUMMARY No doubt, the British influence in the Nigerian political development cannot be overemphasized.
The colonial policies which were put in place by the first Governor-General, Lord Frederick Lugard were essentially based on conjectures (experimental) rather than a 10  well-articulated programme.
This fact was corroborated by his immediate successor - Sir Hugh Clifford when he reminded the British Government that the system of government was recognized as purely experimental and had failed to realize the expectation entertained concerning it.
(See Confidential Letter from H. Clifford).
From the Indirect Rule system to the creation of the Nigerian Council through amalgamation, Lugard s conception and vision of the colonial territory had great influence on his policies which formed the basis upon which the colonial masters built the modern nation-state now known as Nigeria.
6.0 TUTOR-MARKED ASSIGNMENT 1.
Explain the colonial policy of indirect rule and justify how it shaped the structure of Nigeria.
2.
What are the reasons for the 1914 amalgamation of Nigeria by Lugard?
3.
Would you agree with the statement that, the 1914 amalgamation of Nigeria was amalgamation without unification ?
7.0 REF ERENCES/FURTHER READING Ajayi, J.F.A (1961).
The British Occupation of Lagos.
cited by Robert S. Smith: The Lagos Consulate 1851-1861.
London: Macmillan, 1978.
Lugard F. D. (1915).
Confidential letter , to Secretary of State A. Bonar Law, C.S.O/1/34, Vol.
5.
Ibadan: Nigerian National Archives.
Clifford H. (1919).
Confidential letter to Viscount Milner, the Secretary of State for the Colonies , C. O.
583, Vol.
78 (London, Public Record Office).
Kirk-Greene, A.H.M.
(1918).
The Principles of Native Administration in Nigeria.
(The Section which deals with 1906: Lugard s Political Memorandum) Lagos Standard, 15 April, 1914.
Ojiako, J. O (1918).
Nigeria: Yesterday, Today, And ?
Onitsha: Africana Educational Publishers.
Okafor, S. O.
(1981).
Indirect Rule: The Development of Central Legislature in Nigeria.
Lagos: Nelson.
Olawale, J.B. (1980).
Topics on Government Constitutions , Vol.
II.
Ilesa: Jola Publications.
11  Post, Kenneth and Michael, Vickers (1973).
Structure and Conflict in Nigeria.
London: Heinemann.
Price, J.H (1967).
Political Institutions of West Africa.
3rd Edition.
London: Hutchinson.
Report of the Constitutional Conference containing the Resolutions and Recommendations, Vol.
II, Abuja, 1995, p.43.
The General Acts of the Brussels Conference, relative to the African Slave Trade Treaty Series No.
7, 1992, p.14.
Wight, M. (1947).
British Colonial Constitution.
Oxford: Clarendon Press, 1952.
12  UNIT 2 CLIFF ORD S CONSTITUTION 1922 CONTENTS 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objectives 3.0 Main Content 3.1 The Nigerian Council 3.1.1 Composition of Official Members 3.2 Criticisms Against the Constitution 3.3 Merits of the Constitution 3.4 Defects of the Constitution 3.5 Major Improvements of the Constitution 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutor-Marked Assignment 7.0 References/Further Reading 1.0 INTRODUCTIO N The amalgamation of the Northern and Southern Protectorates and the subsequent establishment of the Nigerian Council in 1914 by Lord Lugard no doubt, opened a floodgate of criticisms from the African elites and some colonial officials alike.
One of such non-African critics was Sir Hugh Clifford who was later to succeed Lugard in 1919.
In a confidential letter dated July 7, 1922 (See Draft Confidential Letter), he made some scathing observations and later, recommendations on the Central Legislative Council and other administrative policies of Lord Lugard.
Therefore, on assumption of office, Sir Hugh Clifford introduced a new Constitution with some striking provisions that distinguished his administrative system from that of his predecessor.
2.0 OBJECTIVES At the end of this unit, you should be able to: • list the political reforms introduced by the Clifford s Constitution of 1922 • describe its characteristic features and its effects on the political and constitutional development of Nigeria.
13  3.0 MAIN CONTENT Following the perceived drawbacks in the Lugard s administrative and constitutional arrangements for Nigeria, the educated Africans especially in the coaster towns mounted agitations for political reforms that would give Africans rights to participate in their own affairs.
The National Congress of British West Africa with its headquarters at the Gold Coast (now Ghana), made representation to London with a petition calling, among other things, for greater representation of Africans in the Legislative Council throughout the British West African Territories (Price 1967:37).
In 1919 Lord Lugard was posted out and was to be replaced by Sir Huge Clifford who assumed office in 1922 following the passage of a new Order by the Nigerian Legislative Council which came into effect in 1923.
What was later to be known as the Clifford s Constitution of 1922 opened the epoch of Constitutional development in Nigeria.
Clifford merged the Legislative Council meant for the Colony of Lagos with the Nigerian Council to become a new one under the new ordinance.
The Constitutional Order (See Royal Order-in-Council) provided for the following members hip.
3.1 The Nigerian Council i) Official members 27 ii) Unofficial members (Non-Africans) 09 iii) Unofficial members(Africans) 06 iv) Elected unofficialAfricanmembers(Lagos) 03 v) Elected unofficialAfricanmembers(Calabar) 01 Total 46 3.1.1 Composition of Official Members The official members were composed of: 1.
The Governor (as the President) 2.
Executive Council members 3.
The Ten Senior Residents in Nigeria 4.
The Deputy Chief Secretary to the Government 5.
The Secretary to the Northern and Southern Provinces 6.
The General Manager of the Railways 7.
The Director of Public Works, and 8.
The Post-master General The Legislative Council was to make laws, subject to the Governor s veto and reserved powers, for the Colony of Lagos and the Southern 14  provinces while the powers to legislate for the Northern protectorate were vested in the Governor.
(See Report of 1994/95 Constitutional Conference).
Other important provisions of the Clifford s Constitution were: a) The Governor had powers to veto or give consent to any law passed by the Legislative Council subject to the instruction given to him by the British Government.
No law took effect until he or the British Government had assented to it.
b) Unofficial members who were nominated by the Governor were to hold their seats for five years which, subject to approval of the British Government, was renewable for a period not exceeding five years.
c) The Governor was also empowered to suspend any member of the Legislative Council with the approval of the British Government.
d) Members of the Legislative Council could either jointly or severally, propose any Ordinance Bill except such Ordinance on finance which was the prerogative of the Governor.
3.2 Criticism s Against the Constitution 1.
Although the elective principle introduced by the Constitution was commendable, it came under heavy criticisms by the African elites on the basis that it limited the franchise of Africans.
According to the Constitution, only the British subjects or protected persons who met the condition of possession of properties and annual gross income of 100 Pound Sterling were qualified to vote, or be voted for (See Tamuno, 1966:33-40).
These conditions made it difficult for many Nigerians in Lagos and Calabar to be qualified.
The outrageous income was fixed at a time when an average worker earned about 25 pence a day.
2.
Another drawback of the Constitution was that the Executive Council was predominantly white officials to the exclusion of Africans.
The Council exercised wide powers on policy formulation and implementation with far reaching effects on the lives of Africans.
3.
Another defect of the Constitution was that the North was excluded from the purview of the Legislative Council.
The Northern provinces were ruled by proclamation as was the case under Lord Lugard.
This isolation had adverse effects on the political development in the area as Nigerians in that part of the country were indifferent to the Nationalist struggles like their Southern counterparts.
African elites regarded this as a divide and 15  rule policy of the British Government to slow down the awareness of the people.
4.
Finally, the retention of casting vote and veto power on policy issues by the Governor did not make the new Legislative Council any better than the one it sought to replace.
In addition, the nominated members were at liberty to act at the whims and caprices of the Governor when matters came to voting.
3.3 Merits of the Constitution 1.
Perhaps the most striking feature of the 1922 Constitution was the introduction of Elective Principle which, for the first time, provided opportunity for Africans to elect their representatives and participate in the Legislative process.
This was commendable because it provided an impetus for the early rise of nationalist movements in Nigeria and also the evolution of political parties in the Country.
It was during the period that the first Nigerian National Democratic Party (NNDP) which was led by Herbert Macaulay was formed.
Also, the Nigerian Youth Movement and the National Council of Nigerian Citizens were formed.
The political parties joined forces with the nationalist movements to give the British Government a stiff opposition.
2.
Another important merit of the Constitution was that it encouraged the establishment of newspapers to further the cause of the struggle for decolonization.
For instance, Late Samuel Herbert Macaulay founded The Daily News in 1925 while Sir Kitoye Ajasa founded The Nigerian Pioneer in 1926.
Others were The Nigerian Daily Times by Sir Adeyemo Alakija, a Lagos lawyer and the West African Pilot by Dr. Nnamdi Azikiwe.
The debut of the Newspapers contributed tremendously to the awakening of the political consciousness of Nigerians.
3.4 Defec ts of the Constitution i.
The continued retention of isolation policy of the Northern provinces retarded the process of political and constitutional developments of the area.
ii.
The elective principle, limited to Lagos and Calabar, disenfranchised many Africans because of the obnoxious qualification requirements attached to it.
iii.
The composition of the Executive Council was predominantly Europeans.
Africans were not represented in the Council despite enormous powers it wielded.
16  iv.
The wide powers given to the Governor by the constitution to veto the laws made by the Council, coupled with the fact that majority of its members were nominated by the Governor made the Legislative Council a caricature of the Lugard s Nigerian Council which was criticized by Clifford.
3.5 Major Improvements of the Constitution The Clifford s Constitution of 1922 recorded the following improvements on that of Lord Lugard s Constitution.
i) It merged and enlarged the Legislative Councils for better effects.
ii) For the first time, it introduced elective principles.
iii) It stimulated the political awareness of more people in the colonial territory.
iv) It accelerated the evolution of Nationalism and formation of political parties.
SELF ASSESEMENT EXERCISE How was has the administrative reforms carried out by Sir Clifford different from that of Lord Lugard?
4.0 CONCLUSION Since the revival of the Legislative Council by Sir Hugh Clifford in 1923, efforts were mainly concentrated on linking the native authorities in the South with the Council as the Northern colonial administrative officials were averse to and therefore repulsed any attempt by the Council to interfere with the North (Okafor, 1981:131).
The activities of the newly emerged political parties and the nationalist movements precipitated debates on the future of Nigeria.
There were agitations for political reforms to give Africans prominent roles to play in their own affairs.
Although some provisions of the 1922 Constitution were criticized, it provided some elixir for Africans to take more than passing interests in the colonial administration and policies in their country.
In the subsequent units, we s hall discuss the role of the early nationalists and the political parties in the development of the Nigerian nation.
17  5.0 SUMMARY The Clifford s Constitution of 1922 was a watershed in the political and Constitutional development of Nigeria.
It brought about the development of early political parties that worked pari passu with the Nationalists Movements that fought the colonial government in Africa.
6.0 TUTOR-MARK ED ASSIGNMENT 1.
The 1922 elective principle was not without some limitations.
Discuss.
2.
How will you distinguish between the 1914 Nigerian Council and the Legislative Council of 1922?
7.0 REF ERENCES/FURTHER READING Draft Confidential letter dated 7 July, 1922 from Sir Hugh Clifford to Right Honourable Winston S. Churchill, Secretary of State for the Colonies , C. O.
583, Vol.
111 (Public Records Office, London).
Draft Royal Order in Council dated 21 November, 1922, C.O 380, Vol.
172 (Public Records Office, London).
Okafor, S. O (1981).
Indirect Rule - The Development of Central Legislature in Nigeria.
Lagos: Nelson.
Price, J. H (1967).
Political Institutions of West Africa.
3rd Edition.
London: Hutchinson.
Report of the 1994/95 Constitutional Conference, Resolutions and Recommendations, Vol.
II, Abuja, p.43.
Tamuno, T. N (1966).
Nigeria and Elective Representatives, 1923-1947 London.
18  UNIT 3 EARLY NATIONALIST AND POLITICAL MOVEMENTS CONTENTS 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objectives 3.0 Main Content 3.1 Conceptual Clarifications 3.2 Emergence of Nationalism in Nigeria 3.3 Early Nationalist Groupings 3.4 The First Political Movement 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutor-Marked Assignment 7.0 References/Further Reading 1.0 INTRODUCTIO N Under this unit, we intend to take a look at the nationalist struggles leading to different Constitutional conferences and reforms that culminated in the granting of independence in 1960 by the British colonial government.
The emergence of early political parties during the period was a product of the activities of the nationalist leaders.
From the Lagos Youth Movement which was later to change to Nigerian Youth Movement (NYM), to the Hubert Macaulay-led Nigerian National Democratic Party (NNDP), through to the National Council of Nigeria and Cameroon s (NCNC) that was later led by Dr. Nnamdi Azikiwe.
These were the major political platforms used by the Nigerian leaders to confront the British colonial administration.
2.0 OBJECTIVES At the end of this unit, you should be able to: • describe the events leading to constitutional conferences in Nigeria • explain the meaning of nationalism, nation and state • list the factors that encouraged nationalism and its effects on the colonial administration • mention the dynamics of politics under the colonial era.
19  3.0 MAIN CONTENT 3.1 Conceptual Clarifications Natio nalism What is nationalism?
This is somewhat a complex concept to grasp in terms of definition because there is no single factor to which it could be traced.
Nationalism is usually a passion for unity, community of tribes, geographical contiguity, religious and cultural affinity and, to crown it all, political and historical aspirations.
It is, therefore, a phenomenon derived from the word nation which Price (1967: 24) defines as an association of men and women who have or believe that they have the following things in common: common ancestry; common history and tradition; common language, common culture, common religion and shares common boundary.
Nationality is another word very close to nationalism but Appadorai (1968:15) defines it as a spiritual sentiment or principle arising from amongst a number of people usually of the same race, resident on the same territory, sharing common language, the same religion, similar history and traditions, common interests, with common political associations and common ideas of political unity .
The word nationalism can also be explained within the prism of a State given the s ymbiotic relationship between the two concepts - nation and State .
In fact, the two concepts are often used interchangeably or as a compound word but going by the definition of a State, one would notice certain characteristics of it that cannot be attributed to a nation and vice versa.
While it is true that a State is also a territorial association of men and women like a nation, they may not necessarily share common attributes of tribal affinity like a nation.
A State is an association organized for specific purposes with a clearly defined territory and an organized system of government.
A nation may or may not have its territory as clearly defined as that of a State.
For instance, Yoruba nation has its territory across two modern nation-states i.e.
the Federal Republic of Nigeria and Benin Republic.
The Hausa- Fulani nation also has its territory cut across many countries in West Africa.
Many examples abound, even within the Nigerian States.
The following are some similarities and differences between a Nation and a State: 20  Nati on eatt Members shares or believe th eyIt is in most cases an artificial creation, share certain things in commonbinding diverse people together.
No inh erent inherent spiritual quality spiritual quality Territory may not be cl early A clearly defined territory over which it defines.
May spread across maenxyercise coercive powers States Modern nations lack sovereign Statesare sovereign overtheirterritories powers May have organized governmentIt is a prerequisite to have an organ ized with a system of laws government with a system of laws There is a feeling of nationalit y orMay lackthe feeling of nationalityor onenes s oneness This leads us to the myths and conceptual analysis of nationalism for the purpose of this course.
To many people nationalism connotes a tendency of warfare between ethnic groups or as the force that destabilizes multiethnic countries.
However, this view is wide off the mark because of the fact that nationalism is a phenomenon that affects peoples everyday actions in many positive ways without necessarily making them violent.
Another misconception that must be cleared about this concept is that it is something fundamentally different from racism.
The basis of nationalism could be influenced by religion, ethnicity, language, race among other factors.
Nationalism in the Twentieth Century could be perceived as the ideological movement for the attainment and maintenance of autonomy, cohesion and individuality for a social group, some of whose members conceive it to be an actual or potential nation.
Nielsen (1998:253-95) contends that the term nationalism has a variety of meanings and encompasses the two phenomena noted as: i) The attitude that the members of a nation have when they care about their identity as members of that nation, and ii) The actions that members of a nation take in seeking to achieve (or sustain) some form of political sovereignty.
For our present purpose, let us align with the definition of nationalism in the context of the colonial politics in Nigeria as a policy designed to achieve national self-determination by the removal of alien rule.
Although the goal of the early nationalist was initially not for self- determination, it was rather to demand for increased participation in the governmental process on a regional level.
It also included a fight against inconsistencies inherent in the British colonial policies which ignited regional animosities by attempting to preserve the indigenous cultures of each area and introduced western political and social concepts all at the same time.
This corroborates the opinion of Olawale (1980:45) that 21  nationalism is an act of political awareness or consciousness of the colonized people with the desire to achieving equal status, equal rights and equal opportunities with their white counterparts.
3.2 Emergence of Nationalism in Nigeria The history of the emergence of early nationalism in Nigeria could be traced to the southern part of the country, spearheaded by those whose thinking was shaped by European ideas, they were also antagonistic to the policy of indirect rule which had entrenched what was considered to be an anachronistic ruling class (traditional chiefs) in power rather than the westernized elites.
There were so many sources of the ideological and socio-political inspirations as-well-as economic factors responsible for the southern nationalists.
Among the motivators were the prominent American-based activists such as Marcus Garvey and W.E.B Du Bois and Nigerian students who joined those from other colonies in pan-African groups, such as the West African Student Union (WASU) founded in London in 1925(See Price 1967:24) .
They were later to become so critical of colonial rule that they started championing the cause for self-government, constitutional and social reforms and eventually, independence.
One of the social reforms demanded was the religious racism practiced by the European missionaries and public servants.
The whites openly discriminated against Africans from attaining certain status in their churches which led to the emergence of independent African Christian churches at the end of the Nineteenth Century.
Also in the civil service, education and business sectors, Africans suffered discriminations from their European counterparts.
All these gave impetus to nationalist struggle in Nigeria.
In the economic sector, the import and export trades were dominated by European traders and a few commercial firms.
According to Ekundayo (1973:216), by 1917 there were 77 European trading firms in Nigeria which included: the United African Company (UAC); Compagnie Francaise de l Afrique Occidentale (CFAO); Societé Commerciale de l Ouest Africaine (SCOA) and P eterson Zochonis (PZ), etc.
These firms came together with other European firms to form a cartel called Association of West African Merchants (AWAM) which was used to control prices of both manufactured goods they sold and the cash crops bought from African farmers.
African farmers had no control over the prices of farm implements and other imported goods they bought from the European firms and at the same time, they had no control over the prices of their farm produce like cocoa, cotton, cash crops and others.
To worsen the situation was the monopoly enjoyed by the Lebanese, Syrians and Indians over retail trading because they could 22  easily attract credit facilities from the European firms and loans from their banks.
The banks were willing to accept deposits from Africans but when it came to borrowing, they ran into difficulties.
The control of the economy was totally in the hands of expatriates, to the detriment of Africans who found it difficult to compete with the Europeans in the import and export business for lack of capital base.
Further, the wage employment opportunity was another factor that aided the early nationalism in Nigeria.
The civil service, judiciary and the organized private sectors were almost closed against Africans.
The few Africans employed suffered discrimination as they were prevented from rising to positions of responsibility to exercise control over expatriates, no matter the level of their education.
Africans cannot rise beyond the level of a clerk which explained why early educated Africans took to professions such as Law and Medicine where they can be self-employed.
3.3 Early Nationalist Gro upings In the early 1920s, sequel to the Clifford s Constitution, there were several types of non-political associations consisting of professional and businessmen such as the Nigerian Union of Teachers, the Nigerian Law association, which was later to provide trained leadership for such political groups and the Nigerian Produce Traders Association which was led by Chief Obafemi Awolowo.
Also, ethnic and kinship organizations that often took the form of a tribal union were formed in the same period.
These organizations were visible mainly in the urban areas and also sprang up as a result of rural-urban drift in search of white-collar job by Africans who felt alienated by the anonymity of the urban environments and were drawn together by ties to their ethnic homelands.
By the mid-1940s, the major ethnic groups had formed such associations as the Igbo Federal Union and the Egbe Omo Oduduwa, a Yoruba cultural movement, formed in London by Obafemi Awolowo in 1948.
Another type of organizations that was more politically inclined was the youth or student groups such as the West African Students Union (WASU), the Lagos Youth Movement which became the vehicle of intellectuals and professionals.
They were the most politically conscious segment of the population and stood in the vanguard of the nationalist movement.
In 1933 Dr. James Churchill Vaughan, Ernest Sisei Ikoli, Samuel Akinsanya (Odemo of Isara) were brought into the (LYM) by Eyo Ita and in 1937 the name was changed to Nigeria Youth Movement (NYM) with Barrister Hezekiah Oladipo Davies as the Secretary.
Newspapers, some of which were published before World War I, provided coverage of nationalist views.
The principal figure in the political activity that ensued was Herbert Macaulay, often re ferred to as the father of Nigerian 23  nationalism.
He aroused political awareness through his newspaper, the Lagos Daily News, while leading the Nigerian National Democratic Party (NNDP), which dominated elections in Lagos from its founding in 1922 until the ascendancy of the Nigeria Youth Movement (NYM) in 1938 which first used nationalist rhetoric to agitate for improvements in education.
Similarly, Macaulay s political platform called for economic and educational development, Africanization of the civil service, and self-government for Lagos.
Significantly, however, Macaulay s NNDP remained almost entirely a Lagos party, popular only in the area with experience in elective politics.
In addition, the rapid growth of organized labour in the 1940s also brought new political forces into play in form of labour movements.
But the proliferation of labour organizations, however, fragmented the movement, and potential leaders lacked the experience and skill to draw workers together.
3.4 The First Political Movement According to Ojiako (1981:13), on August 26, 1944 the pioneer of militant nationalism in West Africa was born named the National Council of Nigeria and the Cameroons with the major objective to exert heavy pressure for accelerated political development in Nigeria.
The following officers were elected at its inaugural meeting held at the Glover Memorial Hall: i) President Herbert Macaulay ii) Vice President J. O. Lucas iii) General Secretary Nnamdi Azikiwe iv) Financial Secretary A. W. Howells v) Treasurer L. P. Ojukwu vi) Auditor were Messrs: L. A. Onojobi & A. Ogedegbe vii) Legal Advisers were Messrs: E. J. Alex Taylor, J.E.O.
David, E.A.
Akerele, A.Alakija, Ladipo Odunsi and J. I. C. Taylor.
SELF ASSESSM ENT EXER CISE What were the factors responsible for opposition to colonial administration in Nigeria?
4.0 CO NCLUSIO N Students of Nigerian Government and Politics should appreciate and learn more about this background to the Nigerian nationhood so that they can analyze the contemporary issues in the current Nigerian politics.
They should understand the dynamics and the environmental 24  factors leading to the emergence of the early nationalist movements and political parties and see whether there is any symbiotic relationship with the modern nation.
5.0 SUMMARY It would be noticed that the membership and activities of the nationalist leaders were limited to the southern part of Nigeria.
This could be as a result of the British inconsistencies in the policy implementation.
For instance, the elective principle of 1922 was restricted to Lagos and Calabar while the northern Nigeria was ruled by proclamation by the colonial Governor.
This dichotomy also had historical and cultural dimensions, which the British government intended to preserve.
6.0 TUTOR-MARKED ASSIGNMENT 1.
What is nationalism?
Compare and contrast nation and state.
2.
Carefully analyse the evolution of nationalists and political movements in Nigeria.
3.
What do you think were the factors that aided the nationalist struggle in Nigeria?
7.0 REF ERENCES/FURTHER READING Appadorai, A.
(1968).
The Substance of Politics (11th ed.).
London: Oxford University Press.
Ekundare, R. O.
(1973).
An Economic History of Nigeria.
London: Methuen.
Ojiako, J. O.
(1981).
Nigeria: Yesterday, Today, And ?
Onitsha: Africana Educational Publishers.
Nielsen, K. (1998).
Liberal Nationalism, Liberal Democracies and Succession.
University of Toronto Law Journal, Vol.
No.
48.
Olawale, J.
B.
(1980).
Topics on Government Constitutions, Vol.
II.
Ilesha: Jola Publications.
Price, J. H. (1967).
Political Institutions in West Africa.
London: Hutchinson.
25  UNIT 4 SIR ARTHUR RICHARD S CONSTITUTION 1946 CONTENTS 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objectives 3.0 Main Content 3.1 Background to the 1946 Constitution 3.2 Composition of the Central Legislature 3.3 Composition of the Regional Assemblies 3.3.1 The North 3.3.2 The West 3.3.3 The East 3.4 Main Provisions of the Constitution 3.5 Criticisms of the Constitution 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutor-Marked Assignment 7.0 References/Further Reading 1.0 INTRODUCTIO N In the last unit, we discussed the Clifford s constitution of 1922 and the attendant political developments it brought to the entity called Nigeria during that period.
In this unit we are going to discuss the constitution introduced by Sir Arthur Richards in 1946 and its implications on the structure and superstructure of Nigeria.
We shall also examine why the educated elites continued to demand for further reforms despite some merits inherent in the 1946 constitution.
2.0 OBJECTIVES At the end of this unit, you should be able to: • List the objectives and the provisions of the 1946 constitution • list the drawbacks of the constitution and the contentious issues raised by the nationalists.
3.0 MAIN CONTENT 3.1 Background to the Constitution The 1946 Constitution which was named after its author Arthur Richard was enacted by the British government as the Nigeria (Legislative Council) Order in Council in 1946 and came into operation on 1st January, 1947.
It was based on the proposals (See Arthur 26  Richard s Letter) sent on 6th December, 1944 by Sir Arthur Richard (later Lord Milverton) to the British government which was later approved with some amendments.
His views as contained in the proposals were greatly influenced by the nationalists agitations for administrative and constitutional reforms in Nigeria.
Earlier, his predecessors Sir Donald Cameron and Sir Bernard Bourdillon were critical of the 1922 Clifford s constitution and saw the need for changes to be brought into the existing system.
By 1943 when Sir Arthur Richards became the Governor of Nigeria, there was a growing realization among the official and unofficial opinions that the 1922 Constitutional Order had outgrown its usefulness.
Some of the bones of contentions were the use of the traditional rulers to the exclusion of the educated elites in the native administration and the segregation of the north from the rest of the country.
The Richard s constitution for the first time, gave Nigerians a majority in both national and regional legislative assemblies.
It was also the first time that the North was brought under the same administrative control with the South.
The objects of the constitution were, among others: to promote the unity of Nigeria; to provide adequately within that unity for the diverse elements which make up the country; and to secure greater participation by Africans in the discussion of their own affairs.
See Awolowo, (1966:4-6).
The main features of the constitution were as follows: 3.2 Composition of the Central Legislature a) The Central Legislature which was unicameral was presided over by the Governor and was made up of the following members: 13 ex-officio m embers (heads of Ministries) Three nominated official members 24 nominated unofficial members Four elected unofficial members (Lagos 3, Calabar 1) b) Regional Legislature (bi-cameral in the North, unicameral in the West and the East) 3.3 Composition of Regional Houses of Assembly 3.3.1 The North The constitution provided for the North, a House of Assembly and a House of Chiefs.
The House of Chiefs was made up of all first class and not less than 2nd class Emirs.
The House of Assembly was made up of: 27  a) 19 official members b) 20 unofficial members (14 were selected by the Native Authorities while 6 were appointed by the Governor to represent special interests) 3.3.2 The W est This region had a unicameral legislature, unlike the North which had a House of Chiefs.
The Western House of Assembly was composed of the following: a) 14 official members b) 15 unofficial members (these included three Chiefs nominated by the Governor; seven members were selected by the Native Authorities while the remaining five members were also nominated by the Governor to represent some special interests).
3.3.3 The East Like the West, the Eastern Region was also given a unicameral legislature which was made up of the followings: a) 14 official members b) 15 unofficial members (these included 10 members selected by the Native Authorities and the remaining five members nominated by the Governors to represent special interests) Generally, the followings were the main functions of the Regional Assemblies: i) To serve as the electoral college for the Central Legislature ii) To consider a resolution on matters either referred to them by the Governor or introduced by a member iii) To deliberate on the annual budget estimates to be placed before them by the Governor 3.4 Main Provisions of the 1946 Constitution 1.
It divided Nigeria into three regions North, West and East and established legislative councils in each of the regions, thereby allowing the people of each region to develop at their own pace.
2.
For the first time, the northern part was brought within the same legislative authority.
Before the integration, the Governor was empowered to legislate directly for the people in the Northern 28  provinces since they were not represented in the preceding Nigerian Legislative Council.
3.
It gave powers to the regional assemblies to elect members to the central legislature.
4.
It retained the elective principle of the 1922 constitution with the limited franchise to Lagos and Calabar but increased the number of the unofficial members at the Legislative Council.
5.
The constitution also retained the veto power for the Governor.
3.5 Some Criticisms against the 1946 Constitution 1.
The nationalists were not completely happy with Sir Arthur Richards for the manner he introduced the constitution without consulting the Nigerian people for their inputs.
Although the draft constitutional proposals were approved by the African unofficial members of the legislative council, the nationalists contended that they were not the true representative of the people hence, the proposals was passed in utter disregard of the peoples opinion.
Obafemi Awolowo (1966:7) opined: because he did not consult the people before he introduced his constitution, Sir Arthur Richards came under heavy strictures.
2.
Another defect of the constitution was that it retained most of the objectionable features of the past.
Though it aimed at securing greater participation of Nigerians in their own affairs, the new legislative councils created remained mere deliberative bodies with the retention of the veto powers by the Governor.
The constitution failed to provide for ministerial positions for Nigerians which the nationalists saw as a step towards self- government.
3.
The Richards constitution also came under heavy criticism by the nationalists who felt that both the Chiefs and the unofficial members nominated by the Governor were colonial stooges who will always support the government.
4.
The retention of the elective principle without increasing the number of Africans to be elected, coupled with the restricted franchise was seen as a calculated attempt by the government to exclude the educated elite who were sufficiently conscious of their rights.
Thus, the constitution was regarded as a year of further extension and consolidation of the British Imperial power 29  rather than marking the commencement of imperial withdrawal See Olawale (1980:59).
SELF ASSESSM ENT EXER CISE What changes can you notice in the composition of the Legislative Council under Richards constitution?
4.0 CO NCLUSIO N Despite the shortcomings of the 1946 constitution, it should be commended for promoting unity in Nigeria by bringing the whole of the country under the same Legislation which was quite a radical departure from the past.
The establishment of regional assemblies moved the government closer to the people and served as a leap towards representative government.
These new innovations increased the tempo of political activities in Nigeria.
5.0 SUMMARY The British government became convinced of the need for changes in her colonial policies by the developments after the 2nd World War.
This was assisted by the increased tempo of agitations by the nationalists who took part in the war on the side of Britain.
Therefore, the British parliament wasted no time in approving the proposals submitted by Sir Arthur Richards who became the Governor of Nigeria in 1945.
The 1946 constitution though, brought some changes in the sub-structure and superstructure in Nigeria, it was not without some objectionable features which were condemned by the nationalists and served as impetus for improvement in the subsequent constitutions.
6.0 TUTOR-MARKED ASSIGNMENT 1.
What were the major provisions of the Richards constitution of 1946?
2.
Despite the marked departure of the Richards constitution from that of the Clifford s of 1922, it still suffered condemnation from the nationalists.
How would you justify their criticisms?
30  7.0 REF ERENCES/FURTHER READING Awolowo, Obafemi (1966).
Thoughts on Nigerian Constitution.
Ibadan: Oxford University Press.
Letter dated 6 December 1944 from A. Richards to Oliver Stanley, Secretary of State for the colonies.
Issued as a Session Paper, No.
4, 1945, Cmd 6599.
Olawale J.
B.
(1980).
Topics on Government Constitutions (Nigeria & Sierra Leone).
Ilesha: Jola Publications.
31  MO DULE 2 TO WARDS NIGERIA S INDEP ENDENCE Unit 1 The McPherson s Constitution of 1951 Unit 2 The Oliver Lyttleton s Constitution of 1954 Unit 3 The 1960 Independence Constitution Unit 4 1963 Republican Constitution UNIT 1 TH E MACPHERSON S CONSTITUTION O F 1951 CONTENTS 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objectives 3.0 Main Content 3.1 Evolution of Nigerian Federalism 3.1.1 Regional Recommendations 3.2 Main provisions of the Constitution 3.3 Composition of the Regional Assemblies 3.4 Merits of the Constitution 3.5 Defects of the Constitution 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutor-Marked Assignment 7.0 References/Further Reading 1.0 INTRODUCTIO N In the last unit, we learnt that one of the major complaints of the nationalists against the Richards Constitution of 1946 was, among others, that Nigerians were not consulted before the document was imposed on them.
Therefore, in introducing his own constitution in 1951, Sir John McPherson who too became the Governor in 1948, meticulousl y avoided his predecessor s error by giving the people across, all shades of opinion, the opportunity to ventilate their views on the constitution.
Therefore, Sir John McPherson made a history of being the first colonial Governor ever to, allow Africans to have inputs in the document that explained, how they were to be governed.
32  2.0 OBJECTIVES This unit explains the background to the 1951 constitution, its important features and the landmark revolution it made in the Nigerian political history.
At the end of this unit, you should be able to: • explain the evolution of federalism • identify the prospects and problems of the constitution • explain nationalists agitation for self-government 3.0 MAIN CONTENT 3.1 Evolution of Nigerian Federalism Before this constitution was promulgated into law, Sir John Macpherson presented its draft and allowed Nigerians to debate it at conferences which took place at every strata of the society from the Central through to the District and village levels.
According to Awolowo (1966:6) the colonial Governor, through his Chief Secretary Sir Hugh Foot, framed a number of questions to which people were called upon to apply their minds and give specific answers.
The followings were excerpts of the questions: • Do we wish to see a fully centralized system with all the legislative and executive power concentrated at the centre, or do we wish to develop a federal system under which each different Region of the country would exercise a measure of internal autonom y?
• If we favour a federal system of government, should we retain the existing Regions with some modifications of existing regional boundaries, or should we form Regions on some new basis, such as the many linguistic groups which exist in Nigeria?
• What changes should be made in the composition of the Regional Legislative Houses and Legislative Councils?
Should the number of unofficial members be increased?
Should the system of nominated members be retained?
• What functions and powers should be reserved to the Central Legislative Council in order to achieve the overriding objective of maintaining and strengthening the unity of Nigeria?
33  • Should the system to be introduced in all these matters and necessarily be the same in each Region, o r should each Region be given freedom to decide on modifications to suit its own peculiar circumstances and needs?
At the end of the conferences, the followings were the general consensus from each of the regions.
(see Olusanya; 1973:130-32): 3.1.1 Regional Recommendations 1.
Northern Regio n • A federal system • A central Legislature • Regional Legislature to legislate on specific subjects and others as may be vested by the Central legislature.
2.
Western Reg ion • A federal system whose component units would be formed on ethnic and linguistic basis • A federal parliament • Regional parliaments competent to legislate on all residual matters not specifically included in the legislative powers of the central parliament.
3.
Eastern Regio n • A federal system • A central legislature • Regional legislature that can legislate only on matters as the central legislature may delegate to them 4.
The Lago s Colony According to Awolowo (1966:7), the recommendations of the Lagos Colony conference were substantially in the same terms as those of the Western Regional Conferences.3 In response to the public opinion, Sir John Macpherson s constitution substantially reflected some of the views expressed at the conferences and contained in the recommendations submitted by each region.
34  3.2 Main P rovisions of the Constitution a) It introduced a federal system in which the constitutional powers were divided between the central and the regional legislatures with the proviso that in the event of a clash under the concurrent legislative matters, the regional laws was voided to the extent of its inconsistency with that of the central legislature.
b) The Governor had the reserved powers to refuse assent to any bill passed by the central legislature or to enact into law, bills rejected by the parliament.
c) Flexible electoral laws at the central, regional and provincial levels.
d) The number of the elected Nigerians into the legislative councils both at the central and regional levels was increased.
e) The Governor was empowered to stop or propose amendment to any regional bill considered to be in conflict with the national interest.
f) It maintained the three regional structures - North, East and West with Legislative and Executive Councils established in each.
Both the North and the West had a bi-camera Legislature each while the East had a single-chamber Legislature.
3.3 Composition of the Regional Assemblies The No rthern Regio n i) House of Assembly • President appointed by the Lieutenant-Governor • Official members 4 • Special members 10 • Elected members 90 ii) House of Chiefs • Governor as President • All first class Emirs • Other Chiefs 37 • Official member 3 • Adviser on Moslem Law 1 35  The Western Regio n i) Ho use of Assembly • Governor as the President • Official members 4 • Special members 3 • Elected members 80 ii) Ho use of Chiefs • Lieutenant-Governor as President • All first and second class Obas 50 • Official members 3 • Special members 3 The Eastern Reg ion i) Ho use of Assembly • Lieutenant-Governor as President • Official members 5 • Special members 3 • Elected members 80 3.4 Merits of the Constitution 1.
This was the first constitution ever to be drawn with the full participation or consultation of Nigerians which was seen as an improvem ent on the previous exercises.
2.
The constitution was also the first to introduce quasi-federalism in Nigeria and also to introduce Ministerial positions for Nigerians.
3.
It was commendable because it introduced a Revenue Allocation formula based on the principles of Derivation, Needs and National Interest.
3.5 Defec ts of the Constitution 1.
The constitution was condemned by the nationalists because it was only the government proposals that were eventually considered at the final stage.
2.
In the same vein, the composition of the Constitution review committee was designed to suit the imperialist interests, giving 36  more preference to the native Chiefs who had been serving the colonial interests.
3.
The constitution was also criticized for not providing for the position of Prime minister and Premier at the Central and Regional levels of government, which would have given the government a semblance of responsible leadership.
4.
The ministers were not in charge of given departments or a ministry that is, they were ministers without portfolios.
SELF ASSESSMENT EXERCISE What were the contributions made by the existing political parties to the evolution of federalism in Nigeria?
4.0 CONCLUSION The introduction of enlarged membership at the Central and Regional levels by the 1951 constitution provided the opportunities for the formation of political parties that contested elections into the Regional Assemblies.
While the Chief Obafemi Awolowo-led Action Group (AG) controlled the West, the Sir Ahmadu Bello-led Northern Peoples Congress (NPC) controlled the North, the Dr. Nnamdi Azikiwe-led National Council and Nigerian Citizens (NCNC) controlled the East.
The subsequent political intrigues led to the breakdown of the Constitution and gave way to another one in 1954.
5.0 SUMMARY Sir John Macpherson s constitution of 1951 was the first to be drawn with the inputs from Nigerians and it served as a catalyst for federalism in Nigeria.
The constitution retained some of the old structures but introduced some modifications thereto.
The constitution was rejected because of its inherent defects.
6.0 TUTOR-MARKED ASSIGNMENT 1.
Critically examine Sir John Macpherson s Constitution of 1951.
2.
Discuss some of the landmark innovations introduced by the 1951 Constitution.
3.
Elucidate briefly on the processes and stages that the making of the 1951 Constitution took.
37  7.0 REF ERENCES/FURTHER READING Awolowo, Obafemi (1966).
Thought on Nigerian Constitution.
Ibadan: Oxford University P ress.
Olusanya, G. O (1973).
The Second World War and Politics in Nigeria, 1939-1953.
London: Evans Brothers.
38  UNIT 2 THE O LIVER LYTLLETON S CONSTITUTIO NOF 1954 CONTENTS 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objectives 3.0 Main Content 3.1 Constitutional Conferences 3.1.1 London Conference 1953 3.1.2 Decisions of the London Conference 3.1.3 Lagos Conference 1954 3.2 Main Features of the 1954 Constitution 3.2.1 Central Legislature 3.2.2 Composition of the Regional Legislature 3.3 Other Important Provisions of the Constitution 3.4 Merits of the Constitution 3.5 Its Shortcomings 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutor-Marked Assignment 7.0 References/Further Reading 1.0 INTRODUCTIO N After about two years, it became obvious that the Macpherson s Constitution had become unworkable because what the system introduced fell short of what Nigerians desired.
In the opinion of Obafemi Awolowo (1966), the Federation which existed under the Macpherson s Constitution was a very tight one.
In the opinion of Awolowo (1966:11), it proved unbearably restrictive and obstructive in operation.
The document contained some provisions that were patently contradictory to the principles and norms of federalism.
This and some other factors such as: intra-party crisis, mutual suspicion by major ethnic groups, the Kano riots of May 1953 and the issue of self-government in 1956 precipitated the total breakdown of the Constitution in 1953.
Against this background, series of Constitutional conferences were organised and held between 1953 and 1958 to address the Constitutional crisis the outcomes of which culminated in the Lyttleton s Constitution of 1954 and the Independence Constitution of 1960.
39  2.0 OBJECTIVES Under this unit, you will be educated about the processes, which the making of the 1954 constitution took, and; At the end of this unit, you should be able to: • describe the main provisions of the constitution • describe comparative ideas of the constitution and the one before it • identify the merits and demerits of the constitution.
3.0 MAIN CONTENT 3.1 Constitutional Conferences Constitutional conferences which agreed on a number of issues were held in London and Lagos as a means of involving Nigerians in the making of the new constitution.
3.1.1 London Conference 1953 This constitutional conference was held in London under the chairmanship of Oliver Lyttleton, the Secretary of State for the Colonies between July 30 and August 22, 1953.
It was attended by nineteen delegates who consisted of six from each of the three regions and one from the Southern Cameroons.
Some of the important issues discussed were: i) The shortcomings of the 1951 Constitution ii) The motion for self-government in 1956 iii) How to implement the changes 3.1.2 Decisions of the Conference • That the regions should be truly autonomous from the central government in respect of subjects under the residual powers • That Lagos should become excised from the Western region to become a Federal territory • That the official designation of the Lieutenant-Governor should be substituted for Governors in the regions while the Governor of Nigeria should be designated Governor-General.
• That there should be power sharing between the central and the regional governments.
• That self-government should be granted by Her Majesty to regions that desired it.
40  3.1.3 Lagos Conference of 1954 This was a follow up to the London Constitutional conference to finish the unfinished matters and was also to consider the advice of Sir Louis Chick, the Fiscal Commissioner appointed at the London conference.
The conference agreed in principle with his recommendations on the allocation of resources between the Federal and regional governments and also settled on the following issues: • That the police and public service be regionalized.
• That the Southern Cameroons become autonomous.
• That the judiciary should be regionalized.
3.2 Main F eatures of the 1954 Constitution Since the making of this Constitution was preceded by series of conferences as enunciated above, little wonder then that its provisions were based on the issues agreed upon at the conferences.
The constitution, among others, established a Central Legislative Council and Regional Assembli es in which both the Governor-General and Regional Governors ceased to be members respectively.
The Legislative Council at each level was composed of the followings: 3.2.1 Central Legislature • A Speaker • Ex-officio members 3 • Elected members represented as follows:- • The Northern Region 92 • The Western Region 42 • The Eastern Region 42 • The Southern Cameroons 6 • The Lagos Colony 2 3.2.2 Composition of the Regional Legislature i) The Western Region (Bicameral) • Speakers appointed by each of the Houses • Elected members 80 • Members representing special interests 5 ii) The Northern Region (Bicameral) • Speaker for the Assembly appointed by the Governor 41  • The House of Chiefs was presided over by the Governor • Elected members 131 • Members representing special interests 5 iii) The Eastern Region (Unicameral) • A Speaker appointed by the Governor • No Official or special members allowed - • Elected members 84 3.3 Other Important Provisions of the Constitution i) A Federal Supreme Court was established for the centre to replace the West African Court of Appeal while a High Court of Lagos and a High Court of the Regions, as well as that of the Southern Cameroons were also created.
ii) It provided for the position of the Prime Minister at the centre and Premiers for the regions iii) The regions were made independent of the centre in that it transferred all the legislative and executive powers to the regions with some exclusively reserved for the centre.
iv) The Lagos Colony became a Federal Territory having been excised from the Western Region.
v) It regionalized both the public service and the judiciary vi) A unicameral Legislature for the centre.
vii) Under the fiscal allocation, half of the proceeds from export duties and revenues from mineral resources were to be retained by the regions, thus emphasizing the derivation principle.
3.4 Merits of the Constitution 1.
For the first time, the Constitution laid a foundation for a federal structure for Nigeria by providing for a clear division of both legislative and executive powers between the Central and the Regional governments.
2.
It also paved the way for self-government which was later achieved by the Western and Eastern regions in 1957 while the Northern region attained the status in 1959.
42  3.
The Constitution provided for direct elections to both the federal and regional legislatures unlike the previous Electoral College system.
4.
The constitution also provided for appointment as ministers with portfolio for Nigerians, thereby giving Nigerians both authority and responsibility for the first time.
3.5 Its Shortcomings However, the constitution had its own defects some of which were: 1.
Its failure to provide for the second legislative chamber at the centre to guide against any possible tyrannical tendencies by a single-chamber legislature and also to ensure a balanced representation by Nigerians.
2.
The appointment of the ministers which was based on the regional-based political parties made their allegiance and loyalty tilted toward their regions rather than to the entire nation.
3.
Although, the Governor-General and Regional Governors were exempted from the legislature, they still held most of their traditional powers enjoyed under the 1954 constitution.
For example, the approval of the Governor-General or the Governors must be obtained before any budget estimate could be laid before any of the legislature.
They were also empowered to veto any legislation by withholding their assent.
SELF ASSESSMENT EXERCISE What improvements were achieved on federalism under this constitution?
4.0 CONCLUSION The Oliver Lyttleton s Constitution came into effect on October 1, 1954 and the leaders of the three major political parties became the Premier of their respective regions viz: • Northern region: Sir Ahmadu Bello, leader of the Northern Peoples Congress (NPC) • Western region: Chief Obafemi Awolowo, leader of the Action Group (AG) • Eastern region: Dr. Nnamdi Azikiwe, leader of the National Council of Nigeria and Cameroons (NCNC), and • Southern Cameroons: Dr. E.M.L Endeley, leader of the Kamerun National Congress 43  5.0 SUMMARY This constitution marked the end of the era of pre-independence constitution-making in Nigeria.
The main provisions of the colonial constitution were very much similar albeit, with some modifications to satisfy the curiosity of the nationalist leaders.
In general, the constitutions were meant to serve as instrument of authority for colonial administrative policies in Nigeria.
6.0 TUTOR-MARK ED ASSIGNMENT 1.
What do you consider as the main achievements of the 1954 Constitution?
2.
Discuss the preliminary steps taken before the Lyttleton s Constitution of 1954 was promulgated.
3.
Examine the merits and deficiencies of the 1954 Constitution.
7.0 REF ERENCES/FURTHER READING Awolowo, Obafemi (1966).
Thoughts on Nigerian Constitution.
Ibadan: Oxford University P ress.
44  UNIT 3 THE INDEP ENDENCE CONSTITUT IO N OF 1960 CONTENTS 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objectives 3.0 Main Content 3.1 The 1957/1958 Constitutional Conferences 3.1.1 Main Focus of the Conference 3.1.2 The 1957 Conference s Major Resolutions 3.1.3 The 1958 Conference s Major Resolutions 3.2 Major Provisions of the 1960 Constitution 3.3 Major Changes in the Constitution 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutor-Marked Assignment 7.0 References/Further Reading 1.0 INTRODUCTIO N This constitution marked the beginning of the post-independence era of constitution-making, a period between independence and the First Republic in Nigeria.
The 1960 constitution contained most of the issues settled at the 1957 and 1958 constitutional conferences specifically organized to remedy some of the weaknesses inherent in the Lyttleton s 1954 Constitution and also, the issue of independence for Nigeria.
2.0 OBJECTIVES At the end of this unit, you should be able to: • explain the preliminary steps taken before the promulgation of the constitution • indicate the main provisions and the improvements in the constitution over the one it replaced.
3.0 MAIN CONTENT 3.1 The 1957/1958 Constitutional Confer ence 3.1.1 Main Focus of the Conference One of the major factors that accentuated the agitations for self- government and early independence for Nigeria was the fact that Ghana 45  was granted political independence and became a sovereign nation in March 1957.
Therefore in May 1957 the Nigerian Constitutional conference took place in London under the Chairmanship of Mr. Allan- Lennox Boyd, the Colonial Secretary with delegates from the regional governments and a cream of political leaders were also in attendance.
The following were some of the major issues addressed: • The question of independence for Nigeria • The regional self-government • The minority question • Granting additional responsibility to the political leadership • Power sharing between the Federal and Regional governments.
3.1.2 The 1957 Conference s Major Resolutions • Sir Henry Willinck was appointed to head a commission to look into the ways of allaying the fears of the minority ethnic groups who had been agitating for separate region in Nigeria.
• The political leaders, for the first time, unanimously agreed on October 1, 1960 as the date for Nigeria s independence.
• Lagos to remain excised from the Western region and to be the federal territory.
• Unified electoral system based on universal adult suffrage was to be adopted in the regions except for the North where it was to be restricted to adult male.
• The West and the East were to be granted the status of self- government on 8th August, 1957 while the North was to attain the status in 1959.
• It recommended a bi-cameral legislature for Nigeria A Senate and a House of Representatives.
• The position of Prime Minister and Premier were recommended for the central and regional governments respectively.
• The police should be centrally controlled even as the conference recognized its dual responsibility to both the Federal and the Regional governments.
• It was recommended that the fundamental human rights should be entrenched in the 1960 Constitution to protect the liberties of the minority groups.
• In the same vein, it was also recommended that the non-Moslems minorities in the Northern Nigeria should be given the option to have their litigations heard by non-Moslem Courts.
3.1.3 The 1958 Conference s Major Resolutions This conference was attended by various categories of delegates from Nigeria and it was aimed at clearing some grey areas contained in the 46  recommendations by the 1957 London conference.
It lasted between September 29 and October 27, 1958.See Ojiako (1981:53).
Some of the followings were the major issues around which its recommendations were centred: • The minority groups problems • Northern regional self-government • Date of Independence • The control of the police and the prisons • Revenue generation/sharing arrangement • The position of the Southern Cameroons at independence.
3.2 Major Provisions of the 1960 Constitution 1.
It provided for a Cabinet, Westminster or Parliamentary system of government in which there was a Governor-General (representing the Queen of England) and a Prime Minister as head of government.
Under the system, Dr. Nnamdi Azikiwe who was the Governor-General was a ceremonial head while Sir Abubakar Tafawa Balewa, the Prime Minister exercised the Executive powers in the day-to-day running of the government.
The one (Governor-General) was a dignified or ceremonial head of state while the other (Prime Minister) was the effective head of government.
Other essential features of the government were: • Fusion of powers members of the Executive were also members of the Parliament • Collective respo nsibility members of the Executive were collectively responsible to the Parliament in which case, no Minister of Cabinet rank should criticize the government in public otherwise the government will collapse • Vote of No Confidence once the Parliament passes a vote of no confidence on the Prime Minister the government stands dissolved • The sta tus of the Prime Minister he was invited by the Head of State being the leader of the party with majority in the Parliament to form the government.
Therefore, he was primus inter pares first among equals .
2.
It established a Federal parliament which was made up of two chambers A Senate and a House of Representatives.
The Senate was composed of 44 members, in which the three regions were represented by 12 selected members.
The Federal Territory of Lagos had 4 members while 4 members were selected by the Governor-General in consultation with the Prime Minister.
The 47  House of Representatives, on the other hand, was comprised of 320 popularly elected members from various constituencies across the federation.
3.
The 1960 Constitution divided powers between the Federal and Regional governments into Exclusive, Concurrent and Residual Legislative Lists.
It gave only the Federal government the powers to legislate on any subjects under the Exclusive List such as Defence, External Affairs, Customs and Immigration, Currency, Citizenship, Airway, Railways, etc.
The Regions were empowered to legislate on any subjects under the Residual List which were matters not listed under the Exclusive or Concurrent Lists while both the Federal and the Regions were to legislate on any subjects under the Concurrent Legislative List which included Education, Judiciary, Agriculture, Industrial development, Census, Taxation, Elections, etc.
4.
The Independence Constitution of 1960 enshrined in details, the Fundamental Human Rights as a measure to allay the fears of the minority groups and also to guarant ee the liberties of the Nigerian citizens.
It included: Rights to freedom of speech; Freedom of association and movement; Freedom from discriminatory treatment on account of sex, religion, tribe or language; Freedom of worship; Freedom of expression; Freedom to privacy and life, etc.
5.
The Constitution provided for emergency powers given to the Prime Minister with the approval of the Federal parliament to declare a state of emergency for the purpose of maintaining peace, order and good government.
It defined the emergency period as a situation when: a) The federation of Nigeria was at war b) There was total breakdown of law and order in any part thereof c) There was a resolution passed by two-thirds (2/3) majority members of the parliament declaring that democratic institutions were being threatened by subversive elements in the country.
6.
In order to ensure the independence of Judiciary, the 1960 Constitution established a National Judicial Service Commission with the powers to recomm end for appointment, Justices of the Supreme Court and High Court Judges.
The salaries and allowances of the judicial officers were charged on the Consolidated Fund, which meant that government was no longer 48  in a position to control them through salaries.
Other provisions in this regard were: • Justices or Judges could no longer be easily removed by the government.
Their removal was made a complicated Constitutional matter • The Federal Supreme Court was vested with the power of Judicial review to declare the action of ether the Federal or Regional government illegal, null and void if such violated the Constitution • The Judiciary became decentralized under the 1960 Constitution, whereby the regions had the power over the regional Courts while the Supreme Court and the Court of Appeal were under the Federal control.
7.
Another important feature of the independence Constitution was the provision for its amendment, the procedure of which was made cumbersome to protect the federal union.
The motion for amendment must receive a two-thirds majority votes in the federal parliament in concurrence with a two-thirds votes in at least, two-thirds of the regions.
3.3 Major Changes in the Constitution The 1960 independence Constitution introduced quite a number of major improvements over the previous exercise in the Nigerian constitutional development.
Apart from the fact that its making was left entirely in the hands of Nigerians, it went further to entrench the federal system of government in Nigeria.
Some of the major changes introduced were: • For the first time in Nigerian political history, bicameral legislature whereby there were Houses of Ass embly and Houses of Chiefs in each of the regions (especially in the Eastern region where there was no traditional institution) in the country.
This was aimed at making the federal structure more meaningful in the post-colonial Nigeria.
It was also necessary to make representation more equitable both at regional and federal level.
• Another significant improvement was the unified electoral system which brought the whole country together under the same electoral laws.
Hitherto, the principle of universal adult suffrage was alien in the Nigerian electoral system, especially in the Northern part where women were not allowed to vote or be voted for.
49  SELF ASSESSM ENT EXER CISE What were the main focus and resolutions of the 1957/58 constitutional conferences?
4.0 CO NCLUSIO N The 1960 Constitution made a tremendous improvement on the previous exercises in Nigeria.
The electoral commission, judicial service commission and public service commissions were given some degree of autonomy from the federal executive in order to allow for fairness in their discharge of duties and also to ensure job security for the officers.
5.0 SUMMARY The observable defects detected in the 1954 Constitution led the nationalists to demand for a reform which came through conferences in 1957 and 1958.
The decisions reached at the two Constitutional conferences were incorporated into the Independence Constitution of 1960 which was in use in Nigeria in the First Republic.
6.0 TUTOR-MARK ED ASSIGNMENT 1.
Critically examine the achievements and drawbacks of the Nigerian Independence Constitution of 1960 2.
What are the features of the 1960 Nigerian Constitution?
7.0 REF ERENCES/FURTHER READING Dudley, B. J.
(1982).
Introduction to Nigerian Government and Politic.
Evanston: Northwestern University Press.
Ojiako, J. O.
(1981).
Nigeria: Yesterday, Today, And .
.
.?
Onitsha: Africana Educational Publishers.
50  UNIT 4 THE 1963 REPUB LICAN CONSTITUTIO N CONTENTS 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objectives 3.0 Main Content 3.1 The Prelude 3.1.1 Main Features of the 1963 Constitution 3.1.2 Some Defects of the 1963 Constitution 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutor-Marked Assignment 7.0 References/Further Reading 1.0 INTRODUCTIO N Save for some of the defects of the Independence Constitution, one of the other contributing factors for the clamour for a change of the Constitution was the fact that Nigeria, at independence, inherited a weak and unprepared leadership, lacking in national consciousness and constituency due to lack of enough period for Nigerians in the management of their own affairs before granting of independence.
There were a number of issues left unresolved by the British government before they left.
According to Ojo (1985:12) .it must be admitted that the British Government by sheer abdication of responsibility left some explosive issues for Nigerians to solve at Independence.
Therefore, Nigeria inherited a weak socio-political structure, a defective and unbalanced federation, an intensification of ethnic consciousness and rivalries, a subverted indigenous ethos of government and culture, and above all, an inexperienced leadership (Ojo, 1985:12) When discussing the leadership problem in Nigeria, Eleazu (1977:245), is of the view that: Most people taking a cue from their leaders did not develop a commitment to the ideal of national unity.
The values and symbols that loomed large in their political imagery were those of sectionalism and sub-national centres of power.
Hence, any group that felt aggrieved immediately sought its own centre of power a state within which it could protect what it has as unique to itself.
51  2.0 OBJECTIVES At the end of this unit, you should be able to: • describe the process taken to, effect the changes • distinguish the amendments made • explain the distinctive features of the Constitution • make a comparison between the 1960 and the 1963 documents.
3.0 MAIN CONTENT 3.1 The Prelude In the second quarter of 1963, there was an All-Party summit where the issue of redefining the status of Nigeria from monarchy to republican as was clearly manifested in the British Act of parliament which served as the source of the legislative powers of the independent Nigeria.
The All- Party conference was preceded by the meeting of the Prime Minister and the regional Premiers for the same purpose.
Consequently, the Constitution witnessed some changes that led to the severance of the last vestiges of colonialism in Nigeria which enjoyed general acceptability by Nigerians.
According to Obafemi Awolowo (1966:14): As for the 1963 Republican Constitution, it is on record that, save for the provisions relating to the Judicial Service Commission, the Privy Council and the office of the Director of Public Prosecutions, it was jubilantly and eulogistically hailed by practically all sections of our community.
3.1.1 Main Features of 1963 Constitution The most striking feature of the Republican Constitution of 1963 was the removal of the imperial basis upon which the 1960 Constitution was defined in the Act of the British Parliament.
This element was removed and substituted for the Federal Act of the Nigerian Parliament 1963, thereby granting full autonomy to the Nigerian Parliament.
Under the Constitution, the Queen of England ceased to be Nigeria s Head of State while the position of the Governor-General was replaced with the President who became the repository of the federal executive powers.
Governors were vested with similar authority at the regional levels, although, this arrangement was just in theory since the real executive powers were exercised by the Prime Minister and his cabinet ministers.
The President was to remain in office for a period of five years (See Sec.
36:1, 1963 Constitution) but the document was silent on the number of times he was eligible to contest.
He was the Ceremonial Head of State and Commander-in-Chief of the Armed Forces (See Sec.
52  34, 1963 Constitution).
The President could be removed from office if found guilty of misconduct or was unable to perform his duties (See Sec.
10, 1963 Constitution).
He was to perform the following functions, among others: i) To invite the leader of the majority party in the Parliament to form the government ii) To convene or prorogue the Parliament when its tenure is expired or after fresh elections, as the case may be iii) To receive letter of credence from foreign ambassadors iv) To dissolve the Parliament if a vote of no confidence was passed on the government.
By convention, the Prime Minister was expected to resign v) He must assent his signature to bills passed by the Parliament to become laws vi) To declare a state of emergency in accordance with the provisions of the Constitution.
Another landmark in the Republican Constitution was the regionalization of the judiciary with the Supreme Court of the Federation as the highes t appellate Court of the land instead of the Privy Council in London.
The Constitution gave the President the power to appoint the Justices of the Supreme Court and the Judges of the Federal High Court on the advice of the Prime Minister.
In the 1963 Constitution, both the Senate and the Federal House of Representatives were jointly responsible for the selection and the removal of the President in consonance with the laid down procedure in the document.
In 1963 Dr. Nnamdi Azikiwe was elected by secret ballot at a joint session of the Parliament.
Other important functions of the Parliament (especially the House of Representatives) were to: i) make laws for the whole country; ii) control public fund; iii) approve budget and ratify important appointments; and iv) act as checks on the other two important organs of government - Executive and the Judiciary.
The Republican Constitution provided for the Police Force for the Federation and also for local authority Police in the regions.
The Inspector-General was the head of the Federal Police while a regional Commissioner of Police who was subordinate to the Inspector-General controlled the local authority Police.
Like the 1960 Constitution, the Republican Constitution also divided powers between the Federal, Regional and Local governments.
The 53  Exclusive Legislative List contained subject upon which only the Federal can legislate.
Both the Federal and the Regional governments legislated on items under the Concurrent Legislative List while the Residual List was left for the regional government.
Finally, the Republican Constitution, 1963 also enshrined the Article of Fundamental Human Rights following the 1948 Universal Declaration of Human Rights and the European Convention on Human Rights, 1950.
Perhaps the most striking point in the Constitution was the provision for the process for State creation which gave birth to the creation of the Mid-West region in 1963, the only State to be created so far by the civilian government in Nigeria.
3.1.2 Some Defects of the 1963 Constitution 1.
Dua l Heads The Republican Constitution threw away the imperial status of Nigeria but retained the imperial Constitutional Monarchical system of government which provided for two people efficient and dignified heads to lead a government.
The system may work well for the British people who practised a unitary system but it stood to reason why the system was adopted for a large, multi-ethnic and diverse country like Nigeria.
The system gave room for confusion in the decision-making process where the two heads belonged to different political parties, different ethnic groups and different religious background.
2.
Collective Respo nsibility to the Pa rliament The principle of collective responsibility which underscored the supremacy of the Parliament to the President, the Prime Minister and the cabinet Ministers was a contradiction in Nigeria where the regions were autonomous of the central authority, more so, when the authority of the Parliament could be challenged at the law Courts.
In addition, the Senate under the Republican Constitution cannot function as expected in a federal set up because its powers were limited by the Constitution.
Thus the doctrine of checks and balances that was the hallmark of government became a lacklustre.
3.
Judicial Independence This concept was undermined by the Republican Constitution which placed the appointments, promotions and discipline of Judges under the control of the Prime Minister who was to advise the President on such issues instead of creating an independent Judicial Service Commission 54  to perform the functions.
Hence, the fate of judicial officers became subjected to the whims and caprices of politicians.
SELF ASSESSMENT EXERCISE What were the landmark achievements of the 1963 constitution?
4.0 CONCLUSION The Republican Constitution of 1963 was a milestone in the history of constitutional development in Nigeria.
In the first place, it removed the stigma of imperialism from the Nigeria s political landscape and it was the first document to give Nigerians the power to solve, though partially, one of the contending issues left unresolved by the British colonial authority.
However, the political leadership failed to be faithful to the letters and spirits of the Constitution, especially in the areas of violation of Fundamental Human Rights and sundry issues that led to the collapse of the First Republic in 1966.
5.0 SUMMARY The 1963 Republican Constitution was only slightly different from that of 1960 Independence Constitution.
However, it contained some provisions that were lacking in that of the 1963 document, apart from the fact that it removed colonial relics the Queen s representative (Governor-General) and the Privy Council as the highest Court in Nigeria.
The Constitution divided the legislative powers among the levels of governments and made the Regions co-ordinate and not subordinates to the Federal government.
6.0 TUTOR-MARKED ASSIGNMENT 1.
Outline critically, the main features of the Republican Constitution of 1963.
In what way(s) was it different from the 1960 Independence Constitution?
2.
In the Republican Constitution of 1963 the President reigns but did not rule.
Discuss.
3.
Despite some landm ark innovations in the 1963 Constitution, it had its own contradictions.
Do you agree?
7.0 REF ERENCES/FURTHER READING Awolowo, Obafemi (1966).
Thoughts on Nigerian Constitution.
Ibadan: Oxford University Press.
Eleazu, U. O (1977).
Federalism and Nation-Building: The Nigerian Experience 1954-1964.
Ilfracombe: Devon, Arthur H. Stockwell.
Ojo, J.
D (1985).
The Development of the Executive under the Nigerian Constitutions 1960 8.
Ibadan: University Press.
55  MODULE 3 POST-COLONIAL PERIOD Unit 1 The Theory of Federalism Unit 2 Evolution of Federalism in Nigerian Unit 3 Government & Politics (1966-1979) Unit 4 The Collapse of the First Republic UNIT 1 THE THEORY OF FEDERALISM CONTENTS 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objectives 3.0 Main Content 3.1 Conceptual Analysis of Federalism 3.1.1 Federation and Confederacies 3.1.2 Federal and Unitary States 3.1.3 Principles of Federalism 3.1.4 Essential Features of a Federal State 3.2 Prospects and problems of federalism 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutor-Marked Assignment 7.0 References/Further Reading 1.0 INTRODUCTIO N The post-colonial period in the annals of Nigerian political history started on October 1, 1960 when the British flag, the Union Jack was lowered in Nigeria and the reign of government was taken over by the Nigerian leaders who emerged through the process of the 1959 general elections.
Before we go into the nitty-gritty of the issues, it is pertinent to discuss the theory of federalism which is the foundation upon which the Nigerian polity was constructed.
The unit will acquaint the student with the political structure bequeathed to Nigeria by the British colonial government.
To examine the rationale behind the decision to configure the political structure the way it was and also to see how well the s ystem has been working for the country.
56  2.0 OBJECTIVES At the end of this unit, you should be able to: • describe the origin of federalism as a form of government in Nigeria • identify the genesis of the nation s political challenges • explain the theory of federalism, among others.
3.0 MAIN CONTENT 3.1 Conceptual Analysis of Federalism What is federalism or federal system of government?
This is a political system whereby a group of autonomous states form an association with a central body and agrees to surrender part of their sovereignty to the central authority in the area of external affairs and other domestic matters of common interest.
A federation could also be defined as a union where the constitutional powers are divided between two or more levels of government and where the citizens are subjected to different levels of authority.
In a federal system, there is a central government and the component units that are not subordinate to but co-ordinate with the central body.
But in the common interest of the union, the central authority has its ways when there is clash of interest.
Appadorai (1968:495) defines federalism thus: A state in which there is a central authority that represents the whole, and acts on behalf of the whole in external affairs and in such internal affairs as are held to be of common interest; and in which there are also provincial or state authorities with powers of legislation and administration within the sphere allotted to them by the constitution.
3.1.1 F ederations and Confederacies There is a distinction between a federation and confederation which are often confused by some people.
A confederation is also a union of sovereign states but with a loose centre because the federating units retain their sovereignty in its original form and concept.
The federating units sustain the central authority and membership could be withdrawn at will.
Example of a confederation is Switzerland and quasi- government (associations) such as the Economic Community of West African States (ECOWAS), African Union (AU), European Union (EU), 57  Commonwealth of Nations, United Nations (UN) and such other similar bodies.
Though a union of States (like a federation), there is no constitutional division of powers between the centre and the component units in a confederacy.
Individual citizens of the confederacy are responsible, primarily, to their home governments; the orders of the common authority only affect him as may be imposed by his/her home State because it is a league of sovereign States.
Therefore, it is possible for any component unit to have a legal right to secede from the union in a confederation but secession in a federation may lead to civil war as was the case in America between 1861 and 1865 and Nigeria between 1967 and 1970.
3.1.2 Federal and Unitary States A Unitary state is one in which there is a domineering central authority serving as the sole source of authority to the territorial units.
All the governing authorities within the State are created; have their powers defined, and their form of administrative structure determined by the central government.
In the opinion of Awolowo (1966:9), the distinguishing characteristic of a unitary state is that it has only one supreme legislative authority, whereas that of a federal state has within it a number of supreme legislative authorities which are co-ordinate with and independent of one another in the exercise of their respective powers.
3.1.3 Principles of Federalism a) The Need for Unio n For a federation to evolve there must be a compelling desire by smaller states to feel the need for a union and express such desire.
Smaller states are vulnerable to encroachment by foreign powers which may be a compelling factor to form a federal union with other neighbouring independent states to enjoy common defence, common currency, free trade and other internal and external economies arising from such union.
b) Geo gra phical Co ntiguity Nearness to one another in terms of geographical boundaries, historical and economic opportunities is sine qua non for the success of independent States seeking to form a federal union.
Appadorai (1968:499) opines: The physically contiguity of countries which are to form a federation is certainly a favourable, and possibly a necessary condition for the success of federal government.
58  Ordinarily, the desire to form a union would not arise if the countries are widely separated and incompatible in some natural traits, the sacrifice to be made out of the union would naturally obliterate whatever advantages accruing there from.
c) The Desire for Interna l Autonomy The desire for a federation by a group of independent states precludes the establishment of a unitary state or any arrangement that encroach on their local sovereignty.
A desire among the component states for the preservation of their independence in all but essentially common maters is a precondition for this form of political organisation.
In his contribution, A. V. Dicey (1939) sa ys federalism is a natural constitution only for a body of States which desire union and does not desire unity.
d) Principle of Equa lity There should be no marked inequalities among the federating states in terms of land mass, population, m ilitary power, economic resources, etc.
If there is any of the federating states as powerful in the union as to be half, equal or double in size and other parameters than the rest combined, this may lead to domination and eventual collapse of the union.
3.1.4 Essential Features of a Federal State i) A Written a nd Rigid Constitution To prevent the breakup of the union through secession, it is necessary for a federal State to have a Constitution that is not only written and rigid but also emphasize the Supremacy of the Constitution in order to curtail the activities of the centrifugal forces and subversive elements (See Sec.
1:1-3, Constitution of the Federal Republic of Nigeria, 1999).
ii) Division of Powers The Constitution should enshrine the division of powers among the central and component states.
The Legislative powers are divided into Exclusive, Concurrent and Residual Lists (See Second Schedule, Parts I & II, Constitution of the Federal Republic of Nigeria, 1999) and the cumbersome procedure for the amendment (See Sec.
9:1-4, Constitution of the Federal Republic of Nigeria, 1999) of the Constitution is also stated.
The Exclusive Legislative List contains the subject upon which only the Federal Government can legislate such as Defence, External Affairs, Currency, Stamp duties etc.
The Concurrent Legislative List, on the other hand, are the items upon which both the Federal and the State 59  governments can make laws such as Education, Agriculture, Trade and Commerce, etc.
but in the event of a conflict, the Federal Laws prevails and that of the State becomes void to the extent of its inconsistency.
The Residual Legislative List contains items or matters on which the states can make laws.
In most federal systems such matters include, Local government, culture, health and education.
iii) A Supreme Co urt Another important feature of a Federal State is the establishment of a Supreme Court (See Sections 232:1:2 and 233, Constitution of the Federal Republic of Nigeria, 1999) to interpret the Constitution and adjudicate in disputes between the Federal and the component units on the one hand, and between the Federal, States and individual citizens on the other.
The Supreme Court should also have power of judicial review so as to prevent dictatorship or legislative rascality in the federation.
It is the highest Court of the land and the last hope of the common man.
iv ) Bi-cameral Leg islature It is equally important for a federal union to have a two-chamber National Assembly to be composed of elected representatives of the people from different component units.
For example, in Nigeria the Upper Chamber (Senate) has members elected on equal basis across the 36 States of Nigeria, including the Federal Capital Territory, Abuja while the membership of the Lower Chamber (House of Representatives) is made proportional to the population of the component states.
3.2 Prospects and Problems of Federalism Since there are no roses without thorns, federalism, in juxtaposition with unitary system of government, is either good or bad depending on the anthropological environment in which it is practised.
At least in the developing democracies, the following are the common problems of federal system: i) Dua l Allegia nce Allegiance is the citizen s loyalty which can be given at a time to a ruler or state but in a federal set up like Nigeria, a citizen s allegiance is dual - one to his/her state of origin and second, to the federal authority.
Consequently, in most cases the citizens are subjected to multiple laws on taxation, environment, traffic, etc.
In a situation where there is conflict between the federal and the component state, the citizens become the grass that suffers the clash between two elephants.
This is 60  not the case in a unitary system where authority is centralized, uniform and easily recognizable.
ii) Conflict o f Interest Another significant problem of a federal system is the occasional conflict of interest, duplication of duties and clash of authority between the federal and the component states since they both can legislate on subjects under the Concurrent Legislative List.
A situation where the political parties controlling the central and the states governments are different, there is the likelihood of showmanship by either party to achieve a political interest.
Some states may suffer persecutions in the hand of the federal authority while some others may have more than their fair share simply because of political differences.
The unhealthy rivalry leads to unequal, wasteful and inequitable distribution of national resources.
iii) Satisfa ctory Metho d o f Amendment The procedure for constitutional amendment in a federal state is cumbersome since it requires the votes of not less than two-thirds majority of all members of the National Assembly (Senate and House of Representatives in Nigeria) and also approval by the resolution of not less than four-fifths majority of all the members of the Houses of Assembly of not less than two-thirds of all the States (See Sec.
9:2-4, Constitution of the Federal Republic of Nigeria, 1999).
This tortuous process makes it difficult to have a consensus of opinion on the amendment of the Nigerian constitution in order to make the document reflect the current realities in the federation.
This invariably accounts for why no civilian government has been able to create either a new Local Government or a State since 1963.
This is not without some negative effects on the acceleration of development in the country.
iv) Threa ts of Secessio n As the component units in a federation are usually not identical in size, population, mineral resource, etc., it is not impossible that the larger units may have overbearing influence on account of their population to the detriment of the smaller units.
The cries of marginalization may lead to the struggle for self-determination which is a euphemism for secession.
The Nigerian federation was threatened to its very foundation between 1967 and 1970 when the Eastern region unilaterally declared secession from the federation over the claim of marginalization and maltreatment of Igbos in the North.
The embers of secession are still alive in view of the activities of the militant groups in the Niger Delta 61  Area accusing the federal authority of neglect, marginalization and environmental degradation.
v) Adva ntages/Pro spects of Federa lism Despite all these weak points, federalism as a political system has quite a number of advantages, some of which are enumerated as follows: a) Unity in diversity A federal system promotes unity amongst people of diverse culture, religion and histor y which makes them put national interests beyond and above that of their individual ethnic groups.
They blend, interrelate, inter-marry and speak with one voice which commands respectability in the international community.
b) Healthy Competitio n Federalism encourages rapid growth and development among the heterogeneous people that constitutes its component units that operate at different pace with different policies and programmes.
Since resources are not equally distributed, there is the advantage of maximum exploitation and relatively equitable allocation of the national wealth according to needs and in the overall interest of the federation.
The component units are tempted to emulate good programmes and exchange good ideas from one another in a healthy competition.
c) Eco no mies o f Scale In a federation, resources are usually pulled together for maximum output with minimized cost for national productivity.
Unlike small nations, union of nations in federalism has the advantages of availability of labour, raw materials, high level of consumption, savings and investment.
These are catalysts for rapid economic growth and development.
SELF ASSESSM ENT EXER CISE Can you observe any difference between the theories and practice of federalism in Nigeria?
4.0 CO NCLUSIO N A unitary state appears stronger than a federation because the powers are centralized which makes decision making easier and quicker with the attendant accelerated rate of development.
There can be no conflict of 62  interest or authority or divided loyalty by the citizens.
This is why Willoughby (1963:117) opines: no conflict or confusion regarding responsibility for work to be performed, no overlapping of jurisdictions and no duplication of work, plant, or organization which cannot be immediately adjusted.
Dicey (1939:173-4), concludes that the comparative weakness of federalism is no accident; it is inherent in it.
5.0 SUMMARY Federalism, confederalism and unitarism are political systems that need careful dissection for better understanding because they are so interwoven that the point at which one stops marks the beginning of another.
The reason for the adoption of any of the system varies from one country to the other.
Essentially, history, anthropology, geography and other environmental variables are determining factors in the decision to adopt any of them.
Federalism is a political set up with a central authority and component states that are co-ordinates and not subordinate to one another.
While confederacy is its direct opposite in that it relaxes the authority at the centre in favour of the confederating units.
Unitary state, on the other hand, is diametrically opposed to a confederacy because the authority is highly concentrated at the centre, not sharing the powers with any components.
6.0 TUTOR-MARKED ASSIGNMENT 1.
What is federalism?
Compare and contrast between a con-federal and a unitary state.
2.
Federalism promotes unity in diversity but not without its problems.
Discuss this statement in details.
3a.
What are the conditions for federalism as a system of government?
b.
Under what condition(s) would you give preference to a unitary government over federal arrangement?
63  7.0 REF ERENCES/FURTHER READING Appadorai, A.
(1968).
The Substance of Politics.
11th Edition.
Delhi: Oxford University Press.
Awolowo, Obafemi (1966).
Thoughts on Nigerian Constitution.
Ibadan: Oxford University Press.
Dicey, A. V. (1939).
Introduction to the Study of the Law of the Constitution.
9th ed., ch.
Iii and Appendix IV.
London: Macmillan Press.
Willoughby, W. F. (1963).
The Government of Modern State., ch.
Xii and xiii, Appleton-Century.
64  UNIT 2 EVO LUTION OF F EDERALISM IN NIGERIA CONTENTS 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objectives 3.0 Main Content 3.1 Historical Perspectives 3.1.1 British Colonial Officials Inference 3.1.2 Colonial Office Thinking 3.1.3 Nigerians Views 3.1.4 Debates at 1957/58 Constitutional Conferences 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutor-Marked Assignment 7.0 References/Further Reading 1.0 INTRODUCTIO N Nigerian is a federal state forged by, the British colonial administration through different experimentations of policies, coupled with the prevailing circumstances and inferences compelling a federal structure for the nation which was later to be translated into, federal Constitutional developments, beginning with the Sir Arthur Richard s constitution of 1946.
2.0 OBJECTIVES In furtherance to the lessons in Unit One of this Module on the characteristic nature of Federalism in contradistinction to Confederalism and Unitarism, we wish to examine the evolution of federalism as a political system in Nigeria.
At the end of this unit, you should be able to: • describe the underpinnings of Nigerian federation • outline the various steps taken by the colonial masters • describe the role played by different dramatis personae of the political leadership and the Nigerian people at large.
3.0 MAIN CONTENT 3.1 H istorical Perspectives The adoption of the federal system of government for Nigeria could not have been by mistake in view of the historical antecedent of the British 65  rule in the country.
There were two contending forces on this issue viz: The Federalist and the Unitarian Schools of thought.
They both advanced various views on the type of Constitution or political structure desirable for Nigeria.
But the question may be asked that why did we choose one of these two types of Constitution or administrative structure in preference to the other?
Apart from certain features such as geography, contiguity and economies of scale accruable, the issue of diversity is very germane to this discussion and should be given special mention.
There are ten principal national groups in Nigeria constituting about 80% of the entire population.
See the table below: Na tionality Population (millio ns) Hausa/Fulani 13.6 Yoruba 13.0 Ibo 7.8 Efik/Ibibio 3.2 Kanuri 2.9 Tiv 1.5 Ijaw 0.9 Edo 0.9 Urhobo 0.6 Nupe 0.5 TOTAL 4 4.9 Source: Awo lowo, O., (196 6:24) One historical fact that lends credence to the origin of federalism in Nigeria was that the conquest of each Nigerian nationality, kingdoms, empires, princedoms and village republics took different forms and at different times.
Therefore, from 1900 to 1913, what is now known as Nigeria was ruled as two different colonial territories known as the Lagos Colony and the Protectorates of Northern and Southern Nigeria which were separately ruled and administered.
From the period of amalgamation (1914) to the Clifford s era in 1922, there were two distinct Legislative authorities for Nigeria.
For the Colony of Lagos, it was the Legislative Council that served as the Legislative authority while it was the Governor advised by the Nigerian Council for the Protectorates of Northern and Southern Nigeria.
However, the North was ruled by proclamation because it was not represented in the Nigerian Council.
66  The only period when Nigeria was ruled as one country was between 1946 and 1951 during which the North became integrated and had delegates in the central Legislature under the Richard s Constitution.
3.1.1 British Colonial Officials Inferences An early official reference by the colonial officials, to the idea of federalism in Nigeria was made in 1928 at an Executive Council meeting, See Okafor (1981:131).
H. R. Palmer, (See Proceeding of the Executive Meeting) the Lieutenant-Governor for the Northern Provinces, while contributing to the discussion on whether the Ordinances enacted by the legislature should be applicable to the North held that: The general assumption that Nigeria as a whole could be freely legislated for was wrong.
In Nigeria, there were three separate units which more and more would require separate legislation for their different needs.
To legislate on a steam roller basis for the whole country would result in eventual upheaval.
In the end there would have to be a separate federal Council for each of the three units as in the Federated Malay States.
The three units would consist of areas east of the Niger, the North and the Yoruba country.
Another colonial voice in support of federation in Nigeria was that of G. J. Lethem who wrote a confidential report, Impressions of a Tour in the Eastern Province (See Lethem, Memorandum).
In it, he advocated for decentralization while ascribing the problem of Nigeria s development to its size, population of the dependency and the diversity in the social organization of the various communities.
Sir Donald Bourdillon, Governor of Nigeria (1935-1943) could not have concurred the more with Lethem when, in 1939 he divided the country into three administrative units North, East and West and summarized his views on the future relationship between the central legislature in a Memorandum on the Future Political Development of Nigeria (See Bourdillon, B., Memorandum) in which he postulated a building of a federal structure with regional legislatures in the North, East and West, and a central legislature in Lagos.
3.1.2 The Colonial O ffice Thinking The Colonial office in London was not left out in the debates on future political arrangement for Nigeria.
In 1939, its thought on the subject were put forward by J.
B. Sidebotham, the Principal Secretary in the 67  office who based his argument for a federation on the premise that there were social and geographical differences between the three divisions Northern, Eastern and Western in Nigeria.
He concludes: any attempt to pour the constitutional future of a vast country into a single mould which the metal may either be inadequate or not sufficiently molten to fill may prove disastrous.
(See Bourdillon, B., Memorandum) Concluding, he argued that with the three divisions at varying stages of development, it would be both unreasonable and impossible to expect them to participate effectively in a unitary system.
3.1.3 Niger ians Views On the home front, some political leaders in Nigeria either in writin gs or by political statements made their views known on the future political arrangement for the country.
For instance, Obafemi Awolowo was regarded as a convinced federalist as he expressed the idea in some of his literary works namely: My Early Life (1960); Thoughts on Nigerian Constitution (1966) and Path to Nigerian Freedom (1966).
His unmistakable position on federalism for Nigeria could be fathomed when he surmised that Nigeria is not a nation but rather a mere geographical expression, see Awolowo, Obafemi, (1966:47-8): There are no Nigerians in the same sense as there are English , Welsh , or French .
The word Nigeria is merely a distinctive appellation to distinguish those who live within the boundaries of Nigeria from those who do not.
In the same vein, Sir Abubakar Tafawa Balewa, the first Nigerian Prime Minister also made a statement that was heavily loaded with some grains of federal tendency in 1947.
His words: .since the amalgamation of Northern and Southern provinces in 1914, Nigeria has existed as one country only on paper .it is still far from being united.
Nigerian unity is only a British intention for the country.
(Hansard, March 20 to April 2, 1947 at p. 208) 3.1.4 Debates of 1957/58 Conferences The first practical step ever to be taken towards making federalism a constitutional matter was that of Sir Arthur Richards (later Lord Milverton) in 1946 that not only embedded federal ideas into his constitution but also divided the country into three distinctive regions.
68  His conviction on the desirability of federal system as a panacea for Nigeria s problems was illustrated when he stated thus: .it is only the accident of British suzerainty which has made Nigeria one country.
It is still very far from being one country or one nation socially or even economically .socially and politically there are deep differences between the major tribal groups.
They do not speak the same language and they have highly divergent customs and ways of life and they represent different states of culture.
(See Lord Milverton s address) Although, Richards Constitution of 1947 came under heavy criticisms by Nigerian nationalists on the ground that it was imposed, however, the elements of federalism introduced was accepted as demonstrated when Sir John Macpherson allowed debates which took place from the Central through Regional, Provincial, Divisional to the village levels before the Sir John Macpherson s 1951 Constitution was introduced.
Also, Nigerians minced no words on their preference for federal system when another round of opportunities came handy during the 1957/58 Constitutional Conferences before subsequent Constitutions were introduced up to the 1960 independence Constitution.
These were the sources and origins of federalism as a political system in Nigeria.
SELF ASSESSMENT EXERCISE What were the colonial office and Nigerians disposition to federalism as a political system in post-colonial Nigeria?
4.0 CONCLUSION From the foregoing, it could be deduced that the Nigerian federalism met the condition of desirability as one of the prerequisites but the structure, as it were, appears to have been constructed on a defective foundation.
The obvious fears of domination expressed by the minority ethnic groups which led to the setting up of the Henry Willinck s Minority Commission was not properly addressed as it did not accede to the demand for creation of more states as solution to allay the minority fears.
Thus, the British government failed to address this problem of the structural imbalance before it granted the country independence in 1960.
Meanwhile, federalists argued that a federation of three regions such as in Nigeria where one of the regions is larger than the other two put together, is fraught with illogicalities.
Other imperfections of the Nigerian federation could be summarized as follows: 69  • Lack of accurate and reliable census data • inequitable distribution of resources • Ethnic rivalry, suspicion and nepotism • Resource control and allocation • Too much power at the centre to the detriment of the component units • Constitutional impediments 5.0 SUMMARY The history of the Nigerian federation is as old as the history of the country itself.
The British government and the colonial administrators in Nigeria were faced with the problems of differences in ecological and anthropological set up in the country which, coupled with other factors, probably dictated the need to forge a federation where there could be unity in diversity among other opportunities.
The Nigerian nationalists understood the terrain and the nature of their country much more than the colonial authority which had brought together different nationalities to form a political entity now known as Nigeria.
The desire for autonomy by the pre-colonial ethnic groups in Nigeria made them to crave for a federal arrangement which came in tandem with the views of the British officials in the country based on their personal experience and empirical evidence.
However, the federal structure bequeathed by the British felt short of expectation because of its observable lopsidedness and imperfections, hence the agitations for a restructuring and re-arrangement of the polity which had started since the colonial period still persist today.
6.0 TUTOR-MARK ED ASSIGNMENT 1.
Explain in detail, the sources and origin of Nigerian federalism.
2.
How would you justify the calls for resource control or restructuring of the Nigerian polity?
3.
What would you recommend as panacea to the centrifugal or divisive tendencies in Nigeria?
70  7.0 REF ERENCES/FURTHER READING Awolowo, O.
(1966).
Thoughts on Nigerian Constitution.
Ibadan: Oxford University Press.
.
(1966).
Path to Nigerian Freedom.
London: Faber and Faber.
Bourdillon, B.
Memorandum on the future political development of Nigeria , G. O.
583, Vol.
244, Public Record Office, London.
Lord Milverton s address at a joint meeting with the Royal Empire Society, London, 28th January, 1948.
Lethem, G. J.
A Memorandum dated 15-08-1928 attached to draft copy of a confidential report on Impressions of a tour in the Eastern Provinces , G.S.O, 10/1 File 98 (Nigeria National Archives, Ibadan).
Okafor, S. O.
(1981).
Indirect Rule: The Development of Central Legislature in Nigeria.
Hong-Kong: Thomas Nelson.
Proceedings of the Executive Council meeting held at the Chief Secretary s Office, Lagos, on Saturday, 1st December, 1928.
Tafawa Balewa, A. Hansard, March 20 to April 2, 1947, p.208 The submission made in form of an official comment entitled Note , written by J.
B. Sidebotham as attachment.
71  UNIT 3 GOVERNMENT AND POLITICS 1960 - 1966 CONTENTS 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objectives 3.0 Main Content 3.1 Political P arties in the First Republic 3.1.1 Action Group (AG) 3.1.2 Northern People s Congress (NPC) 3.1.3 National Council of Nigerian Citizens (NCNC) 3.1.4 Minor Parties 3.1.5 Federal Election of 1959 3.1.6 NPC/NCNC Alliances 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutor-Marked Assignment 7.0 References/Further Reading 1.0 INTRODUCTIO N As studied in the previous units in this course, self-government that led to the independence started as an experiment first, in the Western and Eastern Regions while the Northern Region was to follow suit later.
The success of this test-run in governance appeared to have encouraged the British government to organize general elections in 1959 giving birth to the NPC/NCNC coalition government led by Sir Abubakar Tafawa Balewa as the Prime Minister in what is generally known as the Nigerian First Republic from October 1, 1960.
2.0 OBJECTIVES At the end of this unit, you should be able to: • explain the basis and structure of the political parties in the period • describe the political intrigues in the First Republic • identify the remote and immediate causes of military intervention in the political process • list the successes and failures of successive military regimes.
72  3.0 MAIN CONTENT 3.1 Political Parties in the F irst Republic The three major political parties that dominated the Nigeria s First Republic s politics were formed in response to the challenges posed by the Richards Constitution of 1946.
The Constitution had introduced three regions, each with a Legislature and a House of Chiefs (with the exception of the Eastern region which had but only one chamber) and provided for electoral process through which the members for the regional and central parliaments were elected.
However, the reforms reflected in the Macpherson s constitution of 1951 attracted the formation of the major political parties that held sway in the First Republic which was terminated in 1966.
The three political parties were metamorphosis of tribal unions of the major ethnic groups that dominated the political scene during the period.
3.1.1 Action Group (AG) This party which was formed in 1951 drew most of its members from the Egbe Omo Oduduwa (a Yoruba Socio-cultural group) and a splinter group of the Nigerian Youth Movement (See Sklar, 1963:101-11).
The party was led by Chief Obafemi Awolowo who later became the first Premier of the Western Region on the platform of the party until 1955 when he moved to the Central to become the official Opposition Leader of the parliament.
The main objectives of the Action Group party were, among others: • To bring and organize within its fold, all nationalists in the Western Region, so that they may work together as a united Party, and submit themselves to party loyalty and discipline.
• To prepare and present to the public, programmes for all departments of governm ent, and to strive faithfully to ensure the effectuation of such programmes through those of its members that are elected into the Western House of Assembly and the Federal Legislature (See Olusanya, 1973:139-40).
The following personalities were the pioneer officers elected when the party was launched in 1951 at Owo (See Ojiako, 1981:68-70): President Chief Obafemi Awolowo Vice-President (West) Dr. J.
A Doherty Vice-President (East) Dr. E. O. Awhuche Vice-President (North) Alh.
Sule Maito Federal Secretary Mr. Ayotunde Rosiji 73  Federal Treas urer Alh.
S. O. Gbadamosi Federal Publi city Secretary Mr. S. O. Shonibare Legal Adviser (West) Mr. A. M. A. Akinloye Legal Adviser (East) Mr. A. Adeoba Legal Adviser (North) Vacant Party Chaplain Rev.
E. O. Alayande Party Imam Mallam M. S. Yabagi Father of the Party Dr. Akinola Maja Deputy Leader Chief S. L. Akintola Organising Secretary Mr. S. T. Oredein Party Manager Mr. O. Agunbiade-Bamishe Administrative Secretary Mr. Olatunji Dosunmu 3.1.2 Northern People s Congress (NPC) This party also started as a socio-cultural organization called Jamiyyar Muutanen Arewa which was one of the associations formed by the Northern educated elements in the 1940s.
The organization became the Northern People s Congress when it became apparent that the North required a legitimate political party to lead the people and also work the new Constitution of 1951.
The party adopted One North, One People as its motto and declared the followings as its objectives: • Regional autonomy within one Nigeria.
• Local government reform within a progressive Emirate system based on tradition and custom.
• The voice of the people to be heard in all the Council of the North.
• Drives for education throughout the whole North, lying due emphasis on the improvement of the social, economic, and cultural life of the people.
• Eliminate bribery and corruption in every sphere.
• Eventual self government for Nigeria with Dominion status within the British Commonwealth.
• Membership of the Northern People s Congress to be open to all people of Northern descent, whether as individuals or as a union or as a political party.
• Industrial and economic development of the Northern Region.
(See Okafor, 1981:210).
The following personalities were its pioneer officers: President General Alh.
Sir Ahmadu Bello 1st Vice-President Alh.
Sir Abubakar Tafawa Balewa 2nd Vice-President Alh.
Mohammadu Ribadu 74  General Secretary Abba Mohammadu Habib General Treasurer Alh.
Aliyu Makama Bida Gen. Financial Secretary Alh.
Issa Kaita North Regional President Mall.
Ibrahim Musa Gashash Organising Secretary I Mall.
Habib Raji Abdullah Organising Secretary II Mall.
Mohammadu King Publicity Secretary Mall.
Abubakar Tugar Administrative Secretary Mall.
Garba Abuja 3.1.3 National Counc il of Nigerian Citizens (NCNC) In alliance with the Nigerian National Democratic Party (NNDP), this could have been the only nationally-oriented party (See Okafor, 1981:201) in the post-independent Nigeria having been jointly formed in 1945 by Herbert Macaulay and Dr. Nnamdi Azikiwe under the name: National Council of Nigeria and Cameroons which later became the National Council of Nigerian Citizens (NCNC) when the Cameroons was excised from Nigeria.
The party came into being after the demise of the NNDP which had dominated the Lagos politics until the domination was challenged by the Nigerian Youth Movement.
However, the Earnest Ikoli and Oba Samuel Akinsanya (the Odemo of Isara s) crisis (See Azikiwe, 1957:7-8) that led to the disintegration of the Nigerian Youth Movement in the 40s paved the way for the NCNC.
The leadership of the party consisted of prominent nationalists like Herbert Macaulay, Nnamdi Azikiwe, L. A. Onojobi, A. Ogedegbe, E. A. Akerele, L. Odunsi, D. C. Osadebay and A. O. Olorun-Nimbe.
Its cardinal objectives were stated thus: • To extend democratic principles and to advance the interests of the people of Nigeria and the Cameroons, under the British Mandate.
• To organize and collaborate with all its branches throughout the country.
• To adopt suitable means for the purpose of imparting political education to the people of Nigeria with a view to achieving self- government.
• To afford the members the advantages of a medium of expression in order to secure political freedom, economic security, social equality and religious toleration in Nigeria and th e Cameroons, as a member of the British Commonwealth of Nations (See Okafor, 1981:195).
75  3.1.4 Minor Parties One of the notable minor parties that took part in the politics of the First Republic was the Northern Elements Progressive Union (NEPU) formed by the radicals in the leadership of the Northern People s Congress who were expelled from the NPC on the basis of irreconcilable ideological differences by the conservative elements in the party.
Okafor (1981:210) opines: NEPU on the other hand depended for its support mainly on Northerners, often called Yan Iska (Sons of the Wind), who had given up their traditional allegiances and taken up a new way of life.
Most of them were petty traders or craftsmen.
Generally, they lived in urban areas like Kano, Kaduna, Zaria, Minna, Gusau, Jos.
The party championed the cause of the talakawas (the poor masses) in the North which, according to Kurfi (1983:8), was one of the thirteen minority parties that managed to contest the federal election in 1959.
Others listed were: United Middle-Belt Congress (UMBC), Bornu Youth Movement (BYM) in the North, Mabolaje Grand Alliance and Otu Edo in the West and the United National Independence Party and the Democratic Party of Nigeria and Cameroons in the East (See Post, 1964:102).
3.1.5 The Federal Elections of 1959 The federal election that ushered in the First Republic in Nigeria was conducted on December 12, 1959 (See Ojiako, 1981:76&76).
The elections outcome witnessed the movement of Chief Obafemi Awolowo of the Action Group and Dr. Nnamdi Azikiwe of the NCNC from their respective Regional P remiership positions in the West and East to the Federal Legislature.
On the contrary, the Premier of the Northern Region Sir Ahmadu Bello, the Sardauna of Sokoto decided to remain in the saddle as Premier of the Northern Region, seconding his Deputy, Sir Abubakar Tafawa Balewa to hold forth as the NPC Leader in the Federal Legislature.
The statistics of Voters Registration and voting pattern in the 1959 election were as shown in Table 1 below: Region Persons Actual Percentage Votes Percentage enti tled to Registration Registration Cas t Poll register North 3,885,000 3,640,284 93.7 3,258,520 89.4 East 3,423,000 2,598,234 75.7 1,929,754 75.3 West 2,759,000 2,653,188 96.2 1,887,209 71.2 Lagos 177,000 144,000 81.6 110,072 76.2 Source: Nigeria Official Gazette, No.
15, Vol.47, March 24, 1960, pp.351-69 76  The seats won by Political Parties and Independent candidates are presented in table 2 below: Political Eastern Northern Western Federal TOTAL Party and Regi on Region Region Territory Independent (Lagos) Action 14 25 33 1 73 Group NCNC 58 - 21 2 81 NPC - 134 - - 134 NEPU - 8 - - 8 NDC 1 - - - 1 Independent - 7 8 - 15 TOTAL 73 174 62 3 312 Source: Ojiako, 1981:77 3.1.6 NPC/NCNC Alliances From the above tables certain things became obvious: Table 1 revealed the enthusiasm of Nigerians to participate in the historic election that ushered in independence.
Also, the table presented a graphic picture of a voting pattern that confirmed the tribal and regional nature of the major political parties.
From table 2, we could see that the parties only had good showings in their regions of influence thus, making it difficult for any single party to have the required majority to go it alone in the government at the Federal level.
One of the principles of Parliamentary s ystem of government which was adopted in the First Republic was that the Leader of the party in the opinion of the Her Majesty the Queen, had comfortable majority in the Parliament, who could be invited to form the government.
On the strength of this, Sir James Robertson, the then Governor-General invited Sir Abubakar Tafawa Balewa to form a new government.
Therefore, the three major political parties went into horse-trading and negotiation which resulted into a coalition government between the NPC and the NCNC.
On December 20, 1959 the government was formed with the followings as members of the Federal Cabinet: NPC/NCNC Coalitio n Government 1959 1966 Sir Abubakar Tafawa Balewa - Prime Minister Alh.
Muhamm adu Ribadu - Lands and Lagos Affairs Chief Festus Okotie-Eboh - Finance Mr. Raymond Njoku - Transport and Aviation Alh.
Inuwa Wada - Works and Survey 77  Mr. Zanna.
B. Dipcharima - Commerce and Industry Mr. Joseph M. Johnson - Labour and Welfare Mr. Aja Nwachukwu - Education Mallam Maitama Sule - Mines and Power Mallam Shehu Shagari - Economic Dev.
& Natural Resources Mr. Olu Akinfosile - Communications Mallam Usman Sarki - Internal Affairs Mr. Theophilus Benson - Information Mallam Waziri Ibrahim - Health Mall.
Musa Yar Adua - Pensions and Establishment Mr. M. T. Mbu - Minister of State Mr. M. A. Olanrewaju - Minister of State SELF ASSESSM ENT EXER CISE How were the First Republic s political parties formed?
Did they have national outlook?
4.0 CO NCLUSIO N The first Federal Cabinet was exclusive of the Action Group, NEPU and other minor parties that were represented at the Federal House of Representatives.
These parties constituted opposition to the NPC/NCNC coalition government with Chief Obafemi Awolowo as the Opposition Leader.
However, by regional representation in the seventeen-member Cabinet, the North had ten members, the West had three, and the East had three while Lagos had one.
5.0 SUMMARY The journey into Nigeria s First Republic started with the Federal Elections conducted in 1959 under Sir James Robertson as the British Colonial Governor-General.
Parliamentary or Cabinet system of government was adopted with multi-party that was ethnical and regional-based.
The turnout at the election and the results confirmed the enthusiasm of Nigerians to attain independence from the British and also the fact that voting was along ethnic lines.
However, the participation of some minority parties and independent candidates at the election also attested to the fact that some electorates looked beyond party, ethnic or any other primordial sentiments.
6.0 TUTOR-MARK ED ASSIGNMENT 1.
Compare and contrast between the major political parties in the 1959 elections in terms of structure, membership and geographical influence.
78  2.
How far was it true that the political parties in the First Republic were ethnic based?
3.
Explain the consequence of the 1959 general elections in Nigeria.
7.0 REF ERENCES/FURTHER READING Azikiwe, N. (1957).
The Development of Political Parties in Nigeria: An address delivered under the auspices of the Oxford West African Student s Union on June 11 at Rhodes House, Oxford, and London.
Kurfi, Amadu (1983).
The Nigerian General Elections 1959 and 1979 and the aftermath.
Lagos: Macmillan.
Nigeria Official Gazette, No.
15, Vol.
47, March 24, 1960, pp.
351-69 Olusanya, G. O.
(1973).
The Second World War and Politics in Nigeria (1939-1953).
London: Evans Brothers.
Ojiako, J. O.
(1981).
Nigeria: Yesterday, Today, And ?
Onitsha: Africana Educational Publishers.
Okafor, S. O.
(1981).
Indirect Rule - The Development of Central Legislature in Nigeria.
Lagos: Thomas Nelson.
Post, K. W. J.
(1964).
The Nigerian Federal Election of 1959: Politics and Administration in a Developing Political System.
London: Oxford University Press.
Sklar, R. L. (1963).
Nigerian Political Parties: Power in an Emergent African Nation.
Princeton, New Jersey: Princeton University Press.
79  UNIT 4 THE CO LLAP SE OF THE FIRST REPUB LIC CONTENTS 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objectives 3.0 Main Content 3.1 Background to the 1966 Military Intervention 3.1.1 Remote Causes 3.1.2 Tribal/Regional Parties 3.1.3 Intolerance of Opposition 3.1.4 Controversies over Population Census 3.2 Immediate Causes 3.2.1 Action Group Crisis of 1962 3.2.2 Trial of Action Group Leaders 3.2.3 Controversial 1964/5 Federal Election 3.2.4 The 1965 Western region Election Riots 3.3 The Collapse of the First Republic 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutor-Marked Assignment 7.0 References/Further Reading 1.0 INTRODUCTIO N Until the mid sixties, the interest of academics in the African political change was concerned mainly on the role of political parties, pragmatic leadership, political and democratic institutions.
There was no focus on the military as an alternative political force because of the peaceful manners by which most African countries were granted independence by the imperial powers.
Oyediran (1979:1) posits: Unlike in many Latin American countries, independence in most African countries was granted through constitutional negotiation rather than through military action.
This peaceful transfer of power gave considerable advantage to other political forces in the task of nation-building.
The failure of these forces helped to prepare the way for the m ilitary.
The systemic failure in the Nigeria s First Republic, therefore, paved the way for the military intervention on January 15, 1966.
2.0 OBJECTIVES The intent of this unit is to look at the remote and immediate causes of the 1966 military intervention in the Nigeria s political process.
At the end of this unit, you should be able to: • identify the political and social issues that led to the first coup 80  • describe the circumstances that led to the counter coup in the same year • identify the intricacies of Nigerian politics.
3.0 MAIN CONTENT 3.1 Background to the 1966 Military Intervention The first military coup took place in Nigeria on January 15, 1966 when the five military officers in the rank of Majors led by Major Nzeogwu Kaduna, announced the military take-over of the civilian government led by Sir Abubakar Tafawa Balewa.
The young military officers claimed to have come, among others, to bring to an end, gangsterism and disorder, corruption and nepotism.
However, with the benefit of hindsight, it has been revealed that there were more to it than the stated reasons for the military putsch.
In the opinion of A.H. M Kirk-Green (See Kurfi, 1983:23) the tragedy of 1967 (civil war) is that many of its seeds were not, as is often claimed, sown in October or even July 1966, but in the 1950 s or, as some see it, in 1914 or may be even in 1900 itself.
There were remote as-well-as immediate factors responsible for the military coup of 1966.
We shall examine them briefly one after the other.
3.1.1 Remote Causes i) Unba lanced Federal St ructure Political analysts are of the opinion that the genesis of the 1966 military coup was the 1914 amalgamation of the Northern and Southern Protectorates of Nigeria with one of the regions bigger in size and population than the other two put together.
The bringing together of diverse people with different socio-cultural background, level of education and development is seen as an unbalanced structure which naturally provoke suspicion and fear of domination by the minority ethnic groups in the country.
This phenomenon found expression in Oluleye (1985:p.xvii) that the Nigerian Army was Northern-dominated to the magnitude of 70% in both cadres, officers and other ranks.
This structural dilemma of the Nigerian Army as an integral part of the body politic, made it difficult to be completely free from the influences of politics in the country.
3.1.2 Tribal/Regional Parties Another remote cause of the 1966 military uprising could be traced to the seed of tribalism and nepotism embedded in the formation of the 81  three major political parties by the three major ethnic groups that were later to control the regional governments of their origin.
The ethnic rivalry which began in 1941 between the Ibo and Yoruba members of the Nigerian Youth Movement over the Ikoli-Akinsaya crisis resulted in the Igbo members leaving the party en mass and thus, reducing the NYM to a Yoruba organization.
This, in the opinion of Schwarz Jr., (1965:51), was the beginning of the plague on Nigerian politics ever since.
Between 1941 and 1950, the unhealthy rivalry between the Ibo and Yoruba became so intensified even beyond the political turf that by 1948 Azikiwe had ceased to be Zik of Africa but Zik of the Ibo nation .
(Oyediran, O., 1979:7).
Lack of clear-cut ideologies by most of the First Republic major political parties was also identified as a remote cause of the 1966 coup.
The NPC was feudalistic and aristocratic which cont rasted to its political bed mate (the NCNC) that embraced, to some extent, egalitarian temperament while the Action Group preached democratic socialism .
But it was only the latter that showed some degree of commitment to its avowed ideology through the populist s programmes which the party introduced in the Western Region.
Closely related to this was the role of the official opposition played by the AG which made the party s leadership become vulnerable for political elimination because opposition which was a core element in the Westminster system practised in the First Republic is alien to African politics.
3.1.3 Intolerance of Opposition The AG literally became a thorn in the flesh of the ruling parties especially with the ferocious criticisms and eventual defeat of the Anglo-Nigeria Defence Pact of 1961 with the support of the students of the University of Ibadan.
The NPC-NCNC foreign policy also came under the sledge hammer of the AG that also championed the cause of the minority ethnic groups who were agitating for additional state creation in the country.
The party was doing these in order to gain the people s support so that it could win the next election and form the federal government.
This threat, reasoned by the NPC-NCNC coalition government, had to be nipped in the bud somehow.
3.1.4 Controversies over Population Census Yet another contentious issue identified by analysts as a remote factor for the 1966 crisis was the results of the 1962/63 population census.
In Nigeria, census data are used as basic determinant of Constituency delimitation, allocation of seats at the Legislature, sharing of revenue accruable from the federation pool and distribution of social amenities, 82  among other uses.
Therefore, little wonder that census has been one of the sensitive political issues in Nigeria.
For instance, the 1952-3 census figure was used to allocate the 312 seats in the House of Representatives to the regions as follows (Oyediran, 1979:16): Northern Region 174 EasternRegion 73 WesternRegion 62 Lagos 3 The census result which gave a total of 30.4 million, out of which 16.8 million were in the North, 7.2 million in the East, 6.1 million in the West and 0.27 million in Lagos (See Kurfi, 1983:17), which was used for the above allocation of seats was seen by the southern political leaders structurally defective and it was hoped that the 1962-3 head counts would be used to redress the perceived lopsidedness which was not to be because of the controversy that attended the results of the exercise from every sections of the country except the North.
The cacophony over the 1963 census led to a big crisis that led to the break- down of the alliance between the NPC and the NCNC and paved the way for new political alignment and realignment.
3.2 Immediate Causes 3.2.1 Action Group crisis of 1962 The Action Group, the party in the government in the Western region, was plunged into serious crisis early in 1962 over a number of irreconcilable differences between the Leader of the party, Chief Obafemi Awolowo and his Deputy, Chief Samuel Ladoke Akintola who by then, was the Premier of the region after Chief Awolowo had assumed the position of the Leader of the Opposition at the federal level.
The crisis blew open at the party s National Conference at Jos when Chief Akintola, Ayo Rosiji, the party s Secretary and a few others who were Regional Ministers in Akintola s government, staged a walk-out.
They were summarily charged with anti-party activities and got dismissed from the party.
This led to a vote of no confidence passed on Akintola as the Premier which led to his removal from office and his replacement with Chief Dauda Soroye Adegbenro.
This led to an open fracas on the floor of the Western Region House of Assembly in which the Mace (the House s symbol of authority) was broken.
The Federal government, under the pretext of exercising its powers to maintain law and order in the country, declared a state of emergency in 83  the region and appointed Chief Mathew Adekojo Majekodunmi (a Senator and Federal Minister of Health) as Sole Administrator with wide powers leading to heavy clampdown on the opposition party leaders which included the setting up of the Justice J.
B. O. Coker Commission of Inquiry to probe certain parastatals in the Western Region.
3.2.2 The Trial of Action Group Leaders The report of the Coker s Commission of enquiry which indicted Chief Obafemi Awolowo but exonerated Chief S. L. Akintola, seemed to set the stage for a final showdown by the Federal authority against the opposition group and in particular, to sing the funeral dirge of the Action Group.
During the emergency period, the Police was asked to search the houses of the opposition leaders in the Region, the outcome was that a large quantities of arms and ammunition which some AG members illegally imported into the country to be used, illegally, to overthrow the Federal government were found (See Iroanusi, 2000:38).
This led to the arrest of Chief Obafemi Awolowo, Chief Anthony Enahoro and other leaders of the AG.
They were charged with treasonable felony and conspiracy to overthrow the Federal Government.
They were sentenced to various prison terms, ranging from 10 to 15 years.
3.2.3 The Controversial 1964/5 Federal Elections The massive rigging of the 1964 Federal elections was the last straw that broke the camels back because of the total breakdown of law and order and wanton destruction of lives and properties in protest against the results.
The elections became a straight battle between two major political alliances viz: the Nigerian National Alliance (NNA) which was a conglomeration of the Northern Peoples Congress (NPC); Akintola s Nigerian National Democratic Party (NNDP); Dr. Chike Obi s Dynamic Party and the Mid-West Democratic Front.
The second alliance was the United Progressive Grand Alliance (UPGA) which was an amalgam of the NCNC, the AG, NEPU and the United Middle-Belt Congress (UMBC).
On the eve of the election, December 8, 1964, the federal parliament which was elected on December 12, 1959 was dissolved to pave the way for a new House.
There were accusations and counter-accusations of political harassment in the North by opposition group (UPGA) during electioneering campaigns.
This prompted UPGA leadership to direct its supporters to boycott the election to protest the unlawful arrest, persecution, kidnapping and in some cases, killing of its members.
As a follow up, its members in the Federal Electoral Commission resigned but all these did not deter the election from holding.
The results of the election showed the NNA sweeping the polls despite the alleged irregularities by the opposition.
84  3.2.4 The 1965 Western Region election riots Western Nigeria is the cockpit of Nigerian politics particularly between 1962 and the time of military takeover of political power in 1966 (Mackintosh, 1966:550).
Western Nigeria can be regarded not without some justification as the problem area of the Nigerian federation.
Even though it is the most homogeneous of the regions (after the creation of the Mid-West region in 1963); it has not been easy for the peoples to unite in the same way that the Ibo of the East or the Hausa of the North have done.
The tenure of office for the Western Region House of Assembly members had lapsed and the time for another election had b een fixed for October 11, 1965.
The reality on ground in the West proved that Akintola s NNDP cannot win in any free and fair election but with the assistance of the federal might, the NNA was hell-bent on retaining the control of the region to the exclusion of the AG and its allies.
In any case, the NNDP members were bus y boasting about whether or not the people voted for them, they were going to win the election.
Therefore, the ruling party resorted to rigging and political gerrymandering.
After receiving nomination forms from one party, Electoral Officers deserted their offices to deny the opposition from submitting their nomination papers so that the government candidates could be returned unopposed.
The swearing in of Chief S. L. Akintola as the Premier of the Western Region based on the flawed election sparked off a violence of an unprecedented dimension.
Arsons, maiming, killing and destruction of properties became the order of the day in what was called operation we tie which gave the Region the soubriquet Wild, Wild West.
SELF ASSESSMENT EXERCISE Enumerate the remote and immediate causes of the 1966 military coup.
4.0 CONCLUSION The remote and immediate factors responsible for the collapse of the First Republic are highlighted above.
The Federal Government proved ineffective in maintaining law and order because it was helpless while the Western Region was burning over the election result.
The attack on innocent people who had nothing to do with the election gave an ethnic coloration to the protest.
The military also cited corruption and nepotism as reasons for the intervention on January 15, 1965.
The Prime Minister Sir Abubakar Tafawa-Balewa, Chief Samuel Akintola, Sir Ahmadu Bello, the Premiers of Western and Northern Regions respectively and a 85  number of political and military leaders were killed during the military coup.
5.0 SUMMARY The election that brought the First Republic into being was conducted in 1959 and the system of government practised was Parliamentary or Westminster system in which both the Prime Minister and all his cabinet ministers were members of the Parliament.
Since there was no party that had the required majority members in the Parliament to form the government, a coalition was formed between the NPC, NCNC and some other minor parties.
The build ups to the collapse of the Republic were traced beyond the immediate causes of oppression of political opponents, favouritism, corruption and election rigging.
The violence that greeted the results of the Western Region Parliamentary election of 1965 sparked off a chain of events that led to the military coup on January 15, 1966.
6.0 TUTOR-MARK ED ASSIGNMENT 1.
Give detailed background to the 1966 military coup.
2.
Explain the immediate circumstances leading to the collapse of the First Republic.
7.0 REF ERENCES/FURTHER READING Iroanusi, S. O.
(2000).
The Making of the Fourth Republic.
Lagos: Sam Iroanusi Publications.
Kurfi, Ahmadu (1983).
The Nigerian General Elections 1959 and 1979 and the aftermath.
Lagos: Macmillan.
Kirk-Green, A.H. M. Crisis and Conflict in Nigeria, cited by Amadu Kurfi (1983), The Nigerian General Elections 1959 and 1979 and the aftermath.
Lagos: Macmillan.
Mackintosh, J. O.
(1966).
Nigerian Government and Politics.
Evanston: North western University Press.
Oyediran, O.
1979 (ed).
Nigerian Government & Politics under Military Rule 1966-79.
London: Macmillan.
Ojiako, J. O., (1981).
Nigeria: Yesterday, Today, And .?
Onitsha, Africana Educational Publishers.
86  Oluleye, J. J., (1985).
Military Leadership in Nigeria 1966-1979.
Ibadan: University Press.
Schwarz Jr., F. E. O.
(1965).
Nigerian: The Tribes, the Nations, or the Race.
Cambridge: Massachusetts Institute of Technology Press.
87  MODULE 4 MILITARY LEADERSHIP IN NIGERIAN POLITICS Unit 1 The Military Intervention In Nigerian Politics Unit 2 Towards Military Disengagement Unit 3 Achievements of Military Regime in Nigeria UNIT 1 THE MILITARY INTERVENTIO N IN NIGERIAN PO LITICS CONTENTS 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objectives 3.0 Main Content 3.1 The Division in the Military 3.1.1 The Northern Riots of May 29, 1966 3.1.2 The July 29, 1966 Counter-Coup 3.1.3 The 30-Month Civil War 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutor -Marked Assignment 7.0 References/Further Reading 1.0 INTRODUCTIO N It is quite arguable whether the collapse of the First Republic in 1966 was the fault of the 1960 Constitution or the attitude of the politicians but the fact remains that, the convening of a Constituent Assembly by the military in 1977 that produced the 1979 Constitution, was an acquiescence of the failure of the previous Constitutions.
However, much as there were remote and immediate factors responsible for the military coup of January 15, 1965, the cumulative effects of these coupled with lack of deep-seated values within the military hierarchy snowballed into the thirty-month civil war in Nigeria.
2.0 OBJECTIVES At the end of this unit, you should be able to: • identify the events that led to the first military coup and the counter-coup of 1966 • explain the intrigues within the military that led to the civil war • identify the military leadership in Nigerian politics • list the contribution of the military to the growth and development of the country.
88  3.0 MAIN CONTENT What provided the immediate stimulus for the January 15, 1966 military putsch was, according to Luckham (See Oyediran, 1979:24), the superimposition of unfavorable environmental conditions from the civil violence in the Western Region, set off by the Regional election of October, 1965.
The coup plotters (all in the rank of Major) were led by Chukwuma Kaduna Nzeogwu, others were: Onwuategu, Ifeajuna, Okafor, Chukwuma and Ademoyega, the only Yoruba.
They struck on Saturday, January 15, 1966 by kidnapping and killing both political and military leaders, mostly of Yoruba and Hausa ethnic stock.
Oluleye opines: They sprang by pulling the trigger in Lagos, Ibadan and Kaduna but Enugu was spared through fickleness and conspiracy (See Oluleye, 1985:27).
Political analysts believe that even if the coup had been planned with the best of intentions, its outcome looked patently to the other ethnic groups, particularly in the North and West, like an Ibo conspiracy (See Oyediran, 1979:27).
After the killing of the Prime Minister during the topsy-turvy and the President Dr. Nnamdi Azikiwe could not be found, the Acting President Dr. Nwafor Orizu made a broadcast to the nation at 11.30 p.m. that he had been advised by the Council of Ministers and that they had unanimously decided to hand over the government of the Federation to the Armed Forces in view of the present situation in the country (See Ojiako, 1981:226).
3.1 The Division in the Military The mantle of leadership fell on General Johnson Thomas Aguiyi-Ironsi who was the most senior military officer, as the Head of State and Commander-in-Chief of the Armed Forces and Military Governors were appointed for the Regions.
Col. Adekunle Fajuyi for the West; Lt. Cols.
Odumegwu Ojukwu and Hassan Usman Katsina for the East and North respectively while David Ejoor was appointed for the Mid-West.
The new Head of State enjoyed the goodwill of the general public, even in the North the attitude was one of wait and see rather than of outright resentment.
However, General Ironsi squandered his good luck and tolerability within a period of six months by his actions and inactions.
Firstly, he reneged in his promise to bring the January coup plotters to justice and to worsen the situation the Ibos in the North were engaged in taunting the Northerners in public over the killing of Sir Ahmadu Bello.
Oluleye (1985:32-33) posits: Every Ibo person paraded himself as Ironsi.
Unwittingly, the Ibos displayed the photograph of Sir Ahmadu Bello, 89  the Sardauna of Sokoto, in awkward position with his head under the jungle boot of Major Nzeogwu.
It was displayed in homes and shops of the Ibos.
Where people did not notice the photograph, they would invite their attention to it.
To the Northerners they usually said, You see your papa under the foot of Major Nzeogwu .
Other allegations against Gen. Ironsi, according to Oluleye (1985:33), were that: a) He failed to release Chief Obafemi Awolowo and other politicians in jail in line with the demands of the opposition group in the country.
b) In pursuance with Ibo ambition, he made s ome highly unbalanced promotions in the Army which favoured the Ibo officers and he got them appointed to key commands and political appointments as prefects.
c) He promulgated Decree No.
34 (otherwise known as unification decree ) which was a major constitutional and political issue, without consultation.
The unification decree sought to abolish the federal structure of the country and replaced it with a unitary system.
He also decreed the political parties and tribal unions out of existence.
These actions were regarded as calculated attempts by the Ibos to dominate the other tribes in the country.
3.1.1 The Northern Riots of May 29, 1966 The cloud of uncertainties which pervaded the nation later descended in torrential civil disturbances in some parts of Northern provinces where the Ibos were attacked and killed.
As Dudley (1973:132) observes, The Ibo were attacked not because they were Ibo but because the name Ibo had become more or less synonymous with exploitations and humiliation.
It was essentially an attack on a mental stereotype .
The attack which was the preliminary action to the July 29, 1966 counter-coup led to the mass exodus of the Ibos from the North and even the West back home - the East.
According to Kurfi (1983:38), the clarion call in line with the general mood in the North during the disturbances was Araba or Aware (Hausa word for secession ).
90  3.1.2 The July 29, 1966 Counter-Coup This coup d etat, unlike that of January 15, which involved civilian victims, was confined within the military circle.
The soldiers of Northern origin rose to the call by Northerners to defend the honour of the Northern region by avenging the killing of Northern political and military leaders by the coup presumably masterminded by the Ibos.
The Supreme Commander, General Ironsi who was on a nation-wide tour in Ibadan, and as-well-as his host, Col. Francis Adekunle Fajuyi the Military Governor of the Western Region were kidnapped and killed.
Many senior military officers of Eastern origin were also killed in the putsch.
This led to further migration of Ibos and non-Ibos alike from the Northern and Western parts of the country to their home land.
Oluleye (1985:41), reflecting on the mood of the nation says: From the time of the kidnapping of Major-General Aguiyi-Ironsi on the morning of 29 July, 1966 till 30 July, the country witnessed an interregnum.
The whole populace was confused until August 1, 1966 when Lt. Col. Yakubu Gowon assumed the leadership of the new military government and Commander-in-Chief of the Armed Forces.
The new Head of State, in his maiden broadcast titled No trust or confidence in a Unitary System of Government said inter alia: I had been brought to the position today of having to shoulder the responsibilities of this country and the Armed Forces with the consent of the majority of the members of the Supreme Military Council as a result of the unfortunate incident that occurred on the early morning of 29 July, 1966.
..The country was plunged into a national disaster by the grave and unfortunate action taken by a section of the Army against the public.
.was done by elimination of political leaders and high- ranking Army officers, a majority of whom came from a particular section of the country.
the last report was that he (the Supreme Comm ander) and the West Military Governor were both kidnapped by some soldiers.
Up till now, there is no confirmation of their whereabouts.
I have come to strongly believe that we cannot continue in this wise, as the basis of trust and confidence in our unitary system of government has not been able to stand the test of time 91  .the basis for trust and unity is not there I intend to continue the policy laid down in the statement by the Supreme Commander on 16 January, 1966 published on January 26, 1966 (See Oluleye, 1985:41).
Above was the revised version of the planned speech by the leaders of the July 29 uprising because the original intention was to seize the reins of governm ent and then announce the secession of the Northern Region from the rest of the country (See Kurfi, 1983:38).
However, the military Governor of the Eastern Region, Lt. Col. Odumegwu Ojukwu was not satisfied with the new military leadership in Lagos as he contended that there were yet more senior military officers rather than Lt. Col. Yakubu Gowon to succeed Gen. Aguiyi-Ironsi as the new Head of State and Commander-in-Chief of the Armed Forces.
This marked the beginning of animosity in the military hierarchy until Odumegwu Ojukwu was forced to surrender in 1970.
3.1.3 The 30-Month Civil W ar The brick-bat between Lt-Cols.
Yakubu Gowon and Odumegwu Ojukwu continued while the latter convened a Consultative Assembly on May 26, 1967 where he delivered a long address in which he took a retrospective look at the political development in Nigeria since 1914.
He, therefore, sought the mandate to declare at the earliest practicable date Eastern Nigeria a free, sovereign and independent state by the nam e and title of the Republic of Biafra (Kirk-Green, 1966:427-44).
This prompted Gowon to address the nation on the 27 May, 1967 in which he condemned the action of the military Governor of the Eastern Region.
He said that the citizens of Nigeria have not given the military regime any mandate to divide up the country into sovereign states and to plunge them into bloody disaster .
He assured Nigerians that he would not run away from the onerous responsibility to keep the country as one.
In the light of this, he declared a state of emergency throughout Nigeria with immediate effect and claimed he had assumed full powers as Commander-in-Chief of the Armed Forces and Head of the Federal Military Government for the period of the emergency (See Oyediran cited in a Journal).
General Gowon further took the following steps as part of his programme of actions to address the emergency situation: 92  • Announced the reorganization of the country into twelve-state structure with new military Governors posted to each accordingly.
• Through an instrument of pardon, he released Chief Obafemi Awolowo and all the political prisoners from jail.
He made Chief Awolowo the Vice-Chairman of the Federal Executive Council and Federal Commissioner for Finance.
• He formed a broad-based Federal cabinet which embraced politicians and top civil servants to allow the military to concentrate on the prosecution of the war.
• He declared a military action against the Biafran Army on July 6, 1967.
These steps made General Yakubu Gowon to become popular and his government literally enjoyed legitimacy, having touched on many contending issues that bordered on the interest of the minority group and the opposition political class.
Oluleye (1985:152) vividly captured the mood when he says: He had the mandate from the people right from the beginning of the war loudly proclaimed as GOWON, meaning, GO ON WITH ONE NIGERIA .
The co-operation of the people by all assessments was total during his management of the military and political crises.
SELF ASSESSMENT EXERCISE What were the events that led to the bad blood among two military leaders which later degenerated to civil war?
4.0 CONCLUSION On January 15, 1970, General Phillip Effiong of the Biafran Army handed over the surrender note which was received on behalf of the Federal Military Government by Col. Olusegun Obasanjo thus, bringing to an end the three-year war.
There were series of concerted efforts both within and outside Nigeria, to avert the civil war but all were to no avail because of the recalcitrant attitude of the Biafran Leader Lt. Col. Ojukwu who had started confiscating Federal Government properties in the Eastern Region.
Biafran Flag, National Anthem and Currency were launched and appeal was made to the international community for recognition and assistance to prosecute the war.
Efforts were also made by some African Leaders, notably, General Ankrah of Ghana and Emperor Haile Selaisse of Ethiopia.
Also, Presidents Ahmadu Ahidjo of the Cameroon and Amani Diori of Niger Republic played prominent roles in ensuring that the crisis was resolved on a round-table rather than on the battle front.
However, the secession move gained the recognition 93  of some African countries such as Gabon, Tanzania, Ivory Coast and Zambia.
5.0 SUMMARY The political instability which led to the military coup and the counter- coup in 1966 could be traced to factors beyond the immediate causes such as oppression of the opposition group, corruption, nepotism and the passivity of the Balewa s governm ent to the total break down of law and order in the Western Region which posed great insecurity in the country towards the end of 1965.
We have explained in this unit that some of the underpinnings were: the imbalanced federal structure, fear of domination by the minority group, mutual suspicion by the ethnic groups in the country and a host of others that have continued to threaten the unity and stability of the Nigerian nation.
6.0 TUTOR-MARK ED ASSIGNMENT 1.
What, in your views, were the causes of political instability in the First Republic?
2.
Account for the Military intervention in the Nigerian politics in 1966.
3.
What were the major steps taken by General Gowon in 1967 which conferred legitimacy on his government during the emergency period?
7.0 REF ERENCES/FURTHER READING Dudley, B. J.
(1973).
Instability and Political Order: Politics and Crisis in Nigeria.
Ibadan: University Press.
Kirk-Green, A. H. M. Cited in Crisis and Conflict in Nigeria: A Documentary Sourcebook, 1966-70, Vol.
1. pp.
427-44.
Kurfi, A.
(1983).
The Nigerian General Elections 1959 and 1979 and the aftermath.
Ibadan: Macmillan.
Ojiako, J. O.
(1981).
Nigeria: Yesterday, Today, And ?
Onitsha: Africana Educational Publishers Nig.
Ltd. Oluleye J. J., (1985).
Military Leadership in Nigeria 1966-1979, Ibadan: University Press.
Oyediran, O.
(ed.
1979).
Nigerian Government & Politics under Military Rule 1966-1979, London: Macmillan Press Ltd., Oyediran, Oyeleye, Reorganization of the Nigerian Federation: Its Background and Administrative Problems , Philippine Journal of Public Administration, XVIII, 3.
94  UNIT 2 TOWARDS MILITARY DISENGAGEMENT CONTENTS 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objectives 3.0 Main Content 3.1 General Obasanjo in the Saddle 3.1.1 Elections into the New Local Councils and the Constituent Assembly 3.1.2 Emergence of the Political Parties in the Second Republic 3.1.3 The 1979 General Elections 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutor-Marked Assignment 7.0 References/Further Reading 1.0 INTRODUCTIO N General Murtala Ramat Mohammed succeeded General Yakubu Gowon as the Head of State and Commander-in-Chief of the Armed forces.
However, his rule was short lived as he was assassinated by coup plotters shortly after he had announced the creation of new additional States from 12 to 19 and the movement of the Federal Capital from Lagos to Abuja.
He was succeeded by General Olusegun Obasanjo as the new Head of State and Commander-in-Chief of the Armed forces.
One of the major challenges of the regime was the disengagem ent of the military from the political scene, to the barracks.
This was a promise made by his predecessor General Murtala Ramat Mohammed in 1975 which he pledged to implement to the letter in line with the mood of the moment.
More so, the political environment both at home and abroad was no longer conducive for military rule, not with the barrage of criticisms from the academia and the Nigerian press calling for quick return to civil rule.
2.0 OBJECTIVES At the end of this unit, you should be able to: • explain the transition programme leading to the Second Republic • identify the challenges faced by the military in implementing the transition programme • describe the attitude of politicians towards military disengagement • list some intellectual materials that will enable you contribute to, discussions on transition to civil rule in 1979.
95  3.0 MAIN CONTENT 3.1 General Obasanjo in the Saddle On October 4, 1975, the Head of State Brigadier Murtala Mohammed had announced the committee of 50 wise men charged with the responsibility of drafting a new Constitution to guide the conduct of government in the Second Republic.
The wise men were later to become 49 because one of the members, Chief Obafemi Awolowo declined hi s appointment on the pretext that he was not consulted before he heard his name in the media.
However, the committee held its maiden meeting on October 18, 1975 at the Nigerian Institute of International Affairs, Lagos.
Addressing the meeting, the Head of State, Brigadier Murtala Mohammed declared the military government s position on some settled issues and then went ahead to recommend the Executive Presidential System in which the President and the Vice-President would be directly elected by the people.
Other issues included: • Commitment to a Federal System • Elimination of unhealthy competition among the political class • Decentralization of power • A good electoral system to ensure free, fair and credible elections in the country • The country should remain a secular state.
There should be no state religion • The principle of federal character should be reflected in the federal, and state appointments.
The committee which was headed by Chief Frederick Rotimi Alade Williams submitted its report on September 14, 1976 to Lt-Gen. Olusegun Obasanjo.
On October 7, 1976 the draft Constitution was launched for public debate by the Chief of Staff, Supreme Headquarters Brigadier Shehu Musa Yar Adua to allow for a robust debate by the Constituent Assembly.
3.1.1 Elections into New Local Government Councils and the Constituent Assembly In line with its transition programme, the military government conducted elections into the newly created Local Government Areas throughout the Federation on the zero-party bases.
That marked the first election to be conducted in almost a decade of political instability in the country.
The exercise which was conducted in December 1976 96  witnessed the election of Council Chairmen and Councillors without any political party affiliations.
This was aimed at giving the people at the grassroots the opportunity of having a bite at the apple of democracy.
Also in August 1977 the Federal Military Government conducted elections to elect delegates into the Constituent Assembly which was charged with the sole responsibility of thoroughly debating the draft Constitution in order to have a workable document for the country.
The Constituent Assembly had 232 members out of which only 203 were popularly elected from each Local Government Areas in the country.
Other delegates were appointed by the government to represent special interests such as: women, students, traditional rulers, labour, the press, commerce and industry, etc.
The Assembly submitted its report in August 1978 and in September 21, 1978 General Olusegun Obasanjo lifted the ban on political activities in the country.
This opened a floodgate of opportunity for the formation of political parties to contest the 1979 general elections.
3.1.2 Emergence of Political partie s in the Second Republic According to Amadu Kurfi (1983:93), the Federal Electoral Commission (FEDECO) had on its record 52 Associations that announced their existence since the ban on political activities was lifted.
Out of this number, 35 applied for registration, but by 31st December 1978 which was the closing date, only 19 Associations considered themselves eligible and submitted application but only five were eventually recognized and registered.
One of the five registered political parties was the Unity Party of Nigeria (UPN) which was announced by Chief Obafemi Awolowo within 24 hours after the lifting of the embargo by the Federal Military Government.
The party was built on the ideology of democratic socialism with the four cardinal programmes viz: i) Free education at all levels; ii) Free medical services; iii) Full and gainful employment, and iv) Integrated rural development.
Membership of the party was replete with the old members of the defunct Action Group with the exception of a few like Chief Anthony Enahoro, Dr. Samuel Gumsu Ikoku who had disagreed with Chief Obafemi Awolowo on principle over continued participation in the military regime after the civil war and others who had gone with the Chief Akintola s NNDP during the 1962/64 Western Region crisis.
The other four registered political parties were: 97  1.
National Party of Nigeria (NPN) 2.
Nigerian Peoples Party (NPP) 3.
Great Nigeria P eoples Party (GNPP) 4.
Peoples Redemption Party (PRP) The NPN This party had Alhaji Shehu Usman Shagari as its flag bearer and actually won the 1979 election to become the first Executive President of the Federal Republic of Nigeria.
The NPN was a reincarnation of the defunct Northern Peoples Congress (NPC) of the First Republic.
Although the party did not profess any ideology, it was inclined towards a free market econom y and its major polic y thrust was on agriculture for which it designed a term green revolution .
Unlike the UPN, the party s Chairman was different from its flag bearer.
While Chief Meredith Adisa Akinloye was the Chairman, the Presidential flag bearer was Alhaji Shehu Shagari which was in sharp contrast with the UPN structure where the two positions were combined by Chief Obafemi Awolowo.
The NPP The founder and leader of this party was Dr. Nnamdi Azikiwe who also led the defunct National Convention of Nigerian Citizens (NCNC) in the First Republic.
The Constitution, the manifesto, political philosophy and membership of the NPP was similar with those of the defunct NCNC.
There was a dichotomy between the office of the Chairman of the party and its Presidential flag bearer.
Like the NPN, while Chief Olu Akinfosile was the party s National Chairman, its Presidential candidate was the Owelle of Onitsha, Dr. Nnamdi Azikiwe.
The GNPP This party was a breakaway faction of the NPP under the leadership of Alhaji Waziri Ibrahim who was popularly known in the political circle as the apostle of politics without bitterness .
Alhaji Waziri Ibrahim served as a Minister with Cabinet rank under the Balewa s government.
Like his UPN counterpart, the positions of the party s Chairman and the Presidential flag bearer were co mbined as the Alhaji Waziri Ibrahim and the party tilted toward progressivism.
The PRP Mallam Aminu Kano who was the leader of the Peoples Redemption Party joined the National Party of Nigeria before he pulled out to form his own party.
The PRP attracted majority of members of the defunct 98  Northern Element Progressives Union (NEPU), a party of Nigerian radicals and Talakawas who are anti northern oligarchy.
Both Mallam Aminu Kano s PRP and the Waziri s GNPP were later to form an alliance with the UPN and a faction of the Azikiwe s NPP to fight the 1983 general elections.
3.1.3 The 1979 General Elections By January 1979 all the political parties have started traversing every nook and cranny of Nigeria canvassing for votes from the electorates.
Parties held rallies, picnics and national conventions to mobilize, educate and enlighten the people about the programme of their parties and also about the election procedure.
The five political parties fielded candidates for seats in the Senate, House of Representatives and the States House of Assemblies.
The constituencies created for the election by the FEDECO were as follow: Presidential Election 1 Gubernatorial Election 19 Senatorial Election 95 House of Representatives Election 449 State Assemblies Election 1347 (Source: Kurfi, 1983 :160 ) The staggered elections which were by secret ballot were held in the following order as arranged by the FEDECO: a) Senatorial Elections - Saturday, July 7, 1979 b) House of Representatives Elections - Saturday, July 14, 1979 c) State Assembly Elections - Saturday, July 21, 1979 d) Gubernatorial Elections - Saturday, Jul y 28, 1979 e) Presidential Elections - Saturday, August 11, 1979 (Source: Kurfi, 1983 :169 -70) The summary of the results of the 1979 Senatorial and House of Representatives election released by FEDECO were as presented below: House of Representatives PARTY/REGION EAST NORTH WEST TOTAL UPN 2 13 96 111 NPP 60 16 2 78 NPN 37 121 11 169 PRP - 49 - 49 GNPP 4 39 - 43 TOTAL 103 23 8 108 440 99  Senato rial Electio ns PARTY/REGION EAST NORTH WEST TOTAL UPN - 4 24 28 NPP 12 4 - 16 NPN 6 29 1 36 PRP - 7 - 7 GNPP 2 6 - 8 TOTAL 20 50 25 95 (Source: Kurfi, 1983:177 -78 ) The summary of the 1979 gubernatorial election results released by FEDECO showed the performance and strength of the political parties in each State of the Federation as shown in the tables below: 1979 Governorship Election Results STATES NPN UPN NPP GNPP PRP TOTAL Anambra - - 1 - - 1 Bauchi 1 - - - - 1 Bendel - 1 - - - 1 Benue 1 - - - - 1 Borno - - - 1 - 1 Cross 1 - - - - 1 River Gongola - - - 1 - 1 Imo - - 1 - - 1 Kaduna - - - - 1 1 Kano - - - - 1 1 Kwara 1 - - - - 1 Lagos - 1 - - - 1 Niger 1 - - - - 1 Ogun - 1 - - - 1 Ondo - 1 - - - 1 Oyo - 1 - - - 1 Plateau - - 1 - - 1 Rivers 1 - - - - 1 Sokoto 1 - - - - 1 Total 7 5 3 2 2 19 100  19 79 Presidential Elections Scoreboard STATE VOTERS NPN UPN NPP GNPP PRP TOTAL Anambra 2,601,548 163164 9053 1002082 20228 14500 1209028 Bauchi 2,084,059 623989 29960 47314 154218 143202 998683 Bendel 2,376,410 242320 356381 57629 8242 4939 669511 Benue 1,563,413 41168 13864 63097 42993 7277 538879 Borno 2,753,400 246778 23885 9642 384278 46385 710968 Cross River 2,442,227 425815 77775 50671 100105 6737 661103 Gongola 2,284,500 227057 138561 27856 217914 27750 639138 Imo 3,465,198 101516 7335 999636 34616 10252 1153355 Kaduna 3,420,839 596302 92382 65321 190926 447771 1381712 Kano 5,174,447 243643 14960 11041 18468 907136 1195248 Kwara 1,085,163 190142 140006 1830 20251 2376 345605 Lagos 1,811,973 59515 681762 79320 3943 3824 828364 Niger 1,040,753 287072 14155 4292 63273 14555 383347 Ogun 1,603,004 46358 689655 2343 3974 2338 744668 Ondo 2,422,714 57361 1294666 11752 3561 2509 1384788 Oyo 4,520,120 177999 1197983 7732 8029 4804 1396547 Plateau 1,618,378 190458 29029 269666 37400 21852 548405 Rivers 1,409,472 499114 71114 98754 15025 3212 687751 Sokoto 3,765,139 898994 34102 12499 358021 44977 1349593 Total 47,433,757 5,688,857 4,916,651 2,822,523 1,686,489 1,732,113 16,846,633 N.B.
48,279 votes rejected in Plateau So urce: Ojia ko , 1981:297 & 305 From the above results, it could be seen that the voting pattern along the ethnic lines of the 1959 elections continued in the 1979.
The political parties that controlled the States in the Second Republic were members of the defunct political parties that controlled the Regions under which the new States fell.
For example, the NPN which controlled majority of the States in the Northern part of Nigeria in 1979 was made up of majority of the members of the defunct NPC.
The same was applicable to the UPN that controlled all the States in the South-western part of Nigeria which was the area of influence of the defunct Action Group in the First Republic.
The case of the NPP which was the offshoot of the NCNC over the control of the South-eastern States was not different.
However, there was s ome noticeable improvement in the performance of the parties over that of the First Republic.
The UPN, NPN and NPP made some inroads into other parts of the country outside their traditional strongholds.
Finally, on October 1, 1979, General Olusegun Obasanjo handed over the reins of power to Alhaji Shehu Usman Shagari, the Presidential candidate of the National Party of Nigeria, having been declared the winner of the Presidential election by the Federal Electoral Commission and thus marked the second attempt at democracy in Nigeria.
101  SELF ASSESSM ENT EXER CISE Enumerate some of the transition programmes implemented by Obasanjo military regime before the 1979 general elections.
4.0 CO NCLUSIO N The election of the first Executive President of Nigeria in 1979 was controversial and in fact, contested at election tribunal up to the Supreme Court of Nigeria as provided for by the 1977 Electoral Decree.
The Progressive Parties Alliance (a conglomeration of the UPN, NPP, GNPP and a faction of PRP) led by Chief Obafemi Awolowo contended that the declaration of Alhaji Shehu Shagari as winner was unlawful since he had not satisfied Section 34A sub-section 1(c), (ii) of the Electoral Decree which stipulated that for a winner to emerge, he/she must have one-quarter of lawful votes cast in at least two-thirds of all the States of the Federation.
The election was, however, confirmed because the Court was satisfied that Alhaji Shehu Shagari met the constitutional requirement in 12 States of the Federation and two-thirds of the votes cast in the thirteenth State.
The case was rested on the premise that it was impossible to have one-quarter of human-being and the two-thirds is greater than a halve hence, the thirteenth State was regarded as a whole.
5.0 SUMMARY The Military leadership of Murtala/Obasanjo regime was faithful with its transition programme and other corrective administrative measures promised on coming to power through a bloodless coup in 1975.
Therefore, the disengagement from politics in Nigeria in 1979 by the military was an epochal event in the history of African politics.
It was the first time any African Military Leader would ever voluntarily hand over power to civilian rulers.
6.0 TUTOR-MARK ED ASSIGNMENT 1.
What are the factors responsible for the July 1975 bloodless coup in Nigeria?
2.
What are the corrective measures taken by the Nigerian Military Government between 1975 and 1979?
3.
The 1959 and 1979 elections in Nigeria were one and the same.
Discuss.
102  POL 221 NIGERIAN GOVERNMENT AND POLITICS I 7.0 REF ERENCES/FURTHER READING Ademoyega, A.
(1981).
Why We Struck.
Ibadan: Evans Brothers.
Kurfi, A.
(1983).
The Nigerian General Elections 1959 and 1979 and the aftermath.
Ibadan: Macmillan Publishers.
Cervenka, Zdenek (1972).
A History of the Nigerian War.
Ibadan: Onibonoje Press.
Iroanusi, S. O.
(2000).
The Making of the Fourth Republic.
Lagos: Sam Iroanusi Publications.
Ojiako, J. O.
(1981).
Nigeria: Yesterday, Today, And ?
Onitsha: Africana Educational Publishers.
103  POL221 NIGERIAN GOVERNMENT AND POLITICS I UNIT 3 ACHIEVEMENTS O F THE MILITARY CONTENTS 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objectives 3.0 Main Content 3.1 Keeping Nigeria United 3.1.1 Restructuring of the Polity 3.1.2 Provision of Infrastructure 3.1.3 Improvement in Education 3.1.4 War Against Indiscipline (WAI) 3.1.5 Dynamic Foreign Policy 3.2 Problems of Military Rule 3.2.1 Human Rights Violation 3.2.2 Corruption 3.2.3 Sit-tight Syndrome 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutor-Marked Assignment 7.0 References/Further Reading 1.0 INTRODUCTIO N Nigeria was too young as a sovereign nation when, in 1966, the military truncated her first attempt at democracy.
The military leadership was in the saddle for a period of thirteen years before it voluntarily returned power to the civilians on October 1, 1979.
The circumstances that brought out the military from the barracks to governance cannot be blamed on the military, rather, it had lent credence to the notion that the military could serve as a balancing force in the power equation in the country.
Each time there was a military coup against a civilian government, the claim was usually that the military have come to correct the excesses, maladministration, corrupt tendencies and abuse of office by the politicians.
However, political analysts have come to wonder whether the military itself could be said to be immune against these allegation that could merit its corrective posture, given the fact that there were coups against fellow military governments.
We have explained and analyzed causes of military interventions in Nigeria between 1966 and 1976 but this unit is aimed at examining the achievements and the demerits of military rule in Nigeria.
104  POL 221 NIGERIAN GOVERNMENT AND POLITICS I 2.0 OBJECTIVES At the end of this unit, you should be able to: • list the military contribution to nation-building • identify the effects of military rule on the international scene • explain the problems of military rule.
3.0 MAIN CONTENT It is a truism that the worst of a civilian administration is better than the best of a military regime no matter how benevolent.
This is against the background that soldiers rule by force while an elected civilian government rules by the mandate of the people.
The first step taken by the military after a coup is to suspend the country s Constitution; promulgate decrees (military laws) abrogating the rights and liberties of the citizens.
Since they were not elected, they do not owe any allegiance to the people nor do they feel obliged by people s yearnings.
Notwithstanding, the story of the military rule in Nigeria could be likened to a baby that could not be thrown away with bath water.
It would be a miscarriage of justice to ignore the Nigerian military s legacies that have contributed to the growth and development of the Nigerian nation.
3.1 K eeping Nigeria United The Nigerian military deserves a pat on the back for successfully quelling a 30-month civil war to keep the nation united.
Although, many people may blame the Nigerian civil war on the personality clash between two military officers Lt. Cols.
Yakubu Gowon and Odumegwu Ojukwu.
That belief may be wrongly given that the genesis of the national crisis had been traced to a number of factors, both remote and immediate in the preceding units in this course.
However, the men and officers of the Nigerian Armed Forces laid down their lives to defend the unity of the country otherwise Nigeria would have disintegrated like many failed republics in the world.
Today everybody is proud that, all things being equal, Nigeria has everything it takes to become a world power and also a big player in the global politics.
3.1.1 Restructuring the Polity On the eve of the civil war, the military changed the geo-political configuration of Nigeria from a four-region to a twelve-state federal structure.
Although, this could be a war strategy, it was a welcome development to the minority groups in the country who had been 105  POL221 NIGERIAN GOVERNMENT AND POLITICS I clamouring for the exercise since the colonial period.
Further, in order to assuage the fears of the minority ethnic nationalities in the country, another state creation exercise took place in 1975 which brought the total number of the Nigerian component units to nineteen.
Also in the same year, Local Government Areas were created by the military in order to bring government nearer to the grassroots people.
Up to date, the Federal Republic of Nigeria is made up of thirty-six States, seven- hundred and seventy-four LGAs and a Federal Capital Territory (FCT).
No civilian government has even been able to accomplish this feat successfully.
3.1.2 Provision of Social Infrastructure The military after the end of the war, embarked on construction of network of roads to enhance the movement of people and goods which has improved the social and economic interaction among Nigerians.
In addition, the military constructed Airports and Seaports in Lagos, Port Harcourt, Ilorin, Jos, Enugu, Kano and Sokoto and purchased aircraft to open the country to the international community for meaningful economic relations.
Because of the ease with which the military took decisions, it established many industries in the mining, oil, marine, aviation and automobile sectors of the economy as a means of creating job opportunities for Nigerians; to prevent the emergence of a monopoly and also to invest in less profitable ventures which may not attract the interest of private entrepreneurs.
The construction of oil refineries in Warri, Port Harcourt and Kaduna was to the credit of the military.
It was aimed at making the country depend less on imported fuel for domestic consumption.
In the same vein, many River Basins were established to promote productivity in the agricultural sector.
3.1.3 Improvement in Education By 1966 when the military made incursion into Nigerian politics, there were only four Universities in the country: Universities of Ibadan, Ife, Zaria and Nsukka.
Apart from the University (College) of Ibadan which was established by the colonial government in 1948, the other three were established by the Regional Premiers in the First Republic but by 1999 when the military disengaged, the number of University established by the federal or state military government have increased tremendously.
The military government established many specialized Universities for Agriculture, Science and Technology as-well-as many polytechnics across the federation.
106  POL 221 NIGERIAN GOVERNMENT AND POLITICS I On May 22, 1973 the military regime under General Gowon established the National Youth Service Corps scheme.
Some of its objectives include to: • develop common ties among the youths and promote national unity • inculcate discipline in the youths by instilling in them a tradition of industry and patriotism and loyal service to the nation • raise the moral level of youths by giving them the opportunity to learn about higher ideals of national achievement and social and cultural improvement No doubt the scheme has come a long way in ensuring the national integration and cohesion of the diverse people of Nigeria.
3.1.4 War Against Indiscipline (WAI) In 1984 the Buhari/Idiagbon military regime made a conscious effort at reviving the dwindling social ethics in the Nigerian society by waging war against indiscipline which included: queuing culture, work ethics, and environmental sanitation.
The military also waged war against drug trafficking, illegal foreign exchange business, examination malpractices and other misdemeanours that had eaten deep into the social fabrics of the Nigerian society and which have cast negative aspersions on every citizen of the country in the international community.
3.1.5 Dynamic Foreign Policy Under General Murtala/Obasanjo regime, the Nigerian foreign policy was restructured to make Africa its centre piece.
This was the period when African countries were fighting against the last vestiges of colonialism in Angola, Zimbabwe, Namibia, Soweto and the apartheid regime in South Africa.
Nigeria became a Frontline State because of her leading role in the struggle which led to the granting of independence to all the aforementioned countries and eventually the collapse of apartheid policy in South Africa at the turn of the last Century.
Technical Aid Corps is another scheme designed by the military under General Babangida as a foreign policy instrument to assist African countries with the abundance of Nigeria s human resources.
In addition, the establishment of a regional economic community called Economic Community of West Africa was initiated by the Nigerian military administration to promote trade and commerce beyond the tariff wall and diplomatic barriers in the West African sub-region.
107  POL221 NIGERIAN GOVERNMENT AND POLITICS I Finally, the Nigerian military had the opportunity to prolong its stay in the political scene but was faithful with its promise to return the country to democratic rule which came to pass on October 1, 1979 and 1999.
3.2 Problems of Military Rule 3.2.1 Human Rights Violation Military rule is detestable the world over, because of its lack of respect for constitutionality and the rule of law in governance.
The first task immediately the military takes over an elected government is to suspend the nation s constitution and resort to ruling by decrees conceived and promulgated by a few clique of officers who constitute themselves into a Supreme Military Council or Armed Forces Provisional Ruling Council as the case may be.
Military decrees are made superior to the regular laws of the land with retrospective effects which cannot be challenged in any Law Court.
Citizens usually lose their fundamental rights such as freedom of speech, association, movement, privacy, etc.
The Press, Trade Unions and Human Rights groups and such other democratic institutions are seen and treated as rebels by the military junta.
They are either decreed out of existence or gagged from operation or get their recalcitrant members detained and humiliated for championing people s causes.
The precision with which the military takes decisions, in most cases without properly digesting the facts at issue, usually leads to miscarriage of justice or outright injustice on innocent people in the society.
Under Murtala/Obasanjo s regime many civil servants were wrongfully dismissed (with ignominy) or retired (without benefits) from the service.
This affected the morale and work ethics in the civil service which some would argue as the genesis of corruption in the public service in order to save for the rainy days .
In 1984 under Buhari/Idiagbon regime, some Nigerians were arraigned before a military tribunal rather than a regular Court for drug offences which they have committed before the advent of the regime.
Despite the public outcry and protest by the Nigerian Bar Association, the offenders were sentenced to death by firing squad.
In summary, dividends of democracy are completely absent under a military rule.
3.2.2 Corruption Each time the military comes on board, one of the excuses it gives for seizing power is corruption in high places but this appears to be a case of the kettle calling the pot black as events in Nigeria has proved that the military itself is not immune against the social malady.
This fact came to the fore during the probe panel set up by Gen. Murtala Mohammed in 1975 to ascertain how rich Gowon s Governors were, and how the wealth was acquired.
According to Oluleye (1985:176): 108  POL 221 NIGERIAN GOVERNMENT AND POLITICS I The findings were an eye sore, as many of them were on the ladder to becoming millionaires.
Except Brigadiers Mobolaji Johnson and Oluwole Rotimi, others were booted out via dishonourable discharge after they were divested of some of the ill-gotten gains.
In 1981, President Shehu Shagari, in response to public demand, set up a judicial panel of enquiry on the missing $2.8b oil money under the military administration of General Olusegun Obasanjo.
President Olusegun Obasanjo in 2002 also set up Justice Okigbo panel to investigate the alleged mismanagement of the oil windfall money during General Ibrahim Babangida s regime.
The panel had since submitted its report but it is yet to be officially released.
Similarly, the probe of the tenure of General Sanni Abacha s administration by the civilian administration of President Olusegun Obasanjo yielded fruitful results as billions stolen from public treasury by the late maximum ruler were recovered from his foreign bank accounts.
As upright and honest as the Buhari/Idiagbon regime might have appeared to be, the scandal of the unchecked 53 suit cases imported into the country when the nation s borders (land, air and sea) were supposedly closed, cast a slur on the integrity and moral uprightness of the administration.
3.2.3 Sit-Tight Syndrome Military leaders as well as their civilian counterparts in Africa are both guilty of the odious megalomaniac tendency w hich has become the bane of development in many African countries.
General Yakubu Gowon s regime lost the confidence and esteem of Nigerians when he announced that his administration needed more time as the 1974 return to civil rule promise was unrealistic .
The lust for power also led General Babangida to become obsessed with sit-tight agenda by annulling the June 12, 1993 general elections which was generally acclaimed as the freest and fairest in the annals of Nigeria s election.
If not for divine intervention, Gen. Sanni Abacha had almost succeeded in transmuting from military to civilian President in 1998 when the five political parties (described as five fingers of a leprous hand by Chief Bola Ige) created by him had adopted him as their candidate for the 1999 presidential election.
SELF ASSESSMENT EXERCISE What are the merits and demerits of military rule in Nigeria?
4.0 CONCLUSION Military government attracts adverse reactions from international community because of the uncivil and undemocratic manners by which 109  POL221 NIGERIAN GOVERNMENT AND POLITICS I it rules.
For many years Nigeria was regarded as a pariah nation and thus, ostracized by industrial nations in retaliation to the draconian rule by General Sanni Abacha between 1993 and 1999.
5.0 SUMMARY As there are no roses without thorns, so goes a saying, military rule has some advantages as well as some disadvantages, given the level of our development as a nation.
There are instances where military were given heroic welcome against a civilian dictator in a country or a military junta had intervened as a corrective measure to restore democracy shortly after.
This was the case in the Ghanaian revolution under Ft. Lt. Gerry Rawlings in 1979 and 1981.
6.0 TUTOR-MARK ED ASSIGNMENT 1.
Military rule is an aberration and should be treated as a social leper.
Discuss.
2.
How do you account for military contribution to Nigeria s development?
3.
Military regime, no matter how benevolent, cannot be a substitute to democratic rule.
7.0 REF ERENCES/FURTHER READING Barrett, L. (1979).
Danjuma: The Making of a General.
Enugu: Fourth Dimension Publishing Company.
Oluleye, J. J.
(1985).
Military Leadership in Nigeria 1966-1979.
Ibadan: University Press.
110
