 NATIONAL OPEN UNIVERSITY OF NIGERIA SCHOOL OF MANAGEMENT SCIENCES COURSE CODE: TSM 341 COURSE TITLE: FINANCIAL ACCOUNTING AND MANAGEMENT FOR HOSPITALITY AND TOURISM TSM341 COURSE GUIDE COURSE GUIDE TSM341 FINANCIAL ACCOUNTING AND MANAGEMENT FOR HOSPITALITY AND TOURISM Course Team Mrs. O. I. Inua (Developer/Writer/Coordinator) - NOUN Dr. (Mrs.) Rauta Bitrus Jat (Editor) -UNIJOS Dr. Dimis I. Mai-Lafia (Programme Leader) - NOUN ii TSM341 COURSE GUIDE NATIONAL OPEN UNIVERSITY OF NIGERIA National Open University of Nigeria Headquarters 14/16 Ahmadu Bello Way Victoria Island Lagos Abuja Office No.5 Dar es Salaam Street Off Aminu Kano Crescent Wuse II, Abuja Nigeria E-mail: centralinfo@noun.edu.ng URL: www.noun.edu.ng Published By: National Open University of Nigeria First Printed 2012 ISBN: 978-058-803-5 iii TSM341 COURSE GUIDE CONTENTS PAGE Introduction ………………………………………………………….
1 What You will Learn in This Course ………..………….……….….. 1 Course Aims ………………………………………………………… 1 Course Objectives…………………………………………………… 1 Working Through This Course..………………………………….… 2 Course Materials ……………………………………………............. 3 Study Units …………………………………………………............. 3 Assignment File …………………………………………………….. 3 Presentation Schedule……………………………………………….. 4 Assessment ………………………………………………………….
4 Tutor-Marked Assignment (TMAs) ……………………................... 4 Final Examination and Grading …………………………………….
4 Course Making Scheme …………………………………………….
5 Course Overview ……………………………………………............ 5 How to Get the Most from this Course………………….................... 6 Facilitators/Tutors and Tutorials …………………………………… 8 Summary …………………………………………………………….
9 iv Introduction TSM341: Financial Accounting and Management for Hospitality and Tourism is a two credit course for Bachelor of Science in tourism studies programme.
The course consists of fifteen (15) units i.e.
three (3) modules of five (5) units per module.
The material has been developed to suit graduate students in tourism studies at the National Open University of Nigeria (NOUN) by adopting an approach that highlights the key areas of accounting and management in the tourism industry.
A student who successfully completes this course will surely be in a better position to manage tourism as well as hotel and catering outfits.
The course guide tells you briefly what the course is all about, what course materials you will be using and how you can work your way through these materials.
It suggests some general guidelines for the amount of time you are likely to spend on each unit of the course in order to complete it successfully.
It also gives you some guidance on your tutor-marked assignments.
Detailed information on tutor-marked assignments is found in the separate assignment file which will be available in due course.
What You Will Learn in This Course This course will introduce you to the major aspects of financial accounting and management accounting for tourism services.
During the course, you will learn how to prepare simple financial statements of various types for business outfits and you will also be introduced to relevant topics in management accounting.
Course Aims The course aims to give you an understanding of the techniques of managing resources (especially financial) in tourism outfits and other forms of hospitality business.
Course Objectives To achieve the course aims stated above, the course sets overall objectives.
In addition, each unit also has specific objectives.
The units’ objectives are also included at the beginning of each unit; you should read them before you start working through the unit.
You may want to refer to them during your study of the unit to check on your progress.
You should always look at the unit objectives after TSM341 FINANCIAL ACCOUNTING AND MANAGEMENT FOR HOSPITALITY AND TOURISM completing a unit, in this way, you can be sure that you have done what is required of you in the unit.
Below are the overall objectives of the course.
By meeting these objectives, you should have achieved the aims of the course as a whole.
On successful completion of the course, you should be able to achieve the following objectives.
• Define the concept of financial accounting, write a brief history of accounting, discuss the major features of the hospitality and tourism industry, highlight the essential qualities of accounting information for decision-makers and discuss the users of accounting information; • Discuss the basic accounting concepts and terms; • State and describe accounting equation and its cycle comprehensively; • Discuss source documents and books of original entry, ledgers and its subsidiaries, ledgers with cash and credit transactions, trial balance, correction of errors, use of suspense account and the effect of errors on profits; • Explain and prepare the accounts of sole proprietorship, partnership and companies; • Explain the concept of cost; • Give a detailed explanation of working capital management; • Explain the break-even analysis; • Make capital budgeting decisions.
Working through This Course To complete this course, you are required to read the study units, read related books and read other materials provided by the National Open University of Nigeria (NOUN).
You will also need to undertake practical exercises for which you need access to a personal computer running Windows 95.
Each unit contains self-assessment exercises, and at certain points during the course, you will be expected to submit assignments.
At the end of the course is a final examination.
The course should take you about 17 weeks to complete.
Below are the components of the course, what you have to do, and how you should allocate your time to each unit in order to complete the course successfully on time.
ii TSM341 FINANCIAL ACCOUNTING AND MANAGEMENT FOR HOSPITALITY AND TOURISM Course Materials Major components of the course are the following materials.
• Course guide; • Study units; • Textbooks; • Assignment file; • Presentation schedule.
Study Units The study units in this course are as follows.
Module 1 Unit 1 Introduction to Financial Accounting Unit 2 Basic Accounting Concepts and Terms Unit 3 Accounting Equation and Accounting Cycle Unit 4 Accounting Cycle - Source Documents and Books of Original Entry Unit 5 Accounting Cycle - Ledger (The Main Book of Accounts) and the Subsidiaries Module 2 Unit 1 Accounting Cycle – Ledger with Cash and Credit Transactions, Trial Balance and Correction of Errors Unit 2 Accounting Cycle – Account of Sole Proprietorship and Preparation of Final Accounts Unit 3 Final Account Adjustments Unit 4 Partnership Accounts Unit 5 Introduction to Companies Account Module 3 Unit 1 Companies Accounts Unit 2 The Concept of Cost Unit 3 Break-Even Analysis Unit 4 Working Capital Management Unit 5 Capital Budgeting Decisions Assignment File In this course, you will find all the details of the work you must submit to your tutor for marking.
The marks you obtain for these assignments iii TSM341 FINANCIAL ACCOUNTING AND MANAGEMENT FOR HOSPITALITY AND TOURISM will count towards the final mark you obtain for this course.
Further information on assignments will be found in the assignment file itself and later in the section on assessment in this course guide.
There are 15 sets of tutor-marked assignments in this course; you should attempt them all.
Presentation Schedule The presentation schedule included in your course materials gives you the important dates in the year for the completion of Tutor-Marked Assignments (TMAs) and attending tutorials.
Remember, you are required to submit all your assignments by the due date.
You should guard against falling behind in your work.
Assessments There are two aspects to the assessment of the course: first the tutor- marked assignments; and second a written examination.
In tackling the assignments, you are expected to apply information, knowledge and techniques gathered during the course.
The assignments must be submitted to your tutor for formal assessment in accordance with the deadlines stated in the Presentation Schedule and the Assignment File.
The work you submitted to your tutor will count for 30% of your total score in this course.
At the end of the course, you will need to sit for a final written examination.
This examination will also count for 70% of your total score in this course.
Tutor-Marked Assignments (TMAs) There are fifteen tutor-marked assignments in this course and you are advised to attempt all.
Aside from the course material provided, you are advised to read and research widely using other references which will give you a broader viewpoint and may provide a deeper understanding of the subject.
Ensure all completed assignments are submitted on schedule before set deadlines.
If for any reason, you cannot complete your work on time, contact your tutor before the assignment is due to discuss the possibility of an extension.
Unless in exceptional circumstances extensions may not be granted after the due date.
Final Examination and Grading The final examination for this course will be of three hours duration and have a value of 70% of the total course grade.
All areas of the course iv TSM341 FINANCIAL ACCOUNTING AND MANAGEMENT FOR HOSPITALITY AND TOURISM will be assessed and the examination will consist of questions which reflect the type of self-testing, practice exercises and tutor-marked problems you have previously encountered.
All areas of the course will be assessed.
Utilise the time between the conclusion of the last study unit and sitting for the examination to revise the entire course.
You may find it useful to review your self-assessment tests, tutor-marked assignments and comments made on them before the examination.
Course Marking Scheme The work you submit will count for 30% of your total course mark.
At the end of the course, you will be required to sit for a final examination, which will also count for 70% of your total mark.
The table below shows how the actual course marks will be allocated.
Table 1: Course Marking Scheme Assessment Marks Assignment 4 assignments, best 3 will be used for C.A.
= 10 marks x 3 = 30% Final Examination 70% of overall course marks Total 100% of course marks Course Overview This table brings together the units and the number of weeks you should take to complete them and the assignments that follow them.
Unit Title of work Weeks Assessment Activity (End of Unit) Module 1 1 Introduction to Financial 1 Accounting 2 Basic Accounting Concepts and 1 Terms 3 Accounting Equation and 1 Accounting Cycle 4 Accounting Cycle – Source 1 Documents and Books of Original Entry 5 Accounting Cycle – Ledger 1 (The Main Book of Accounts) and the Subsidiaries Module 2 v TSM341 FINANCIAL ACCOUNTING AND MANAGEMENT FOR HOSPITALITY AND TOURISM 1 Accounting Cycle – Ledger 1 with cash and credit transactions, Trial Balance and Correction of Errors 2 Accounting Cycle – Account of 1 Sole Proprietorship and Preparation of Final Accounts 3 Final Account Adjustments 1 4 Partnership Accounts 1 5 Introduction to Companies 1 Accounts Module 3 1 Companies Accounts 1 2 The Concept of Cost 1 3 Break-even Analysis 1 4 Working Capital Management 1 5 Capital Budgeting Decisions 1 Revision 2 Total 17 How to Get the Most from This Course In distance learning, the study units are specially developed and designed to replace the university lecturer.
Hence, you can work through these materials at your own pace, and at a time and place that suit you best.
Visualise it as reading the lecture instead of listening to a lecturer.
Each of the study units follows a common format.
The first item is an introduction to the subject matter of the unit, and how a particular unit is integrated with the other units and the course as a whole.
Next is a set of learning objectives.
These objectives let you know what you should be able to do by the time you have completed the unit.
You should use these objectives to guide your study.
When you have finished the unit, you must go back and check whether you have achieved the objectives.
If you make a habit of doing this, you will significantly improve your chances of passing the course.
The main body of the unit guides you through the required reading from other sources.
This will usually be either from your set books or from a Reading Section.
You will be directed when you need to use a computer and guided through the tasks you must do.
Activities are interspersed throughout the units, and answers are given at the end of the units.
Working through these tests will help you to vi TSM341 FINANCIAL ACCOUNTING AND MANAGEMENT FOR HOSPITALITY AND TOURISM achieve the objectives of the units and prepare you for the assignments and the examinations.
You should do each activity as you come to it in the study unit.
There are also numerous examples given in the study units, work through these when you come to them, too.
The following is a practical strategy for working through the course.
If you run into any trouble, telephone your facilitator.
When you need help, don’t hesitate to call and ask your tutor to provide it.
In summary remember the following hints.
• Read this course guide.
• Organise a study schedule.
Refer to the course overview for more details.
Note the time you are expected to spend on each unit and how the assignments relate to the unit.
You need to gather all the information in one place, such as your diary or a wall calendar.
Whatever method you choose to use, you should take a decision and write your own dates for working on each unit.
• Once you have created your own study schedule, do everything you can to stick to it.
The major reason that students fail is that they get behind with their courseworks.
If you get into difficulties with your schedule, please let your facilitator know before it is too late for help.
• Turn to unit 1 and read the introduction and the objectives of the unit.
• Assemble the study materials.
Information about what you need for a unit is given in the ‘Introduction’ at the beginning of each unit.
You will always need both the study unit you are working on and one of your set books on your desk at the same time.
• Work through the unit.
The content of the unit itself has been arranged to provide a sequence for you to follow.
As you work through this unit, you will be instructed to read sections from your set books or other articles.
Use the unit to guide your reading.
• Keep in mind that you will learn a lot by doing the assignments carefully.
They have been designed to help you meet the objectives of the course and, therefore, will help you pass the examination.
Submit all assignments not later than the due dates.
vii TSM341 FINANCIAL ACCOUNTING AND MANAGEMENT FOR HOSPITALITY AND TOURISM • Review the objectives for each study unit and confirm that you have achieved them.
If you feel unsure about any of the objectives, review the study material or consult your tutor.
• When you are confident that you have achieved a unit’s objectives, you can then start on the next unit.
Proceed unit by unit through the course and try to space your study so that you keep yourself on schedule.
• When you have submitted an assignment to your tutor for marking, do not wait for its return before starting on the next unit.
Keep to your schedule.
When the assignment is returned, pay particular attention to your facilitator’s comments.
Consult your tutor as soon as possible if you have any question or problem.
• After completing the last unit, review the course and prepare yourself for the final examination.
Check that you have achieved the unit objectives and the course objectives.
Facilitators/Tutors and Tutorials There are 15 hours of tutorials provided in support of this course.
You will be notified of the dates, times and locations of these tutorials, together with the name and phone number of your tutor, as soon as you are allocated a tutorial group.
Your tutor will mark and comment on your assignments, keep a close watch on your progress and on all difficulties you might encounter as they would provide assistance to you during the course.
You must mail your tutor-marked assignments to your tutor well before the due date (at least two working days are required).
They will be marked by your tutor and returned to you as soon as possible.
Do not hesitate to contact your tutor by telephone, e-mail, or discussion board if you need help.
The following might be circumstances in which you would find help necessary.
• When you do not understand any part of the study units or the assigned readings; • When you have difficulty with the self-assessment exercises; • When you have a question or problem with your tutor’s comment on an assignment or with the grading of an assignment.
You should try your possible best to attend the tutorials.
This is the only chance to have face-to-face contact with your tutor and ask questions which are answered instantly.
You can raise any problem encountered during the course of your study.
To gain the maximum benefit from viii TSM341 FINANCIAL ACCOUNTING AND MANAGEMENT FOR HOSPITALITY AND TOURISM course tutorials, prepare a question list before attending them.
You will learn a lot from participating in discussions.
Summary TSM341: Financial Accounting and Management for Hospitality and Tourism intends to expose the undergraduate student to the nitty-gritty of managing the hospitality and tourism industry.
Upon completing the course, you will be equipped with the knowledge required to manage the financial resources in a hospitality and tourism outfit.
We hope you enjoy your acquaintances with the National Open University of Nigeria (NOUN).
We wish you every success.
ix TSM341 FINANCIAL ACCOUNTING AND MANAGEMENT FOR HOSPITALITY AND TOURISM Course Code TSM341 Course Title Financial Accounting and Management for Hospitality and Tourism Course Team Mrs. O. I. Inua (Developer/Writer/Coordinator) - NOUN Dr. (Mrs.) Rauta Bitrus Jat (Editor) -UNIJOS Dr. Dimis I. Mai-Lafia (Programme Leader) - NOUN x TSM341 FINANCIAL ACCOUNTING AND MANAGEMENT FOR HOSPITALITY AND TOURISM NATIONAL OPEN UNIVERSITY OF NIGERIA National Open University of Nigeria Headquarters 14/16 Ahmadu Bello Way Victoria Island Lagos Abuja Office No.5 Dar es Salaam Street Off Aminu Kano Crescent Wuse II, Abuja Nigeria E-mail: centralinfo@noun.edu.ng URL: www.noun.edu.ng Published By: National Open University of Nigeria First Printed 2012 ISBN: 978-058-803-5 xi TSM341 FINANCIAL ACCOUNTING AND MANAGEMENT FOR HOSPITALITY AND TOURISM CONTENTS PAGE Module 1 ………………………………………………………… 1 Unit 1 Introduction to Financial Accounting…………….….
1 Unit 2 Basic Accounting Concepts and Terms……….……... 10 Unit 3 Accounting Equation and Accounting Cycle…….…... 19 Unit 4 Accounting Cycle - Source Documents and Books of Original Entry……………………………………….… 25 Unit 5 Accounting Cycle - Ledger (The Main Book of Accounts) and the Subsidiaries………..…………….
33 Module 2 ………………………………………………………… 51 Unit 1 Accounting Cycle – Ledger with Cash and Credit Transactions, Trial Balance and Correction of Errors… 51 Unit 2 Account of Sole Proprietorship and Preparation of Final Accounts………………………………………… 69 Unit 3 Final Account Adjustments…………………………… 82 Unit 4 Partnership Accounts………………………………… 108 Unit 5 Introduction to Companies Account………………….
124 Module 3 …………………………………………………………134 Unit 1 Companies Accounts…………………………………..134 Unit 2 The Concept of Cost………………………….………..148 Unit 3 Break-even Analysis…………………………….……..153 Unit 4 Working Capital Management………………………...167 Unit 5 Capital Budgeting Decisions………………………......188 xii TSM341 FINANCIAL ACCOUNTING AND MANAGEMENT FOR HOSPITALITY AND TOURISM MODULE 1 Unit 1 Introduction to Financial Accounting Unit 2 Basic Accounting Concepts and Terms Unit 3 Accounting Equation and Accounting Cycle Unit 4 Accounting Cycle-Source Documents and Books of Original Entry Unit 5 Accounting Cycle-Ledger (The Main Book of Accounts) and the Subsidiaries UNIT 1 INTRODUCTION TO FINANCIAL ACCOUNTING CONTENTS 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objectives 3.0 Main Content 3.1 Brief History of Accounting and Business 3.2 Definition of Financial Accounting 3.3 Users of Accounting Information 3.3.1 External Users 3.3.2 Internal Users 3.4 Essential Qualities of Accounting Information for Decision-makers 3.4.1 Relevance 3.4.2 Reliability 3.4.3 Consistency 3.5 Major Features of the Hospitality and Tourism Industry 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutor-Marked Assignment 7.0 References/Further Reading 1.0 INTRODUCTION This is the first unit of Financial Accounting and Management for Hospitality and Tourism.
It will cover a period of one hour and we shall be looking at the major features of the industry, evolution of accounting, definition of financial accounting, users of accounting information, the essential qualities of financial accounting information and the major features of the hospitality and tourism industry.
1 TSM341 FINANCIAL ACCOUNTING AND MANAGEMENT FOR HOSPITALITY AND TOURISM 2.0 OBJECTIVES At the end of this unit, you should be able to: • write a brief history of accounting • define financial accounting in various ways • identify the users of accounting information • explain the essential qualities of financial accounting information • identify the major features of the hospitality and tourism industry.
3.0 MAIN CONTENT 3.1 Brief History of Accounting and Business The activity of accounting has been around for several thousand years as could be seen in inventories and sales records found at archaeological sites.
During the Medieval era, there was increase in trade between Europe and the Middle East, and Italy became the intersection for trade.
Business activities were increasing in size and distance, and owners could no longer control these activities.
Stewards were therefore employed to assist the owners who relied on written document to assess the performance of these stewards.
This led to the first major advance in accounting.
Around the 13th century AD, modern accounting (“double entry” accounting) was developed in the following Italian city states.
(a) Genoa – a major centre of commercial activity.
The concept of business entity was assumed here.
(b) Florence – a major artistic centre where Gold was accepted as standard coin across Europe.
Large associations and partnership that pooled capital were developed.
Individual partner’s capital accounts were distinguished and profits were allocated between partners.
(c) Venice – a key commercial and port city.
Double entry accounting was perfected here and modern accounting was originated.
The first surviving accounting textbook was written by Luca Pacioli in 1494.
It publicised the method of Venice and helped to spread literacy among the middle class.
Pacioli, who is often referred to as the father of accounting, was a mathematician and a merchant.
Though he did not invent the double entry system, he spread the knowledge.
The next important period of accounting history is the 19th century which began in Britain in 1830 which brought about Watt’s steam engine and Hargreaves’s spinning jennies.
Later, the industrial 2 TSM341 FINANCIAL ACCOUNTING AND MANAGEMENT FOR HOSPITALITY AND TOURISM revolution took over the United States of America after the civil war.
There was increase in production, physical size of businesses, number of employees, government regulation and taxation.
Funds for such increase were obtained from outsiders in the form of stocks and bonds and this led to businesses operating as corporations.
There was therefore the need to provide information to outsiders/investors so as to inform them of how well their investment was doing.
The second major advancement in accounting was between 1900 and 1930 where organisations were required to prepare reports of their financial performance for a period and there was also the need for the standardisation of such reports to ease inter-country comparison.
The third major advancement was the development of international standards and the harmonisation of accounting reports.
SELF-ASSESSMENT EXERCISE 1 1.
What are the major characteristics of each of the major advancements in accounting?
2. Who is the father of accounting and what was he known for?
3.2 Definition of Financial Accounting Accounting has three arms: financial accounting, cost accounting and management accounting.
Accounting Financial Cost Management Fig.
1.1: Arms of Accounting Both cost and management accounting information are only for internal users such as management, while financial accounting information is for both external and internal users.
Financial accounting is that field of accounting that treats money as a means of measuring economic performance instead of (as in the case of cost accounting) as a factor of production.
It encompasses the entire system of monitoring and control of money as it flows in and out of the firm as assets and liabilities, revenues and expenses.
Financial accounting gathers and summarises financial data to prepare financial 3 TSM341 FINANCIAL ACCOUNTING AND MANAGEMENT FOR HOSPITALITY AND TOURISM reports such as balance sheet and income statement for the firm’s management, investors, lenders, suppliers, tax authorities and other stakeholders.
The American Accounting Association (AAA) defined accounting as “the process of identifying, measuring and communicating economic information to permit informed judgement and decisions by the user of the information.
An accountant is a professional who observes economic activities, records the observations in the prescribed books, analyses his recordings, interprets his analysis and prepares reports to all users of the information.
The initial job of observing and recording is done by a person called a book-keeper.
The process of a book-keeper recording data relating to accounting transactions in the accounting books is known as book-keeping.
SELF-ASSESSMENT EXERCISE 2 Give the AAA’s definition of accounting.
3.3 Users of Accounting Information Financial accounting information is useful in making financial or economic decision by its users.
These users are numerous and have different needs that must be met by the financial information.
The information is recorded in financial statement or report.
Users of financial accounting information fall into the following two categories.
3.3.1 External Users These include the followings.
1.
Potential investors who are interested in investing their money in viable businesses; 2.
Tax authorities that require financial information to calculate tax payable by a firm; 3.
Regulatory authorities such as the Nigerian Accounting Standards Boards (NASB), Corporate Affairs Commission (CAC), Institute of Chartered Accountants of Nigeria (ICAN), etc.
require financial information of firms so as to regulate their activities; 4 TSM341 FINANCIAL ACCOUNTING AND MANAGEMENT FOR HOSPITALITY AND TOURISM 4.
Suppliers who could be trade creditors require information that would enable them know whether or not firms that they intend to supply goods on credit are able to meet their short-term obligations; 5.
Customers of reporting firms are able to know the amount of profit being made and this will inform them on whether the prices placed on commodities are too high; 6.
Bankers who could also be referred to as loan creditors use financial statement of firms to assess their borrowing capacity and their financial obligations; 7.
Competitors use financial reports of similar firms to judge their own performance and identify areas of improvement; 8.
The public which refers to the immediate environment where a firm is situated suffers in one way or the other from the activities of the firm.
They are therefore interested in knowing about the performance of the firm to enable them negotiate properly for welfare facilities such as hospitals, schools, electricity, water, good roads, employment, etc.
3.3.2 Internal Users These include the followings: 1.
Owners of the business (sole owners, partners, and shareholders).
They are interested in knowing how their money has been utilised i.e.
how profitable the business is and what the financial resources of the business are (i.e.
assets and liabilities); 2.
Managers of the Business (decision makers, chief financial officers, chief executive officers, etc.)
are able to monitor performance and plan for the future with the aid of financial information; 3.
Employees of the business need financial information to be aware of the performance of the firm and determine whether they are well paid.
Employees form unions to carry out such activities.
SELF-ASSESSMENT EXERCISE 3 List the various users of financial accounting information.
5 TSM341 FINANCIAL ACCOUNTING AND MANAGEMENT FOR HOSPITALITY AND TOURISM 3.4 Essential Qualities of Accounting Information for Decision-makers The principal accounting standard setting body in the United States of America, the Financial Accounting Standards Board (FASB) describes Relevance and Reliability as the two primary qualities that make accounting information useful for decision making.
Comparability, which includes consistency, is a secondary quality.
These qualities are further explained below.
3.4.1 Relevance Accounting information is relevant if it is capable of making a difference in a decision.
Information is said to be relevant if it: • has predictive value by helping users form predictions about the outcomes of past, present and future events; • has feedback value i.e.
to confirm prior expectations; • is timely i.e.
having information available to decision makers before it loses its capacity to influence decisions.
3.4.2 Reliability This depends on verifiability, faithful representation and neutrality.
• Verifiability, which involves securing a high degree of consensus among independent measures using the same measurement methods, should be ensured.
• Faithful representation refers to the agreement between accounting numbers and the resources or events those numbers purport to represent.
• Neutrality – accounting information must be both relevant and reliable.
3.4.3 Consistency Where the application of various methods of deriving information is used over time, the information value is increased and comparisons of relative economic opportunities or performance can be compared.
SELF-ASSESSMENT EXERCISE 4 What are the major qualities of accounting information?
6 TSM341 FINANCIAL ACCOUNTING AND MANAGEMENT FOR HOSPITALITY AND TOURISM 3.5 Major Features of the Hospitality and Tourism Industry Accounting and control systems throughout industry and commerce have undergone drastic changes.
There is now an upward trend in disposable income with obvious implications for eating out and international travels.
The number of eating out companies have multiplied and travelling abroad for business and pleasure is now a common occurrence.
The hospitality and tourism industry – hotels, motels, restaurants, cafes, public houses, country clubs, leisure centres, tour operators, travel agencies – have become substantial employers of labour, but there are some characteristics/features, problems and implications for accounting.
3.5.1 Sales Instability This is a special characteristic and is inherent in almost all hospitality operations.
Sales instability or fluctuations that occur in the volume of business are the following three kinds.
(a) Annual pattern – many hotels, restaurants and other establishments are seasonal.
Frequently, the volume of business achieved during the season is three times that of off-seasons.
(b) Weekly pattern – many city restaurants do little business during the first few days of the week, but operate at almost full capacity towards the end of the week.
Others may observe that operations are more at the beginning of the week than towards the end.
(c) Daily pattern – In catering operations, there are fluctuations in the level of activity and the revenue inflow during the working day.
Peak periods are lunch time and after 6.00 p.m. 3.5.2 Effects of Sales Instability The effects of sales instability are as detailed below.
(a) Uncertainty: there is a degree of uncertainty about the future volume of sales.
(b) Spare capacity: where there is sales instability and uncertainty, there is inevitably some spare capacity and the consequent failure to utilise fully the resources and facilities of the establishment.
(c) Profit instability: spare capacity and a high level of fixed costs tend to result in a high degree of profit instability.
During slack 7 TSM341 FINANCIAL ACCOUNTING AND MANAGEMENT FOR HOSPITALITY AND TOURISM periods, considerable losses may be incurred and these may take quite some time to recover during busy periods.
Hotel operators have begun to appreciate, more and more, the need to keep good accounting records.
Transactions may be either cash or credit.
All the postings to the guest’s account must be made as soon as possible so that his bills may be ready for presentation.
SELF-ASSESSMENT EXERCISE 5 1.
What are the implications of sales inability to the hospitality and tourism industry?
2.
List ten (10) sources of income in the hospitality and tourism industry.
4.0 CONCLUSION In this unit, you have seen that financial accounting is an essential tool for describing and measuring the performance of an organisation from period to period.
5.0 SUMMARY This unit has been able to give you a brief history of accounting and business, starting from the medieval period till date.
You have also learnt the definitions of accounting, you can now identify the users of accounting information and the essential qualities of accounting information.
You are now conversant with the major features of the hospitality and tourism industry.
6.0 TUTOR-MARKED ASSIGNMENT 1.
Give the American Accounting Association (AAA) definition of financial accounting.
2.
Explain clearly the essential qualities of accounting information.
8 TSM341 FINANCIAL ACCOUNTING AND MANAGEMENT FOR HOSPITALITY AND TOURISM 7.0 REFERENCES/FURTHER READING Okoye, A.E.
(2000).
Financial Accounting for Students and Managers.
Benin City: Mindex Publishing Company.
Outhart, T.; Barker, R.; Colquhoun, M.; Crabtree, L. & Taylor, L. (1997).
Leisure and Tourism for Advanced GNVQ.
London: Collins Educational.
Wood, F. & Sangster, A.
(2002).
Business Accounting Vol.
I. London: Prentice Hall.
www.businessdictionary.com www.acct.tamu.edu/giroux/shorthistory.html.
9 TSM341 FINANCIAL ACCOUNTING AND MANAGEMENT FOR HOSPITALITY AND TOURISM UNIT 2 BASIC ACCOUNTING CONCEPTS AND TERMS CONTENTS 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objectives 3.0 Main Content 3.1 Financial Accounts for all Purposes 3.2 Financial Accounting Standards 3.3 Financial Accounting Concepts 3.4 Basic Terms in Financial Accounting 3.4.1 Debit and Credit 3.4.2 Income and Expenses 3.4.3 Assets 3.4.3.1 Intangible 3.4.3.2 Tangible 3.4.4 Liabilities 3.4.4.1 Current Liabilities 3.4.4.2 Long-term Liabilities 3.4.5 Owners Equity 3.4.6 Capital 3.4.7 Sales and Purchases 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutor-Marked Assignment 7.0 References/Further Reading 1.0 INTRODUCTION In the second unit of this course, you will be introduced to the various accounting concepts that are applied in the preparation and presentation of financial statements and basic accounting terms.
2.0 OBJECTIVES At the end of this unit, you should be able to: • discuss why one set of accounts has to serve many purposes • explain the existence of accounting standards • explain the fundamental accounting concepts • define basic terms in financial accounting.
10 TSM341 FINANCIAL ACCOUNTING AND MANAGEMENT FOR HOSPITALITY AND TOURISM 3.0 MAIN CONTENT 3.1 Financial Accounts for all Purposes Financial accounts or reports are not usually drawn up for a particular set of users, but they are drawn up to be used by all users of financial statements.
As a result of this, there is a need to adopt a common framework for the preparation and presentation of the information contained within them.
It therefore implies that there has to be a commonly established practice concerning how the information in the financial statement is prepared and presented.
As a result of the fact that everyone receives the same financial report, all the various users have to believe that the assumptions upon which the financial statements are based are valid and appropriate or else there will be no trust in the financial statements.
These assumptions are what make up the accounting concepts.
SELF-ASSESSMENT EXERCISE 1 Financial accounts are prepared for a particular set of users.
Discuss.
3.2 Financial Accounting Standards Accounting standards are needed so that financial statements will fairly and consistently describe financial performance.
Without standards, users of financial statements would need to learn the accounting rules of each company and comparisons between companies would be difficult.
Accounting standards used today are referred to as Generally Accepted Accounting Principles (GAAP).
These principles are “generally accepted” because an authoritative body has set them or the accounting profession widely accepts them as appropriate.
The practice of accountancy worldwide is governed by sets of rules and guidelines.
These rules and guidelines are compiled into standards.
There are two sets of standards governing the accounting practice in Nigeria.
They are as follows.
a) International Standards –these are made up of the International Accounting Standards (IAS) and the Standards Interpretation Committee (SIC) b) Local Standards – these are made up of the Statement of Accounting Standards (SAS) and the Auditing Guidelines (AG)?
The Nigeria Accounting Standards Board (NASB) is responsible for the issuance, monitoring and compliance of the Statement of Accounting Standards.
As at February 2008, 30 standards have been issued.
You can 11 TSM341 FINANCIAL ACCOUNTING AND MANAGEMENT FOR HOSPITALITY AND TOURISM get details of these standards from this website: www.nasbnigeria.org/sas.php.
The treatment of these standards is outside the scope of this course.
SELF-ASSESSMENT EXERCISE 2 Define Accounting Standards and list all the standards in the SAS.
3.3 Financial Accounting Concepts For financial standards to result in coherent financial accounting and reporting, the fundamental concepts need to be sound, comprehensive and internally consistent.
These concepts guide the selection of transactions; events and circumstances to be accounted for; their recognition and measurement; and the means of summarising and communicating them to interested parties.
Concepts enhance preparers’ and auditors’ understanding of the common foundation and reasoning employed in considering alternatives.
The four fundamental concepts are as follows.
1.
Accrual concept: revenue and expenses are taken account of when they occur and not when the cash is received or paid out.
2.
Consistency concept: once an entity has chosen an accounting method, it should continue to use the same method, except for a sound reason to do otherwise.
Any change in the accounting method must be disclosed.
3.
Going concern concept: it is assumed that the business entity for which accounts are being prepared is solvent and viable and will continue to be in business in foreseeable future.
4.
Prudent / conservation concept: revenues and profits are included in the balance sheet only when they are realised (or there is reasonable “certainty” of realising them) but liabilities are included if there is reasonable possibility of incurring them.
Other concepts include the followings.
5.
Entity concept: accounting records reflect the financial activities of a specific business or organisation, and not of its owners or employees i.e.
the activities of the business should be recorded separately from those of its owners.
6.
Matching concept: transactions affecting both revenues and expenses should be recognised in the same accounting period.
12 TSM341 FINANCIAL ACCOUNTING AND MANAGEMENT FOR HOSPITALITY AND TOURISM 7.
Materiality concept: relatively minor events may be ignored, but the major ones should be fully disclosed.
8.
Objectivity concept: financial statements should be based only on verifiable evidence, comprising an audit trail.
9.
Realisation concept: any change in the market value of an asset or liability is not recognised as a profit or loss until the asset is sold or the liability is paid off (discharged).
SELF-ASSESSMENT EXERCISE 3 Define accounting concept and explain the four fundamental concepts.
3.4 Basic Terms in Financial Accounting There are some common terms that financial accounting students should be familiar with to enhance understanding of financial statement preparation and presentation.
These terms are as follows.
3.4.1 Debit and Credit These are the backbone of any accounting system.
Every accounting entry in the general ledger contains both a debit and a credit.
All debits must equal all credits.
If they do not, the entry is out of balance.
Depending on what type of account you are dealing with, a debit or credit will either increase or decrease the account balance.
Table 1: Debits and Credits vs. Account Types Account Debit Credit Assets Increase Decrease Liabilities Decrease Increase Income Decrease Increase Expenses Increase Decrease Note that for every increase in one account, there is an opposite (and equal) decrease in another.
That is what keeps the entry in balance.
Debit entries are made on the left while credit entries are made on the right.
For example, where there is a cash sale of N100, 000 the entry would be: Dr. Cash account N100, 000 Cr.
Sales account N100, 000 13 TSM341 FINANCIAL ACCOUNTING AND MANAGEMENT FOR HOSPITALITY AND TOURISM 3.4.2 Income and Expenses Companies are interested in keeping track of where they get income and where it goes.
An increase in income will result to a credit entry while a decrease will result to a debit entry.
Income account will comprise of sales revenue, interest income, income from sale of assets, consulting income, etc.
All increase in expenses should be debited while all decreases should be credited.
Typical expense account includes salaries and wages, telephone, electricity, repairs, maintenance, depreciation, amortisation, interest, rent, etc.
3.4.3 Assets This is something valuable that an entity owns, benefits from, or has use of, in generating income.
In accounting, an asset is something an entity has acquired or purchased, and which has money value.
An asset can be: • something physical such as cash, machinery, inventory, land and building; • an enforceable claim against others, such as accounts receivable; • rights such as copyright, patent, trademark, etc; • an assumption such as goodwill.
Assets shown on their owner’s balance sheet are usually classified according to the ease with which they can be converted into cash.
Assets could be further subdivided as follows.
3.4.3.1 Intangible These are the long-term resources of an entity, but have no physical existence.
They derive their value from intellectual or legal rights, and from the value they add to the other assets.
Intangible assets are generally classified into two broad categories.
(a) Limited-life intangible assets (b) Unlimited-life intangible assets (a) Limited-life Intangible Assets are as follows.
• Patents: limited legal monopoly granted to an individual or firm to make, use and sell its inventions and exclude others from doing so.
• Copyright: legal monopoly that protects published original work (for the duration of its author’s life plus 50 years) from unauthorised use.
14 TSM341 FINANCIAL ACCOUNTING AND MANAGEMENT FOR HOSPITALITY AND TOURISM • Goodwill: intangible but saleable asset, almost indestructive except by indiscretion.
It is built over the years generally with promotion, good customer and supplier relationship, high quality of goods and services, high quality and conduct of management and employees.
Its value is realised when the business is sold and is reflected in the excess of a firm’s selling price over the firm’s net worth.
(b) Unlimited-life Intangible Assets are as follows.
• Trademarks: distinctive design, graphics, logo, symbols, words or any combination thereof that uniquely identifies a firm and/or its goods or services, guarantees the items genuineness and gives its owners the legal rights to prevent the trademark’s unauthorised use.
Intangible assets cannot be destroyed by fire or other natural disasters.
They normally cannot be used as collateral to obtain loans.
Intangible assets like goodwill can be destroyed by carelessness.
Monetary value of intangible asset = market value – net value of tangible assets 3.4.3.2 Tangible Anything that has long-term physical existence or is acquired for use in the operations of the business and not for sale to customers is described as intangible.
They can be destroyed by natural disasters and can be used as collateral to raise loans and can be more readily sold to raise cash in emergencies.
They add to an entity’s market value.
Tangible assets could be as follows.
• Fixed: they are not consumed or sold during the normal course of a business but their owner uses them to carry on its operations.
They are expected to be in use for more than one year.
In a balance sheet, these assets are shown at their net book value (purchase price less depreciation).
Examples of fixed asset include land, buildings, machinery etc.
• Current: any asset expected to last or be in use for less than one year is considered a current asset.
They include accounts receivable, inventory, work-in-progress, cash, etc.
It is also called circulating asset.
15 TSM341 FINANCIAL ACCOUNTING AND MANAGEMENT FOR HOSPITALITY AND TOURISM 3.4.4 Liabilities These are financial obligations, debt, claim or potential loss.
They are claims against assets or legal obligations of a person or organisation, arising out of past or current transactions or actions.
Liabilities could be current or long term.
3.4.4.1 Current Liabilities A balance sheet item which equals the sum of all money owed by a company and due within one year is described as current liabilities.
Also called payables or current debt and include obligations such as deferred dividend, trade credit and unpaid taxes arising in the normal course of a business.
3.4.4.2 Long-term Liabilities These are obligations payable in goods or services at a future period – more than 12 months away from today or the date of balance sheet.
A firm must disclose its long-term liabilities in its balance sheet with their interest rates (or other charges) and date of maturity.
3.4.5 Owners Equity This is capital employed in a firm, computed by deducting the book value of the liabilities from the book value of the assets.
It is also referred to as net assets, net worth, shareholder’s equity or funds.
Hopefully, owners equity should be a positive figure i.e.
assets should exceed liabilities.
It consists of partner’s capital accounts, stock, retained earnings (accumulated profits from prior years).
Where there is an increase in the owners’ equity, we make a credit entry; the reverse is the case where there is a decrease.
3.4.6 Capital Own or borrowed money invested in a business to generate income.
SELF-ASSESSMENT EXERCISE 4 1.
Define an asset and a liability.
2.
What are the major types of asset and liability?
3.4.7 Sales and Purchases Sales are the sale of goods in which the business normally deals in and which were bought with the prime intention of resale.
Disposal of other 16 TSM341 FINANCIAL ACCOUNTING AND MANAGEMENT FOR HOSPITALITY AND TOURISM items which were not initially bought for resale must never be treated as sales.
Purchases are the purchase of goods with the sole intention of selling.
Buying any other item without the intention of sale must never be treated as purchases.
SELF-ASSESSMENT EXERCISE 5 For a hotel, list five (5) items each of sales and purchases.
4.0 CONCLUSION In this unit, you have learnt some concepts and terms that are very vital in the preparation and presentation of financial reports.
They should be well studied to enhance your understanding.
5.0 SUMMARY This unit affords you the opportunity of identifying the basic concepts that guide the preparation, presentation and interpretation of financial statements.
You have also been exposed to commonly used terms in accounting.
6.0 TUTOR-MARKED ASSIGNMENT 1.
Write debit or credit beside each of these items: (a) Decrease in asset; (b) Increase in liability; (c) Increase in income; (d) Decrease in expenses.
2.
Group these items into assets, liabilities, expenses and incomes: (a) Dividend received; (b) Sale of motor vehicle; (c) Purchase of land and building; (d) Creditors; (e) Overdraft; (f) Electricity bills; (g) Sale of stock; (h) Transportation cost; (i) Goodwill; (j) Stock.
17 TSM341 FINANCIAL ACCOUNTING AND MANAGEMENT FOR HOSPITALITY AND TOURISM 7.0 REFERENCES/FURTHER READING Wood, F. & Sangster, A.
(2002).
Business Accounting Vol.
I. London: Prentice Hall.
www.businessdictionary.com www.acct.tamu.edu/giroux/shorthistory.html.
18 TSM341 FINANCIAL ACCOUNTING AND MANAGEMENT FOR HOSPITALITY AND TOURISM UNIT 3 ACCOUNTING EQUATION AND ACCOUNTING CYCLE CONTENTS 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objectives 3.0 Main Content 3.1 Accounting Equation 3.2 The Accounting Cycle 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutor-Marked Assignment 7.0 References/Further Reading 1.0 INTRODUCTION In this third unit of Financial Accounting and Management for Hospitality and Tourism which will cover a period of one hour, you shall be looking at the accounting equation and the accounting cycle generally.
2.0 OBJECTIVES At the end of this unit, you should be able to: • explain the accounting equation • recognise the steps in the accounting cycle • describe the items in each of the steps in the accounting cycle.
3.0 MAIN CONTENT 3.1 The Accounting Equation The worth of a business is derived by adding up what the accounting records say belongs to a business and deducting what the business owes.
This simple idea is the basis of financial accounting and it is known as the accounting equation.
This is the most fundamental equation of double-entry bookkeeping system; it expresses the relationship between what is owned and what is owed.
When a business is to start trading, it needs resources.
Let us first of all assume that the owner supplies all the required resources.
This can be reflected as follows.
19 TSM341 FINANCIAL ACCOUNTING AND MANAGEMENT FOR HOSPITALITY AND TOURISM Resources in the business = Resources supplied by the owner.
The resources in the business are called assets while the resources supplied by the owner are referred to as capital.
The accounting equation will therefore be shown as follows.
Assets = Capital Now, other people, apart from the owner could apply some resources needed in the business.
These resources are known as liabilities.
The accounting equation will now change as follows.
Assets = Capital + Liabilities This equation can be expressed in various forms, i.e.
Capital = Assets – Liabilities This is the most common way of expressing the accounting equation.
It should be noted that no matter how the equation is switched, the totals of both sides must be equal.
The accounting equation is expressed in a financial position statement called a balance sheet.
No matter how many transactions there may be, the accounting equation must always balance.
For example: 1.
Introduction of capital by depositing N100, 000 cash.
The balance sheet would appear as: N Asset - Cash 100,000 Capital 100,000 2.
Purchase of an asset – motor vehicle by cash (N7, 000) Assets: Motor Vehicle 7,000 Cash 93,000 100,000 Capital 100,000 20 TSM341 FINANCIAL ACCOUNTING AND MANAGEMENT FOR HOSPITALITY AND TOURISM 3.
The purchase of another asset (stock) for N3, 000 on credit Assets: Motor Vehicle 7,000 Stock 3,000 Cash 93,000 103,000 Less: Liabilities Creditors 3,000 100,000 Capital 100,000 4.
Sale of stock for N1, 000 on credit Assets: Motor Vehicle 7,000 Stock 2,000 Debtor 1,000 Cash 93,000 103,000 Less: Liabilities Creditors 3,000 100,000 Capital 100,000 5.
Sale of stock for N500 cash Assets: Motor Vehicle 7,000 Stock 1,500 Debtor 1,000 Cash 93,500 103,000 Less: Liabilities Creditors 3,000 100,000 Capital 100,000 6.
Part payment of stock bought on credit (N1, 200) Assets: Motor Vehicle 7,000 Stock 1,500 Debtors 1,000 Cash 92,500 101,800 21 TSM341 FINANCIAL ACCOUNTING AND MANAGEMENT FOR HOSPITALITY AND TOURISM Less: Liabilities Creditors 1,800 100,000 Capital 100,000 Note that the totals of the two sides of the balance sheet always balance no matter the type of transactions made.
Also, every transaction affects two accounts.
For example: 1.
When capital is introduced – the capital and cash accounts are affected.
2.
When motor vehicle was purchased with cash – asset account and cash account are affected.
3.
When stock was purchased on credit – stock account and creditor’s account are affected.
SELF-ASSESSMENT EXERCISE 1 State the accounting equation in different ways.
3.2 The Accounting Cycle This refers to the sequence in which data is recorded and processed until it becomes part of the financial statements at the end of the period.
Most organisations in the private and public sectors and some of the larger ones in the voluntary sector, use the double-entry accounting system to record their financial transactions.
Small voluntary organisations, such as local clubs and societies, may use simplified accounting procedures.
However, all organisations produce final accounts to summarise their financial information on an annual basis.
This is carried out through a series of steps known as accounting cycle.
22 TSM341 FINANCIAL ACCOUNTING AND MANAGEMENT FOR HOSPITALITY AND TOURISM Original / Source Documents Purchase Purchase Sales Expenses Fixed Cheques Receipts Invoice Credit Sales Credit Invoices Assets notes Invoice notes invoices Entered into Books of Original Entry Purchase Day Purchase Sales Sales Expenses The The Cash Book Returns Day Returns Day Book Journal Book Book Book Book Posted to The Ledgers Purchase Sales Nominal General Cash Ledger Ledger Ledger Ledger book • Cash book fulfills both the roles of books of original entry and ledger.
Balances from ledgers are taken to Trial Balance The Final Accounts Trading Account Profit and Loss Balance Sheet Account Figure 2.1: The Accounting Cycle SELF-ASSESSMENT EXERCISE 2 List the steps in the Accounting Cycle.
4.0 CONCLUSION In this unit, you are acquainted with a sound knowledge of the accounting equation and the sequence of the accounting cycle which will be a very strong foundation for any accounting student.
5.0 SUMMARY In this unit, attempt has been made to explain the accounting equation to you and the various ways in which the equation can be expressed.
This 23 TSM341 FINANCIAL ACCOUNTING AND MANAGEMENT FOR HOSPITALITY AND TOURISM unit has also been able to define the accounting cycle and the items in each step of the cycle.
24 TSM341 FINANCIAL ACCOUNTING AND MANAGEMENT FOR HOSPITALITY AND TOURISM 6.0 TUTOR MARKED ASSIGNMENT 1.
Pay a visit to any hospitality or tourism centre and collect ten source documents.
2.
State the accounting equation in three ways.
7.0 REFERENCES/FURTHER READING Outhart, T.; et al (1997).
Leisure and Tourism for Advanced GNVQ.
London: Collins Educational.
Wood, F. & Sangster, A.
(2002).
Business Accounting Vol.
I. London: Prentice Hall.
25 TSM341 FINANCIAL ACCOUNTING AND MANAGEMENT FOR HOSPITALITY AND TOURISM UNIT 4 ACCOUNTING CYCLE: SOURCE DOCUMENTS AND BOOKS OF ORIGINAL ENTRY CONTENTS 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objectives 3.0 Main Content 3.1 The Source Documents 3.2 Books of Original Entry 3.2.1 The Purchases Day Book 3.2.2 The Purchases Return Day Book 3.2.3 The Sales Day Book 3.2.4 The Sales Return Day Book 3.2.5 Expenses Day Book 3.2.6 The Journal 3.2.7 The Cash Book 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutor-Marked Assignment 7.0 References/Further Reading 1.0 INTRODUCTION In this fourth unit, you will be exposed more to the study of accounting cycle.
The source documents and the books of original entry shall also be examined.
2.0 OBJECTIVES At the end of this unit, you should be able to: • give examples of source documents used in the hospitality and tourism industry • identify source documents used for various transactions • list all the books of original entry • prepare the books of original entry.
3.0 MAIN CONTENT 3.1 The Source Documents Each accounting transaction should be supported by proper documentation.
This is a form of internal control to help ensure 26 TSM341 FINANCIAL ACCOUNTING AND MANAGEMENT FOR HOSPITALITY AND TOURISM accurate accounting records.
Source documents contain information crucial to documentation that an exchange transaction has occurred, including date, amount, parties and description of the transaction.
Source documents can be generated by outside parties (e.g.
vendors, creditors, customers) or can be internally generated.
Examples of source documents include the followings.
(1) Purchase invoice – for items (goods or services) bought on credit.
(2) Purchase credit notes – also referred to as debit notes, are meant for goods returned to supplier.
(3) Sales invoice – for items (goods or services) sold on credit.
(4) Sales credit notes – for refunds to credit customers as a result of goods returned by them.
(5) Expenses invoice – for expense item such as transportation, stationery incurred on credit.
(6) Fixed asset invoice – for fixed asset items bought on credit.
(7) Cheques – for payments out of current accounts to suppliers or from customers.
(8) Receipts – for items (goods or services) bought or sold on cash basis.
SELF-ASSESSMENT EXERCISE 1 Define source documents and list examples.
3.2 Books of Original Entry These can also be referred to as books of prime entry, or subsidiary books or special journals.
These books record all the details of the source documents.
They are important because they sum up financial information that is used in the ledgers.
We can say that they serve as a link between the source documents and ledgers and are vital for tracing transactions through the accounts to locate errors or check for accuracy and authenticity.
The main books of original entry are as follows.
3.2.1 The Purchases Day Book (PDB) This records the information on the purchase invoice.
This book contains information on transaction such as date, amount, name of item purchased and the purchase invoice number.
27 TSM341 FINANCIAL ACCOUNTING AND MANAGEMENT FOR HOSPITALITY AND TOURISM Example Record the following transactions in the Purchases Day Book of Exclusive Hotels for the month of July, 2008.
July 5 Bought 2 liters of groundnut oil on credit from Nana Stores N 2, 000 July 12 Bought 2 bags of rice on credit from Gege Shops N10, 000 July 20 Bought beverages on credit from Dada Supermarket N 8, 000 July 26 Bought 2 packets of spices on credit from Wegis N 1, 800 Solution Exclusive Hotels Purchases Day Book Date Particulars Invoice Amount No.
(N) July 5 2 liters of groundnut oil on credit from 2,000 Nana Stores July 12 2 bags of rice on credit from Gege Shops 10,000 July 20 beverages on credit from Dada Supermarket 8,000 July 26 2 packets of spices on credit from Wegis 1,800 July 31 Transfer to debit side of purchases account 21,800 3.2.2 The Purchases Return Book This is also referred to as return outwards book.
It records information on purchase credit note indicating goods returned to suppliers.
The purchase credit notes are received from suppliers indicating that they have received the returned goods and hence reducing the indebtedness of the customer.
Returns are made if the goods are defective or not up to standard.
Example Record the following returns made by Exclusive Hotels: July 28 Beverages to Dada supermarket N2, 000 July 29 Spices to Wegis N 250 28 TSM341 FINANCIAL ACCOUNTING AND MANAGEMENT FOR HOSPITALITY AND TOURISM Solution Exclusive Hotels Purchases Return Book Date Particulars Invoice No.
Amount (N) July 28 Dada Supermarket 2, 000 July 12 Wegis 250 July 31 Transfer to credit side of purchases return account 2, 250 3.2.3 The Sales Day Book (SDB) This records the invoices an organisation sends to its customers for credit sales.
The source document from which information is derived for SDB is the sales invoice.
Example Record the credit sales transaction made by Exclusive Hotel for the month of July: July 3 Sold 10 plates of breakfast @ N1, 000 per plate to Mr. Tim N10, 000 July 18 Sold 3 bottles of Eva wine @ N750 per bottle to Mr. Sam N2, 250 July 23 Sold 2 cartons of bottle water @ N980 per carton to Mr. Ken N1, 960 July 27 Sold 4 plates of dinner @ N1,200 per plate to Mr. John N4, 800 July 30 Sold 7 plates of fruit salad @ N350 per plate to Mr. Andy N2, 450 Solution Exclusive Hotels Sales Day Book Date Particulars Invoice Amount No.
(N) July 3 10 plates of breakfast @ N1, 000 per plate to Mr. Tim 10, 000 July 18 3 bottles of Eva wine @ N750 per bottle to Mr. Sam 2, 250 July 23 2 cartons of bottle water @ N980 per carton to Mr. Ken 1, 960 July 27 4 plates of dinner @ N1,200 per plate to Mr. John 4, 800 July 30 7 plates of fruit salad @ N350 per plate to Mr. Andy 2, 450 July 31 Transfer to credit side of sales account 21, 460 29 TSM341 FINANCIAL ACCOUNTING AND MANAGEMENT FOR HOSPITALITY AND TOURISM 3.2.4 Sales Returns Day Book This can also be referred to as return inwards book.
Records the credit notes an organisation sends to its customers informing them that they have acknowledged receipt of items returned by these customers, therefore reducing the customers’ indebtedness.
Example The following returns were made by staff of NOUN as a result of oversupply made by the hotel: July 19 2 bottles of Eva wine @ N750 per bottle from Mr. Sam N1, 500 July 24 1 carton of bottle water @ N980 per carton from Mr. Ken N 980 Solution Exclusive Hotels Sales Returns Book Date Particulars Invoice Amount No.
(N) July 19 2 bottles of Eva wine @ N750 per bottle from Mr. Sam 1, 500 July 18 1 carton of bottle water @ N980 per carton from Mr. Ken 980 July 31 Transfer to the debit side of sales returns account 2, 480 3.2.5 Expenses Day Book These expenses are incurred for the day-to-day running of the business.
Example Record the following expenses incurred in the month of July in the appropriate book.
July 8 Fuel for generator N5, 000 July 14 Transportation N 700 July 26 Lighting N1, 750 30 TSM341 FINANCIAL ACCOUNTING AND MANAGEMENT FOR HOSPITALITY AND TOURISM Solution Exclusive Hotels Sales Returns Book Date Particulars Invoice Amount No.
(N) July 8 Fuel 5, 000 July 14 Transportation 700 July 26 Lighting 1, 750 July 31 Transfer to the debit side of general expenses account 7, 450 3.2.6 The General Journal This is a form of diary that records purchases (and disposals) of all fixed assets (whether bought on credit or cash basis).
It is also used for other unusual items, such as correction of errors, writing off bad debts, etc.
It records other items which do not pass through the five books already treated and the cash book.
The use of the journal makes fraud by bookkeepers very difficult.
It also reduces the risk of entering the item only once instead of having double entry.
The layout of the Journal looks like this.
The General Journal Date Details Folio Dr. Cr.
The name of account to be debited XX The name of account to be credited XX Narrative The narrative is a description of what is being done and provides a reason for the entry.
It should be noted that the journal is not a double entry account and hence, the entry on the double entry account should be made after writing the journal.
Example Record the following transactions in the journal.
• Exclusive Hotels bought a generator plant from Cash ‘n Carry for N500,000 on 11 July, 20XX • A debt of N3, 000 owing to Exclusive Hotels from NOUN is written off as bad debt on 31 July, 20XX.
31 TSM341 FINANCIAL ACCOUNTING AND MANAGEMENT FOR HOSPITALITY AND TOURISM Solution Exclusive Hotels The Journal Date Details Folio Dr. Cr.
July 11 Generator 500, 000 Cash ‘n Carry 500, 000 Being purchase of generator on credit July 31 Bad debts 3, 000 NOUN 3, 000 Being bad debt written off 3.2.7 The Cash Book This records all incoming and outgoing payments (cheques), expense items transacted on cash (not credit) basis, cash sales and purchases and all bank transactions.
Although the cash book is a book of original entry, it is also part of the ledger because it contains the cash account and the bank account and it conforms to the double entry principles.
We will therefore treat it in details while treating ledgers.
SELF-ASSESSMENT EXERCISE 2 What is the main function of the cash book?
4.0 CONCLUSION In this unit, you have learnt that source documents and books of original entry are the initial trends in the accounting cycle.
Recording of transactions at this stage is normally done by a bookkeeper who seeks objective evidence before recording transactions in the accounting books.
5.0 SUMMARY In this unit, you have been able to identify common examples of source documents and their functions.
You have also treated the Books of Original Entry with special reference to the Journal and the Cash book.
6.0 TUTOR MARKED ASSIGNMENT 1.
The following transactions took place in the month of May, 20XX in Excellence Hotel: N May 1 Sold to Zenith Bank 24 crates of soft drinks @ N1,000 per crate 24,000 May 7 Sold to Aguda Community Bank 4 cartons of Bottle water @ N980 per carton 3,920 May 9 Bought from Coca cola 5 cartons of Five Alive Juice @ 32 TSM341 FINANCIAL ACCOUNTING AND MANAGEMENT FOR HOSPITALITY AND TOURISM N6, 000 per carton 30,000 May 16 Bought from UAC 100 loaves of Bread @ N140 per loaf 14,000 May 23 Sold 3 plates of lunch to Mr. Adetola @ N1, 200 per plate 3,600 May 31 Bought 10 tins of Sardine from Big Treat Supermarket @ N100 each 1,000 You are required to write up the Purchases and Sales Day Books on behalf of Excellence Hotel for the month of May, 20XX.
2.
Give five examples of Source Documents.
7.0 REFERENCES/FURTHER READING Okoye, A.E.
(2000).
Financial Accounting for Students and Managers.
Benin City: Mindex Publishing Company.
Outhart, T.; Barker, R.; Colquhoun, M.; Crabtree, L. & Taylor, L. (1997).
Leisure and Tourism for Advanced GNVQ.
London: Collins Educational.
Wood, F. & Sangster, A.
(2002).
Business Accounting Vol.
I. London: Prentice Hall.
33 TSM341 FINANCIAL ACCOUNTING AND MANAGEMENT FOR HOSPITALITY AND TOURISM UNIT 5 ACCOUNTING CYCLE: LEDGER ACCOUNTS CONTENTS 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objectives 3.0 Main Content 3.1 The Ledger – the Main Book of Accounts 3.2 Types of Ledgers 3.3 The Ledger Accounts 3.4 The Double Entry System 3.5 The Cash Book 3.6 Types of Cash Books 3.7 Discounts 3.8 Folio Columns 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutor-Marked Assignment 7.0 References/Further Reading 1.0 INTRODUCTION In this fifth unit of this course, you will continue your study on accounting cycle and the ledger will be treated.
You will also look at discounts and how they affect the accounts and the different types of cash books.
2.0 OBJECTIVES At the end of this unit, you should be able to: • write up accounts using the double entry principles • prepare the different types of cash books • explain how to balance the ledgers including the cash book.
3.0 MAIN CONTENT 3.1 The Ledger-the Main Book of Account The effect of accounting transaction listed in the day books will not be reflected in the financial statements until they are posted to the general ledger.
Posting is the process of transferring balances (totals) from the day books and journals to the ledgers.
Originally, the ledger was a single book containing all the accounts.
But, as organisations became larger and more complex, there was the need to have a set of ledgers.
This makes it easier to understand and to divide the work of recording 34 TSM341 FINANCIAL ACCOUNTING AND MANAGEMENT FOR HOSPITALITY AND TOURISM entries between different people.
The double entry principle is used when entries are made in the ledger.
The common principle is, debit the receiving accounts and credit the giving accounts.
3.2 Types of Ledgers The ledger has been broken down into several separate books.
Those most businesses use are as follows.
1.
Sales ledger – containing a separate account for each debtor (sometimes known as debtors’ ledger).
2.
Purchases ledger – containing a separate account for each creditor (sometimes known as creditors’ accounts).
3.
Nominal ledger – containing a separate account for each expense item, e.g.
stationery, electricity, etc.
4.
General ledger – containing the remaining accounts of the organisation.
For example, fixed assets account, and capital accounts.
5.
The cash book – although the cash book can be referred to as book of original entry, but because we have a debit and credit side, it is also part of the ledger.
SELF-ASSESSMENT EXERCISE 1 List and explain the different types of ledgers.
3.3 The Ledger Accounts As explained earlier, different books or accounts make up the ledger.
The ledger is broken down in such a way that the accounts can be easily traced.
Below is a diagram that shows at a glance the types of accounts in a ledger.
35 TSM341 FINANCIAL ACCOUNTING AND MANAGEMENT FOR HOSPITALITY AND TOURISM ACCOUNTS PERSONAL IMPERSONAL ACCOUNTS ACCOUNTS Debtors Creditors Real Accounts Nominal Accounts Accounts for all lands Accounts for and possession expenses, income and capital Figure 5.1: Types of Accounts in a Ledger With reference to the above figure 5.1, accounts could be personal or impersonal.
3.3.1 Personal Accounts These are accounts for the third parties that organisations deal with.
These third parties could be debtors (customers) or creditors (suppliers).
They are located in the sales and purchases ledger.
3.3.2 Impersonal Accounts These accounts are divided into real accounts and nominal accounts.
1.
Real accounts – they are accounts in which possessions are recorded.
They are accounts for ‘real things’ and include the accounts for fixed assets.
They are located in the general ledger.
Examples are buildings, fixtures and fittings, etc.
2.
Nominal accounts – they are accounts in which expenses, income and capital are recorded.
They are found in the nominal ledger.
They record money spent or received.
SELF-ASSESSMENT EXERCISE 2 What are the accounts that make up the ledger?
36 TSM341 FINANCIAL ACCOUNTING AND MANAGEMENT FOR HOSPITALITY AND TOURISM 3.4 The Double Entry System The double-entry system of accounting has been in use for hundreds of years and till date, there is no better way of recording financial transactions.
The fundamental principle of double entry bookkeeping is that all the postings to the ledger should consist of balancing components.
When we enter the data relating to the transaction in the accounting books, we need to ensure that we do so in a way that ensures that only the items that were affected by the transactions are shown as having changed.
For each transaction, entry will be made to show an increase or decrease of any one item and another entry to show the increase or decrease of the other item.
It can be seen that each entry is made twice.
Each ledger account is split into two halves – the debit side (which is traditionally the left-hand side of the page) and the credit side (which is the right-hand side of the page).
The debit side is usually abbreviated to Dr. and the credit side to Cr.
Figure 5.2 is the layout of a page of an accounts book.
TITLE OF ACCOUNT IS WRITTEN HERE Left-hand side of the page.
This Right-hand side of the page.
This is the ‘debit’ side.
is the ‘credit’ side.
Figure 5.2: Layout of a page of an Accounts Book From figure 5.2, it can be seen that the shape resembles a ‘T’.
This is why the ledger is often referred to as T-account.
Note that for every debit entry, there must be a corresponding credit entry.
Figure 5.3 shows a more detailed layout of a typical ledger account.
ACCOUNT NAME Dr. Cr.
Date Details F Amount Date Details F Amount Figure 5.3: Typical Ledger Account Page 37 TSM341 FINANCIAL ACCOUNTING AND MANAGEMENT FOR HOSPITALITY AND TOURISM Relating the double entry principle to the accounting equation, we have the following rules.
Capital = Assets – Liabilities To increase each item Credit Debit Credit To decrease each item Debit Credit Debit Looking at the accounts, the rules will appear as: Capital Account Decreases Increases – + Asset Account Increases Decreases + – Liability Account Decreases Increases – + Examples We shall attempt the entries of the following transactions: 1.
The proprietor starts the business with N100, 000 cash on 01 January, 20XX.
2.
A motor vehicle is bought for N20, 000 cash on 03 March, 20XX.
3.
Furniture is bought on credit from shop fitters for N1, 200 on 11 April, 20XX.
4.
Paid the amount owing in cash to shop fitters on 01 June, 20XX.
38 TSM341 FINANCIAL ACCOUNTING AND MANAGEMENT FOR HOSPITALITY AND TOURISM The accounts will look like this.
1.
The first transaction affects the capital and cash accounts.
The capital account is increasing; therefore, we credit the account.
The cash account is also increasing because cash is being introduced, so we debit the cash account.
Note that cash is an asset.
2.
The second transaction affects the motor vehicle and cash accounts.
Cash is spent i.e.
reduced for purchasing motor vehicle (motor vehicle is increasing).
Cash and motor vehicle are both assets.
We debit motor vehicle account and credit cash account.
3.
Shop fitters are our creditor and we have incurred a liability because we owe, so we credit shop fitters account and debit furniture account since we have acquired an asset.
4.
We are now paying our creditor so our indebtedness to shop fitters has reduced so we debit shop fitters account and credit cash since we are paying in cash and therefore reducing our cash asset.
Dr. Capital Account Cr.
Date Particulars N 01 Jan Cash (a) 100,000 Dr. Cash Account Cr.
Date Particulars N Date Particulars N 01 Jan Capital (a) 100,000 03 Jan Motor vehicle (b) 20,000 01 Jun Shop Fitters(c) 1,200 Dr. Motor Vehicle Account Cr.
Date Particulars N Date Particulars N 03 Mar Cash(b) 20,000 Dr. Furniture Account Cr.
Date Particulars N Date Particulars N 11 Apr Shop Fitters(d) 1,200 39 TSM341 FINANCIAL ACCOUNTING AND MANAGEMENT FOR HOSPITALITY AND TOURISM Dr. Shop Fitters Account Cr.
Date Particulars N Date Particulars N 01 Jun Cash© 1,200 11 Apr Furniture (d) 1,200 Note that for every debit entry, there is always a corresponding credit entry.
More Examples: Post the following transactions into the appropriate ledger accounts: (a) Feb. 1 Started business with N250, 000 in the bank; (b) Feb. 2 Bought office furniture by cheque N15, 000; (c) Feb. 3 Bought machinery N75, 000 on credit from Shoprite; (d) Feb. 5 Bought a van paying by cheque N60, 000; (e) Feb. 8 Sold some furniture not required for N6, 000 on credit to Usman & Sons; (f) Feb. 15 Paid amount owing to Shoprite by cheque; (g) Feb. 23 Received amount due from Usman & Sons in cash; (h) Feb. 28 Bought more machinery with cheque N28, 000.
Solution: Dr. Capital Account Cr.
Date Particulars N Date Particulars N 28 Feb Bal.
c/d 250,000 01 Feb Bank account 250,000 28 Feb Bal.
b/d 250,000 Dr. Cash Account Cr.
Date Particulars N Date Particulars N 23 Feb Usman & Sons 6,000 28 Feb Bal.
c/d 6,000 01 Mar bal.
b/d 6,000 40 TSM341 FINANCIAL ACCOUNTING AND MANAGEMENT FOR HOSPITALITY AND TOURISM Dr. Bank Account Cr.
Date Particulars N Date Particulars N 01 Feb Capital account 250,000 03 Feb Furniture 15,000 05 Feb Motor Van 60,000 15 Feb Shoprite 75,000 28 Feb Machinery 28,000 _______ Bal.
c/d 72,000 250,000 250,000 01 Mar Bal.
b/d 72,000 Dr. Motor Van Account Cr.
Date Particulars N Date Particulars N 05 Feb Bank 60,000 28 Feb Bal.
c/d 60,000 01 Mar Bal.
b/d 60,000 Dr. Furniture Account Cr.
Date Particulars N Date Particulars N 02 Feb Bank 15,000 08 Feb Usman & Sons 6,000 28 Feb Bal.
c/d 9,000 15,000 01 Mar Bal.
b/d 15,000 Dr. Shoprite Account Cr.
Date Particulars N Date Particulars N 15 Feb Bank 75,000 0 3 Feb Machinery 75,000 Dr. Usman & Sons Ltd Account Cr.
Date Particulars N Date Particulars N 08 Feb Furniture 6,000 23 Feb Cash 6,000 Note that for this worked examples we added items such as Balance c/d and Balance b/d.
Balance c/d – refers to balance carried down.
This is the difference in the amount on the debit and credit side.
It is normally inserted at the 41 TSM341 FINANCIAL ACCOUNTING AND MANAGEMENT FOR HOSPITALITY AND TOURISM end of the period (to close the account) and in this case, February.
It is the difference that makes both the debit and credit side to agree.
Balance b/d – refers to balance brought down.
This figure is always the same as that of balance c/d.
It is the figure for the beginning of the period.
It is the figure we are left with in the previous period and have to work within the next period.
SELF-ASSESSMENT EXERCISE 3 The following are transactions for the month of June.
Post them to the appropriate ledger and close the accounts.
June 01 Started business with N200, 000 in cash June 02 Paid N180, 000 of the opening cash into a bank account for the business June 05 Bought office furniture on credit from Enibos for N12, 000 June 08 Bought a van paying by cheque N95, 000 June 12 Bought machinery from Uyi Technical on credit N56, 000 June 18 Returned faulty office furniture costing N6, 200 to Enibos June 25 Sold some machinery for N7, 500 cash June 26 Paid amount owing to Enibos N5, 800 by cheque June 28 Took N10, 000 out of the bank June 30 Prosperity Microfinance Bank lent N50, 000 giving the money by cheque.
3.5 The Cash Book As the name implies, the cash book is a book that records all cash or bank transactions.
This characteristic makes it a day book.
It is a very busy book because numerous transactions are recorded there.
It also obeys the principle of double entry and this makes it a ledger.
There is the debit side that records all receipts and the credit side that records all payments.
SELF-ASSESSMENT EXERCISE 4 What do you understand by a cash book?
3.6 Types of Cash Books The cash book contains major columns.
The number of these major columns determines the type of cash book.
The cash book could either be a two-column cash book or a three-column cash book.
42 TSM341 FINANCIAL ACCOUNTING AND MANAGEMENT FOR HOSPITALITY AND TOURISM 3.6.1 The Two-column Cash Book This type of cash book contains a cash column and or discount column.
A typical layout of a typical two-column cash book looks like this.
CASH BOOK Dr. Cr.
Date Particulars F Cash Discount Date Particulars F Cash Discount allowed received Figure 5.4: A Typical Two-column Cash Book 3.6.2 The Three-Column Cash book (Bank Cash Book) A three-column cash book contains a cash column, bank column and a discount column.
This is a more comprehensive form of cash book.
Figure 5.5 is an example of how a three-column cash book should look like.
CASH BOOK Dr. Cr.
Date Particulars F Cash Bank Discount Date Particulars F Cash Bank Discount allowed received Figure 5.5: A Typical Three-column Cash book As stated earlier, the cash book obeys the principle of double entry.
Every debit entry in the cash book has a corresponding credit entry in a ledger account while every credit entry has a corresponding debit entry.
This is with exception of the discount columns.
This is known as a memorandum entry so the double entry principle does not apply.
43 TSM341 FINANCIAL ACCOUNTING AND MANAGEMENT FOR HOSPITALITY AND TOURISM 3.7 Discounts We have been making reference to discounts without an understanding of the term.
Discounts are rebates or reduction in prices given to a customer for one reason or another.
The major types of discounts are cash discounts and trade discounts.
3.7.1 Cash Discounts This is a rebate given or enjoyed as a result of prompt payment.
The rate of cash discount is normally stated as a percentage and the period within which such payment is made is quoted on the sales document by the seller.
A company may have two types of cash discounts in its books.
These are: 1.
Discounts allowed: these are cash discounts allowed by a business to its customers when they settle their debts on time– usually within one month of when it was incurred.
It is normally treated as an expense and hence has a debit balance.
2.
Discounts received: these are cash discounts received by a business from its suppliers when it settles its debt owed to them promptly.
It is treated as an income and thus has a credit balance.
Example 1 Bankole owes N1, 000 for cutleries bought.
He pays within the time limit applicable for a 5% cash discount.
Show what he is expected to pay.
Solution N1, 000 x 5% = N50 ⇒ Discount allowed is N50 Bankole is expected to pay N950.
The effect is: (a) Our cash has increased by N950 since Bankole has paid us, so we debit the cash account.
(b) Bankole who was a debtor with a debit balance has reduced his indebtedness by N950, so we credit Bankole’s account.
44 TSM341 FINANCIAL ACCOUNTING AND MANAGEMENT FOR HOSPITALITY AND TOURISM (c) Bankole’s account has also reduced by N50 discount, so we credit him and debit Discount allowed by N50, which is an expense.
Dr. Cash Account Cr.
Date Particulars N Date Particulars N 20 May Bankole 950 s Dr. Bankole’s Account Cr.
Date Particulars N Date Particulars N 01 May Cutleries 1,000 20 May Cash 950 ____ 20 May Discount All.
50 1,000 1,000 Dr. Discount Allowed Account Cr.
Date Particulars N Date Particulars N 20 May Bankole 50 Example 2 We owed UAC N40, 000 for 4 bags of flour bought and paid on 12 June, 20XX by cheque.
We were given a 2½% cash discount.
Show the relevant accounting entries.
Solution N40, 000 x 2½% = 5/200 x 40,000 = N1, 000 ⇒ Discount received is N1, 000 We are expected to pay N39, 000.
The effect is: (a) We have settled our indebtedness by paying through our bank account so our bank account has reduced by N39, 000.
(b) UAC has received N39, 000 in settlement of our indebtedness, our account in UAC books would be credited by that amount.
45 TSM341 FINANCIAL ACCOUNTING AND MANAGEMENT FOR HOSPITALITY AND TOURISM (c) We enjoyed a discount of N1, 000 which increases our cash position by that amount, so we debit UAC and credit discount received by N1,000 which is an income.
Dr. Bank Account Cr.
Date Particulars N Date Particulars N 12 Jun UAC Foods 39,000 Dr. UAC Foods Ltd. Account Cr.
Date Particulars N Date Particulars N 01 May Bank 39,000 01 Jun Flour 40,000 20 May Discount Rec.
1,000 _____ 40,000 40,000 Dr. Discount Received Account Cr.
Date Particulars N Date Particulars N 12 Jun UAC Foods 1,000 3.7.2 Trade Discounts This is a rebate given to customers who buy large quantities or who buy goods for resale to encourage continued patronage or enable the customers to make a profit.
Trade discount is deducted from the gross amount of the selling price in the invoice sent to the buyer.
It is reflected in the day book and it is the net amount that is posted to the personal account of the buyer.
It should be noted however, that trade discounts are never shown in double entry accounts nor in the final accounts.
SELF-ASSESSMENT EXERCISE 5 Explain what is meant by discounts.
3.8 Folio Columns These are columns used in the accounting books to help in tracing information.
It is normally shown on the left side of the money columns.
Writing the particulars of entries may not be enough.
The folio shows the name of the other book in which the transaction was recorded and the number of the pages of the other book.
The folio column should only be filled when the double entry has been completed.
46 TSM341 FINANCIAL ACCOUNTING AND MANAGEMENT FOR HOSPITALITY AND TOURISM Comprehensive Example of the Cash Book 20XX N Oct 1 Balances brought down from September: Cash balance 290 Bank balance 6,540 Debtors accounts: Bello 1,200 Nnamdi 2,800 Deji 400 Creditors accounts: Umaru 600 Agaba 4,400 Remi 1,000 Oct 2 Bello pays by cheque less 2½% cash discount 1,170 Oct 8 We pay Remi by cheque less 5% cash discount 950 Oct 11 We withdrew N1, 000 cash from bank for business use 1,000 Oct 16 Nnamdi pays us by cheque less 2½% cash Discount 2,730 Oct 25 We paid wages in cash 920 Oct 28 Deji pays us in cash after deducting 5% cash Discount 380 Oct 29 We pay Umaru by cheque less 5% cash discount 570 Oct 30 We pay Agaba by cheque less 2 ½ % cash discount 4,290 Page 7 CASH BOOK (CB) Dr. Cr.
Discount Discount Date Particulars F allowed Cash Bank Date Particulars F received Cash Bank N N N N N N 01/05 Bal.
b/d 2900 6540 08/05 Remi PL6 50 950 02/05 Bello SL1 30 1170 11/05 Bank C 1000 11/05 Cash C 1000 16/05 Nnamdi SL2 70 2730 25/05 Wages NL1PL4 920 28/05 Deji SL3 20 380 29/05 Umaru PL5 30 570 30/05 Agaba 110 4290 ___ ____ _____ 31/05 Bal.
c/d ___ 750 3630 120 1670 10440 190 1670 10440 01/06 Bal.
b/d 750 3630 ‘C’ implies contra.
A contra entry is made when both the debit and credit entries of an item are in the same book.
47 TSM341 FINANCIAL ACCOUNTING AND MANAGEMENT FOR HOSPITALITY AND TOURISM SALES LEDGER (SL) Bello’s Account Page 1 Dr. Cr.
Date Details F Amount Date Details F Amount N N 01/05 Balance b/d 1,200 02/05 Bank CB7 1,170 ____ 02/05 Discount CB7 30 1,200 1,200 Nnamdi’s Account Page 2 Dr. Cr.
Date Details F Amount Date Details F Amount N N 01/05 Balance b/d 2,800 16/05 Bank CB7 2,730 ____ 16/05 Discount CB7 70 2,800 2,800 Deji’s Account Page 3 Dr. Cr.
Date Details F Amount Date Details F Amount N N 01/05 Balance b/d 400 28/05 Bank CB7 380 ___ 28/05 Discount CB7 20 400 400 PURCHASES LEDGER (PL) Umaru’s Account Page 4 Dr. Cr.
Date Details F Amount Date Details F Amount N N 29/05 Bank CB7 570 01/05 Balance b/d 600 29/05 Discount CB7 30 ___ 600 600 Remi’s Account Page 6 Dr. Cr.
Date Details F Amount Date Details F Amount N N 08/05 Bank CB7 950 01/05 Balance b/d 1,000 08/05 Discount CB7 50 ____ 1,000 1,000 48 TSM341 FINANCIAL ACCOUNTING AND MANAGEMENT FOR HOSPITALITY AND TOURISM Agaba’s Account Page 5 Dr. Cr.
Date Details F Amount Date Details F Amount N N 30/05 Bank CB7 4,290 01/05 Balance b/d 4,400 30/05 Discount CB7 110 ____ 4,400 4,400 NOMINAL LEDGER (NL) Wages Account Page 8 Dr. Cr.
Date Details F Amount Date Details F Amount N N 25/05 Cash CB7 920 Discounts Received Account Page 9 Dr. Cr.
Date Details F Amount Date Details F Amount N N 31/05 Monthly Total CB7 190 Discounts Allowed Account Page 10 Dr. Cr.
Date Details F Amount Date Details F Amount N N 31/05 Monthly Total CB7 120 Note: Bank Overdrafts From our example, the bank column of the cash book has a debit balance implying that we have some money left in our bank.
This balance is an asset.
However, there are times when we withdraw money from our bank more than what we actually have.
The bank account is therefore overdrawn, which implies that we owe our bank.
To that extent, the account is a liability and the balance becomes a credit.
CASH BOOK Dr. Cr.
Discount Discount Date Particulars F allowed Cash Bank Date Particulars F received Cash Bank N N N N N 01/06 Bal.
b/d XXX XXX 01/06 Wages XX 04/06 Bello XX XX 16/06 Agaba XX XXX 09/06 Nnamdi XX XXX 20/06 Remi XXX 27/06 Umaru XXX 31/06 Bal c/d ___ ____ XXX 30/06 Bal.
c/d ___ XX ____ XX XXX XXX XX XX XXX 01/07 Bal.
b/d XX 01/07 Bal b/d XX 49 TSM341 FINANCIAL ACCOUNTING AND MANAGEMENT FOR HOSPITALITY AND TOURISM In a balance sheet, the item bank overdraft will be treated as a current liability.
SELF-ASSESSMENT EXERCISE 6 1.
What are folio columns?
2.
Define a bank overdraft and state its accounting treatments.
4.0 CONCLUSION In this unit, you are now more conversant with the technical aspects of accounting when compared to previous units.
Treatment of financial transactions at this stage should be done with extreme care and diligence.
Well prepared ledger accounts will form well prepared final accounts.
5.0 SUMMARY In this unit, you have learnt about the ledger and the various accounts under it.
The double entry system was also treated alongside the cash book.
We also mentioned items such as discounts, folio columns and bank overdraft.
6.0 TUTOR-MARKED ASSIGNMENT 1.
Write up a three-column cash book for a wine wholesaler from the following details.
20XX N May 01 Balances brought forward: Cash 2,300 Bank 47,560 May 02 The following paid their debts by cheque less 5% discount: Rewane 1,400 Tayo 2,200 Harry 3,000 May 04 Paid rent by cheque 1,200 May 06 Johnson lent us N10, 000 in cheque 10,000 May 08 We paid the following by cheque less 2½% discount: Norman 3,600 Payne 4,800 Chukwudi 8,000 50 TSM341 FINANCIAL ACCOUNTING AND MANAGEMENT FOR HOSPITALITY AND TOURISM May 10 Paid motor expenses in cash 440 May 12 Harcourt pays his account of N770, by cheque N740 deducting cash discount of N30 May 15 Paid wages in cash 1,600 May 21 Cash withdrawn from Bank for office use 3,500 May 24 Cash drawings 1,200 May 25 Paid Temidayo N1,400, by cash N1,330 having deducted N70 cash discount May 29 Bought furniture paying by cheque 6,500 May 31 Received commission by cheque 880 2.
What are folio columns?
7.0 REFERENCES/FURTHER READING Okoye, A.E.
(2000).
Financial Accounting for Students and Managers.
Benin City: Mindex Publishing Company.
Outhart, T.; Barker, R.; Colquhoun, M.; Crabtree, L. and Taylor, L. (1997).
Leisure and Tourism for Advanced GNVQ.
London: Collins Educational.
Wood, F. & Sangster, A.
(2002).
Business Accounting Vol.
I. London: Prentice Hall.
51 TSM341 FINANCIAL ACCOUNTING AND MANAGEMENT FOR HOSPITALITY AND TOURISM MODULE 2 Unit 1 Accounting Cycle-Ledger with Cash and Credit Transactions, Trial Balance and Correction of Errors Unit 2 Account of Sole Proprietorship and Preparation of Final Accounts Unit 3 Final Account Adjustments Unit 4 Partnership Accounts Unit 5 Introduction to Companies Account UNIT 1 LEDGERS WITH CASH AND CREDIT TRANSACTIONS CONTENTS 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objectives 3.0 Main Content 3.1 Ledgers with Cash and Credit Transactions 3.2 Trial Balance 3.3 Correction of Errors 3.4 Use of Suspense Account 3.5 The Effect of Errors on Profits 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutor-Marked Assignment 7.0 References/Further Reading 1.0 INTRODUCTION This is the sixth unit of this course.
Our study on accounting cycle continues, but this time, you will be looking at how balances from the day books are taken to the ledgers.
you shall be learning about a special kind of cash book known as petty cash book.
2.0 OBJECTIVES At the end of this unit, you should be able to: • prepare ledgers using information from the day books • treat both cash and credit transactions while preparing ledgers • define a trial balance and identify its characteristics • identify the errors that affect the trial balance and the ones that do not 52 TSM341 FINANCIAL ACCOUNTING AND MANAGEMENT FOR HOSPITALITY AND TOURISM • correct errors through the use of suspense account.
3.0 MAIN CONTENT 3.1 Ledgers with Cash and Credit Transactions We have earlier said that the ledger is the main book of accounts.
It records both cash and credit transactions with the use of double entry principle.
The cash transactions are posted directly to the ledger.
But, all credit transactions are initially recorded in the day books and the balances from these day books are posted to the ledgers.
Comprehensive Example of Cash and Credit Transaction Posting Zoro Supermarket started business on the 1st of January, 20XX and the following transactions took place within the period: Jan 1 A bank account was opened with N125, 000 Jan 3 Bought goods on credit from Usama N4, 100 and Edobor N3, 000 Jan 5 Sold goods on credit to Ugiagbe N950 and Isoken N1,200 Jan 6 Cash sales N5,500 Jan 10 Paid wages in cash N1, 450 Jan 13 Purchased goods by cheque N3, 800 Jan 14 Purchased motor van by cheque N32, 500 Jan 16 Received cheque from Isoken in settlement of his account Jan 17 Sold goods on credit to Audu N1, 250 Jan 20 Paid Mr. Usama and Edobor by cheques for amounts owed them Jan 22 Ugiagbe sent us cheques to clear his debts Jan 24 Purchased goods on credit from Mr. Igho N1, 550 Jan 29 Paid wages in cash N1, 500 Jan 30 Paid electricity bill by cheque N340 Jan 30 Paid Igho by cash for settlement of debt owed.
Required: Prepare the relevant day books and enter transactions into the ledger.
Solution Purchases Day Book Date Particulars Invoice No.
Amount (N) Jan 3 Mr. Usama 4,100 Jan 3 Mr. Edobor 3,000 Jan 24 Mr. Igho 1,550 Jan 31 Transfer to debit side of purchases account 8,650 53 TSM341 FINANCIAL ACCOUNTING AND MANAGEMENT FOR HOSPITALITY AND TOURISM Sales Day Book Date Particulars Invoice Amount No.
(N) Jan 5 Mr. Ugiagbe 950 Jan 5 Mr. Isoken 1,200 Jan 17 Mr. Audu 1,250 Jan 31 Transfer to credit side of sales account 3,400 PURCHASES LEDGER Usama’s Account Page Dr. Cr.
Date Details F Amount Date Details F Amount 20/01 Bank a/c 4,100 03/01 Purchases a/c 4,100 Edobor’s Account Page Dr. Cr.
Date Details F Amount Date Details F Amount 20/01 Bank a/c 3,000 03/01 Purchases a/c 3,000 Mr. Igho’s Account Page Dr. Cr.
Date Details F Amount Date Details F Amount 30/01 Bank a/c 1,550 24/01 Purchases a/c 1,550 PURCHASES ACCOUNT Dr. Cr.
Date Details F Amount Date Details F Amoun t Jan 13 Bank 3,800 Jan 30 Balance c/d 12,450 Jan 24 Purchases Day Book 8,650 ______ 12,450 12,450 Feb. 1 Balance b/d 12,450 BANK ACCOUNT Dr. Cr.
Date Details F Amount Date Details F Amount Jan 16 Isoken a/c 1,200 Jan 13 Purchases a/c 3,800 Jan 22 Ugiagbe a/c 950 Jan 14 Motor van a/c 32,500 Jan 20 Mr. Usama a/c 4,100 Jan 20 Mr. Edobor a/c 3,000 Jan 30 Balance c/d 41,590 Jan 30 Electricity a/c 340 43,740 43,740 Feb 01 Balance b/d 41,590 54 TSM341 FINANCIAL ACCOUNTING AND MANAGEMENT FOR HOSPITALITY AND TOURISM This balance is a credit one which means that the bank account has been overdrawn.
SALES LEDGER Mr. Ugiagbe’s Account Page Dr. Cr.
Date Details F Amount Date Details F Amount Jan 5 Sales a/c 950 Jan 22 Bank a/c 950 Mr. Isoken’s Account Page Dr. Cr.
Date Details F Amount Date Details F Amount Jan 5 Sales a/c 1,200 Jan 16 Bank a/c 1,200 Mr. Audu’s Account Page Dr. Cr.
Date Details F Amount Date Details F Amount Jan 17 Sales a/c 1,250 Jan 30 Balance c/d 1,250 Feb 01 Balance b/d 1,250 SALES ACCOUNT Dr. Cr.
Date Details F Amount Date Details F Amount Jan 30 Balance c/d 8,900 Jan 06 Cash a/c 5,500 _____ Jan 30 Sales Day 3,400 8,900 Book 8,900 Feb 01 8,900 Balance b/d CASH ACCOUNT Dr. Cr.
Date Details F Amount Date Details F Amount Jan 06 Sales a/c 5,500 Jan 10 Wages a/c 1,450 Jan 30 Mr. Igho a/c 1,550 _____ Jan 30 Balance c/d 2,500 5,500 5,500 Feb 01 Balance b/d 2,500 55 TSM341 FINANCIAL ACCOUNTING AND MANAGEMENT FOR HOSPITALITY AND TOURISM NOMINAL LEDGER WAGES ACCOUNT Dr. Cr.
Date Details F Amount Date Details F Amount Jan 10 Cash a/c 1,450 Jan Balance c/d 1,450 Feb 01 Balance b/d 1,450 30 ELECTRICITY ACCOUNT Dr. Cr.
Date Details F Amount Date Details F Amount Jan 30 Bank a/c 340 Jan 30 Balance c/d 340 Feb 01 Balance b/d 340 GENERAL LEDGER MOTOR VAN ACCOUNT Dr. Cr.
Date Details F Amount Date Details F Amount Jan 14 Bank a/c 32,500 Jan 30 Balance c/d 32,500 Feb 01 Balance b/d 32,500 3.2 The Trial Balance This is the fourth step in the accounting cycle.
We were told that we record initial transactions in the source documents from where they are entered into the books of original entry and thereafter these are posted to the ledgers.
In the ledgers, we talked about closing figures called balances.
These balances are taken to the trial balance where they are recorded in the debit or credit side.
The trial balance can therefore be described as a list of ledger balances.
It tells us whether or not there is arithmetical accuracy in the bookkeeping process and it also checks for adherence to the double entry principle.
Below is a layout of a Trial Balance: Particulars / Details Debit Credit Purchases XXX Sales XXX Debtors XXX Creditors XXX Motor Vehicle XXX Cash XXX Bank Overdraft ____ XXX XXX XXX Figure 6: Layout of a Trial Balance 56 TSM341 FINANCIAL ACCOUNTING AND MANAGEMENT FOR HOSPITALITY AND TOURISM These figures are taken directly from the ledger balances without altering the figures on the debits or credits.
When the debit and credit side of the trial balance agree, it is assumed that there is arithmetical accuracy in the books and the bookkeeper has adhered to the double entry principle.
But where we have differences in the debit and credit side, we would need to go back to the books in order to trace the cause of the difference.
It should however be noted that the fact that the debit and the credit sides of the trial balance agree or are the same does not mean that the trial balance is free from error.
There are some errors that may have been made but do not affect the trial balance.
This will be treated later in this unit.
Example of a Trial Balance Using information from Zoro Supermarket Ledgers, prepare a trial balance as at the end of January, 20XX.
Trial Balance as at 30 January, 20XX Particulars / Details Debit Credit Purchases 12,450 Sales 8,900 Debtor (Mr. Audu) 1,250 Wages 1,450 Motor Van 32,500 Cash 2,500 Electricity bill 340 Bank Overdraft 41,590 Total 50,490 50,490 SELF-ASSESSMENT EXERCISE 1 1.
Define a trial balance and highlight its characteristics.
2.
Enter the accounts for the month of March from the following information relating to a small supermarket.
You are required to balance up the accounts and extract a trial balance at the end of the period: March 1 Started business with capital in cash of N2, 500 March 2 Bought goods on credit from the following persons: Deji N540; Chris N870; Ken N250; Dayo N760; Lumide N640 March 4 Sold goods on credit to Badejo N430; Bake N620; Harry N1, 760 March 6 Paid rent by cash N120 57 TSM341 FINANCIAL ACCOUNTING AND MANAGEMENT FOR HOSPITALITY AND TOURISM March 9 Badejo paid us his account by cheque N430 March 10 Harry paid us N1, 500 by cheque March 12 We paid the following by cheque: Ken N250; Deji N540 March 15 Paid carriage by cash N230 March 18 Bought goods on credit from Maro N430; Bidemi N1, 100 March 21 Sold goods on credit to Hakeem N670 March 31 Paid rent by cheque N180.
3.3 Correction of Errors There are some errors that do not affect the agreement of the trial balance totals.
These errors are difficult to trace and it would take a lot of patience and expertise to locate and correct these errors.
These kinds of errors areas follows.
• Errors of omission – this is where a transaction is completely omitted from the books.
For example, a credit sale is made but was not recorded in the sales account nor was it recorded in the debtor’s account.
The trial balance total on the debit and credit sides will be the same because the same figure was omitted from the debit and credit sides of the trial balance.
• Errors of commission – this is where a correct figure is recorded in the correct side of a wrong person’s account.
This type of error takes place where the bookkeeper is not used to the names of customers that are common in the locality.
For instance, a sale of N200 to Babatunde was recorded in Babajide’s account.
The transaction was recorded in the correct class of account i.e.
personal account but in the wrong person’s account.
The sales account will be credited and Babajide’s account will be debited as a debtor.
When these figures are taken to the trial balance, the debtor’s figure will not be affected because both Babatunde and Babajide are regarded as debtors; hence this error will not affect the trial balance.
• Errors of principle – this is where a correct figure is recorded on the correct side of the wrong class of account.
For example, the purchase of a fixed asset is recorded as purchases.
The accounting entries will be: Dr. purchase account instead of fixed asset account Cr.
cash account With this type of entries, the trial balance will not be affected.
58 TSM341 FINANCIAL ACCOUNTING AND MANAGEMENT FOR HOSPITALITY AND TOURISM • Compensating errors – this is where errors cancel out each other.
The debit side of the trial balance could have been erroneously added up by N1, 000 too much and incidentally the credit side could also have been added up by the same amount.
This error will correct out each other because both sides of the trial balance will be N1, 000 too much.
This error cannot easily be detected by merely looking at the trial balance.
• Errors of original entry – this occurs when an original figure is not correct but is consistently used up to the trial balance and the double entry is correctly observed.
For example, a sales invoice was prepared carrying N500 instead of N600.
This amount was debited to bank account while the sales account was credited with the wrong figure N500 which implies that the trial balance will still agree.
• Complete reversal of entries – this is where the correct figure of a transaction is entered on the wrong sides of the account.
For instance, a credit purchase of N300 should have been entered as Dr. purchase account N300 Cr.
creditors account N300 But was entered as Dr. creditors account N300 Cr.
purchase account N300 The trial balance will still balance because the debit and credit sides have been affected by the same amount.
• Transposition error – this is when each character of a figure is not written in the correct sequence in prime books, and it is consistently used both for the debit and credit entries.
For instance, instead of writing N147, N174 was entered.
Both the debit and credit sides will be more by the difference which is N27 implying that the trial balance will not be affected.
It is worthy to note that this sort of error can be classified under errors of original entry.
In correcting these errors, the double entry accounts are affected by making journal entries.
To this end, we will first show corrections in the journal before posting the journal entries to the ledger accounts affected.
Worked examples: 1.
Show the journal entries necessary to correct the following errors: 59 TSM341 FINANCIAL ACCOUNTING AND MANAGEMENT FOR HOSPITALITY AND TOURISM (a) A sale of goods N6, 780 to Johnson had been entered in Jackson’s account.
(b) The purchase of a machinery on credit from Lemi for N43, 900 had been completely omitted from our books.
(c) The purchase of a van N38, 000 had been entered in error in the motor expenses account.
(d) A sale of N2, 210 to Eweka had been entered in the books, both debit and credit as N2, 120.
(e) Commission received N2, 570 had been entered in error in the sales account.
(f) A receipt of cash from Tope N770 had been entered on the credit side of the cash book and the debit side of Tope’s account.
(g) A purchase of goods for N1, 890 had been entered in error on the debit side of the drawings account.
(h) Discounts allowed of N3, 660 had been entered in error on the debit side of the discounts received account.
Solution The Journal S/N Particulars/Details Dr. Cr.
(a) The accounts required are sales account and Johnson’s account.
The problem with this entry is that Jackson’s account was debited instead of Johnson’s account.
The sales account is not affected.
To correct this error, we credit Jackson’s account to cancel the initial entry and correctly debit Johnson’s account.
6,780 6,780 Johnson’s account Jackson’s account Being error of commission now corrected.
(b) Machinery’s account and Lemi’s account have both been omitted meaning that there was no entry at all for both accounts.
We therefore need to correct this error by making the entries.
43,900 Machinery account 43,900 Lemi account Being error of omission now corrected.
(c) This transaction ought to be entered in the van account and cash/bank account.
But it was entered in the motor expenses account and the cash/bank account.
The cash / 60 TSM341 FINANCIAL ACCOUNTING AND MANAGEMENT FOR HOSPITALITY AND TOURISM bank account was correctly entered, so it does not need to be corrected.
The motor expenses account was debited so we would credit it to cancel the entry and correctly debit the van account.
38,000 Van account 38,000 Motor Expenses account Being error of principle now corrected.
(d) Eweka account and Sales account have been undercasted by N90 to the debit and credit sides.
Eweka account 90 Sales account 90 Being error of transposition now corrected.
(e) The Sales account was credited instead of the commission received account.
So we will debit the Sales account to cancel the entry, while we credit the commission received account.
Sales account 2,570 Commission received account 2,570 Being error of commission now corrected.
(f) The entries were completely reversed.
So, we will cancel the entries first, before we make the correct entry.
Cash account 770 Tope account 770 Being the cancellation of wrong entries.
Cash account 770 Tope account 770 Being error of complete reversal of entries now corrected.
(g) Transaction was wrongly entered in the drawings account.
To correct this, we will credit the drawings account and debit purchases account with the amount.
1,890 Purchases account 1,890 Drawings account Being error of principle now corrected.
(h) Discount allowed account should have been debited but discount received account 61 TSM341 FINANCIAL ACCOUNTING AND MANAGEMENT FOR HOSPITALITY AND TOURISM was debited.
We will have to correct it first by crediting the discount received account before we effect the correct entry by debiting the discount allowed account.
Discount allowed account 3,660 Discount received account 3,660 Being error of commission now corrected.
2.
While cross-checking entries that were made in preparing the accounts of an organisation, the following errors were identified: (a) Extra capital of N100, 000 paid into the bank had been credited to sales account.
(b) Goods taken for own use N7, 000 had been debited to general expenses.
(c) Private insurance N890 had been debited to insurance account.
(d) A purchase of goods from Caleb N8, 570 had been entered in the books as N5,870.
(e) Cash banked N3,900 had been credited to the bank column and debited to the cash column in the cash book.
(f) Cash drawings of N400 had been credited to the bank column of the cash book.
(g) Returns inwards N1,680 from Miller had been entered in error in Michael’s account.
(h) A sale of a Van for N1,000 had been credited to Motor Expenses.
Required: Give the journal entries required to correct the errors.
Narrations are not required.
Solution The Journal S/N Particulars/Details Dr. Cr.
(a) Sales account 100,000 Capital 100,000 (b) Drawings account 7,000 General expenses account 7,000 (c) Insurance account 890 Drawings account 890 (d) Purchases account 2,700 Caleb account 2,700 (e) Bank account 3,900 62 TSM341 FINANCIAL ACCOUNTING AND MANAGEMENT FOR HOSPITALITY AND TOURISM Cash account 3,900 Bank account 3,900 Cash account 3,900 OR Bank account 7,800 Cash account 7,800 (f) Bank account 400 Cash account 400 (g) Michael’s account 1,680 Miller account 1,680 (h) Motor Expenses account 1,000 Motor Disposal account 1,000 SELF-ASSESSMENT EXERCISE 2 1.
List and explain the errors that do not affect the trial balance.
2.
The bookkeeper for Premier Hotels discovered the following errors: (a) Goods sold to Akeem for N37, 000 was omitted because the sales invoice was missing.
(b) Salaries paid was N99, 000, but was mistakenly casted as N90,000 and cash balance was N31, 000 but was mistakenly entered as N40,000.
(c) The sum of N10, 000 for repair of a motor vehicle was wrongly entered in the Motor Vehicle account.
(d) Goods bought on credit from Mr. Eweka valued N12, 500 was wrongly entered in Mr. Elaho’s account.
(e) Goods sold on credit to Mrs. Ijeh for N7, 000 was wrongly entered into Mr. Ijeh’s account.
Required: Correct the errors through the journal entry.
3.4 Use of Suspense Account We have looked at the errors that do not affect the trial balance.
However, there are many errors that will cause both sides of the trial balance not to agree.
These errors are caused by: (1) entering a different amount on the debit and credit sides; 63 TSM341 FINANCIAL ACCOUNTING AND MANAGEMENT FOR HOSPITALITY AND TOURISM (2) making incorrect additions (casting) in any account thereby making the corresponding debit or credit entry different from it; (3) making an entry on one side of the accounts and forgetting to make the second entry.
When it is discovered that both sides of the trial balance do not agree, efforts should be made to discover the cause(s) of the errors so they can be corrected.
But, when the errors cannot be easily identified at that moment, the amount causing the difference is placed in a suspense account to temporarily ensure that both sides of the trial balance agree.
Below is a layout on how the trial balance will look like after inserting a suspense account: Particulars/Details Dr. Cr.
N N Totals after all the accounts balances have 200,000 186,478 been listed _______ 13,522 Suspense account 200,000 200,000 To make both sides agree, a figure of N13, 522 for the suspense account has been included.
The suspense account is shown in a ledger and the correction of the errors that make the difference will pass through the suspense account.
SUSPENSE ACCOUNT Dr. Cr.
Date Details F Amount Date Details F Amount Dec. 31 Difference per trial 13,522 balance There is no double entry here i.e.
no debit to match the credit of N13, 522.
It is assumed that there is a N13,522 hidden somewhere in the accounts that has been omitted when the balances were extracted for the trial balance; or that an extra N13,522 has been added by mistake to the debit entries in the trial balance.
This single credit entry is therefore like completing the double entry, the debit side being the mistake.
The cause of the difference in that trial balance must be discovered before the preparation of the final accounts.
But if the error causing the difference is not found, then the suspense account will be included in the balance sheet.
Where the suspense account is on the credit side like the one we have, it is included in the capital and liabilities side of the balance sheet.
When the suspense account is on the debit side, it should be shown on the assets side of the balance sheet.
64 TSM341 FINANCIAL ACCOUNTING AND MANAGEMENT FOR HOSPITALITY AND TOURISM Worked examples: The trial balance as at 31 December, 20XX showed a difference of N770, being a shortage on the debit side.
While going through the records in the following year, the following errors were discovered.
(a) On February 12, a cheque of N1,500 paid to Ladi had been correctly entered in the cash book, but had not been entered in Ladi’s account; (b) On February 18, the purchases account had been undercast by N200; (c) On March 2, a cheque of N930 received from Kehinde had been correctly entered in the cash book, but had not been entered in Kehinde’s account.
Required: Correct the following errors through a journal.
Solution The Journal S/N Particulars/Details Dr. Cr.
(a) Ladi’s account 1,500 Suspense account 1,500 Being payment of cheque omitted from Ladi’s account now corrected (b) Purchases account 200 Suspense account 200 Being undercasting error now corrected (c) Suspense account 930 Kehinde’s account 930 Being amount omitted from Kehinde’s account now corrected.
The next step is to open a suspense account and show the corrected entries.
SUSPENSE ACCOUNT Dr. Cr.
Date Details F Amount Date Details F Amount Jan 01 Difference Feb 12 Ladi’s 1,500 as per trial 770 Feb 18 account 200 Feb 03 balance 930 Purchases _____ Kehinde’s 1,700 account 1,700 account 65 TSM341 FINANCIAL ACCOUNTING AND MANAGEMENT FOR HOSPITALITY AND TOURISM It should be noted that only errors that caused both sides of the trial balance not to agree are corrected via the suspense account.
SELF-ASSESSMENT EXERCISE 3 1.
What kind of errors could cause the trial balance totals not to agree?
2.
On the 31st December, 20XX, the trial balance of Uniben Guest House did not agree and a suspense account was opened as shown below: Particulars/Details Dr. Cr.
Cash 76,000 Bank 100,000 Sales 160,000 Suspense account _______ 16,000 176,000 176,000 While going through the accounts in January, the following errors were discovered: (a) A cheque for N29,000 received as dividend has been entered in the cash book but the double entry was not completed; (b) Purchases of N13,000 cash has been posted to the cash book but the corresponding double entry was not made.
You are required to correct the errors using a journal and suspense account.
3.5 The Effect of Errors on Profits We have discussed the errors that are made when accounts are prepared.
These errors could easily be detected through the trial balance or they could not easily be detected.
In the same way, there are errors that affect the original profits calculated and there are some that do not affect the profits.
If the error affects items only in the balance sheet, then the original calculated profits will not be affected.
However, where the error affects items in the trading, profit and loss account, then the original profit will be affected and would need altering after correcting errors.
You may be required to calculate the corrected net profit figure for the year.
After identifying the errors that would affect the net profit, we need to consider how it has affected the net profit i.e.
has it increased or decreased the profit figure?
66 TSM341 FINANCIAL ACCOUNTING AND MANAGEMENT FOR HOSPITALITY AND TOURISM Example After preparing the trial balance, a difference of N600 was discovered on the debit side.
During the period, the following errors were identified: (a) Sales overcast by N700; (b) Insurance was undercast by N400; (c) Cash received from a debtor entered in the cash book only N500; (d) A purchase of N590 entered in the books as N950 on both the debit and credit entries.
You are required to correct the errors through the journal and suspense account where necessary.
Also, calculate the corrected net profit, assuming that the calculated net profit was N16, 000.
Solution The Journal S/N Particulars/Details Dr. Cr.
(a) Sales account 700 Suspense account 700 Being sales overcast now corrected.
(b) Insurance account 400 Suspense account 400 Being insurance undercast now corrected.
(c) Suspense account 360 Debtor’s account 360 Being cash received omitted from debtor’s account now corrected.
(d) Purchases account 500 Cash account 500 Being transposition error now corrected.
The next step is to open a account and show the corrected entries.
SUSPENSE ACCOUNT Dr. Cr.
Date Details F Amount Date Details F Amount Difference Sales 700 as per trial 600 account balance 500 400 Debtor’s 1,100 Insurance 1,100 account account 67 TSM341 FINANCIAL ACCOUNTING AND MANAGEMENT FOR HOSPITALITY AND TOURISM (a) Sales overcast will increase the net profit.
To correct this, we will reduce the figure from the original net profit.
(b) Insurance is an expense and since it was undercast it implies that the net profit was overstated, so we will reduce the figure from the original profit.
(c) Cash is a balance sheet figure so this will not affect the net profit.
(d) Purchase was overcasted implying a reduction in net profit, we will therefore add the difference from the net profit.
Statement of Corrected Net Profit S/N Particulars/Details Amount (N) Net profit per accounts 16,000 Less: Sales overcast 700 15,300 Insurance undercast 400 14,900 Add: Purchases overcast 360 Correct Net Profit for the Year 15,260 SELF-ASSESSMENT EXERCISE 4 Explain how errors will affect the calculation of net profit.
4.0 CONCLUSION Errors that affect the trial balance are easier to detect and correct compared to those that do not affect the trial balance.
Every attempt should be made to find errors; a suspense account should only be opened if all other efforts to trace errors have failed.
It should be noted that except you are asked to, avoid the use of suspense account.
5.0 SUMMARY In this unit, we have been able to treat cash and credit posting in the ledgers.
We also considered the fourth step in the accounting cycle which is the trial balance and it was defined as a list of ledger balances.
Finally, we also looked at correction of errors that affect or do not affect the trial balance and how these errors could affect the original net profit figure.
The journal was predominantly used when correcting these errors.
68 TSM341 FINANCIAL ACCOUNTING AND MANAGEMENT FOR HOSPITALITY AND TOURISM 6.0 TUTOR MARKED ASSIGNMENT 1.
The trial balance of NOUN Guest House as at 31 December, 20XX was balanced by the inclusion of N25, 130 on the debit side.
Subsequent investigation revealed the following errors: a.
Discounts received of N3,240 in June have been posted to the discounts allowed account.
b.
Wages of N29, 630 paid in February have not been posted from the cash book.
c. A remittance of N9, 400 received from Killian in July has been posted to the credit of Kenneth.
d. In August, the guest house took advantage of an opportunity to purchase a large quantity of stationery at a bargain price of N20,000.
No adjustments have been made in the accounts for the fact that ¾ in value of this stationery was in stock on 31 December, 20XX.
e. A payment of N3, 410 to Johnson in August has been posted as N1,430.
f. A remittance of N30, 000 received from Daniel, a credit customer, in December has been credited to sales.
The draft accounts for the year ended 31 December, 20XX of NOUN Guest House showed a net profit of N247, 600.
Required: (a) Prepare the suspense account showing, where appropriate, the entries necessary to correct the errors through a journal.
(b) Prepare a computation of the corrected net profit for the year ended.
2.
Briefly describe a trial balance 7.0 REFERENCES/FURTHER READING Okoye, A. E. (2000).
Financial Accounting for Students and Managers.
Benin City: Mindex Publishing Company.
Wood, F. & Sangster, A.
(2002).
Business Accounting Vol.
I. London: Prentice Hall.
69 TSM341 FINANCIAL ACCOUNTING AND MANAGEMENT FOR HOSPITALITY AND TOURISM UNIT 2 ACCOUNTING CYCLE: ACCOUNT OF SOLE PROPRIETORSHIP CONTENTS 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objectives 3.0 Main Content 3.1 Sole Proprietorship 3.2 Preparation of Final Accounts 3.3 Trading, Profit and Loss Account 3.3.1 Gross Profit 3.3.2 Net Profit 3.3.3 Effect of Profit or Loss on the Capital Account 3.4 The Balance Sheet 3.4.1 Assets 3.4.2 Liabilities 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutor Marked Assignment 7.0 References/Further Reading 1.0 INTRODUCTION In this unit, we shall be considering the preparation of the final accounts which consist of the trading, profit and loss accounts and the balance sheet.
For the purpose of this unit, we shall consider the final accounts of a sole proprietor.
You will learn how to adjust and arrive at cost of goods sold; discover the difference between gross profit and net profit.
You will also learn how to transfer net profit to the capital account at the end of the period.
2.0 OBJECTIVES At the end of this unit, you should be able to: • state the characteristics of a sole proprietorship • identify the characteristics of a trading, profit and loss account and a balance sheet • prepare a trading, profit and loss account and a balance sheet • prepare the final accounts with adjustments.
70 TSM341 FINANCIAL ACCOUNTING AND MANAGEMENT FOR HOSPITALITY AND TOURISM 3.0 MAIN CONTENT 3.1 Sole Proprietorship The main reason for setting up businesses is to make profit.
Owners are interested in knowing the performance of the business from time to time.
Performance is measured in terms of profit or loss.
We have different types of business and they include the following.
(a) Sole proprietorship (b) Partnership (c) Limited liability company.
The relevant laws prescribe the minimum information which must be disclosed in their respective financial statements.
The laws take into account the type of ownership and the peculiar needs of the owners with respect to the accounting information.
The accounting requirements of the various forms of organisations, as influenced by the relevant legislations, will be considered in this and the next three units.
This unit examines some of the peculiar characteristics of the accounts prepared for sole proprietorship.
A sole proprietorship, also referred to as sole trader, is a business that is fully owned by one person.
He employs other people that work for and with him, he makes decisions on his own, raises capital from his own savings or borrows from banks, money lenders or friends and relatives.
The growth and survival of the business depends on him, therefore he completely bears the risk of the business.
He has unlimited liability i.e.
he is liable to the debts of the business and so his personal belongings could be used to settle outstanding debts.
Most of the time, the business comes to an abrupt end when the proprietor dies or is incapacitated.
The business of a sole trader is not seen as a separate legal entity from its owner.
When the business is charged to court, the owner is also charged to court.
The tax paid by the owner is the same as that paid by the business.
Tax is charged based on the financial statement of the business prepared by the owner.
The owner decides what to do with profits made and he is free to transact business and control his funds without any legal restrictions.
SELF-ASSESSMENT EXERCISE 1 Briefly describe a sole proprietorship stating five characteristics of this form of business.
71 TSM341 FINANCIAL ACCOUNTING AND MANAGEMENT FOR HOSPITALITY AND TOURISM 3.2 Preparation of Final Account The final account is the last step in the accounting cycle.
This statement can also be referred to as financial statements, financials, etc.
There are rules and regulations guiding the preparation and presentation of final accounts.
These rules vary from country to country.
For example, the bodies that control the preparation of final accounts in Nigeria include the Nigerian Accounting Standards Board (NASB), the Nigerian Stock Exchange (NSE), and professional bodies like the Institute of Chartered Accountants of Nigeria (ICAN), etc.
The final accounts prepared by a sole proprietorship are: (a) The trading account (b) The profit and loss account (c) The balance sheet.
SELF-ASSESSMENT EXERCISE 2 1.
List some bodies that regulate the preparation of final accounts in Nigeria.
2.
What makes up the final accounts of a sole proprietorship?
3.3 Trading, Profit and Loss Account The calculation of profits or losses, as the case may be, is the most important objective of the accounting function.
Apart from the profits helping to measure performance, they help companies to: • plan ahead; • obtain loans from banks, other businesses or individuals; • tell prospective business partners how successful the business is; • tell prospective buyers how successful the business is; • calculate the tax due on profits.
The trading, profit and loss accounts inform us of the financial performance of any business as at the end of the period.
It could also be referred to as the income statement.
It reveals to us two types of profits.
3.3.1 Gross Profit The gross profit is found in the trading account which is part of the trading, profit and loss account.
Gross profit is the excess of sales revenue over the cost of goods sold.
Where the cost of goods sold is in excess of the sales revenue, the result is a gross loss.
We are interested 72 TSM341 FINANCIAL ACCOUNTING AND MANAGEMENT FOR HOSPITALITY AND TOURISM in calculating the profit only on goods that have been sold.
Below is a layout of the trading account.
Trading account for the year ended 31/12/20XX N N Sales XXX Less: Cost of goods sold: Opening stock XXX Add: purchases XXX XXX Add: wages XXX XXX Less: closing stock XXX XXX Gross Profit XXX This layout is known as the vertical method.
Another type of layout is the traditional or ‘T’ method.
But the vertical method is more popular than the traditional method.
The cost of goods consists of cost incurred in getting goods ready or available for sale.
This cost could include opening stock, purchases, wages, insurance on goods in warehouse, closing stock etc.
The layout of the ‘T’ method is shown below: Trading account for the year ended 31/12/20XX N N N N Cost of sales: Sales XXX Opening stock XXX Add: purchases XXX XXX Wages XXX XXX Less: closing stock XXX XXX Gross Profit XXX ____ XXX XXX 3.3.2 Net Profit The net profit is found in the profit and loss account.
It is made up of the gross profit plus any revenue other than that from sales, such as rent received or commissions earned, less any other expenses excluding that 73 TSM341 FINANCIAL ACCOUNTING AND MANAGEMENT FOR HOSPITALITY AND TOURISM in the cost of sales.
Where the expenses or costs used up exceed the gross profit plus other revenue, the result is said to be a net loss.
Below is the layout for profit and loss account.
Profit and Loss Account for the year ended 31/12/20XX (Vertical Method) N N N Gross Profit XXX Add: Income: Rent received XXX Commission received XXX XXX XXX Less: Expenses: Rent XXX Electricity XXX Telephone bills XXX Salaries XXX Insurance XXX XXX Net Profit XXX Having shown the vertical method of presenting profit and loss account, it is now necessary to present the layout for presenting profit and loss account through the traditional method i.e.
‘T’ method: Profit and Loss Account for the year ended 31/12/20XX (T-Method) N N N N Expenses: Gross Profit XXX Rent XX Add: Other income Electricity XX Rent received XX Telephone bills XX Commission XX XX Salaries XX XXX Insurance XX XXX Net Profit XXX XXX XXX Worked examples: From the following trial balance of Danielle’s, prepare a trading, profit and loss account for the year ended 31st March, 20XX showing the gross profit and net profit.
74 TSM341 FINANCIAL ACCOUNTING AND MANAGEMENT FOR HOSPITALITY AND TOURISM Details/Particulars Dr. (N) Cr.
(N) Sales 287,940 Purchases 238,030 Rent 8,540 Lighting and heating expenses 4,220 Salaries and wages 31,640 Insurance 1,050 Sundry expenses 5,060 Buildings 500,000 Fixtures 10,000 Debtors 31,660 Creditors 12,060 Cash at bank 38,470 Drawings 24,000 Vans 55,000 Motor running expenses 11,330 Capital 659,000 959,000 959,000 Stock as at 31st March, 20XX was N41,660.
Solution Vertical Format Dannielle’s Trading, Profit and Loss Account for the year ended 31/03/20XX N N N Sales 287,940 Less: Cost of goods sold.
Opening stock - Add: purchases 238,030 238,030 Less: closing stock 41,660 196,370 Gross Profit 91,570 Less: Expenses: Rent 8,540 Lighting & heating expenses 4,220 Salaries and wages 31,640 Insurance 1,050 Sundry expenses 5,060 Motor running expenses 11,330 61,840 Net Profit 29,730 75 TSM341 FINANCIAL ACCOUNTING AND MANAGEMENT FOR HOSPITALITY AND TOURISM Traditional Format Dannielle’s Trading, Profit & Loss Account for the year ended 31/03/20XX N N N N Cost of sales: Sales 287,940 Opening stock - Add: purchases 238,030 238,030 Less: closing stock 41,660 196,370 Gross profit c/d 91,570 _______ 287,940 287,940 Expenses: Gross Profit b/d 91,570 Rent 8,540 Lighting & heating expenses 4,220 Salaries and wages 31,640 Insurance 1,050 Sundry expenses 5,060 Motor running expenses 11,330 Net profit 29,730 ______ 91,570 91,570 SELF-ASSESSMENT EXERCISE 3 1.
What is the importance of the profit figure?
2.
Describe the types of profits revealed to us through the trading, profit and loss account.
3.3.3 Effect of Profit or Loss on the Capital Account From the traditional format, the net profit is on the debit side and no corresponding credit is yet to be made to complete the double entry.
The net profit increases the capital of the owner, so we normally credit the capital account with the net profit figure.
The reverse treatment will be the case where losses are incurred.
Every sale at a profit increases the capital as well as every income received.
But a loss or an expense reduces the capital.
We can thus say that the trading, profit and loss account saves the capital account from being overworked with unnecessary details.
Alteration of the capital account will therefore be avoided.
The drawings account can also be said to save the capital account of details concerning withdrawal of cash or stock for personal uses.
For example: 76 TSM341 FINANCIAL ACCOUNTING AND MANAGEMENT FOR HOSPITALITY AND TOURISM Capital Account N N 30/01/20XX Drawings XXX 01/01/20XX Cash XXX 31/12/20XX Balance c/d XXX 31/12/20XX Net Profit from Trading, Profit & ____ Loss Account XXX XXX XXX 01/01/20X2 Balance b/d XXX Drawings Account N N 31/12/20XX Balance c/d XXX 30/10/20XX Capital account XXX Using the information from Trial Balance in the example above, we can prepare the Capital account and Drawing account.
Capital Account N N 31/12/20XX Drawings 24,000 01/01/20XX Balance b/d 659,000 31/12/20XX Balance c/d 664,730 31/12/20XX Net Profit from Trading, Profit ______ Loss Account 29,730 688,730 688,730 01/01/20X1Bal b/d 664,730 N664,730 is the new figure for Capital after adjusting for Net Profit and Drawings.
SELF-ASSESSMENT EXERCISE 4 Briefly describe the effect of profit and loss on the capital account.
3.4 The Balance Sheet This is a statement that shows the financial position of an organisation.
It contains details of assets, liabilities and capital.
Information used in preparing this statement is obtained from the trial balance.
The balance sheet does not form part of the double entry system, so all we do is to 77 TSM341 FINANCIAL ACCOUNTING AND MANAGEMENT FOR HOSPITALITY AND TOURISM lift balances carried forward from the accounts and place them in an appropriate position in the statement.
For a balance sheet to be helpful and meaningful to users, a presentation technique is used.
This saves users the hassles of sorting through information in order to make sense out of the balance sheet.
The assets, liabilities and capital are usually presented in a format.
Firstly, we look at how assets should be presented.
3.4.1 Assets This is normally shown under two separate headings, namely: fixed assets and current assets.
Fixed assets are assets that: (i) were not bought primarily to be sold; (ii) are to be used in the business; (iii) are expected to be of use to the business for a long time.
Fixed assets are presented first in the balance sheet starting with those that would be kept the longest, down to those which will not be kept so long.
For examples: • land and building • fixtures and fittings • machinery • motor vehicle etc.
Where there are intangible fixed assets such as goodwill, patent, etc, they are listed before tangible assets.
Current Assets are assets that are likely to change in the short-term i.e.
within twelve months of the balance sheet date.
They include items held for resale at a profit, amounts owed by debtors, cash at the bank and cash in hand.
These are presented in increasing order of liquidity i.e.
starting with the asset furthest away from being turned into cash, then ending with cash itself.
For examples: • stock • debtors • cash at bank • cash in hand Stock could be sold on credit, then we have debtors, who could pay through cheque (bank) and we withdraw from the bank (cash).
We 78 TSM341 FINANCIAL ACCOUNTING AND MANAGEMENT FOR HOSPITALITY AND TOURISM always have debtors because it could be quite difficult to convert stock to cash.
3.4.2 Liabilities There are two categories of liabilities, namely: current liabilities and long-term liabilities.
Current liabilities – these are items that have to be paid within a year at the balance sheet date e.g.
bank overdraft, trade creditors, accruals, etc.
Long-term liabilities are items that have to be paid more than a year after the balance sheet date, e.g.
bank loan.
Below is a balance sheet layout.
Mega Hotels Balance Sheet as at 31/12/20XX Fixed assets: N N Land and building XXX Fixtures and fittings XXX Current assets: Stock XXX Debtors XXX Bank XXX Cash XXX XXX Less: current liabilities: trade Creditors XXX Net Current Asset (Working Capital) XXX Net worth XXX Financed by: Capital XXX Add: net profit for the year XXX XXX Less: drawings XXX XXX Notes: 1.
The net current asset is derived by subtracting the current liabilities from the current assets.
It shows the amount of resources the business has in a form that is readily convertible into cash.
79 TSM341 FINANCIAL ACCOUNTING AND MANAGEMENT FOR HOSPITALITY AND TOURISM 2.
The operating capital figure shown in the trial balance has changed as a result of addition of net profit made during the year and deducting drawings.
The traditional format will look like this: Mega Hotels Trading Account for the year ended 31/03/20XX N N N N Liabilities: Fixed Assets: Capital XXX Land and Building XXX Add: net profit XXX XXX Fixtures and Fittings XXX XXX XXX XXX Less: drawings XXX Current Assets: XXX Stock XXX Debtors XXX Bank XXX Cash XXX XXX Current liabilities: Creditors XXX ____ XXX XXX The traditional format is prepared here for knowledge purposes; it is no longer in use.
The only time it will be accepted during examination is when it has been specifically requested.
Worked examples: Using information presented in the trial balance of capital hotels, prepare a balance sheet as at that date: Capital Hotels Balance Sheet as at 31/12/20XX N N Fixed assets: Land and building 500,000 Van 55,000 Fixtures and fittings 10,000 565,000 Current assets: Stock 41,660 Debtors 31,660 80 TSM341 FINANCIAL ACCOUNTING AND MANAGEMENT FOR HOSPITALITY AND TOURISM Bank 38,470 111,790 Less: current liabilities: trade creditors 12,060 Net current asset (working capital) 99,730 664,730 Financed by: Capital 659,000 Add: net profit for the year 29,730 688,730 Less: drawings 24,000 664,730 SELF-ASSESSMENT EXERCISE 5 Define a balance sheet and list the items that make up a comprehensive balance sheet.
4.0 CONCLUSION In this unit, you have learnt about the trading, profit and loss account and the balance sheet which are the final stage in the accounting cycle.
It completes the process of recording, summarising and presenting financial transaction.
The source documents, daybooks, ledgers and even the trial balance may not make much meaning to users of financial information.
But these financial statements have been prepared in such a summarised form that meanings could easily be made from them.
5.0 SUMMARY This unit has exposed you to the rudiments of preparing the financial statements of a sole proprietorship which comprise of the trading, profit and loss account (income statement) and the balance sheet.
You discovered from the trading, profit and loss account that you could derive two types of profits, namely: gross profit and net profit.
You have also learnt how items ought to be arranged in the balance sheet in such a way that you could easily make meaning out of it.
The different methods or formats for presenting financial statement were also treated, but it was concluded that the vertical format is what is currently being used.
The traditional or ‘T’ format is only used when it is specifically requested for.
81 TSM341 FINANCIAL ACCOUNTING AND MANAGEMENT FOR HOSPITALITY AND TOURISM 6.0 TUTOR-MARKED ASSIGNMENT 1.
From the following trial balance of better suites, prepare the trading, profit and loss account.
Better Suites Trial Balance as at 31/12/20X2 Details/Particulars Dr. (N) Cr.
(N) Sales 184,620 Purchases 146,290 Salaries 21,500 Motor expenses 5,200 Rent 6,700 Insurance 1,110 General expenses 1,050 Premises 15,000 Motor vehicles 12,000 Debtors 19,500 Creditors 15,380 Cash at bank 16,540 Cash in hand 400 Capital 8,950 54,240 254,240 254,240 Stock as at 31/12/20X2 – N25, 480 Note: stock listed in the trial balance is the opening stock while that listed under the trial balance is the closing stock.
2.
Distinguish between the two categories of liabilities.
7.0 REFERENCES/FURTHER READING Okoye, A.E.
(2000).
Financial Accounting for Students and Managers.
Benin City: Mindex Publishing Company.
Wood, F. & Sangster, A.
(2002).
Business Accounting Vol.
I. London: Prentice Hall.
Anao, A.R.
(1989).
An Introduction to Financial Accounting.
Ikeja: Longman.
82 TSM341 FINANCIAL ACCOUNTING AND MANAGEMENT FOR HOSPITALITY AND TOURISM UNIT 3 FINAL ACCOUNTS: ADJUSTMENTS CONTENTS 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objectives 3.0 Main Content 3.1 Returns 3.2 Carriage 3.3 Capital and Revenue Expenditure 3.4 Accounts Receivables 3.4.1 Good Debts 3.4.2 Doubtful Debts 3.4.3 Bad Debts 3.4.4 Bad Debts Recovered 3.5 Depreciation of Fixed Assets 3.5.1 Methods of Depreciation 3.5.2 Double Entry for Depreciation 3.5.3 Accounting for the Disposal of a Fixed Asset 3.6 Accruals and Prepayments 3.6.1 Accruals (Accrued Expenses) 3.6.2 Prepayments (Prepaid Expenses) 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutor-Marked Assignment 7.0 References/Further Reading 1.0 INTRODUCTION In this unit, you shall be looking further at the trading, profit and loss accounts and balance sheet.
The major work here will be adjusting for returns, carriage, capital expenditure and revenue expenditure, bad debts, depreciations, accruals and prepayments.
This unit contains information that may confuse learners, you are therefore advised to take care and understand the points as they are presented.
2.0 OBJECTIVES At the end of this unit, you should be able to: • explain the various terms treated • make adjustments to financial statements • prepare a trading, profit and loss account and balance sheet containing the appropriate adjustments.
83 TSM341 FINANCIAL ACCOUNTING AND MANAGEMENT FOR HOSPITALITY AND TOURISM 3.0 MAIN CONTENT 3.1 Returns Goods bought for resale are known as stock.
At times, these stocks could be returned to suppliers after they had been bought or they could be returned by customers after they had been sold.
The purchases account and the return outwards account deal with goods purchased and goods returned to the supplier.
The sales account and the returns inwards account deal with goods sold and returned by customers, respectively.
These are the four accounts that deal with the different movement of stock.
When preparing the trading, profit and loss account, these returns will have to come into the calculation of gross profit.
The trading account will appear thus: Trading, Profit and Loss Account for the year ended 31/12/20XX N N N Sales XXX Less: return inwards XXX XXX Less: Cost of goods sold: Purchases XXX Less: return outwards XXX XXX Less: closing stock XXX Gross profit XXX XXX SELF-ASSESSMENT EXERCISE 1 What are returns and how are they treated in the calculation of gross profit?
3.2 Carriage When goods are delivered by suppliers or sent to customers, the cost of transporting the goods is often an additional charge.
This charge is referred to as carriage in accounting.
When it is charged for goods purchased, it is called carriage inwards.
However, when it is charged for goods sent out to customers, it is called carriage outwards.
84 TSM341 FINANCIAL ACCOUNTING AND MANAGEMENT FOR HOSPITALITY AND TOURISM Carriage inwards is always added to the cost of purchases in the trading account.
This always ensures that the true cost of buying goods for resale is always included in the calculation of gross profit.
Carriage outwards is treated in the profit and loss account.
It is included in the calculation of the net profit or loss, but never included in the calculation of gross profit.
In treating carriage inwards and carriage outwards, the trading, profit and loss account would look like this: Trading, Profit and Loss Account for the year ended 31/03/20XX N N N Sales XXX Less: Cost of goods sold.
Opening stock XXX Add: purchases XXX XXX Add: carriage inwards XXX XXX Less: closing stock XXX XXX Gross Profit XXX Less: Expenses: Salaries and wages XXX Lighting XXX Transportation XXX Carriage outwards XXX XXX Net Profit XXX SELF-ASSESSMENT EXERCISE 2 Briefly describe the treatment of carriage in trading, profit and loss account.
3.3 Capital and Revenue Expenditure Expenditure is normally incurred in the process of carrying out business transactions.
Some expenditures tend to lose their values immediately they are incurred while others may retain part of their value for over one financial year.
Expenditures could therefore be classified as capital or revenue expenditure.
Capital expenditure is an expenditure that is incurred by an organisation in acquiring assets which usefulness extend beyond one financial year.
85 TSM341 FINANCIAL ACCOUNTING AND MANAGEMENT FOR HOSPITALITY AND TOURISM This form of expenditure is incurred when money is spent to either buy fixed assets or added to the value of an existing fixed assets.
Such money could be spent on acquiring fixed assets; bringing them into the business; legal costs of buying buildings; carriage inwards on machinery bought; any other cost needed to get a fixed asset ready for use.
Expenditure of this nature involves very large amounts which are charged to the asset account.
However, part of its value is written off against the profit and loss account as an expense in the form of depreciation.
Revenue expenditure is an expenditure that is not spent on increasing the value of fixed assets.
But it is incurred in the day-to-day running of the business, e.g.
operating and maintaining the fixed assets.
Examples of such expenditure include salaries and wages, repair of equipment, stationery, fees, etc.
Such expenditure are treated as expenses and written off against the profit and loss account.
SELF-ASSESSMENT EXERCISE 3 Indicate the type of expenditure in the table below.
S/N Expenditure Type of Expenditure 1 Purchasing of a van 2 Repairs to van 3 Buying machinery 4 Electricity cost of using machinery 5 Improvement of machinery 6 Repairs of machinery 7 Painting outside of a new building 8 Repainting outside of building after some years 3.4 Accounts Receivables In the course of running a business, goods are normally sold on credit and in the process, debts are incurred.
Most times, goods are sold on credit basis in order to increase sales and enhance profits.
The extension of credit has been a significant factor behind economic growth in various countries.
In Nigeria today, bank cards such as Visa and MasterCard are ways of life for today’s average business or consumer.
There are costs associated with credit sales.
They include, for examples, the following.
• Business will often sell off their short-term investment to obtain operating funds and thereby lose future interest or dividend that would have accrued on these investments.
86 TSM341 FINANCIAL ACCOUNTING AND MANAGEMENT FOR HOSPITALITY AND TOURISM • They may also secure bank loans to finance their operations which will give rise to interest costs.
• There could be non-payment by customers.
Firms rarely collect all their debts because some customers go bankrupt, leave the town, die, etc.
This cost of non-payment, known as bad debt is an expense and can be especially high for an entity that has tried to increase sales by being very liberal in granting credit.
It should be noted that these credit sales are shown in the accounting books as debtors or account receivables.
In accounting, there are three major classes of debts and they are as follows.
3.4.1 Good Debts These are debts that have reasonable assurance of collection during the year.
Mr. Sam’s Account (Debtor) N N 01/01/20XX Sales account 1,000 01/06/20XX Cash account 1,000 Cash/Bank Account N N 01/06/20XX Debtor’s account 1,000 At the beginning of the year, goods were sold to Mr. Sam on credit, and his account was debited indicating that he is a debtor.
During the month of June, Mr. Sam pays his debt and so we credit his account reducing his indebtedness and debit cash or bank account.
3.4.2 Doubtful Debts These are debts that the business has little assurance of collecting during the year.
Though there is no evidence to show that the debts will not be repaid, but there is a probability that the debts or part of it may not be recovered.
These debts have not been paid by year end, but they may not have been owed for so long.
Now, to adhere to the prudence concept, there is need to provide for doubtful debts or else we would be 87 TSM341 FINANCIAL ACCOUNTING AND MANAGEMENT FOR HOSPITALITY AND TOURISM overstating our debtors and net profit figure in the balance sheet and profit and loss account respectively.
There is the problem of deciding how much to provide as a provision against the possibility of some debts proving bad in future.
In arriving at a figure for doubtful debts, a business must consider that some debtors will never pay any of the amount they owe, while others will pay a part of the amount owed only, leaving the remaining permanently unpaid.
Most businesses therefore apply a percentage of the overall debtor balance (after deducting the bad debts).
This percentage has been established over the years as being the most appropriate by the business.
The accounting entries needed for the provision for doubtful debts are: (i) Debit the profit and loss account with the amount of the provision; (ii) Credit the provision for doubtful debts account.
Example: Profit and Loss Account N N Provision for Doubtful Debts XXX Provision for Doubtful Debts Account N N Profit & Loss Account XXX In the balance sheet, the provision for doubtful debts will be deducted from the total debtors.
This is a more accurate figure of the value of debtors than the total of all the debtor balances in the sales ledger.
It may not be absolutely accurate, but it is better than not attempting to make an estimate.
3.4.2.1 Increase in the Provision for Doubtful Debts Where there is an increase in the provision for doubtful debt – may be as a result of an increase in the debtors figure, we will debit the profit and loss account (i.e.
deduct it from gross profit as an expense) and credit the provision for doubtful debts account.
88 TSM341 FINANCIAL ACCOUNTING AND MANAGEMENT FOR HOSPITALITY AND TOURISM Profit and Loss Account N N Increase in provision for doubtful debt XXX Provision for Doubtful Debts Account N N Balance c/d XXX Balance b/d XXX ____ Profit & loss (increase) XXX XXX XXX Balance b/d XXX Increase in the provision for doubtful debt increases the total expense figure and hence reduces the profit figure.
3.4.2.2 Reduction in the Provision for Doubtful Debts Where there is a reduction in the provision for doubtful debt, the accounting entry is simply opposite of what we did to increase it.
Debit the provision for doubtful debt account and credit the profit and loss account.
Profit and Loss Account N N Decrease in Provision for Doubtful Debt XXX Provision for Doubtful Debts Account N N Balance c/d XXX Balance b/d XXX Profit & loss (decrease) XXX ____ XXX XXX Balance b/d XXX A reduction in the provision for doubtful debts will be added to the gross profit.
89 TSM341 FINANCIAL ACCOUNTING AND MANAGEMENT FOR HOSPITALITY AND TOURISM Example: On 31 December, 20X1, the debtors figure was N100, 000.
It is estimated that 2% of debts (i.e.
N2, 000) will eventually prove to be bad debts.
The following year, 20X2, the debtors figure increased to N120, 000 and hence the provision for doubtful debt will increase to N2, 400.
In 20X3, the debtors figure had reduced to N105, 000 and the provision is N2, 100.
You are required to show the accounting entries.
Profit and Loss Account N N 20X1 Provision for doubtful debts 2,000 20X3Reduction in provision 20X2 Increase in provision 400 Doubtful debts 300 Provision for Doubtful Debts Account N N 20X1 Profit and loss 2,000 20X2 Balance c/d 2,400 Balance b/d 2,000 ____ Profit and loss 400 2,400 2,400 20X3 Profit and loss 300 Balance b/d 2,400 Balance c/d 2,100 2,400 2,400 3.4.3 Bad Debts These are debts that are a normal business expense.
Businesses take risk because some of their customers may never pay for goods sold to them on credit.
When a debt is found to be bad, the debtors figure shown in the account is worthless and therefore should be eliminated from the accounts.
We debit the profit and loss account to increase the expenses in form of bad debts.
On the other hand, we credit debtors account to cancel the asset.
90 TSM341 FINANCIAL ACCOUNTING AND MANAGEMENT FOR HOSPITALITY AND TOURISM There are different reasons for considering a debt bad.
They are as follows.
• Where a debtor refuses to pay because he claims that the goods were delivered to him damaged or in bad condition.
• Where a debtor claims that he has not received all the items on the invoice issued to him.
• Where a debtor discloses that his business has failed and hence, can only pay a portion of the total amount due.
• Where the debtor’s business has failed totally and he is never likely to repay any part of the debt.
• Where the debtor dies before full payments of debt owed by him.
A Comprehensive Example A business starts on 1st January and its financial year end is 31st December annually.
A table of the debtors, the bad debts written off and the estimated bad debts at the rate of 2% of debtors at the end of each year is now given.
Debtors (after bad Debts thought at end Year Bad Debts debts had been of year impossible to End written off written off collect at 2% N N N 20X2 4,230 60,000 (2% of 60,000) = 1,200 20X3 5,100 70,000 (2% of 70,000) = 1,400 20X4 6,040 77,500 (2% of 77,500) = 1,550 20X5 6,100 65,000 (2% of 65,000) = 1,300 Required: Show the double entry accounts and the extracts from the final accounts.
Solution Bad Debts Account N N 31/12/20X2 Debtors 4,230 31/12/20X2 Profit and Loss 4,230 31/12/20X3 Debtors 5,100 31/12/20X3 Profit and Loss 5,100 31/12/20X4 Debtors 6,040 31/12/20X4 Profit and Loss 6,040 31/12/20X5 Debtors 6,100 31/12/20X5 Profit and Loss 6,100 91 TSM341 FINANCIAL ACCOUNTING AND MANAGEMENT FOR HOSPITALITY AND TOURISM Provision for Doubtful Debts Account N N 31/12/20X2 Balance c/d 1,200 31/12/20X2 Profit and loss 1,200 31/12/20X3 Balance c/d 1,400 01/01/20X3 Balance b/d 1,200 31/12/20X3 Profit and loss 200 1,400 1,400 31/12/20X4 Balance c/d 1,550 01/01/20X3 Balance b/d 1,400 31/12/20X3 Profit and loss 150 1,550 1,550 31/12/20X5 Profit and Loss 250 01/01/20X3 Balance b/d 1,550 31/12/20X5 Balance c/d 1,300 ____ 1,550 1,550 Profit and Loss Account (Extract) For The Year Ended 31/12 N N 20X2 Bad debts 4,230 31/12/20X2 Gross Profit XXX Increase in provision for doubtful debt 1,200 Profit and loss XXX ____ XXX XXX 20X3 Bad debts 5,100 31/12/20X3 Gross Profit XXX Increase in provision for doubtful debt 200 Profit and Loss XXX XXX XXX 20X4 Bad debts 6,040 31/12/20X4 Gross Profit XXX Increase in provision for doubtful debt 150 Profit and loss XXX ____ XXX XXX 20X5 Bad debts 6,100 01/01/20X5 Gross Profit XXX Profit and loss XXX Reduction in Prov.
For Doubtful debt 250 XXX XXX 92 TSM341 FINANCIAL ACCOUNTING AND MANAGEMENT FOR HOSPITALITY AND TOURISM Balance Sheet (Extract) as at 31 December N N 20X2 Debtors 60,000 Less: Provision for doubtful debts 1,200 58,800 20X3 Debtors 70,000 Less: Provision for doubtful debts 1,400 68,600 20X2 Debtors 77,500 Less: Provision for doubtful debts 1,550 75,950 20X2 Debtors 65,000 Less: Provision for doubtful debts 1,300 63,700 SELF-ASSESSMENT EXERCISE 4 Without looking at your book, write down the double entries for: (a) an increase in the provision for doubtful debts; (b) a decrease in the provision for doubtful debts.
3.4.4 Bad Debts Recovered Sometimes, debts that may have been written off as bad debts in the previous years may be recovered.
Below are the accounting entries for bad debts recovered.
1.
Dr. debtor’s account Cr.
bad debts recovered account To reinstate the debt.
2.
Dr. cash/bank Cr.
debtor’s account With the amount received.
3.5 Depreciation of Fixed Assets All items of property, plant and equipment (except land) have limited lives services over several accounting periods.
These services provide revenue for the firm.
To properly account for this, a portion of the cost 93 TSM341 FINANCIAL ACCOUNTING AND MANAGEMENT FOR HOSPITALITY AND TOURISM of long lived assets is written off each year to expense, to be matched against revenue on the profit and loss account.
The process used to allocate the cost of long-lived assets to the accounting periods benefited is known as depreciation.
Depreciation could also be defined as a decrease in the value of fixed asset.
This decrease is calculated as the difference between the amounts paid for the asset and the asset’s present resale value.
No attempt is made to integrate information into the accounts about the ever-changing market values of property, plant and equipment.
Instead, assets classified in this category are maintained in the accounting records at a cost.
For depreciable assets, this cost is subsequently allocated as expense to the years receiving service or benefits.
This therefore implies that depreciation is a process of allocation not valuation.
Before an asset cost is allocated among the periods benefited, a service life must be estimated.
Service life, sometimes called economic or useful life, is the period of time that depreciable assets provide service to a business.
It should be noted that an asset’s service life is different from its physical life i.e.
an asset may still be in physical existence long after it has exhausted its useful life.
In determining an asset’s service life, we must consider three factors.
These factors are as follows.
(a) Physical determination: This is caused by use in the normal course of business.
Repair and maintenance may prolong an asset service life, but at some point, the asset usually requires replacement because it has become worn out.
Physical deterioration could be as a result of: • wear and tear usually take place as a result of usage.
• erosion, rust, rot and decay – land may be eroded or wasted away by wind, rain, sun and other elements of nature.
Metals in motor vehicles or machinery will rust away.
Wood will rot eventually.
Decay may also take place as a result of works of elements of nature and the lack of proper attention.
(b) Economic factors: A situation may arise where an asset is put out of use even when it is in good physical condition.
The factors that could result to this are as follows.
• Obsolescence – this is a situation where an asset becomes out-of- date without it being worn out.
It is a technological factor.
It is capable of shortening the service life of an asset.
94 TSM341 FINANCIAL ACCOUNTING AND MANAGEMENT FOR HOSPITALITY AND TOURISM • Inadequacy – this arises when an asset is no longer used because of the growth and changes in the size of the business.
The asset may still be used by smaller businesses because it is still in shape.
The assets are inadequate to meet the competitive needs of a company.
(c) Time factor: This relates to assets which have legal life fixed in terms of years.
For example, renting a building on lease basis, say for 15 years.
After the passage of the 15 years, the asset (lease) is worth nothing.
Other form of assets affected by the time factor include: patent, goodwill, etc.
Instead of using the term depreciation, we use amortisation.
(d) Depletion: Some assets like land contain raw materials such as limestone, crude oil, etc.
When these materials are extracted, then we can say that the asset is wasting.
To provide for the consumption of an asset of a wasting character is called provision for depletion.
3.5.1 Methods of Depreciation Depreciation can be calculated simply as cost less the amount receivable when the fixed asset is disposed.
This amount receivable is referred to as the residual value or scrap value of an asset.
If the item sold for a lower amount than that which it was bought within the same accounting period, then the difference is charged as depreciation against the period’s net profit.
But, there is the problem of where there is more than one accounting period, an attempt is made to charge each period with the depreciation for that period.
There is no accurate method of allocating the cost of an asset over its useful life because of the following reasons.
1.
There is the problem of assessing an asset’s useful life.
2.
How is “use” measured?
The way an asset is used or handled could affect its residual value.
If it is used by different users, then it would be difficult to apportion the depreciation cost because the rate at which it depreciates is different from period to period.
3.
Repairs and maintenance affect the rate and amount of depreciation.
But, they are not included in the depreciation provision calculations.
4.
There is the difficulty of predicting the amount receivable in x years’ time when the asset is put out of use.
95 TSM341 FINANCIAL ACCOUNTING AND MANAGEMENT FOR HOSPITALITY AND TOURISM There are several acceptable methods for computing depreciation.
The four most often used methods include the straight-line, declining/reducing balance, sum-of-the-year digits and units of output methods.
Some of these methods are so common that they are actually built into electronic spreadsheets which employ function commands.
3.5.1.1 Straight-line Method This method is best applied to assets that provide constant, uniform service to an entity.
The cost of a depreciable asset less the residual value is allocated equally over the estimated service life.
This method is very popular because of its simplicity.
Annual Depreciation = Cost – residual value Service life in years For example, an asset is bought for N300, 000.
Its estimated service life is five years and the estimated residual value is N30, 000.
The annual depreciation can be calculated as: Annual Depreciation = 300,000 – 30,000 = 270,000 5 5 = N54, 000 This can be calculated for 5 years and it will look like this.
Depreciation Accumulated Year Expense Depreciation Book Value 0 0 0 300,000 1 54,000 54,000 246,000 2 54,000 108,000 192,000 3 54,000 162,000 138,000 4 54,000 216,000 84,000 5 54,000 270,000 30,000 These figures show that accumulated depreciation increases by N54, 000 during each year of service life.
The book value is the difference between the cost of the asset and the accumulated depreciation.
It should be noted that the book value can never be reduced below the residual value.
3.5.1.2 Declining/Reducing Balance Method This method involves applying a fixed depreciation rate to the remaining book value of an asset.
For example, if a motor van is bought for N100, 96 TSM341 FINANCIAL ACCOUNTING AND MANAGEMENT FOR HOSPITALITY AND TOURISM 000 and depreciation is to be charged at 20%, the calculations for the first three years would be as follows: N Initial Cost 100,000 Year 1: Depreciation (20%) ( 20,000) 80,000 Year 2: Depreciation (20% of 80,000) ( 16,000) 64,000 Year 3: Depreciation (20% of 64,000) ( 12,800) 51,200 The rate of depreciation may not always be known, but the following formula could be used to find the percentage to apply.
= 1 – n √ S/C where is the rate of depreciation to be applied; n is the number of useful years; S is the residual value or salvage value; C is the cost of the asset.
For example, an asset worth N100, 000 has a useful life of 4 years and its residual value is N2, 560.
The rate of depreciation is calculated as: = 1 – n √ S/C = 1 – 4 √ 2,560 100,000 = 1 – 4/10 = 6/10 or 60% The depreciation for each of the four years would be: N Initial Cost 100,000 Year 1: Depreciation (60% of 60,000) ( 60,000) 40,000 Year 2: Depreciation (60% of 40,000) ( 24,000) 12,000 Year 3: Depreciation (60% of 12,000) ( 9,600) 6,400 Year 4: Depreciation (60% of 6,400) ( 3,840) 2,560 97 TSM341 FINANCIAL ACCOUNTING AND MANAGEMENT FOR HOSPITALITY AND TOURISM It should be noted that the rate applied is a multiple of that calculated under the straight-line method.
Presenting this in a table or tabular form, we have: Depreciation Accumulated Year Expense Depreciation Book Value 0 0 0 100,000 1 60,000 60,000 40,000 2 24,000 84,000 16,000 3 9,600 93,600 6,400 4 3,840 97,440 2,560 The depreciation expense is higher at the early life of the asset and declines as the asset gets older.
This could be as a result of the fact that repairs are less at the early life of the asset and then higher at the later part of the life of the asset and hence less depreciation expense for those years.
3.5.1.3 Sum-of-the-year Digits Method Just like the reducing balance method, the sum-of-the-years’-digits method produces more depreciation expense in the early years of the asset use.
This method uses a successively lower depreciation rate that is applied each year to a constant depreciable base (cost minus residual value).
The rate, which is a fraction, is derived by setting the numerator equal to the remaining years of life at the beginning of the period.
The denominator, in turn equals the total of the service years.
For example, if the useful life or service life is 4.
The denominator will be: 4 + 3 + 2 + 1 = 10 The denominator can easily be calculated using this formula below: D = n (n + 1) 2 where D is the denominator n is the number of service years For example, an asset having a 10-year service life would be computed as: D = n (n + 1) = 110 = 55 2 2 98 TSM341 FINANCIAL ACCOUNTING AND MANAGEMENT FOR HOSPITALITY AND TOURISM If the cost of the asset is N250, 000, the annual depreciation expense would be: Initial cost N 250,000 Year 1: Depreciation (10/55 x 250,000) (45,455) 204,545 Year 2: Depreciation (9/55 x 250,000) (40,909) 163,636 Year 3: Depreciation (8/55 x 250,000) (36,363) 127,273 Year 4: Depreciation (7/55 x 250,000) (31,818) 95,455 Year 5: Depreciation (6/55 x 250,000) (27,272) 68,183 Year 6: Depreciation (5/55 x 250,000) (22,727) 45,456 Year 7: Depreciation (4/55 x 250,000) (18,182) 27,274 Year 8: Depreciation (3/55 x 250,000) (13,636) 13,638 Year 9: Depreciation (2/55 x 250,000) (9,091) 4,547 Year 10: Depreciation (1/55 x 250,000) (4,545) 2 It should be noted that the rate applied is a multiple of that calculated under the straight-line method.
Presenting this in a table or tabular form, we have: Depreciation Accumulated Year Expense Depreciation Book Value 0 0 0 250,000 1 45,455 45,455 204,545 2 40,909 86,364 163,636 3 36,363 122,727 127,273 4 31,818 154,545 95,455 5 27,272 181,817 68,183 6 22,727 204,544 45,456 7 18,182 212,726 27,274 8 16,636 229,362 10,638 9 9,090 238,452 1,548 10 4,545 250,000 - 99 TSM341 FINANCIAL ACCOUNTING AND MANAGEMENT FOR HOSPITALITY AND TOURISM The sums-of-the-years-digits method assumes that an asset is more useful in its earlier years of service life and therefore should depreciate more in more years of usage 3.5.1.4 Units-of-Output Method This method of depreciation could also be referred to as the units-of- production or activity method.
It can be employed when an asset’s service life is expressible in terms of output (such as hours; number of times used, etc.).
The asset’s cost minus the residual value is divided by the total estimated output during the service life.
This computation generates the depreciation rate.
Annual depreciation expense is then calculated by multiplying the depreciation rate by the yearly output.
For example, a tourist centre purchased a business jet for N40 million.
The salvage value of this business jet is N15 million and the service life is estimated to be 100,000 flying hours.
The depreciation rate is calculated as follows: Annual depreciation = Cost – residual value Service life in output = 40,000,000 – 15,000,000 100,000 = N250 per flying hour If the jet was used for 5,000 hours during the year, the depreciation expense would be N250 x 5,000 = N1, 250,000.
The units-of-output method is used when: (i) the service capacity of an asset can be reasonably estimated; (ii) there is a direct relationship between an asset’s use and its decline in service potential.
Assets that meet these criteria include cars, trucks and machines.
SELF-ASSESSMENT EXERCISE 5 Rolls Enterprises purchased a delivery van for N300, 000 on January 19X7.
The van was estimated to have a service life of 5 years and a residual value of N60, 000.
The company is planning to drive the van 200,000 miles annually.
100 TSM341 FINANCIAL ACCOUNTING AND MANAGEMENT FOR HOSPITALITY AND TOURISM Compute depreciation expense for 19X8 by using each of the following methods: (a) Units of output, assuming 170,000 miles were driven during 19X8, and (b) Straight line (c) Sum-of-the-years-digit (d) Reducing balance.
3.5.1 Double Entry for Depreciation This involves making appropriate period-end entries in the financial statements.
Each fixed asset is maintained at its cost in the ledger account while operating another ledger account where the depreciation to-date is recorded.
This account is known as the accumulated provision for depreciation account popularly known as the ‘Provision for Depreciation Account’.
The double entry is: Dr.
The Profit and Loss Account Cr.
The Accumulated Provision for Depreciation Account.
Example: A machine is bought for N20, 000 on 01/01/20X5 and it is to be depreciated at the rate of 20% using the reducing balance method.
Assuming that the financial year end is 31/12, show the accounting entries for the first three years.
Solution: Machinery Account N N 20X5 01/01/ Cash 20,000 Accumulated Provision for Depreciation Account - Machinery N N 31/12/20X5 Balance c/d 4,000 31/12/20X5 Profit and loss 4,000 31/12/20X6 Balance c/d 7,200 01/01/20X6 Balance b/d 4,000 _____ 31/12/20X6 Profit and loss 3,200 7,200 7,200 31/12/20X7 Balance c/d 9,760 01/01/20X7 Balance b/d 7,200 _____ 31/12/20X7 Profit and loss 2,560 9,760 9,760 01/01/20X8 Balance b/d 9,760 101 TSM341 FINANCIAL ACCOUNTING AND MANAGEMENT FOR HOSPITALITY AND TOURISM Profit and Loss Account (Extract) for the year ended 31/12 20X5 Depreciation 4,000 20X6 Depreciation 3,200 20X7 Depreciation 2,560 Balance Sheet (Extract) as at 31/12 N N As at 31/12/20X5: Machinery at cost 20,000 Less: accumulated depreciation ( 4,000) 16,000 As at 31/12/20X6: Machinery at cost 20,000 Less: accumulated depreciation ( 7,200) 12,800 As at 31/12/20X7: Machinery at cost 20,000 Less: accumulated depreciation ( 9,760) 10,240 3.5.3 Accounting for the Disposal of a Fixed Asset When an asset is sold, we would do the following: (i) remove the cost of the asset from the asset account.
(ii) remove the accumulated depreciation on the asset from the accumulated provision.
(iii) calculate the profit or loss on sale and post this to the profit and loss account.
The accounting entries include: (a) Transfer the cost price of the asset sold to an assets disposal account: Dr. Asset Disposal Account Cr.
Asset Account (b) Transfer the depreciation already charged to the assets disposal account: Dr.
Accumulated Provision for Depreciation Account Cr.
Asset Disposals Account (c) For the amount received on disposal: Dr. Cash Book Cr.
Asset Disposals Account 102 TSM341 FINANCIAL ACCOUNTING AND MANAGEMENT FOR HOSPITALITY AND TOURISM (d) Transfer the difference (i.e.
the amount needed to balance the machinery disposals account) to the profit and loss account: (i) If the asset disposals account shows a credit balance, then there is a profit on sale: Dr. asset disposals account Cr.
profit and loss account (ii) If the asset disposals account shows a debit: Dr. profit and loss account Cr.
asset disposals account.
Example If we consider the previous example with cost of asset N20, 000, the net book value as at 31/12/20X7 is N10, 240.
Assuming that the machine is sold in 20X8 for more than N10, 240, say N10, 700, then a profit will be made.
But, if it is sold for less than N10, 240, say N9,500, then a loss will be incurred.
Showing this in a ‘T’-account, the accounts would look like this: Disposal at a profit: Machines N N 01/01/20X5 Cash 20,000 02/01/20X8 Machinery Disposals 20,000 Accumulated Provision for Depreciation: Machinery N N 02/01/20X8 Machinery Disposals 9,760 01/01/20X8 Balance c/d 9,760 Machinery Disposals N N 02/01/20X8 Machinery 20,000 02/01/20X8 Accumulated provision For Depreciation 9,760 31/12/20X8 Profit and Loss 460 02/01/20X8 Cash 10,700 20,460 20,460 Disposal at a Loss: Machines Account N N 01/01/20X5 Cash 20,000 02/01/20X 8 Machinery Disposals 20,000 103 TSM341 FINANCIAL ACCOUNTING AND MANAGEMENT FOR HOSPITALITY AND TOURISM Accumulated Provision for Depreciation: Machinery N N 02/01/20X8 Machinery Disposals 9,760 01/01/20X8 Balance b/d 9,760 Machinery Disposals N N 02/01/20X8 Machinery 20,000 02/01/20X8 Accumulated provision for Depreciation 9,760 02/01/20X8 Cash 9,500 _____ 31/12/20X8 Profit and Loss 740 20,000 20,000 SELF-ASSESSMENT EXERCISE 6 A business which financial year ends on 31/12 purchased on 01/01/20X7 a machine for N50, 000.
The machine was to be depreciated by 10 equal installments.
On 04/01/20X9 the machine was sold for N37, 600.
Show the relevant entries for each of the following accounts for the year ended 31 December, 20X7, 20X8, and 20X9.
(i) Machinery (ii) Provision for depreciation of machinery (iii) Machinery disposals (iv) Profit and loss 3.6 Accruals and Prepayments The financial statements treated, so far, have assumed that all expenses belong exactly to the period of the financial statement.
For example, if the trading, profit and loss account for the year ended 31/12/20X5 was being drawn up, then the rent paid as shown in the trial balance was exactly for 20X5, which implies that there was no rent owing at the beginning of 20X5 nor at the end of 20X5, neither had any rent been paid in advance.
This is a most unlikely case because there is always that tendency for a business to either owe some amount of expenses or pay in advance.
The accounting terms used for such situation are accruals and prepayments.
3.6.1 Accruals (Accrued Expenses) Accruals are consistent with the accrual basis of accounting.
Accrued expenses are expenses that have been incurred but not yet paid.
Examples include the wages incurred by businesses during the last few days of a month and the interest owed to creditors on loans.
Both of these expenses gradually accumulate and are likely to be paid in the next 104 TSM341 FINANCIAL ACCOUNTING AND MANAGEMENT FOR HOSPITALITY AND TOURISM reporting period.
These expenses have already been incurred and must be accounted for whether they have been paid for or not.
The posting to the ‘T’-account would look like this: Rent Account N N 31/12 Balance b/d XXX 31/12 Profit and loss XXXX 31/12 Accruals XXX ______ XXX XXXX Accruals are directed in the profit and loss account i.e.
they are included in calculating the total expense incurred which will reduce the profit figure.
Accruals are also treated in the balance sheet as current liabilities.
3.6.2 Prepayments (Prepaid Expenses) These are expenses that have not yet been incurred but which have been paid for.
They are treated as assets because the business will benefit from them later in the future.
But, because we are only interested in one period at a time i.e.
the current period, we will only deduct the portion of prepayment from the expense amount.
This will in turn reduce the expenses figure and thereby increase our profit while at the same time it will be taken to the balance sheet as a current asset.
Expense Account N N 31/12 Balance b/d XXX 31/12 Prepaid expense XXX 31/12 P & L a/c XXX XXX XXX Example Show the ledger entries for the following items including the balance transferred to the necessary part of the financial statements and the balances carried down to 20X7.
Note that the financial year end is 31/12/20X6.
(a) Motor expenses – paid in 20X6 N7, 440; owing at 31/12/20X6 N280; (b) Insurance – paid in 20X6 N4,200; Prepaid as at 31/12/20X6 N350; (c) Stationery – paid during 20X6 N18, 000; owing as at 31/12/20X5 N2, 500; owing as at 31/12/20X6 N2,900; 105 TSM341 FINANCIAL ACCOUNTING AND MANAGEMENT FOR HOSPITALITY AND TOURISM (d) Rates – paid during 31/12/20X6 N9,500; Prepaid as at 31/12/20X5 N2,200; Prepaid as at 31/12/20X6 N2,900; (e) Sublets part of premises.
Received N5, 500; during the year ended 31/12/20X6.
Tenant owes N1, 800 on 31/12/20X5 and N2,100 on 31/12/20X6.
Solution Motor Expense Account N N 31/12/20X6 Cash/Bank 7,440 31/1220X6 Profit and Loss 7,720 31/12/20X6 Accruals (Bal.
c/d) 280 7,720 7,720 1/1/20X7 Bal b/d 280 Insurance Account N N 31/12/20X6 Cash/Bank 4,200 31/12/20X6 Prepayment (Bal c/d) 350 31/12/20X6 Profit and loss 3,850 4,200 4,200 1/1/20X7 Bal b/d 350 Stationery Account N N 31/12/20X6 Cash/Bank 18,000 1/1/20X6 Accruals (Bal b/d) 2,500 31/12/20X6 Accruals (Bal c/d) 2,900 31/12/20X6 Profit and loss 18,400 20,900 20,900 1/1/20X7 Bal.
b/d 2,900 Rates Account N N 31/12/20X6 Balance b/d 2,200 31/12/20X Prepayments (Bal.
c/d) 2,900 3/12/20X6 Cash/bank 9,500 31/12/20X6 Profit and Loss 8,800 11,700 11,700 Rent Received Account N N 1/1/20X5 Accruals 1,800 31/12/20X6 Cash/Bank 5,500 3/12/20X6 P & L a/c 5,800 31/12/20X6 Accruals 2,100 7,600 7,600 1/1/20X7 Bal.
b/d 2,100 SELF-ASSESSMENT EXERCISE 7 Explain the terms accruals and prepayments.
106 TSM341 FINANCIAL ACCOUNTING AND MANAGEMENT FOR HOSPITALITY AND TOURISM 4.0 CONCLUSION In this unit, you are now conversant with the fact that during the financial year, transactions may not have been concluded.
This may distort the tone or picture of the financial statement.
There is the need therefore to make adjustments to the financial statements.
These transactions may involve return on goods bought or sold, transportation cost, separation of expenditure into capital or revenue, writing off debts considered not collectible, reduction in the value of tangible fixed assets, etc.
When adjustments are made, informed decisions can be made from the financial statements.
5.0 SUMMARY In this unit, you have learnt about final accounts adjustment.
It is a very comprehensive unit as six major adjustments to the financial statements were considered.
These include returns, carriage, capital and revenue expenditure, accounts receivable, depreciation, accruals and prepayments.
6.0 TUTOR-MARKED ASSIGNMENT 1.
National Tours Ledger balances were extracted on 31/12/19X6 as follows: N Debtors 9,000 Cash at bank 13,000 Capital 35,500 Bad debts 3,000 Sales 56,000 Sundry creditors 7,000 Carriage inwards 1,500 Returns inwards 2,000 Returns outwards 3,000 Purchases 21,000 Land and buildings 30,000 Bank charges 5,000 Rent and rates 4,000 Provision for doubtful debts 2,000 Commission received 8,000 Rent received 7,000 Stock as at 01/01/19X6 3,000 Drawings 4,000 Salaries and wages 11,000 Furniture and fittings 12,000 107 TSM341 FINANCIAL ACCOUNTING AND MANAGEMENT FOR HOSPITALITY AND TOURISM Additional information provided: (a) Stock as at 31/12/19X6 was N4, 500 (b) Provision for doubtful debts is to be adjusted to N3, 500 (c) Provision for depreciation is to be made at the rate of 2½% on land and buildings and 10% on furniture and fittings (d) Rent and rates amounting to N1, 500 for the year under review has not been paid (e) Wages of three employees for the month of March, 19X6 totaling N4, 000 were not made.
Provision should be made for this.
Required: Prepare the trading, profit and loss account for the year ended 31/12/19X6 and Balance sheet as at that date.
2.
Differentiate between accruals and prepayments.
7.0 REFERENCES/FURTHER READING Okoye, A. E. (2000).
Financial Accounting for Students and Managers.
Benin City: Mindex Publishing Company.
Solomon, L. M.; Walter, L. N.;Plunkett, L. M. & Vargo, R. J.
(1993).
Accounting Principles.
New York: West Publishing Company.
Wood, F. & Sangster, A.
(2002).
Business Accounting Volume 1.
London: Prentice Hall.
108 TSM341 FINANCIAL ACCOUNTING AND MANAGEMENT FOR HOSPITALITY AND TOURISM UNIT 4 PARTNERSHIP ACCOUNTS CONTENTS 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objectives 3.0 Main Content 3.1 The Meaning of Partnership 3.2 The Need for Partnerships 3.3 Types of Partners 3.4 Characteristics of a Partnership 3.5 Contents of Partnership Agreements 3.5.1 Capital Contributions 3.5.2 Profit/Loss Sharing Ratio 3.5.3 Interest on Capital 3.5.4 Interest on Drawings 3.5.5 Partnership Salaries 3.5.6 Admission of New Partner 3.5.7 Retirement or Death of Partners 3.6 The Financial Statement of a Partnership 3.6.1 The Trading, Profit and Loss and Appropriation Account 3.6.2 The Balance Sheet 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutor-Marked Assignment 7.0 References/Further Reading 1.0 INTRODUCTION In units 7 and 8, you were exposed to the accounts of a sole proprietorship which is a kind of business entity.
In this unit, you are going to learn about another popular entity or form known as partnership.
The main focus will be on the format of the trading, profit and loss account and balance sheet of a partnership form of business.
2.0 OBJECTIVES At the end of this unit, you should be able to: • explain the unique characteristics of a partnership • describe partnership formation and income distribution • distinguish between limited partners and general partners • describe the main features of a partnership agreement • explain what will happen if no agreement exists on how to share profits or losses • draw up the ledger accounts and financial statements for a partnership.
109 TSM341 FINANCIAL ACCOUNTING AND MANAGEMENT FOR HOSPITALITY AND TOURISM 3.0 MAIN CONTENT 3.1 The Meaning of Partnership Partnership is an association of two or more persons to carry on, as co- owners, a business for profit.
Partnerships are alternative types of entity for small emerging companies, which often need more talent, experience, and capital than a single owner can provide.
The people who own a partnership are called partners.
They do not have to be based or work in the same place, though most do.
However, they maintain one set of accounting records and share the profits and losses.
The partnership form of organisation is found in professional practices such as accounting, law, medicine and dentistry.
3.2 Need for Partnerships There are various reasons for multiple ownership of a business and they include: • the capital that is required is more than what one person can provide; • the experience or ability required to manage the business cannot be found in one person alone; • many people want to share management instead of doing everything on their own; • very often, the partners will be members of the same family; • business risk is reduced since losses can be shared by all partners and also by involving more than one person’s expertise, the chances of failure are reduced.
SELF-ASSESSMENT EXERCISE 1 What are the reasons for people wanting to form a partnership?
3.3 Types of Partners There are two types of partners, namely: general and limited partners.
These are explained below.
(a) General partners – they do not have limited liabilities.
In the case of liquidation, they could lose both their capital and personal belongings.
(b) Limited partners – these are partners whose liabilities are limited to the capital they have contributed into the partnership 110 TSM341 FINANCIAL ACCOUNTING AND MANAGEMENT FOR HOSPITALITY AND TOURISM business.
They do not take part in the management of the partnership.
3.4 Characteristics of a Partnership The characteristics of a partnership are as follows.
(i) Ease of formation: a partnership can easily be created by a voluntary agreement between at least two or more people.
The agreement may be oral and finalised by a hand-shake.
However, a formal written “contract” is usually drawn up to show good business practice.
This contract, which is in the form of a document, is commonly known as the “Articles of Partnership”.
The document spells out the right, responsibilities, duties of partners, partners’ investments and withdrawals, the division of net income or loss, the admission of new partners, the withdrawal of partners and procedures to be followed in the event of partner disputes or a partner’s death.
(ii) Unlimited liability: in unit 2 of this course material, you learnt the basic accounting concepts and made reference to the entity concept which states that ‘the business is a legal entity, separate and distinct from its owners’.
However, the partnership is not a separate legal entity and as such, has no legal status under common law.
As a result, each owner is held personally liable (i.e.
has unlimited liability) for the debts of the enterprise.
Thus, if a partnership experiences cash flow problems and becomes insolvent or unable to pay its bills, the partners are required to surrender personal assets to help settle the firm’s obligations.
(iii) Mutual agency: each partner in a partnership acts as an agent of the partnership in business transactions.
Great care must therefore be taken when selecting partners because irresponsible personnel could create a difficult working environment.
(iv) Co-ownership of property and income: partners are the co- owners of an enterprise.
Any asset invested by a partner becomes jointly owned by all the partners.
Partnership’s net income belongs to all the partners and can be divided among them in an agreed proportion.
(v) Limited life: a partnership can be terminated due to death of any member(s), bankruptcy, retirement, incapacity, withdrawal of a partner, accomplishment of the firm’s objectives and the admission of new partners.
Termination, which could also be referred to as dissolution, does not necessarily mean that 111 TSM341 FINANCIAL ACCOUNTING AND MANAGEMENT FOR HOSPITALITY AND TOURISM operations have ceased and assets sold, but, if the surviving partners agree, a new entity can be formed, and activities can continue uninterrupted.
SELF-ASSESSMENT EXERCISE 2 List and discuss the characteristics of a partnership.
3.5 Contents of Partnership Agreements A partnership agreement is normally drawn up by a lawyer or an accountant.
It is always advisable to have a proper written agreement so that there would be fewer problems between partners.
The accounting contents in a partnership agreement include the following.
1.
The capital to be contributed by each partner; 2.
The ratio in which profits (or losses) are to be shared; 3.
The rate of interest, if any, to be paid on capital before the profits are shared; 4.
The rate of interest, if any, to be charged on partners’ drawings; 5.
Salaries to be paid to partners; 6.
Arrangements for the admission of new partners; 7.
Procedures for retirement or death of partners.
3.5.1 Capital Contributions Partners are not compelled to contribute equal amounts of capital though they could decide in future to increase the amount of capital they have invested.
3.5.2 Profit/Loss Sharing Ratios Partners can decide to share profits/losses in any ratio or way they deem fit.
Although it is a popular thought that profits should be shared in the same ratio as that in which capital is invested.
For example, suppose two partners Essen and Mbong brought in N20,000 and N10,000 respectively as capital, profit would then be shared in the ratio of 20,000/30,000 i.e.
 and 10,000/30,000 i.e.
.
112 TSM341 FINANCIAL ACCOUNTING AND MANAGEMENT FOR HOSPITALITY AND TOURISM Let us assume that the following profits were made for the first three years.
Years 1 2 3 Total Net profits 18,000 24,000 30,000 72,000 Profit sharing would be: Essien  12,000 16,000 20,000 48,000 Mbong  6,000 8,000 10,000 24,000 At the end of the first three years, Essien received N24, 000 more than Mbong for investing N10,000 more.
This may be considered not too fair because the duties of the partners may be the same.
But, then Essien should be compensated for contributing extra capital to the business.
The difficulty of compensating for extra capital invested will introduce us to the concept of Interest on capital.
3.5.3 Interest on Capital Interest is treated and deducted from the profit before the distribution of profit according to the agreed profit sharing ratio.
The rate of interest is agreed upon between the partners and should be equal to the return which they would receive if they invest the capital elsewhere.
Let us continue with Essien and Mbong example and assume 5% is charged on capital per annum.
Years 1 2 3 Total Net profits 18,000 24,000 30,000 72,000 Interest on capital: Essien (5% of 20,000) 1,000 1,000 1,000 3,000 Mbong (5% of 10,000) 500 500 500 1,500 Remainder of profit to be shared equally: Essien  8,250 11,250 14,250 33,750 Mbong  8,250 11,250 14,250 33,750 Total profits collected Essien Mbong Interest on capital 3,000 1,500 Remainder of profit 33,750 33,750 36,750 35,250 113 TSM341 FINANCIAL ACCOUNTING AND MANAGEMENT FOR HOSPITALITY AND TOURISM Essien has received N1, 500 more than Mbong and this could be considered adequate for having invested N10,000 more in the firm for three years.
3.5.4 Interest on Drawings Businesses need cash to expand and therefore care should be taken to discourage owners from always withdrawing cash in the form of borrowings.
This is done by introducing interest on drawings.
This interest is charged on the amount borrowed and swells up the profit at the end of the period.
The rate of interest charged can be calculated from the date of withdrawal to the end of the financial year.
For example, suppose Essien and Mbong decided to charge interest on drawings at 5% per annum and their year end is December 31.
The drawings made would be: Essien Date Drawings (N) Interest N 01/01 1,000 1,000 x 5% x 12 months i.e.
1000 x 5 x 12 100 x 12 50 01/03 2,400 2,400 x 5% x 12 months i.e.
2400 x 5 x 10 100 x 12 100 01/05 1,200 1,200 x 5% x 12 months i.e.
1200 x 5 x 8 100 x 12 40 01/07 2,400 2,400 x 5% x 12 months i.e.
2400 x 5 x 6 100 x 12 60 01/10 800 800 x 5% x 3 months i.e.
800 x 5 x 3 100 x 12 10 Interest charged to Essien 260 Mbong Date Drawings (N) Interest N 01/01 600 600 x 5% x 12 months i.e.
600 x 5 x 12 100 x 12 30 01/08 4,800 4,800 x 5% x 5 months i.e.
4800 x 5 x 5 100 x 12 100 114 TSM341 FINANCIAL ACCOUNTING AND MANAGEMENT FOR HOSPITALITY AND TOURISM 01/12 2,400 2,400 x 5% x 1 month i.e.
2400 x 5 x 1 100 x 12 10 Interest charged to Mbong 140 3.5.5 Partnership Salaries As responsibilities increase, there may be the need to compensate partners who take up more tasks than others.
Compensation could be by granting partners partnership salary which is deducted before sharing the balance of profits.
Bonuses or commission related to performance are treated in the same way.
Example Baba and Mama have been in partnership for one year sharing profits and losses in the ratio of Baba 3/5, Mama 2/5.
They are entitled to 5% per annum interest on capitals, Baba having N20, 000 capital and Mama N60, 000.
Mama is to have a salary of N5, 000.
Interest on drawings is charged, Baba N500 and Mama N1, 000.
Net profit before any distribution is N50, 000 for the year ended 31/12/19XX.
N N N Net profit 50,000 Add: Interest on drawings: Baba 500 Mama 1,000 1,500 51,500 Less: Salary – Mama 5,000 Interest on Capital: Baba 1,000 Mama 3,000 4,000 (9,000) 42,500 Share of Profit: Baba (3/5 x 42,500) 25,500 Mama (2/5 x 42,500) 17,000 42,500 The N50, 000 profit has therefore been shared as follows: Total profits collected Baba Mama Share of balance of profit 25,500 17,000 Interest on capital 1,000 3,000 Salary - 5,000 26,500 25,000 Less: Interest on drawings 500 1,000 26,000 24,000 50,000 115 TSM341 FINANCIAL ACCOUNTING AND MANAGEMENT FOR HOSPITALITY AND TOURISM SELF-ASSESSMENT EXERCISE 3 1.
Describe how interest on capital and interest on drawings will affect profit.
2.
Explain how the value of a partnership can be ascertained.
3.5.6 Admission of New Partner In admitting a new member into any partnership, the consent of all existing partners is sought.
The amount of capital to be introduced by the new partner and the sharing of profit and loss would also be agreed upon.
The old partnership will cease to exist while the recent partnership which includes the new partners will now be born.
The accounting procedure is outside the scope of this course.
New partners are usually admitted because the firm has grown or someone is needed with different skills and to replace partners who are leaving the firm as a result of retirement or death of a partner.
3.5.7 Retirement or Death of Partners In the event of retirement or death of a partner, the partnership would be valued because the outgoing partner is entitled to his share of value.
This value is made up of the Net Asset (Total Asset minus Total Liabilities) and goodwill.
Goodwill can be referred to as the extra payment which could be made on a business (if it were to be sold) as a result of some advantageous or unique features it has.
These advantages could include: 1. large number of regular customers 2. employees are efficient and reliable 3. business location 4. brand names that are yet to be included as assets 5. good reputation etc.
3.6 The Financial Statement of a Partnership The financial statements of a partnership are made up of the trading, profit and loss account, partnership appropriations and the balance sheet.
Further explanation is made below.
3.6.1 The Trading, Profit and Loss and Appropriation Account The trading, profit and loss account of a partnership has an extra section shown under the profit and loss account.
This section is referred to as 116 TSM341 FINANCIAL ACCOUNTING AND MANAGEMENT FOR HOSPITALITY AND TOURISM the profit and loss appropriation account which shows the distribution of profit.
The title appropriation account is not normally included in the title of the trading, profit and loss account except where you are specifically requested to include it.
The trading profit and loss and appropriation account normally takes this format: (1) The trading account is the same for the sole proprietorship.
(2) The profit and loss account is the same for the sole proprietorship.
The only difference is the profit and loss appropriation account where the partners profit distribution is shown.
Profit and Loss Appropriation Account N N Net Profit (from the Profit and Loss Account) XXX Add: interest on drawings: • A XXX • B XXX XXX XXX Less: interest on capitals: • A XXX • B XXX XXX Add: salary XXX XXX Profit available for distribution by partners XXX Share of profit: • A XXX • B XXX XXX Example Shola, Bode and Jide are in a partnership.
They share profits and losses in the ratio of 2/5, 2/5 and 1/5 respectively.
The following amounts were contributed as capital for each of them: Shola 60,000 Bode 40,000 Jide 20,000 117 TSM341 FINANCIAL ACCOUNTING AND MANAGEMENT FOR HOSPITALITY AND TOURISM It is agreed that 10% interest per annum will be charged on capital accounts.
Bode and Jide are to receive N30, 000 and N10, 000 respectively as salary.
The net profit of the partnership before deductions was N252, 000.
Interest on drawings (Shola is N5, 000).
You are required to draw up the appropriation account for the year ended 31/12/20X8.
Profit and Loss Appropriation Account N N N Net profit b/d 252,000 Add: Interest on drawings: • Shola 5,000 257,000 Less: salary: • Bode 30,000 • Jide 10,000 40,000 Less: interest on capitals: • Shola 6,000 • Bode 4,000 • Jide 2,000 12,000 52,000 Profit available for distribution 205,000 Share of profit: • Shola (2/5 of 205,000) 82,000 • Bode (2/5 of 205,000) 82,000 • Jide (1/5 of 205,000) 41,000 205,000 Nil 3.6.2 The Balance Sheet The balance sheet of a partnership is significantly different from that of a sole proprietorship.
This is because capital accounts and current accounts of each partner are reflected in the partnership balance sheet.
The capital account includes the amount of money that each partner has contributed or brought into the business while the current account reflects the interest on capital, salaries received, drawings from the business, interest on drawings.
The balance sheet will therefore look like this.
118 TSM341 FINANCIAL ACCOUNTING AND MANAGEMENT FOR HOSPITALITY AND TOURISM Balance Sheet as at 31/12/20XX N N Fixed Assets: Buildings XXX Fixtures XXX XXX Current Assets: Stock XXX Debtors XXX Cash XXX XXX Less: Current liabilities XXX XXX XXX Financed By: Partners’ capital accounts: Marcus XXX Matthew XXX XXX Current accounts: Marcus Matthew Balance b/d XXX XXX Add: interest on capital XXX XXX salary XXX - balance of profit XXX XXX XXX XXX Less: drawings XXX XXX interest on drawings XXX XXX XXX XXX XXX XXX XXX XXX Example: Marcus and Matthew are in partnership sharing profits and losses equally.
The following is their trial balance as at 30 June 20X8: Particulars/Details Dr. (N) Cr.
(N) Building (Cost N750,000) 500,000 Fixtures at cost 110,000 Provision for depreciation on fixtures 33,000 Debtors 162,430 Creditors 111,500 Cash at bank 6,770 Stock as at 30 June 20X7 419,790 Sales 1,236,500 Purchases 854,160 Carriage outwards 12,880 Discounts allowed 1,150 Loan interest – Kay 40,000 Office expenses 24,160 119 TSM341 FINANCIAL ACCOUNTING AND MANAGEMENT FOR HOSPITALITY AND TOURISM Salaries and wages 189,170 Bad debts 5,030 Provision for bad debts 4,000 Loan from Kay 400,000 Capitals: Marcus 350,000 Matthew 295,000 Current Accounts: Marcus 13,060 Matthew 2,980 Drawings: Marcus 64,000 Matthew 56,500 Total 2,446,040 2,446,040 Additional information.
(a) Stock, 30 June, 20X8, N563, 400 (b) Expenses to be accrued: Office Expenses N960; Wages N2, 000 (c) Depreciate fixtures 10% on reducing balance basis, Buildings N10, 000 (d) Reduce provision for bad debts to N3, 200 (e) Partnership salary: N8, 000 to Marcus (f) Interest on drawings: Marcus N1, 800; Matthew N1,200 (g) Interest on capital account balances at 10% Required: Prepare a trading account and profit and loss appropriation account for the year ended 30/06/20X8 and a balance sheet as at that date.
Solution Marcus and Matthew Trading, Profit and Loss Account for the year ended 30/06/20X8 N N N Sales 1,236,500 Less: Cost of sales: Opening stock 419,790 Add: purchases 854,160 1,273,950 Less: closing stock 563,400 710,550 Gross profit 525,950 Add: Reduction in provision 800 for bad debts 528,750 Less: expenses: Office expenses 25,120 Wages 191,170 Depreciation: fixtures 7,700 buildings 10,000 Carriage outwards 12,880 Discounts allowed 1,150 120 TSM341 FINANCIAL ACCOUNTING AND MANAGEMENT FOR HOSPITALITY AND TOURISM Loan interest 40,000 Bad debts 5,030 293,050 Net profit 233,700 Add: Interest on drawings: Marcus 1,800 Matthew 1,200 3,000 236,700 Less: Interest on capitals: - Marcus 35,000 - Matthew 29,500 64,500 Salary: Marcus 8,000 72,500 Profit available for distribution by partners: 164,200 Share of profit: - Marcus (½ of 164,200) 82,100 - Matthew (½ of 164,200) 82,100 164,200 Nil Balance Sheet as at 30/06/20X8 N N N Fixed assets: Cost Depreciation NBV Buildings 750,000 260,000 490,000 Fixtures 110,000 40,700 69,300 860,000 300,700 559,300 Current assets: Stock 563,400 Debtors 162,430 Less: Provision for doubtful debts 3,200 159,230 Bank 6,770 729,400 Less: Current liabilities: Creditors 111,500 Expenses owing 2,960 114,460 Net current assets (working capital) 614,940 1,174,240 Less: Loan from Kay 400,000 774,240 Financed by: Partners’ capital accounts: Marcus 350,000 Matthew 295,000 645,000 121 TSM341 FINANCIAL ACCOUNTING AND MANAGEMENT FOR HOSPITALITY AND TOURISM Current accounts: Marcus Matthew Balance as at 01/07/20X7 13,060 2,980 Add: interest on capital 35,000 29,500 salary 8,000 - balance of profit 82,100 82,100 138,160 114,580 Less: drawings 64,000 56,500 interest on drawings 1,800 1,200 72,360 56,880 129,240 774,240 SELF-ASSESSMENT EXERCISE 4 Explain the features of the balance sheet of a partnership and identify how it differs from that of a sole proprietorship.
4.0 CONCLUSION In this unit, you are now conversant with the fact that a service oriented business could be owned or run by partners.
You were also exposed to how these partners would be compensated for the resources they have invested into the business.
5.0 SUMMARY In this unit, you have learnt: • the features of a partnership; • the reasons why people go into partnerships and the contents of a partnership agreement.
The preparation of the final accounts of partnership business was also treated.
6.0 TUTOR-MARKED ASSIGNMENT 1.
The following list of balances as at 30/09/20X8 has been extracted from the books of Tinubu and Fashola, who are in partnership sharing the balance of profits and losses in the proportions of 3: 2: 122 TSM341 FINANCIAL ACCOUNTING AND MANAGEMENT FOR HOSPITALITY AND TOURISM Particulars/Details Dr. (N) Stationery 35,000 Sales Opening stock 3,221,000 Purchases Rent and rates 230,000 Heat and light 2,082,000 Staff salaries 103,000 Telephone charges 87,000 Motor vehicle running cost 361,000 Discount allowed 29,000 Discount received 56,200 Sales return 9,500 Purchases return 3,700 Carriage inwards 21,000 Carriage outwards 61,000 Fixtures and fittings (at cost) 17,000 Provision for depreciation 24,000 Motor vehicle (at cost) 260,000 Provision for depreciation 112,000 Provision for doubtful debts 460,000 Drawings: Tinubu 250,000 Fashola 3,000 Current account balances @ 01/10/20X7 240,000 Tinubu 110,000 Fashola Capital account balances @ 01/10/20X7 36,000 Tinubu 24,000 Fashola Debtors 330,000 Creditors 170,000 Bank 93,000 84,000 77,000 Additional Information: i. N100, 000 is to be transferred from Tinubu’s capital account to a newly opened Tinubu Loan Account on 01/07/20X8.
Interest is to be charged at 10% per annum on the loan.
ii.
Fashola is to be credited with a salary at the rate of N120, 000 per annum from 01/04/20X8.
123 TSM341 FINANCIAL ACCOUNTING AND MANAGEMENT FOR HOSPITALITY AND TOURISM iii.
Stock in hand at 30/09/20X8 has been valued at cost N320, 000. iv.
Telephone charges accrued due at 30/09/20X8 amounted to N4, 000 and rent of N6, 000 prepaid at that date.
v. During the year ended 30/09/20X8, Fashola took goods worth N10, 000 for his own use.
vi.
Depreciation is to be provided at the following annual rates on a straight line basis: Fixtures and fittings 10% Motor vehicles 20% Required: a.
Prepare a trading and profit and loss account for the year ended 30/09/20X8.
b.
Prepare a balance sheet as at 30/09/20X8 which should include summaries of the partners’ capital and current accounts for the year ended at that date.
2.
What is the make-up of the financial statement of a partnership?
7.0 REFERENCES/FURTHER READING Okoye, A. E. (2000).
Financial Accounting for Students and Managers.
Benin City: Mindex Publishing Company.
Wood, F. & Sangster, A.
(2002).
Business Accounting Volume 1.
London: Prentice Hall.
124 TSM341 FINANCIAL ACCOUNTING AND MANAGEMENT FOR HOSPITALITY AND TOURISM UNIT 5 INTRODUCTION TO COMPANY ACCOUNTS CONTENTS 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objectives 3.0 Main Content 3.1 Meaning of a Company 3.2 Formation of a Company 3.3 Classes of Company 3.4 Features of a Company 3.5 Forms of Capital 3.6 Definition of Terms of Share Capital 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutor-Marked Assignment 7.0 References/Further Reading 1.0 INTRODUCTION Company accounts will present to you the definition of a company and the type of funds that can be raised to finance the company’s activities.
In this unit, you will learn the distinguishing features of a company from other businesses.
The company’s account, also known as limited companies, came into existence originally because of the growth in the size of businesses, and the need to have a lot of people involved in the day-to-day activities.
2.0 OBJECTIVES At the end of this unit, you should be able to: • define a company • explain how a company can be formed • discuss the forms of capital that can be raised by a company • explain the different terms used to denote different aspects of share capital.
3.0 MAIN CONTENT 3.1 Meaning of a Company A company is an entity that has undergone the process of obtaining a legal personality so that it enjoys certain advantages and has certain rights and obligations as specified under the law.
The capital of a 125 TSM341 FINANCIAL ACCOUNTING AND MANAGEMENT FOR HOSPITALITY AND TOURISM limited liability company is divided into shares and these shares can be of any nominal value – N10, N2.50, or any other amount per se.
To become a shareholder or a member of a limited liability company, a person must buy one or more of the shares.
Examples of limited liability companies in Nigeria include: First Bank of Nigeria Plc., Guinness Nigeria Plc., Nigerian Breweries Plc., Nigerian Bottling Company Plc., Lever Brothers Nigeria Plc., UAC Nigeria Plc., etc.
Shareholders, who have paid in full for their shares, have limited liability to the extent of their capital contribution – that is what they have already paid for those shares.
What this in effect means is that they cannot be called upon to bear any further loss in excess of the amount which they have agreed to contribute to the company.
Liabilities can be limited by share or limited by guarantee.
A company is limited by shares if in the event of winding up of the company; shareholders are only called upon to pay off any amount that remains unpaid on any shares which had been issued to them.
This implies that it is only the nominal value of the issued shares that a shareholder loses if the company eventually fails.
On the other hand, a company is limited by guarantee when its members/shareholders can be called upon to pay the amount which they have promised to pay in the event of winding up of the company.
Members’ losses are limited to the amount that they have agreed to pay.
Limitation by shares is always recommended for companies which primary motive is to make profit while limitation by guarantee is recommended for companies that have non-profit objectives e.g.
educational, philanthropic, etc.
motives.
SELF-ASSESSMENT EXERCISE 1 1.
Define a company.
2.
Differentiate between a company limited by shares and that limited by guarantee.
3.2 Formation of a Company During the formation of a company, conditions stated in the Companies and Allied Matters Act (1990) must be met or adhered to.
Registration must be effected by filing the prescribed forms and documents with the Registrar-General of Companies at the Corporate Affairs Commission (CAC).
The prescribed forms and documents are as follows.
(a) The Memorandum of Association, (b) The Articles of Association.
126 TSM341 FINANCIAL ACCOUNTING AND MANAGEMENT FOR HOSPITALITY AND TOURISM 3.2.1 The Memorandum of Association This is one of the most important documents to be filed with the Registrar-General of Companies.
It defines the major characteristics by which the company is to be identified publicly.
It is concerned with the company’s relationship with the outside world.
The major content of the Memorandum of Association are as follows.
(i) Name of the company; (ii) Domicile of registered office; (iii) Objectives of the company; (iv) Statement that liability is limited; (v) Amount of nominal capital; (vi) Number and units into which the capital is divided.
3.2.2 The Articles of Association This document lays down the internal regulations for operating the company.
It spells out the rights and duties of the individual members of the company, between the company and the members, and between the company and those that have been employed as servants and agents.
The purpose of registering this document is to provide a general notification on the terms and conditions under which all matters and disputes concerning the company and in relation to the outside parties may be disposed of.
The Articles of Association contains provisions relating to (i) Proceedings at meetings; (ii) Alteration of capital; (iii) Appointment of directors; (iv) Borrowing powers of directors; (v) Transfer or transmission of shares; (vi) Winding up procedure, etc.
A certificate known as ‘Certificate of Incorporation’ is issued by the Registrar-General of Companies after completion of the registration process.
The certificate contains the name of the company, the nominal capital and date of registration.
It formally confers a legal personality status on the company.
SELF-ASSESSMENT EXERCISE 2 1.
What are the functions of the Corporate Affairs Commission (CAC) in the formation of a company?
2.
What are the contents of the Memorandum of Association and Articles of Association?
127 TSM341 FINANCIAL ACCOUNTING AND MANAGEMENT FOR HOSPITALITY AND TOURISM 3.3 Classes of Company There are two classes of company, namely: (i) the public company, and (ii) the private company.
3.3.1 The Public Company A public company is a company which has issued its shares to the public and which is now traded on the open market.
It has more than 50 members and is allowed by law to invite members of the public to subscribe for its shares.
This implies that any company that offers anyone the chance to take up its shares is a public company.
Shares dealt on the floor of the Nigerian Stock Exchange are all of public limited companies, but this does not mean that all public companies shares are traded on the Stock Exchange.
The ones which shares are traded are known as Quoted Companies.
3.3.2 The Private Company Section 22 (1) to (5) of the Companies and Allied Matters Act (1990) describes a private company as “one which by its Memorandum of Association states that it is a private company and by its Articles of Association restricts the transfer of its shares, limits the persons (excluding bona fide employees and ex-employees of the company), and does not, unless authorised by Nigerian law to do so, invite members of the public to subscribe for its shares or debentures or to deposit money for fixed periods whether or not such money bears interest.
SELF-ASSESSMENT EXERCISE 3 Differentiate between a public company and a private company.
3.4 Features of a Company The following are the features of a company that distinguish it from sole proprietorship and partnership.
1.
A company, especially a limited liability company, is a separate entity from the owner.
If a person sues the company, only the assets of the company can be used to pay any legal judgement.
The personal assets of the owners are safe.
2.
Access to credit facilities is easier for a company.
If it has been in existence for months, banks and other financial institutions 128 TSM341 FINANCIAL ACCOUNTING AND MANAGEMENT FOR HOSPITALITY AND TOURISM will consider the credit record of the company to determine its credit worthiness.
3.
A company needs to register itself especially as a limited liability company to maintain its status.
4.
Companies can acquire assets and incur liabilities.
5.
Companies have perpetual succession.
This implies that they do not cease to exist upon the death of any or all of the owners.
6.
Companies are meant to release the report of its activities to the public for scrutiny.
7.
Companies are to audit their accounts periodically and this is done by an external auditor.
SELF-ASSESSMENT EXERCISE 4 Discuss three features of a company with reference to: i. credit ii.
legal status iii.
succession.
3.5 Forms of Capital Capitals are long-term funds that businesses utilise in carrying out their operations.
These funds could be sourced from owners of the business or lenders to the business.
This can be shown diagrammatically as: Capital Lenders (debentures or loan capital) Owners (share capital) 3.5.1 Debentures or Loan Capital Business entities do not always rely on their owners alone to fund the business.
Businesses oftentimes seek lenders who provide loan to the business, but take no part in the control of the business.
This loan is referred to as debenture or loan capital.
Debenture-holders are entitled to fixed interest and do not share in any surplus profit generated by the 129 TSM341 FINANCIAL ACCOUNTING AND MANAGEMENT FOR HOSPITALITY AND TOURISM business.
Debenture interest must be paid whether or not the business earns a profit.
In the event of winding up, their capital is paid before other forms of capital.
Debentures are usually secured with tangible company assets e.g.
land and buildings, machinery, etc.
This means that debenture-holders could cease the property used for security by the business if the company defaults in either capital or interest payment.
Debenture certificates are issued to the lenders and the rate of interest is shown on the certificate.
A debenture may be either redeemable or irredeemable.
• Redeemable i.e.
repayable at a particular date.
• Irredeemable i.e.
repayable only when the company is officially liquidated.
For example, if a date is shown on the debenture certificate 2000/2005, it means that the company can redeem the loan between year 2000 and 2005.
When debentures are secured on assets, they are referred to as Mortgage Debentures.
But, where they are not secured on any asset, they are known as simple or naked debentures.
SELF-ASSESSMENT EXERCISE 5 1.
Define a debenture.
2.
Differentiate between redeemable and irredeemable debentures.
3.5.2 Share Capital Share capitals are funds generated from owners of a business.
These owners are referred to as shareholders.
Shareholders of a limited company are rewarded in the form of a share of profits known as dividend.
Dividend is paid after directors of the company have agreed to set aside a certain amount to reserves.
There are two main types of shares, namely: • preference shares • ordinary shares 3.5.2.1 Preference Shares This type of share capital is provided by people who are owners as well as lenders.
They earn dividend like owners, they are paid dividend out of profit and they can go without dividend for years if insufficient 130 TSM341 FINANCIAL ACCOUNTING AND MANAGEMENT FOR HOSPITALITY AND TOURISM profits are earned.
However, like lenders (debenture-holders), preference shareholders are entitled to dividend at a fixed rate.
In addition, preference shareholders are paid dividend before the ordinary shareholders, and they do not take part in the control of the company’s business (i.e.
they have no vote).
By varying the terms of issue, preference shares could have voting right but such voting right could be made contingent upon failure to pay dividend on preference shares for a certain period of time.
Preference shares could be further divided into four, namely: participating, cumulative, non-cumulative and convertible preference shares.
(1) Participating preference shares This class of shareholders has the right to share from surplus income more than the fixed dividend by way of an additional fluctuating dividend if the company is successful.
(2) Cumulative preference shares In the event of dividend not being paid for some years, such dividend is postponed to future years in priority to any ordinary share dividend.
(3) Non-cumulative preference shares This class of shares is not entitled to any arrears in dividend payment.
(4) Convertible preference shares This class of share carries the right to be converted at the option of the holder, into another class of shares, normally ordinary shares.
Normally, preference shares like ordinary shares are irredeemable except upon liquidation.
3.5.2.2 Ordinary Shares Also known as equity shares, these shareholders receive the remainder of the total profits available for dividend.
This is the risk capital of a company.
There is no upper limit to the amount of dividend they can receive, and they are always the last to receive any return on their investment.
They stand to gain much but could also lose all their investments.
The rate of dividend on ordinary share capital is not normally fixed since their earnings depend on the volume of profit earned and the availability of cash.
Ordinary shareholders normally 131 TSM341 FINANCIAL ACCOUNTING AND MANAGEMENT FOR HOSPITALITY AND TOURISM control the company through their power to vote at meetings to elect directors, appoint auditors and to amend the Memorandum and Articles of Association.
SELF-ASSESSMENT EXERCISE 6 1.
What are the two main types of share capital?
2.
Briefly explain them.
3.6 Definition of Terms of Share Capital Capital refers to the amount invested in the company so that it can carry on its activities.
In a company, capital refers to “share capital”.
The capital clause in the Memorandum of Association (MA).
must state clearly the amount of capital with which the company is registered, giving details of number of shares and the type of shares of the company.
A company cannot issue share capital in excess of the limit specified in the capital clause without altering the capital clause of the Memorandum of Association.
The following different terms are used to denote different aspects of share capital.
3.6.1 Nominal, Authorised or Registered Share Capital This is the sum mentioned in the capital clause of the Memorandum of Association (MA).
It is the maximum amount which the company can raise by issuing the shares and on which the registration fee is paid.
This limit cannot be exceeded unless the MA is altered.
3.6.2 Issued Share Capital This is that part of the authorised capital which has been offered for subscription to members and includes shares allotted to members for consideration in kind also.
3.6.3 Subscribed Share Capital This is that part of the issues capital at nominal or face value which has been subscribed or taken up by purchaser of shares in the company and which has been allotted.
3.6.4 Called-up Share Capital This is the total amount of called-up capital on the shares issued and subscribed by the shareholders on capital account.
For example, if the 132 TSM341 FINANCIAL ACCOUNTING AND MANAGEMENT FOR HOSPITALITY AND TOURISM face value of a share is N10.00, but the company requires only N2.00 at present, it may call only N2.00 now and the balance of N8.00 at a later date.
N2.00 is the called up share capital and N8.00 is the uncalled share capital.
3.6.5 Paid-up Share Capital This is the total amount of called up share capital which is actually paid to the company by the members.
SELF-ASSESSMENT EXERCISE 7 Differentiate between called-up and uncalled share capital.
4.0 CONCLUSION In this unit, you are now conversant with the fact that a company is defined as an entity that has undergone the process of obtaining a legal personality to enable it carry on business.You also learnt that the prescribed form and document used in doing this is the Memorandum and Articles of Association.
The major classes of a company are public and private.
In carrying out their activities, companies need capital which could be lenders or owners capital.
These capitals need to be properly managed because the company will at the end of a certain period, report to the capital contributors, hence, the need for company accounts.
5.0 SUMMARY In this unit, you have learnt about: • the formation of a company; • the characteristics of a company and; • how funds can be raised by a company.
6.0 TUTOR MARKED ASSIGNMENT 1.
What is the function and relevance of the following: (a) Memorandum of Association (b) Articles of Association 2.
Explain the meaning of the following terms: (a) Authorised share capital (b) Issued share capital 133 TSM341 FINANCIAL ACCOUNTING AND MANAGEMENT FOR HOSPITALITY AND TOURISM (c) Subscribed capital (d) Called-up capital (e) Paid-up capital (f) Uncalled capital.
7.0 REFERENCES/FURTHER READING Anao, A. R. (1989).
An Introduction to Financial Accounting.
Ikeja: Longman Nigeria Plc.
Wood, F. & Sangster, A.
(2002).
Business Accounting Volume 1.
London: Pearson.
www.ask.com 134 TSM341 FINANCIAL ACCOUNTING AND MANAGEMENT FOR HOSPITALITY AND TOURISM MODULE 3 Unit 1 Companies Accounts Unit 2 The Concept of Cost Unit 3 Break-even Analysis Unit 4 Working Capital Management Unit 5 Capital Budgeting Decisions UNIT 1 COMPANY ACCOUNTS: FINAL ACCOUNTS CONTENTS 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objectives 3.0 Main Content 3.1 Introducing Accounts of Companies 3.2 Trading, Profit and Loss Accounts of Companies 3.3 The Appropriation Account 3.3.1 Transfer to Reserves 3.3.2 Goodwill Written Off 3.3.3 Preliminary Expenses 3.3.4 Dividend 3.3.5 Corporation Tax 3.3.6 Net Profit for the Year 3.3.7 Balance Brought Forward from Last Year 3.3.8 Balance Carried Forward to Next Year 3.3.9 Others 3.4 The Balance Sheet 3.5 Issue of Shares 3.5.1 Issue of Shares at a Premium 3.5.2 Issue of Shares at a Discount 3.5.3 Issue of Shares at Par 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutor Marked Assignment 7.0 References/Further Reading 1.0 INTRODUCTION In the previous unit, you were introduced to company accounts.
In this unit, you will be presented with the technicalities involved in preparing the accounting books of companies.
135 TSM341 FINANCIAL ACCOUNTING AND MANAGEMENT FOR HOSPITALITY AND TOURISM At this level, you will only be treating simple entries that would enable you understand the basic accounting treatment of company’s transactions.
2.0 OBJECTIVES At the end of this unit, you should be able to: • prepare trading, profit and loss accounts of companies; • identify the items that should come under the appropriation accounts; • prepare balance sheet of a company; • differentiate between the issue of shares at par, discount and premium.
3.0 MAIN CONTENT 3.1 Introducing Accounts of Companies Companies in Nigeria are expected to prepare the following accounts: • trading and profit and loss account • appropriation account • balance sheet These accounts are required legally and are expected to be prepared periodically.
The vast majority of the accounting principles and techniques which we used for sole traders and partnerships apply equally to a limited company.
The two main areas of change are the capital account and appropriation account.
3.2 Trading, Profit and Loss Accounts of Companies The trading account of a company provides a summary of revenues and costs occurring over a certain time span.
The trading account is the same with that of a sole trader or partnership.
However, there are some differences that may be found in the profit and loss account.
The two main expenses that would be found only in company accounts are directors’ remuneration and debenture interest.
The trading, profit and loss account starts with the net sales (gross sales less value added tax) figure for the period, which includes all sales 136 TSM341 FINANCIAL ACCOUNTING AND MANAGEMENT FOR HOSPITALITY AND TOURISM transactions for both cash and credit.
This is matched with the costs and charges for the period to reveal different levels of profit.
These levels of profit include the followings.
• Gross profit: the difference between net sales and the cost of the materials for producing the sales (in the hospitality and related sectors, the cost of sales is the opening stock + purchases – closing stock); • Operating profit: gross profit minus all other costs associated with trading such as labour costs and operating expenses; • Net profit before tax: operating profit minus interest payable; • Net profit after tax: net profit before tax minus corporation tax.
SELF-ASSESSMENT EXERCISE 1 State the various levels of profit in a company’s trading, profit and loss account.
3.3 The Appropriation Account The appropriation account is the section after the trading, profit and loss account.
It shows how the net profit after tax is to be appropriated.
This appropriation account is similar to that in the partnership account.
The appropriation account will include the followings.
3.3.1 Transfer to Reserves These are transfers made to a reserve account.
It is an amount that should not be included in the calculation of how much should be paid out as dividend; because it can be used to meet capital losses or to declare a bonus share.
This transfer may be made to replace fixed assets or reasons may not be specific.
Principal sources are profit on sale of fixed assets; revaluation of assets and liabilities and redemption of debentures at a discount.
3.3.2 Goodwill Written Off When goodwill is written off from time to time, then it should be shown in the appropriation account and not the main profit and loss account.
137 TSM341 FINANCIAL ACCOUNTING AND MANAGEMENT FOR HOSPITALITY AND TOURISM 3.3.3 Preliminary Expenses These are expenses incurred when a company is being formed.
They include legal expenses, taxes, etc.
3.3.4 Dividend Directors propose what dividends should be paid to shareholders.
To that extent, the amount proposed would be appropriated in the appropriation account.
3.3.5 Corporation Tax This is levied against companies.
It is based on the amounts of profit made from their operations.
3.3.6 Net Profit for the Year This is the net profit brought down from the main profit and loss account following the period’s operations.
3.3.7 Balance Brought Forward from Last Year This is the profit that was not appropriated in the previous year.
It is usually called retained profits.
3.3.8 Balance Carried Forward to Next Year This is the profit that is not appropriated in the current year after dividend has been proposed by the directors.
3.3.9 Others Any other fund set aside to meet specific purposes such as welfare, housing, etc.
138 TSM341 FINANCIAL ACCOUNTING AND MANAGEMENT FOR HOSPITALITY AND TOURISM Proforma of a Company’s Final Accounts Trading, Profit and Loss Account for the Year ended 31/12/200X N N N Sales XXX Less: cost of sales: opening stock XX Add: purchases XX XXX Less: returns XX XXX Less: staff meals XXX XXX Less: closing stock XXX XXX Gross profit XXX Add: other income Rent received XXX Discount received XXX XXX XXX Less: other expenses Wages and salaries XXX National insurance XXX Repairs and renewals XXX Depreciation XXX Rent and rates XXX Light and heat XXX Postage and telephone XXX Bank interest XXX Accountancy fees XXX Miscellaneous expenses XXX XXX Profit for the year before tax XXX Add: profit and loss account as at 01/01/200X XXX XXX Appropriations: Preference share dividend Interim XXX Final XXX Ordinary share dividend XXX XXX General reserve XXX Staff welfare fund XXX Preliminary expenses XXX Goodwill written off XXX (XXX) Retained profit for the year 31/12/200X carried XXX forward to next year 139 TSM341 FINANCIAL ACCOUNTING AND MANAGEMENT FOR HOSPITALITY AND TOURISM 3.4 The Balance Sheet The balance sheet shows the present financial position of a business.
It lists assets and liabilities, grouping them into meaningful sub-totals and totals that explain what are happening financially within an organisation.
Balance Sheet as at 31/12/200X N N N Fixed Assets Property, plant and equipment XXX Store equipment XXX XXX Current Assets Stock – food XXX Stock – beverages XXX Prepayments XXX Debtors/accounts receivable XXX Bank XXX Cash XXX XXX Current liabilities Proposed dividend XXX Creditors XXX Corporation tax owing XXX XXX Net current asset (working capital) XXX XXX Debenture: 8% Debenture repayable 20X3 (XXX) XXX Financed By: Authorised share capital (………… units at N….. per share) XXX Issued share capital XXX Share premium reserve XXX General reserve XXX Profit and loss account XXX XXX XXX Example: The following trial balance is extracted from the books of Eko Hotels as at 31/12/20X5: N N 10% preference share capital 200,000 Ordinary share capital 700,000 10% debenture (repayable 20X9) 300,000 Goodwill at cost 155,000 140 TSM341 FINANCIAL ACCOUNTING AND MANAGEMENT FOR HOSPITALITY AND TOURISM Buildings at cost 950,000 Equipment at cost 80,000 Motor vehicle at cost 172,000 Provision for depreciation: Equipment 1/1/20X5 24,000 Motor vehicle 1/1/20X5 51,600 Stock 1/1/20X5 226,900 Sales 982,000 Purchases 539,100 Carriage inwards 16,200 Salaries and wages 92,400 Director’s remuneration 63,000 Motor expenses 81,200 Rates and insurances 29,300 General expenses 5,600 Debenture interest 15,000 Debtors 186,100 Creditors 113,700 Bank 83,900 General reserve 50,000 Share premium account 140,000 Interim ordinary dividend paid 35,000 Profit and loss accounts 31/12/20X4 ________ 169,400 2,730,700 2,730,700 The following adjustments are needed.
1.
Stock at 31/12/20X5 was N272, 200 2.
Depreciate motor vehicles N30, 000, equipment N12, 000 3.
Accrued debenture interest N15, 000 4.
Provide for preference dividend N20, 000 and final ordinary dividend of 10% 5.
Transfer N20, 000 to general reserve 6.
Write off goodwill N30, 000 7.
Authorised share capital is N200, 000 in preference shares and N1, 000,000 in ordinary shares 8.
Provide for corporation tax N50, 000 Required: prepare the trading, profit and loss account and balance sheet for Eko Hotels.
141 TSM341 FINANCIAL ACCOUNTING AND MANAGEMENT FOR HOSPITALITY AND TOURISM Eko Hotels Trading, Profit and Loss Account for the Year ended 31/12/20X5 N N N Sales 982,000 Less: cost of sales: opening stock 226,900 Add: purchases 539,100 carriage inwards 16,200 782,200 Less: closing stock 272,200 510,000 Gross profit 472,000 Less: Other expenses Salaries and wages 92,400 Motor expenses 81,200 Rates and insurances 29,300 General expenses 5,600 Director’s remuneration 63,000 Debenture interest 30,000 Depreciation: motors 30,000 equipment 12,000 343,500 Profit for the year before taxation 128,500 Less: corporation tax (50,000) Profit after tax 78,500 Add: profit and loss account as at 31/12/2004 169,400 247,900 Appropriations.
Transfer to general reserve 20,000 Goodwill written off 30,000 Preference share dividend 20,000 Ordinary share dividend: interim 35,000 final 70,000 175,000 Retained profit for the year 31/12/20X5 72,900 carried forward to next year Eko Hotels Balance Sheet as at 31/12/20X5 N N N Fixed assets Goodwill 125,000 Buildings 950,000 Equipment 44,000 Motor vehicles 90,400 142 TSM341 FINANCIAL ACCOUNTING AND MANAGEMENT FOR HOSPITALITY AND TOURISM 1,209,400 Current assets Stock 272,200 Debtors/accounts receivable 186,100 Bank 83,900 542,200 Less: Current liabilities Creditors 113,700 Proposed dividends 90,000 Debenture interest owing 15,000 Taxation 50,000 268,700 Net Current asset (working capital) 273,500 1,482,900 Less: Debenture 10% Debenture 300,000 1,182,900 Financed By: Authorised Issued Share capital: Preference shares 200,000 200,000 Ordinary shares 1,000,000 700,000 1,200,000 900,000 Reserves: Share premium 140,000 General reserve 70,000 Profit and loss account 72,900 282,900 1,182,900 Workings: Adjustment 2: Motors Account Cash 172,000 Provision for Depreciation 51,600 Profit and Loss account 30,000 ______ Balance c/d 90,400 172,000 172,000 Balance b/d 90,400 Equipment Account N Cash 80,000 Provision for Depreciation 24,000 Profit and Loss account 12,000 ______ Balance c/d 44,000 80,000 80,000 Balance b/d 44,000 143 TSM341 FINANCIAL ACCOUNTING AND MANAGEMENT FOR HOSPITALITY AND TOURISM Adjustment 3: Debenture Interest Account Balance b/d 15,000 Balance c/d (Profit & Loss) 30,000 Accruals (Balance Sheet) 15,000 _____ 30,000 30,000 Balance b/d 30,000 Adjustment 6: Goodwill Account Balance b/d 155,000 Profit & Loss account 30,000 ______ Balance c/d 125,000 155,000 155,000 Balance b/d 125,000 3.5 Issue of Shares Subject to any limitation in the Articles of Association (AA) of a company with respect to the number of shares which may be issued, and any pre-emptive rights prescribed in the ‘Articles’ in relation to the shares, a company shall have the power, at such times and for such consideration as it shall determine, to issue shares up to the total number authorised in the ‘Memorandum’.
Shares may be issued at a premium, discount and at par.
Accounting entries for this transaction is: Dr. cash account Cr.
share capital account 3.5.1 Issue of Shares at a Premium Shares are said to be issued at a premium when the issue price exceeds the nominal or par value of the shares.
The issue of shares at a premium can occur when the future prospects of the company are bright and they have had a good profit track for years, and dividends are expected to be higher than normal.
Accounting entries are as follows.
Dr. Bank account (with total proceeds from issue) Cr.
Ordinary share capital account (with nominal value) Cr.
Share premium account (with premium value) Cr.
Application and allotment account Example 20,000 ordinary shares of N1.00 were issued at N1.20.
Applications have been received for the 20,000 units and have been subsequently allotted.
144 TSM341 FINANCIAL ACCOUNTING AND MANAGEMENT FOR HOSPITALITY AND TOURISM Bank Account Application and allotment 24,000 Ordinary Share Capital Account Application and allotment 20,000 The share premium is a capital profit for the company and will show credit balance; hence it will be shown in the liability side of the balance sheet under the heading ‘Reserve and Surplus’.
Share Premium Account Application and allotment 4,000 Application and Allotment Account Ordinary Share Capital 20,000 Bank 24,000 Share Premium 4,000 _____ 24,000 24,000 The share premium account is used in writing off the preliminary expenses of the company or the expenses of or commission paid or discount allowed on any issue of shares of the company or in providing for the premium payable on redemption of any redeemable share of the company.
3.5.2 Issue of Shares at a Discount According to the Companies and Allied Matters Act (1990) Section 121 (1), subject to the provisions of this section, it shall be lawful for a company to issue at a discount shares in the company of a class of shares already issued, provided that: (a) the issue of shares at a discount is authorised by the resolution passed in general meeting of the company and is thereafter sanctioned by the court; (b) the resolution specifies the maximum rate of discount at which the shares are to be issued; (c) the shares to be issued at a discount are issued within the month after the date on which the issue is sanctioned by the court or within such extended time as the court may allow.
145 TSM341 FINANCIAL ACCOUNTING AND MANAGEMENT FOR HOSPITALITY AND TOURISM A company may issue shares at less than their nominal value.
This may be resorted to when a company has not traded successfully in the past, but it considers the future prospects to be sufficiently bright as to warrant a new injection of funds.
Accounting entries are: Dr. Bank account Cr.
Application and allotment account Dr. Discount on issue of shares account Cr.
Ordinary share capital account Example Excellence Hotels Plc.
has issued 10,000 ordinary shares of N1.00 each at a price of 90 kobo.
All shares have been bought and full proceeds received.
Show the accounting entries.
Solution: Bank Account N Application and allotment 9,000 Application and Allotment Account N N Ordinary share capital 9,000 Bank 9,000 Discount on Issue of Shares Account N Ordinary share capital 1,000 Ordinary Share Capital Account N Application and allotment 9,000 Discount on issue of shares account 1,000 10,000 The discount on issue of shares account shows a debit balance which denotes a loss to the company that is in the nature of capital loss.
146 TSM341 FINANCIAL ACCOUNTING AND MANAGEMENT FOR HOSPITALITY AND TOURISM 3.5.3 Issue of Shares at Par Shares are said to be issued at par when they are issued at a price equal to the face value.
For example, if a share of N10.00 is issued at N10.00, it is said that the share has been issued at par.
Accounting entries for this transaction are as follows.
Dr. Bank account Cr.
Application and allotment account (with total proceeds) Dr.
Application and allotment account Cr.
Ordinary share capital account (with nominal value of shares allotted) SELF-ASSESSMENT EXERCISE 2 Differentiate between the issue of shares at a premium and the issue of shares at a discount.
4.0 CONCLUSION In this unit, you are now conversant with how the company accounts are prepared based on requirements of bodies such as: the Nigerian Stock Exchange (NSE), Corporate Affairs Commission (CAC), Nigerian Accounting Standards Board (NASB), etc.
The accounts are prepared based on rules and regulations that the preparer must be aware of.
These rules and regulations may be found in accounting standards and professional bodies’ pronouncements, and in this case, hospitality and tourism regulatory bodies.
5.0 SUMMARY In this unit, you have learnt company accounts and the rudiments in the preparation of simple trading, profit and loss accounts as well as balance sheet.
We have also treated the issue of shares in various forms.
6.0 TUTOR-MARKED ASSIGNMENT 1.
In a limited liability company, which of the following are shown in the appropriation account?
i) Debenture interest ii) Proposed dividend iii) Transfer to reserves iv) Directors’ remuneration 147 TSM341 FINANCIAL ACCOUNTING AND MANAGEMENT FOR HOSPITALITY AND TOURISM a) (i) & (ii) b) (ii) & (iii) c) (i) & (iv) d) (ii) & (iv) 2.
The Issued capital of a company is a) always the same as the authorised capital b) the same as preference share capital c) equal to the reserves of the company d) none of the above 3.
A company wishes to pay out all available profits as dividends.
Net profit is N26, 600.
There are 20,000 8% Preference shares of N1 each and 50,000 ordinary shares of N1 each.
N5, 000 is to be transferred to General Reserve.
What ordinary dividends are to be paid, in percentage terms: a) 20% b) 40% c) 10% d) 60% 4.
Ordinary shares can be issued at par, discount or …………….. 5.
State the treatment for goodwill.
7.0 REFERENCES/FURTHER READING Anao, A. R. (1989).
Introduction to Financial Accounting.
Ikeja: Longman.
Wood, F. & Sangster, A.
(2002).
Business Accounting Volume 1.
London: Pearson.
www.ezinearticles.com www.secureonlineorder.net.
www.books.google.com.ng 148 TSM341 FINANCIAL ACCOUNTING AND MANAGEMENT FOR HOSPITALITY AND TOURISM UNIT 2 THE CONCEPT OF COST CONTENTS 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objectives 3.0 Main Content 3.1 Costs 3.2 Costs Concept 3.2.1 Fixed Cost 3.2.2 Variable Cost 3.2.3 Semi-fixed Cost 3.3 Costing Systems 3.3.1 Direct and Indirect Cost 3.3.2 Controllable and Uncontrollable Cost 3.3.3 Outlay Cost and Opportunity Cost 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutor-Marked Assignment 7.0 References/Further Reading 1.0 INTRODUCTION In this unit, you shall be looking at the basic cost concepts and explaining the cost concepts which are appropriate in particular situations.
2.0 OBJECTIVES At the end of this unit, you should be able to: • define the term cost; • explain the various cost concepts; • differentiate between fixed, variable and semi-fixed costs.
3.0 MAIN CONTENT 3.1 Definition of Cost With reference to hospitality and tourism business, especially in the food and beverage unit, cost can be defined as the expense to a food service establishment for goods or services when the goods are consumed or the services are rendered.
When a cost is incurred, there is diminution or reduction in the value of an asset i.e.
something is sacrificed or forgone now in order to secure 149 TSM341 FINANCIAL ACCOUNTING AND MANAGEMENT FOR HOSPITALITY AND TOURISM some benefits or achieve specific objectives.
It is usually measured as a monetary amount that must be paid to acquire goods and services.
To guide their decisions, managers want to know how much a particular thing is.
This “thing” is referred to as a cost object.
Costs may arise in two main ways.
When a hotel buys a washing machine, there is no immediate cost.
One asset (cash) is decreased and another asset (laundry plant) is increased.
The total of assets is unchanged.
As a result of depreciation, the initial cost of the dishwasher will give rise to an annual ‘expense’ over a period of time and so cost is incurred at that point in time.
When cash is spent on rent, transportation, labour, etc., costs are incurred in a different manner.
There is a decrease in cash, but no corresponding immediate increase in another asset.
The calculation of the annual expense in this second case is considerably easier than in the first, where estimates and assumptions have to be made with regard to the technological properties of the asset and its consequent effective life.
Accounting is often referred to as the ‘language’ of businesses.
For it to be an effective means of communication, it must operate within the framework of a set of well-developed rules and also have the characteristics of precision.
In order to give a precise meaning to the name ‘cost’, it is necessary to precede it by some adjective such as ‘fixed’, ‘controllable’, ‘budgeted’, ‘direct’, etc.
In this way, we develop purpose-oriented and unambiguous cost concepts, all of which will be used in different settings and different situations.
SELF-ASSESSMENT EXERCISE 1 1.
Define the word cost.
2.
Discuss briefly how cost may arise in hospitality and tourism business.
3.2 Costs Concept Costing systems record the cost of resources acquired and track their subsequent use.
Recording those costs allow managers to see how these costs behave.
From the point of view of the behaviour of costs in response to changes in the volume of sales (or rate of activity), it is possible to distinguish three categories of cost.
150 TSM341 FINANCIAL ACCOUNTING AND MANAGEMENT FOR HOSPITALITY AND TOURISM 3.2.1 Fixed Costs (FC) These are those costs which do not respond to changes in the volume of sales i.e.
whatever the sales, fixed costs remain constant.
Examples of fixed costs are rent, rates, office expenses, etc.
3.2.2 Variable Costs (VC) These are costs which vary in proportion to the sales volume.
Whatever the change in sales, there is a proportional change in variable cost.
Examples are food, snacks, and beverage costs.
When the volume of business increases (decreases) by a certain percentage, there is normally a proportional increase (decrease) in the sales volume, and hence, the cost of producing those items that will be available for sale.
3.2.3 Semi-fixed Costs (SFC) These are costs which are more in sympathy with but not in proportion to the volume of sales.
Examples are electricity, telephone, gas, etc.
VC FC Cost SFC Cost Cost Sales Sales Sales Figure shows Fixed, Variable and Semi-fixed Costs 3.3 Costing Systems A costing system accounts for costs in two basic stages – accumulation and assignment.
Cost accumulation is the collection of cost data in some organised way by means of an accounting system.
Cost assignment encompasses: (1) tracing accumulated costs to a cost object, and (2) allocating accumulated cost to a cost object.
Cost can be assigned to a department, product or customer to facilitate departmental efficiency, product or customer-profitability analysis.
The crux of cost assignment is whether costs have a direct or an indirect relationship to a particular cost.
151 TSM341 FINANCIAL ACCOUNTING AND MANAGEMENT FOR HOSPITALITY AND TOURISM 3.3.1 Direct and Indirect Cost The distinction between direct and indirect costs flows from the traceability of costs to a unit of output or a department.
A cost may be direct in relation to a department, but indirect in relation to a unit of output.
The direct costs of a cost object are related to the particular cost object and can be traced to it in an economically feasible (cost-effective) way.
However, the indirect costs of a cost object are related to the particular cost object, but cannot be traced to it in an economically feasible (cost-effective) way.
For example, food cost is a direct cost from both points of view.
It may be traced to a unit of output (e.g.
a menu item, a complete meal).
It is clear in which department the cost has arisen.
Food cost is therefore a direct cost from the point of view of its traceability to a particular department.
Kitchen labour is a direct cost as it is clear in which department it originates.
It is an indirect cost in relation to a unit of output as it is impossible in normal circumstances to calculate the labour absorption of any one item produced in the kitchen.
3.3.2 Controllable and Uncontrollable Cost The distinction between controllable and uncontrollable costs depends on management’s ability to influence cost levels or on the controllability of costs.
Examples of controllable costs are food costs, beverage costs, part-time and casual labour.
Uncontrollable costs are insurance, rent, rates, depreciation etc.
3.3.3 Outlay Cost and Opportunity Cost An outlay cost is the financial expenditure which is recorded in accounting records.
An opportunity cost is the profit from some alternative ventures which are forgone by using resources for a particular purpose.
Outlay costs are easy to comprehend: they are there, recorded in the books, they have in fact taken place; they may be measured, related to units of output, sales, etc.
The concept of opportunity cost is, however, more difficult to appreciate.
For example, a restaurant has idle cash of N6, 000,000 and the alternatives for investing the cash are (a) to take over an existing restaurant for N6, 000,000; (b) to modernise the existing units operated by the company.
If the company decides in favour of alternative (a), then the outlay cost will be N6, 000,000.
But the opportunity is the modernising of existing units which will affect decoration atmosphere and efficiency which will in turn make it more difficult to attract business where several alternatives exist.
Opportunity cost is the profit of the most profitable venture forgone by using resources for some other purposes.
152 TSM341 FINANCIAL ACCOUNTING AND MANAGEMENT FOR HOSPITALITY AND TOURISM SELF-ASSESSMENT EXERCISE Give three examples each of the following cost concepts with reference to (i) a hotel manager and (ii) a tour operator: i.
Fixed and variable costs ii.
Direct and indirect costs iii.
Outlay and Opportunity costs 4.0 CONCLUSION Identification of cost in the hospitality and tourism industry is very important because this will help managers to forecast and predict the performance of the organisation.
This is made possible by comparing costs with revenue to arrive at a profit figure.
Cost also assists managers to assess the performance of different departments within the organisation.
5.0 SUMMARY In this unit, we have defined the term cost and discussed the various concepts of cost, i.e.
fixed, variable, direct, indirect, controllable, uncontrollable, opportunity, outlay costs, etc.
6.0 TUTOR-MARKED ASSIGNMENT 1.
Define the following: (a) Fixed cost (b) Variable cost (c) Semi-fixed cost 2.
Explain the costing systems 7.0 REFERENCES/FURTHER READING Horngren, C.T.
; Foster, G. & Datar, S.M.
(2000).
Costing.
New Jersey: Prentice Hall.
Kotas, R. (1998).
Management Accounting for Hospitality and Tourism.
London: Thomas Business Press.
Lucy, T. (2002).
Costing.
London: Biddles Limited.
153 TSM341 FINANCIAL ACCOUNTING AND MANAGEMENT FOR HOSPITALITY AND TOURISM UNIT 3 BREAK-EVEN ANALYSIS CONTENTS 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objectives 3.0 Main Content 3.1 Concept of Break-even Analysis 3.1.1 Uses of Cost Volume Profit (CVP) Analysis 3.1.2 Assumptions Behind CVP Analysis 3.2 The Break-even Point 3.2.1 Break-even Formulae 3.2.2 Break-even Chart 3.2.2.1 The Traditional Break-even Chart 3.2.2.2 Margin of Safety 3.3 Break-even Analysis and Profit Goal 3.4 Limitation of Cost Volume Profit (CVP) Analysis 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutor-Marked Assignment 7.0 References/Further Reading 1.0 INTRODUCTION This unit explains break-even analysis and shows how the behaviour of costs and profits can be predicted with varying levels of activity.
Arithmetic and graphical methods are described and traditional chart, contribution and profit-volume charts are also illustrated.
The assumptions underlying cost-volume-profit analysis and the limitations of the technique are explained.
2.0 OBJECTIVES At the end of this unit, you should be able to: • determine the level of sales to be achieved to avoid losses • calculate the sales level to earn a profit • explain the break-even analysis concept • determine break-even point using formulae and charts • analyse break-even point to determine desired profit.
154 TSM341 FINANCIAL ACCOUNTING AND MANAGEMENT FOR HOSPITALITY AND TOURISM 3.0 MAIN CONTENT 3.1 Concept of Break-even Analysis This is the term given to the study of the interrelationships between costs, volume and profit at various levels of activity.
Frequently, these relationships are depicted by graphs but this is not essential.
The term break-even analysis is the one commonly used, but it is somewhat misleading as it implies that the only concern is with that level of activity which produces neither profit nor loss – the break-even point – although the behaviour of costs and profits at other levels is usually of much greater significance.
Because of this, an alternative term, cost- volume-profit or C-V-P analysis is frequently used and is more descriptive.
3.1.1 Uses of C-V-P Analysis Break-even analysis is the most useful technique of profit planning and control.
It is a device to explain the relationship between costs, volume and profits.
The utility of the break-even analysis lies in the following advantages.
• The break-even analysis is a simple concept to comprehend and interpret the accounting data.
Many business executives are unable to understand accounting data contained in financial statements and reports.
When the data is presented through break-even charts, it becomes very easy to grasp and interpret them.
• The break-even analysis is a useful diagnostic tool.
It indicates to the management the causes of increasing break-even point and falling profits.
• In break-even analysis, we compute break-even point, prepare break-even charts and analyse and report the effect of changing factors on profits.
This whole set of information is important to evaluate the reasonableness and usefulness of profit plans and other budgets and forecasts prepared by the management.
The break-even analysis, thus, provides the basic information for profit improvement studies, and is a useful starting point for detailed investigations.
• The break-even analysis, to some extent, is a useful method for considering the risk implications of alternative actions.
The problem of risk evaluation can be approached by considering the effects of the alternative actions on the break-even point.
The 155 TSM341 FINANCIAL ACCOUNTING AND MANAGEMENT FOR HOSPITALITY AND TOURISM desirability of an action should be considered on the basis of its profit as well as risk.
If profit alone is considered, a firm may commit a risky action.
SELF-ASSESSMENT EXERCISE 1 Briefly explain the usefulness of the C-V-P analysis.
3.1.2 Assumptions behind C-V-P Analysis The major assumptions behind break-even analysis include the following.
• All costs can be resolved into fixed and variable elements; • Fixed costs will remain constant and variable costs vary proportionately with activity; • Over the activity range being considered, cost and revenue behave in a linear fashion; • The only factor affecting costs and revenue is volume; • Technology, production methods and efficiency remain unchanged.
3.2 The Break-even Point The break-even point is that point of sales volume at which total revenue is equal to total costs.
It is a no-profit, no-loss point.
Two approaches can be used to compute the break-even point, namely: (i) the formula approach, and (ii) the chart approach.
3.2.1 Break-even Formulae The break-even point can be computed in terms of units, or in terms of money value or sales volume or as a percentage of estimated capacity.
Break-even Point (in units) = Fixed Costs Contribution/Unit The break-even point (BEP) in units will be reached when units sold create sufficient revenue to cover their total cost–fixed and variable.
Each unit of the product sold will cover its own variable cost and leave a remainder called contribution (or marginal income) to cover fixed costs.
The B.E.P.
will occur when enough units have been sold so that total contribution is just equal to total fixed costs.
Note that contribution/unit = selling price per unit – variable cost/unit 156 TSM341 FINANCIAL ACCOUNTING AND MANAGEMENT FOR HOSPITALITY AND TOURISM Total contribution = contribution per unit x units sold Contribution ratio = sales – variable cost/sales Profit = Total contribution – fixed cost At B.E.P, profit is zero, and therefore, total contribution will just cover the total fixed cost.
Break-even point (N sales) = Fixed Cost x Sales price per unit Contribution/unit The B.E.P.
for a product can be calculated in terms of naira value of sales volume.
Another formula for deriving the B.E.P.
in sales is: Fixed Cost x 1 C/S ratio where the C/S ratio = Contribution per unit x 100 Sales price per unit It should be noted that the above formulae relates to a single product firm or one with an unvarying mix of sales.
With a multi-product firm, it is possible to calculate the B.E.P.
as follows: Break-even Point (N sales) = Fixed costs x sales value Contribution Example: A company makes a single product with a sales price of N10.00 and a marginal cost of N6.00.
Fixed costs are N60, 000.00 per annum.
Calculate: (1) number of units to break-even (2) sales at break-even point.
Solution Contribution = selling price – variable cost = N10.00 – N6.00 = N4.00 (i) B.E.P.
(units) = fixed Cost Contribution per unit = N60, 000 157 TSM341 FINANCIAL ACCOUNTING AND MANAGEMENT FOR HOSPITALITY AND TOURISM 4 = 15,000 units (ii) B.E.P.
(N Sales) = 15,000 units x N10.00 = N150, 000.00 The fact that the firm’s profit is equal to zero at a quantity of 15,000 units is verified as follows: N Sales revenue (15,000 units x N10.00) 150,000 Less: variable cost (15,000 units x N6.00) 90,000 Contribution 60,000 Less: fixed cost 60,000 Nil SELF-ASSESSMENT EXERCISE 2 A manufacturing firm produces a single-product which selling price is N20.00 per unit and the marginal cost per unit is N12.00.
The annual fixed costs of the firm are estimated as N160, 000.00.
Calculate the number of sales value and quantity required to break-even.
3.2.2 The Break-even Chart B.E.P.
can also be computed graphically.
A break-even chart portrays a pictorial view of the relationships between costs, volume and profit.
The B.E.P.
indicated in the chart will be one at which total cost line and total sales line intersect.
The break-even chart may be preferred where there is the need to avoid a detailed, numerical approach when, for example, the recipients of the information have no accounting background.
This chart can be drawn in two ways.
The first is known as the traditional approach and the second is the contribution approach.
Whatever approach is adopted, all costs must be capable of separation into fixed and variable elements.
For the purpose of this course, we shall treat the traditional approach alone.
3.2.2.1 The Traditional Break-Even Chart Assuming that fixed and variable costs have been resolved, the chart is drawn in the following way.
(a) Draw the axes with: 158 TSM341 FINANCIAL ACCOUNTING AND MANAGEMENT FOR HOSPITALITY AND TOURISM (i) the horizontal showing levels of activity expressed as units of output or as percentages of total capacity; (ii) the vertical showing values in N as appropriate for costs and revenue.
(b) Draw the cost lines with the fixed cost as a straight line parallel to the horizontal axis at the level of the fixed cost and total cost line which will start where the fixed cost line intersects the vertical axis and will be a straight line sloping upward at an angle depending on the proportion of variable cost in total costs; (c) Draw the revenue line which is a straight line from the point of origin sloping upwards at an angle determined by the selling price.
Example: A company makes a single product with a total capacity of 4,000,000 litres of Chapman per annum.
Cost and sales data are as follows: Selling price = N100.00 per litre Marginal cost = N50.00 per litre Fixed cost = N10, 000,000.00 Draw a Traditional Break-even Chart showing the break-even point.
N’000 Profit 40,000 30,000 20,000 Total Cost 10,000 Margin of Safety Fixed Cost 5,000 10,000 15,000 20,000 25,000 30,000 35,000 40,000 Output (Litres ’000) From the graph, the B.E.P.
is 20,000,000 litres 159 TSM341 FINANCIAL ACCOUNTING AND MANAGEMENT FOR HOSPITALITY AND TOURISM 3.2.2.2 The Contribution or Margin of Safety The margin of safety is that range of activity over which some profits will always be made.
The range is, therefore, regarded as ‘safe’.
Assuming that the budgeted sale is 30,000,000 units, the margin of safety will be: Margin of Safety = Budgeted sales – Break-even sales = 30,000,000 – 20,000,000 = 10,000,000 litres The margin of safety is a measure of the profit stability of a business.
The wider the margin of safety, the greater the degree of profit stability.
A high margin of safety is particularly significant in times of depression when the demand for the firm’s product is falling.
A low margin of safety may result for a firm which has a low contribution ratio.
Break-even charts have many important advantages.
They are simple to construct, create a powerful impact and give a great deal of insight into the C-V-P relationships of a business.
They do, however, have some limitations.
First, let us look at the time factor.
During inflationary periods, it is unrealistic to attempt to prepare a break-even chart for more than about twelve months.
Both fixed and variable costs show a substantial upward trend, which is not always easy to predict.
Secondly, let us look at linearity.
When constructing a break-even chart, we assume that the sales volume may be represented by a straight line.
The same assumption is usually made in respect of variable cost and total cost.
In fact, this is not always true.
Once a certain volume of sales has been achieved, it may be necessary to offer discounts or reduce room rates or menu prices to achieve higher occupancies.
Similar considerations apply to the cost side of the business.
Where there is no effective system of food and beverage control, food and beverage costs (particularly the former) may fluctuate quite considerably from one trading period to another.
The variable cost line, will not, in such circumstances, be a straight line.
160 TSM341 FINANCIAL ACCOUNTING AND MANAGEMENT FOR HOSPITALITY AND TOURISM Sales s t s o C d n a es l a S Rate of Activity SELF-ASSESSMENT EXERCISE 3 Discuss the limitations of the break-even chart.
3.3 Break-Even Analysis and Profit Goal It is significant to realise that once the firm has reached the break-even point, the difference between sales and variable costs is the firm’s profit.
The reason is that the total fixed costs have already been covered at the break-even point: therefore, an extra sale will simply add to the profit (after deducting variable costs).
The profit rate on sales in excess of the break-even sales will be equal to the contribution ratio.
For example, the estimated sales of a product is N500, 000 and the break-even sales N250,000.
The contribution ratio is 40%.
The profit = N250, 000 x 40% = N100,000.
It is simple to understand that the fixed costs have been covered by the break-even sales of N250, 000; therefore only variable cost (which is 60% of sales in the example) should be subtracted from the extra sales of N250,000 to determine profit.
Subtracting 60% of sales as variable cost implies a 40% (i.e.
100% – 60%) contribution, which is profit in the absence of fixed costs (after the break-even profit).
The implication of the above reasoning is that when profit is divided by the contribution ratio, the amount of sales in excess of the break-even sales is obtained.
Thus, profit of 100,000 = N250, 000 40% This logic can be extended to compute sales volume necessary to earn a desired level of profit.
To earn a desired amount of profit, total 161 TSM341 FINANCIAL ACCOUNTING AND MANAGEMENT FOR HOSPITALITY AND TOURISM contribution should be enough to cover total fixed costs and earn the desired amount of profit.
Thus, target sales = (fixed cost + desired profit) x selling price per unit contribution ratio Number of units for target sales = fixed cost + desired profit contribution ratio Notice that the break-even sales desired profit will be zero.
The profit goal may be stated in terms of profit after taxes.
In such a case, the above formula can be modified as follows: Target sales = fixed cost – {desired profit after tax/(1 – tax rate)} contribution ratio Example: Suppose that a firm has a contribution ratio of 40% and wants to earn an after tax profit of N54, 000 and the income tax rate is 40%.
The firm’s fixed costs are N100, 000.
To earn N54, 000 after tax profit, the sales will have to be as follows: = 100,000 + {54,000/(1 – 0.40)} 0.40 = 100,000 + 90,000 0.40 = N475, 000 The above results can be verified as follows: N Sales 475,000 Less: variable cost (60% of sales) 285,000 Contribution (40% of sales) 190,000 Less: fixed costs 100,000 Profit before tax 90,000 Less: income tax (40%) 36,000 Profit after tax 54,000 SELF-ASSESSMENT EXERCISE 4 Define profit in relation to break-even analysis.
162 TSM341 FINANCIAL ACCOUNTING AND MANAGEMENT FOR HOSPITALITY AND TOURISM Detailed example: The Sheraton Hotel has 100 rooms.
The average room rate is £30.00 and the variable cost per occupied room is £4.00.
Additionally, we are informed as follows.
(a) Food sales amount to £10.00 per occupied room and beverage sales £5.00.
In the minor operated departments, sales amount to £1.00 per occupied room.
(b) The departmental contributions to sales’ ratios are as shown below.
(i) Food sales 65% (ii) Beverage sales 60% (iii) Minor operated departments 50% (c) The fixed costs of the hotel amount to N800, 000 per annum.
We are required to: (a) Prepare a break-even chart for the hotel; (b) Calculate the hotel’s break-even point; (c) Tell Musa Shagari, the owner of the hotel, what room occupancy he must achieve to make a net profit of £200,000.
Solution Variable cost per occupied room £ Rooms department 4.00 Food department (35% of £10.00) 3.50 Beverage department (40% of £5.00) 2.00 Minor operated departments (50% of £1.00) 0.50 Total 10.00 Contribution per occupied room Sales: Rooms department 30.00 Food department 10.00 Beverage department 5.00 Minor operated department 1.00 Total 46.00 Less: Variable cost 10.00 Contribution per occupied room 36.00 163 TSM341 FINANCIAL ACCOUNTING AND MANAGEMENT FOR HOSPITALITY AND TOURISM In securing the basic data for preparing our break-even chart, since we do not know at what level of occupancy the hotel breaks-even or earns the required £200,000 net profit, we will then prepare the break-even chart on the assumption of 100% room occupancy.
Basic data for break-even chart £ (a) Sales: 100 rooms x £46.00 x 365 1,679,000 (b) Variable costs: 100 rooms x £10.00 x 365 365,000 (c) Fixed costs – as given 800,000 1700 1600 1500 1400 1300 1200 B.E.P.
1100 Net Loss 0) 1000 00 Net profit £’ 900 ( s t s 800 o C d 700 n a s e 600 l Sa 500 400 300 200 100 10 20 30 40 50 60 70 80 90 100 Occupancy % The hotel has a wide margin of safety as well as a huge profit wedge.
The hotel breaks even when it reaches just over 60% room occupancy.
The exact B.E.P.
will be calculated using formula: (b) B.E.P.
(rooms) = fixed cost contribution / occupied room 164 TSM341 FINANCIAL ACCOUNTING AND MANAGEMENT FOR HOSPITALITY AND TOURISM = £800,000 £36 = 22,222 (rooms) The hotel’s potential is (100 rooms x 365) = 36,500 rooms sold per annum.
Of these, we have to sell 22,222 rooms to break even.
From this, we conclude that the hotel’s B.E.P.
is reached when room occupancy is: Rooms to be sold = 22,222 x 100 Rooms available 36,500 = 60.9% (c) Now if the hotel is to earn a net profit of £200,000, it needs a total contribution of: Contribution required to break-even £800,000 Contribution required for net profit £200,000 Total £1,000,000 Hence, number of rooms for desired profit = fixed cost + desired profit contribution per occupied room = £800,000 +£200,000 £36 = £1,000,000 36 = 27,777 We see that 27,777 rooms would have to be sold for the hotel to earn a net profit of £200,000.
This is equivalent to room occupancy of: Rooms to be sold (27,777) x 100% = 76.10% Rooms available (36,500) 3.4 Limitations of C-V-P Analysis The break-even or cost-volume-profit analysis is a simple and useful concept.
However, it is based on certain assumptions, which have been discussed earlier.
These assumptions limit the utility and general applicability of the break-even analysis.
Therefore, the analysis should recognise these limitations and adjust data, whenever possible, to get 165 TSM341 FINANCIAL ACCOUNTING AND MANAGEMENT FOR HOSPITALITY AND TOURISM meaningful results.
The cost-volume-profit analysis suffers from the following limitations.
• It is difficult to separate costs into fixed and variable components.
• It is not correct to assume that total fixed cost would remain unchanged over the entire range of volume.
• The assumption of constant selling price and unit variable cost is not valid.
• It is difficult to use the break-even analysis for a multi-product firm.
• The break-even analysis is a short-run concept and has a limited use in long range planning.
• The break-even analysis is a static tool.
SELF-ASSESSMENT EXERCISE 5 List some limitations of the C-V-P Analysis.
4.0 CONCLUSION In this unit, you have learnt that the break-even analysis is a very important tool in planning especially in the short-run You are also conversant with the relationship that exists between cost, output level and profits.
It operates under some certain assumptions and it helps in the consideration of break-even point which is the point where an organisation neither makes profit or loss.
The break-even chart helps you to analyse the B.E.P.
graphically.
The B.E.P.
or C-V-P is very useful especially in diagnosis, understanding accounting data, profit improvement and risk evaluation.
5.0 SUMMARY In this unit, you were taught break-even analysis and you explored the uses of C-V-P analysis, the determination of break-even point using formulae and the break-even chart.
You were well informed about the margin of safety, which is the measure of profit stability.
You also learnt about the assumptions and the limitations of the use of break-even analysis.
166 TSM341 FINANCIAL ACCOUNTING AND MANAGEMENT FOR HOSPITALITY AND TOURISM 6.0 TUTOR-MARKED ASSIGNMENT 1.
The Oasis International Hotel has 100 rooms.
The average room rate is £60.00 and the variable cost per occupied room is £5.00.
Additionally, you have the following information.
Food sales amount to £20.00 per occupied room and beverage sales £8.00.
In the minor operated departments, sales amount to £2.00 per occupied room.
The departmental contribution/sales ratios are as follows: Food sales 65% Beverage sales 60% Minor operated departments 40% The fixed costs of the hotel amount to £1,500,000 per annum.
You are required to: a. calculate the hotel’s break-even point in terms of room occupancy.
b. find what room occupancy must be achieved in order for the hotel to earn a net profit of £300,000.00.
2.
List 5 limitations of the C-V-P analysis.
7.0 REFERENCES/FURTHER READING Kotas, R. (1998).
Management Accounting for Hospitality and Tourism.
London: Thomas Business Press.
Pandey, I.M.
(1999).
Financial Management.
New Delhi: UBS Publishers.
Lucey, T. (1988).
Cost and Management Accounting 1.
Eastleigh: DP Publications.
167 TSM341 FINANCIAL ACCOUNTING AND MANAGEMENT FOR HOSPITALITY AND TOURISM UNIT 4 WORKING CAPITAL MANAGEMENT CONTENTS 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objectives 3.0 Main Content 3.1 Introducing Working Capital Management 3.2 Concepts of Working Capital 3.2.1 Gross Working Capital 3.2.2 Net Working Capital 3.3 Working Capital Position 3.4 Determinants of Working Capital 3.4.1 Nature of Business 3.4.2 Market and Demand Conditions 3.4.3 Technology and Manufacturing Policy 3.4.4 Credit Policy 3.4.5 Availability of Credit from Suppliers 3.4.6 Operating Efficiency 3.4.7 Price Level Changes 3.5 Receivables Management 3.5.1 Cash Discount 3.5.2 Period of Collection 3.5.3 Assessing Credit Worthiness 3.5.4 Follow up Action 3.6 Stock/Inventory Management 3.6.1 Re-order Quantities 3.6.2 Re-order Level 3.7 Cash Management/Cash Budgets 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutor-Marked Assignment 7.0 References/Further Reading 1.0 INTRODUCTION Working capital, also known as net working capital or NWC, is a financial metric which represents operating liquidity available to a business.
Along with fixed assets such as plant and equipment, working capital is considered a part of operating capital.
It is calculated as current assets minus current liabilities.
The management of working capital involves managing inventories (stock), accounts receivables (debtors) and payable (creditors) and cash.
168 TSM341 FINANCIAL ACCOUNTING AND MANAGEMENT FOR HOSPITALITY AND TOURISM 2.0 OBJECTIVES At the end of this unit, you should be able to: • determine the need for investing in current assets • explain the working capital concept with the aid of diagram • explain the effects of excessive working capital • prepare a cash budget • calculate re-order quantities and re-order levels.
3.0 MAIN CONTENT 3.1 Introducing Working Capital Management Decisions relating to working capital and short term financing are referred to as working capital management.
These involve managing the relationship between a firm’s short-term assets and its short-term liabilities.
The goal of working capital management is to ensure that the firm is able to continue its operations and that it has sufficient cash flow to satisfy both maturing short-term debt and upcoming operational expenses.
Management is expected to use a combination of policies and techniques for the management of working capital.
These policies aim at managing the current assets (generally, cash and cash equivalents, inventories and debtors) and the short term financing such that cash flows and returns are acceptable.
Cash management: identify the cash balance which allows for the business to meet the day-to-day expenses, but reduces cash holding costs.
Inventory management: identify the level of inventory which allows for uninterrupted production but reduces the investment in raw materials and minimises reordering costs – and hence, increases cash flow.
For example, supply chain management, Just In Time (JIT), Economic Order Quantity (EOQ) and Economic Production Quantity (EPQ).
Debtors management: identify the appropriate credit policy i.e.
credit terms which will attract customers such that any impact on cash flows and the cash conversion cycle will be offset by increased revenue and hence return on capital.
Short-term financing: identify the appropriate source of financing given the cash conversion cycle.
The inventory is ideally financed by credit granted by the supplier, however, it may be necessary to utilise a 169 TSM341 FINANCIAL ACCOUNTING AND MANAGEMENT FOR HOSPITALITY AND TOURISM bank loan (or overdraft) or to “convert debtors to cash” through factoring.
3.2 Concepts of Working Capital There are two concepts of working capital – gross and net.
These are discussed below.
3.2.1 Gross Working Capital This refers to the firm’s investment in current assets.
Current assets are the assets which can be converted into cash within an accounting year, and these include: cash, short-term securities, debtors (accounts receivable or book debts), bills receivable and stock (inventory).
3.2.2 Net Working Capital This refers to the difference between current assets and current liabilities.
Current liabilities include: creditors (accounts payable), bills payable and outstanding expenses.
A positive net working capital will arise when current assets figure is greater than (>) current liabilities.
A negative networking capital occurs when current liabilities figure is greater than (>) current assets.
SELF-ASSESSMENT EXERCISE 1 Describe the two concepts of working capital.
170 TSM341 FINANCIAL ACCOUNTING AND MANAGEMENT FOR HOSPITALITY AND TOURISM Taxation New Capital Dividends Sale of Fixed Assets Purchase of Fixed Assets Redemption of Capital DEBTORS CASH D R A U E H O R B A E V CREDITORS L O STOCKS Work-in- STOCKS (Finished Goods) Progress (Raw Materials) Figure 13.1: Working Capital Cycle Source: Brockington, R. B.
(1987).
Financial Management.
3.3 Working Capital Position Firms should ensure that they maintain a sound working capital position.
There should be adequate working capital to run the business operations.
Excessive or inadequate working capital positions are dangerous and unhealthy for any firm.
Excessive working capital means holding cost and idle funds which earn no profits for the firm.
Inadequate working capital impairs the firm’s profitability, but also results in production interruptions and inefficiencies and sales disruptions.
3.3.1 Effects of Excessive Working Capital The dangers of excessive working capital are as follows.
• It results in unnecessary accumulation of inventories.
Thus the changes of inventory mishandling, waste, theft and losses increase.
• It is an indication of bad debts and hence, defective credit policy and slack collection period.
171 TSM341 FINANCIAL ACCOUNTING AND MANAGEMENT FOR HOSPITALITY AND TOURISM • It makes management complacent which degenerates to managerial inefficiency.
Accumulating inventories tend to make speculative profits grow.
3.3.2 Effects of Inadequate Working Capital Inadequate working capital is as bad as excessive working capital and has the following dangers.
• Growth is stagnated because there is difficulty in undertaking profitable projects.
• There will be difficulty in implementing operating plans and achieving the firm’s profit target.
• Operating inefficiencies creep in when it becomes difficult even to meet daily commitments.
• Fixed assets are not efficiently utilised for the lack of working capital funds.
Thus, the firm’s profitability would deteriorate.
• It renders the firm unable to avail attractive credit opportunities, etc.
• The firm loses its reputation when it is not in a position to honour its short-term obligations.
As a result, the firm faces tight credit terms.
SELF-ASSESSMENT EXERCISE 2 Give three effects each of the different working capital positions.
3.4 Determinants of Working Capital There are no stringent rules in determining the working capital requirements of firms.
There are a large number of factors that influence the working capital needs of firms.
The following are factors which generally influence working capital requirements of firms.
3.4.1 Nature of Business The nature of business carried out by a firm will influence the working capital requirement of that firm.
A trading and financial firm require large sum of money to be invested in working capital.
For example, retail shops will need large stocks of variety of goods to satisfy its numerous customers.
A hotel or tourist centre will also require varieties 172 TSM341 FINANCIAL ACCOUNTING AND MANAGEMENT FOR HOSPITALITY AND TOURISM of food, snacks, drinks, etc.
to meet the needs of customers who have different backgrounds and tastes.
However, public utilities may have limited need for working capital and have to invest abundantly in fixed assets.
3.4.2 Market and Demand Conditions For the hospitality and tourism sector, there would be seasonal and cyclical fluctuations in the demand for their products and services.
During holidays and festivity periods, demand for product and services will be on the increase.
These are periods of peak demand and increasing production may be expensive for the firm.
Similarly, it would be more expensive during off-peak periods when the firm has to sustain its workforce and physical facilities without adequate production and sales.
A firm may, thus, follow a policy of level production irrespective of seasonal changes in order to utilise its resources to the fullest extent.
This would mean accumulation of inventories during off- peak and quick disposal during peak periods.
3.4.3 Technology and Manufacturing Policy The manufacturing cycle (or inventory conversion cycle) comprises of the purchase and use of raw materials and the production of finished goods.
The technological process with the shortest manufacturing cycle should be chosen (if there is room for choice).
This is because if there is any delay in manufacturing process, it will result in accumulation of work-in-progress and waste of time.
In order to minimise their investment in working capital, some firms have a policy of requesting advance payments from customers.
Service and financial firms do not have a manufacturing cycle.
3.4.4 Credit Policy Firms should use discretion in granting credit terms to customers.
Where a liberal credit policy is practised, credit-worthiness of customers should be rated to prevent collection problems in the future.
The firm should be fast in making collections.
A high collection period will mean tie-up of large funds in debtors and this could increase changes of bad debts.
3.4.5 Availability of Credit from Suppliers A firm will need less working capital if liberal credit terms are available to it from suppliers.
Suppliers’ credit finances the firm’s inventories and reduces the cash conversion cycle.
The same is the case where banks are willing to lend to firms at reasonable and favourable conditions; this 173 TSM341 FINANCIAL ACCOUNTING AND MANAGEMENT FOR HOSPITALITY AND TOURISM will make the firms to finance its inventories and debtors without much difficulty.
3.4.6 Operating Efficiency This relates to the optimum utilisation of all its resources at minimum costs.
The resources could be fixed and current assets.
Where these resources are fully utilised, the use of working capital is improved and the pace of cash conversion cycle is accelerated with operating efficiency.
3.4.7 Price Level Changes Rising price level will require a firm to maintain higher amount of working capital.
Same levels of current assets will need increased investment when prices are increasing.
SELF-ASSESSMENT EXERCISE 3 What are the determinants of working capital?
3.5 Receivables Management A firm’s investment in accounts receivable depends on the following: (a) the volume of credit sales, and (b) the collection period.
Every business wants to be paid for the goods and services it supplies as soon as possible.
Once a sale has been made, the profit making cycle is completed but the resources employed in the process cannot be set working on another cycle until they are released by payment.
There is little point in offering more credit than competitors.
This would tie up a great deal of extra working capital and although it might attract more customers, there is a risk that this will be less credit worthy leading to higher bad debts.
Management needs to establish a policy on its trade debtors and there are several factors to be considered.
These are as follows.
3.5.1 Cash Discount Some firms offer a cash discount for the prompt settlement of accounts.
An invoice might state “Terms: 2½% cash discount within 7 days, otherwise 30 days net”.
This means that the debtor is allowed up to 30 174 TSM341 FINANCIAL ACCOUNTING AND MANAGEMENT FOR HOSPITALITY AND TOURISM days to pay his bill at the stated amount.
If it is paid within the first 7 days of this period, he may deduct 2½% from the total.
This is a way of encouraging prompt payment because early payment not only reduces capital requirements, but also saves administrative costs in pursuing outstanding debtors and may reduce the overall risk of bad debts as well.
3.5.2 Period of Collection The period of credit is often set by the convention of the trade and very little flexibility is afforded to the individual business.
It is usual to offer variously credit terms of 30 days, 60 days or 90 days i.e.
payment is to be made within that interval following the date of the invoice.
Firms in financial difficulties are likely to be attracted to suppliers offering the longest credit.
Offering these terms will most certainly draw customers away from competitors but this customer group is likely to have an above average risk of default.
3.5.3 Assessing Credit Worthiness Before allowing any customer credit, a good debt manager should assess his credit worthiness.
This may be done by examination of his accounts through trade sources or by means of a banker’s reference.
One large debt could wipe out profit earned on a very large volume of sales, and the cost of legal action in pursuit of the debt can be very high and the cost of bad debts can be very devastating.
3.5.4 Follow up Action A system must be maintained which signals outstanding debts which go past their due date of payment.
Some discretion is, however, possible over the amount of pressure which is then applied.
There are many sanctions ranging from polite reminders, through solicitors’ letters and the withholding of supplies to action through a court and the speed with which this process is followed needs careful judgement.
SELF-ASSESSMENT EXERCISE 4 1.
A policy should be established over trade debtors.
Discuss matters that this credit policy is meant to cover.
2.
What are the costs associated with debtors/receivables?
Example Sellers Plc.
makes all its sales on credit.
Its terms are 2½% cash discount within seven days, otherwise net within thirty days.
The value of its annual sales is N500, 000.
The gross margin on sales is 30% and 175 TSM341 FINANCIAL ACCOUNTING AND MANAGEMENT FOR HOSPITALITY AND TOURISM sellers cost of capital is 15% per annum.
Customers can be divided into three categories as shown in the following table.
Category Annual Sales Average period of Proportion of credit taken bad debts A 50,000.00 7 Nil B 250,000.00 30 Nil C 200,000.00 75 2% In an effort to reduce the level of trade debtors and the losses due to bad debts, the following policies are proposed.
All references to sales value are in annual terms.
(i) To offer 3% cash discount for payment in 7 days.
This would induce customers for N50, 000.00 to move from category B to category A and customers worth N20,000.00 to move from category C to category A.
(ii) To offer 5% cash discount for payment in 7 days.
This would increase to N100,000.00 the value of customers moving from category B to category A and to N50,000.00 the value moving from category C to category A.
(iii) To withdraw credit terms from category C customers altogether.
This would result in a loss of business worth N20, 000.00.
(iv) To tighten up the procedure on late payment.
This would reduce the period of credit taken by category C customers to 50 days on average and would improve the proportion of bad debts to 1¾%.
It would result in a loss of business worth N1 5,000.00.
Solution We can assess each of these terms of costs and benefits.
(i) Average debtors now are: Category A = 7 x N50,000.00 365 1 = N959.00 Category B = 30 x N250,000.00 365 1 = N20, 548.00 Category C = 75 x N200,000.00 365 1 = N41, 096.00 N62,603.00 176 TSM341 FINANCIAL ACCOUNTING AND MANAGEMENT FOR HOSPITALITY AND TOURISM If we increase cash discount to 3%, average debtors will become: Category A = 7 x N120,000.00 365 1 = N2,301.00 Category B = 30 x N200,000.00 365 1 = N16,438.00 Category C = 75 x N180,000.00 365 1 = N36,986.00 N55,725.00 There is a reduction in debtors of N6, 878.00 which (at 15% per annum) gives a saving in financing cost of N1,032.00 per annum.
Added to this, there is a saving in bad debts from those who move from category C to category A of 2% x N20, 000.00 = N400.00.
The total benefit is N1, 432.00 per annum.
The cost is the increase in discount: Currently, this is 2½% x N50, 000.00 = N1,250.00 Under this proposal, it will increase to 3% x N120, 000.00 = N3,600.00 The total increase in cost is = N2,350.00 This action would result in a net loss of N918.00 per annum and is thus not worthwhile.
(ii) If the cash discount is raised to 5%, average debtors will become: Category A = 7 x N200, 000.00 365 1 = N3,836.00 Category B = 30 x N150, 000.00 365 1 = N12,329.00 Category C = 75 x N150,000.00 365 1 = N30,822.00 N46,987.00 177 TSM341 FINANCIAL ACCOUNTING AND MANAGEMENT FOR HOSPITALITY AND TOURISM The reduction in debtors is N15, 616.00 and in financing costs N2,342.00.
Bad debts saving is N1, 000.00 and thus total saving is N3, 342.00 per annum.
The increase in discount can be determined.
It will become: 5% x N200, 000.00 = N10,000.00 From its present level 1,250.00 N 8,750.00 This is even less worthwhile than the first proposal losing N5,408.00 per annum.
(iii) To withdraw credit facilities from category C will save financing costs of: 15% x N200,000.00 x 75 = N6,164.00 per annum 365 There will also be a saving in bad debts of 2% x N200, 000.00 = N4, 000.00.
The total savings is N10, 164.00.
The cost will be the loss of gross margin: N20, 000.00 x 30% = N6, 000.00 This proposal is worth implementing as it improves the situation by N4, 164.00 per annum.
(iv) If we tighten up the procedure operated against late payers, there will be a financing cost saving: 15% x 75 – 50 x N200,000.00 = N2,055.00 365 Bad debt saving is ¼% of N200,000.00 = 500.00 Total gain N2,555.00 The cost is 30% margin on N15, 000.00 = N4, 500.00.
This proposal, then, would lead to a net loss of N1, 945.00 per annum and is not worthwhile.
Clearly the best thing to do is to withdraw credit facilities from the slow players.
This would not be a general conclusion, of course, and depends entirely on the estimates and assumptions which sellers have made.
178 TSM341 FINANCIAL ACCOUNTING AND MANAGEMENT FOR HOSPITALITY AND TOURISM 3.6 Stock/Inventory Management Stock may be of raw materials, finished goods which have emerged from a manufacturing process or of items for resale in the case of a retail or wholesale business.
The primary requirement is that stock levels should be optimal i.e.
neither too large nor too small.
We should be aware, in general terms, of the penalties for a business lying in divergence from the optimum.
If stocks are too high, there would be excess capital tied up unproductively; high cost of storage; risk of deterioration; risk of changes in demand or technology will leave surplus stocks unusable.
But then, if stocks are too low, there would be risk of interruption to production; high cost of frequent re-ordering and loss in economies resulting from bulk purchase.
A proper system of control and recording of stocks must be instituted to prevent stocks lying around in heaps thereby making it impossible to know the level of stock and control them.
Also, if there is no control, cost of production will not be known and this will mean that information required for other financial management decision will be incomplete.
A proper system of stock control will have the following elements: physical security of stock in a lockable section controlled by a responsible storekeeper; diversified control of stock ordering and usage by works personnel, issue and receipt by stores personnel, buying by the buying office, and payment by the accounting department; careful documentation of all stock movements and stock levels.
179 TSM341 FINANCIAL ACCOUNTING AND MANAGEMENT FOR HOSPITALITY AND TOURISM Purchase Order BUYING Requisition OFFICE Material Requisition S U FACTORY STORE P P L I E S Goods Invoice BUYING Received note OF FICE Cash Paper Goods Figure 13.2: Stock Control Diagram Source: Brockington, R. B.
(1987).
Financial Management.
3.6.1 Re-order Quantities In inventory management, management needs to know when to re-order (re-order level) and what quantity to order (re-order quantity).
The analysis will assume that all costs are known and that delivery times and consumption rates can be predicted with certainty.
In practice, some degree of approximation and estimation may have to take the place of precise knowledge.
Scenario A: Q = Re-order Quantity Where stock has just been exhausted before new deliveries arrive, Maximum stock = Q Minimum stock = O Average stock level = Q/2 Holding of stock cost = C/Unit per annum Annual holding cost = CQ/2 The more frequently re-ordering takes place, the smaller is the average stock holding and therefore, the smaller is the annual holding cost.
180 TSM341 FINANCIAL ACCOUNTING AND MANAGEMENT FOR HOSPITALITY AND TOURISM Scenario B: N = Number of units of stock used in a year N/Q = Number of orders placed B/Order = Cost associated with ordering and buying (i.e.
clerical costs, transport, etc) BN/Q = Total ordering costs per annum.
The few the number of orders, the smaller the total ordering cost.
Combining both scenarios, total annual cost of stock holdings will be: CQ + BN 2 Q This is that value of the order quantity known as the Economic Order Quantity (EOQ).
Hence: EOQ = 2BN C Where B is the ordering cost N is the number of units of stock used in a year C is the holding cost.
Example Silverbird Hotels uses 10,000 cartons of red wine per annum.
The holding cost of the cartons is N2.00 per carton per annum and ordering cost is N5, 000.00 per order.
Determine the Economic Order Quantity.
Solution: EOQ = 2BN C Where B = N5,000 N = 10,000 cartons C = N2 ⇒ EOQ = 2 x 5,000 x 10,000 2 = 7071 cartons 181 TSM341 FINANCIAL ACCOUNTING AND MANAGEMENT FOR HOSPITALITY AND TOURISM This is the quantity that can be ordered at a time.
3.6.2 Re-order Level This is the stock level at which the order should be initiated.
Ideally, this should be at the point where there remains just enough stock to cover the period of waiting for the order to be delivered.
It thus depends on the delivery times.
Re-order level is determined as follows: R = DN/W Where D is the delivery time in weeks N is the number of units of stock used in a year W is the number of working weeks in the year Example Where Silverbird Hotels orders red wine, delivery usually follows in 6 weeks.
The hotel works for 44 weeks in a year.
What is the re-order level for red wine?
This implies that the storekeeper should be informed to re-order cartons of red wine whenever the stock held falls to 1,364 cartons.
It should be noted that both stock of raw materials and finished goods can be determined in precisely the same way as we have discussed above.
However, the amount of work-in-progress is governed by the length of the production cycle which is largely a technical matter.
The only control which can be exercised by the management of the business is to ensure that the cycle is not necessarily prolonged by slackness or by holdups arising from disputes or from stock shortages.
SELF-ASSESSMENT EXERCISE 5 1.
“Frequent small orders are costly to process and should be avoided”.
Discuss 2.
Distinguish between Re-order Quantity and Re-order Level.
3.7 Cash Management/Cash Budgets A highly profitable manufacturing and sales plan can be seriously impeded if cash is not available at the right time to pay for necessary supplies.
Conversely, there will be less than optimum use of resources 182 TSM341 FINANCIAL ACCOUNTING AND MANAGEMENT FOR HOSPITALITY AND TOURISM if the business carries large cash balances at a time when it is borrowing money expensively from elsewhere.
In the management of cash, we shall be looking at the preparation of cash budgets which are essential tools of the financial manager in providing proper finance for the working capital of a business.
The cash budget is derived from a consideration of the master budget and the structural factors which govern the timing of the cash flows.
Example Lekki Tourist Site has produced a plan for its activities for a forthcoming financial period of six months.
This can be summarised in the form of a budgeted profit and loss account for the period.
Lekki Tourist Site Budgeted Profit and Loss Account for the Forthcoming Six Months N N Sales (50,000 units @ N10.00 each) 500,000 Less: Cost of Sales Materials 100,000 Labour 75,000 Variable overhead 100,000 275,000 Operating profit 225,000 Less: Fixed overhead 125,000 Depreciation 20,000 145,000 Net profit for the six months 80,000 Balance Sheet Prior to the Commencement of the Six Months N N Share Capital and Reserves 200,000 Creditors (previous month’s supplies) 20,000 Creditors (supplies of month before that) 25,000 45,000 245,000 Represented by: Fixed assets 99,000 Current assets: Stock of raw material 20,000 Stock of finished goods 44,000 Debtors (80% previous month sales) 32,000 Cash 50,000 146,000 245,000 183 TSM341 FINANCIAL ACCOUNTING AND MANAGEMENT FOR HOSPITALITY AND TOURISM Lekki Tourist Site trade is seasonal and its forecast sales for the next full year (of which the current budget is inclusive) are: Month Sales 1 40,000 2 40,000 3 60,000 4 80,000 5 120,000 6 160,000 7 140,000 8 80,000 9 60,000 10 60,000 11 50,000 12 40,000 Additional Information: 1.
It is Lekki’s policy to hold stocks of finished goods equal to the requirements of the next two month’s sales and stocks of raw materials equal to the next one month and a half month’s production requirement; 2.
It pays its creditors for supplies, on average, two months after the goods are delivered, but labour and variable overheads are paid for in the month in which they are incurred.
3.
Fixed overheads are paid quarterly in advance.
4.
80% of the company’s sales are to credit customers (the rest being for cash) and debtors are allowed one month’s credit.
5.
Depreciation is a composite figure made up of the appropriate amounts for each of the fixed assets in use.
6.
No cash receipts or payments are expected during the six months of the cash budget for the forthcoming six months.
184 TSM341 FINANCIAL ACCOUNTING AND MANAGEMENT FOR HOSPITALITY AND TOURISM Solution: Workings Schedule 1: Cash Inflow Month 1 2 3 4 5 6 N N N N N N Cash sales (1) 8,000 8,000 12,000 16,000 24,000 32,000 Cash from Debtors (2) 32,000 (3) 32,000 32,000 48,000 64,000 96,000 40,000 40,000 44,000 64,000 88,000 128,000 (1) at 20% of current month’s sales (2) at 80% of previous month’s sales (3) debtors as shown on opening balance sheet.
Schedule 2: Cash Outflow Month of production 1 2 3 4 5 6 Month of Sales 3 4 5 6 7 8 No.
of units produced 6,000 8,000 12,000 16,000 14,000 8,000 Cost Incurred N N N N N N Material 12,000 16,000 24,000 32,000 28,000 16,000 Labour 9,000 12,000 18,000 24,000 21,000 12,000 Variable overhead 12,000 16,000 24,000 32,000 28,000 16,000 Note: Months 7 and 8 production units are to be 6,000 units each.
The material requirement for each of these months will have a cost of N12, 000.
Schedule 3: Material Purchases Month 1 2 3 4 5 6 Purchase half of next month’s requirements 8,000 12,000 16,000 14,000 8,000 6,000 Next month’s but one requ- irements (1) 12,000 16,000 14,000 8,000 6,000 6,000 Total purchases 20,000 28,000 30,000 22,000 14,000 12,000 185 TSM341 FINANCIAL ACCOUNTING AND MANAGEMENT FOR HOSPITALITY AND TOURISM (1) Figures computed from Schedule 2 and accompanying note.
Schedule 4: Cash Outflows (Material Purchases) Month 1 2 3 4 5 6 Month Purchased -2 -1 1 2 3 4 Cash Paid 25,000* 20,000 20,000 28,000 30,000 22,000 * Take from the opening balance sheet.
Fixed overhead total of N125, 000 is paid twice (i.e.
quarterly) in months 1 and 4.
No cash outflow associated with depreciation.
Lekki Tourist Site Cash Budget for the Forthcoming Six Months Month 1 2 3 4 5 6 N N N N N N Cash Inflow (1) 40, 000 40, 000 44, 000 64, 000 88, 000 128, 000 Cash Outflows: Creditors for Materials (2) 25,000 20,000 20,000 28,000 30,000 22,000 Labour (3) 9,000 12,000 18,000 24,000 21,000 12,000 Variable over-heads (3) 12,000 16,000 24,000 32,000 28,000 16,000 Fixed overhead 62,500 _____ _____ 62,500 _____ _____ 108,500 48,000 62,000 146,500 79,000 50,000 Difference/Change (68,500) (8,000) (18,000) (82,500) 9,000 78,000 Cash balance (3) (18,500) (26,500) (44,500) (127,000) (118,000) (40,000) (1) ----------- Schedule 1 (2) ----------- Schedule 2 (3) ----------- Schedule 3 (4) Note: Opening balance of N50,000.
i.e.
N50, 000 – N68, 500 = (N18,500).
- N18, 500 – N8, 000 = (N26, 500).
- N26, 500 – N18,000 = (N44,500), etc.
It can be seen that despite profitable work, there is a progressive increased requirement for cash building up to a peak of N127, 000 in month 4 before it begins to decline again.
It would have been a gross mistake to have assumed that the opening cash balance of N50, 000 would have adequately financed our working capital.
186 TSM341 FINANCIAL ACCOUNTING AND MANAGEMENT FOR HOSPITALITY AND TOURISM SELF-ASSESSMENT EXERCISE 6 What are the likely consequences of a failure to budget for cash requirements?
4.0 CONCLUSION In this unit, you have learnt that working capital management is very essential in the sustenance of a business or firm.
Where the working capital is properly managed, the business is likely to continue into the future.
Preparation of the cash budget seems to be the most important because a company or a firm could be profitable, but not liquid.
Cash is the life blood of every firm and should therefore be properly handled.
In trying to manage cash, you will discover that you are indirectly managing debtors and stock i.e.
there would be proper credit policies to ensure that the asset (debtor) is converted to a more liquid asset (cash) and in the case of stock; there would be more reluctance to tie down cash.
5.0 SUMMARY In this unit, you have been exposed to the concept of working capital, the management of stock / inventory, debtors/receivable and cash.
You are now conversant with the preparation of the cash budget, determination of re-order quantity and level and the establishment of a credit policy.
6.0 TUTOR MARKED ASSIGNMENT 1.
Big Treat Bakeries uses two important items (egg and butter) in its productive process.
A shortage of either of these will cause very costly delays in production.
The materials are highly perishable and therefore difficult to store as well as expensive to handle.
Relevant information: Egg Butter Annual usage 24,000 crates 15,000 buckets Holding costs per annum N5.00 per crate N10.00per bucket Buying cost N100.00 per order N80.00 per order Delivery Time 5 weeks 10 weeks Required: Determine the Economic Order Quantity (EOQ) and the Re- order Level (assume 50 working weeks).
2.
Explain 5 determinants of Working Capital.
187 TSM341 FINANCIAL ACCOUNTING AND MANAGEMENT FOR HOSPITALITY AND TOURISM 7.0 REFERENCES/FURTHER READING Brockington, R. B.
(1987).
Financial Management.
Channels Island: Guernsey Press.
Pandey, I. M. (2005).
Financial Management.
New Delhi: UBS Publishers.
188 TSM341 FINANCIAL ACCOUNTING AND MANAGEMENT FOR HOSPITALITY AND TOURISM UNIT 5 CAPITAL BUDGETING CONTENTS 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objectives 3.0 Main Content 3.1 Capital Budgeting 3.1.1 Features of Capital Budgeting 3.1.2 Stages of Capital Budgeting 3.2 Methods of Investment Appraisal 3.2.1 Pay Back Method 3.2.2 Average Rate of Return 3.2.3 Time Value of Money 3.2.3.1 Net Present Value Method 3.2.3.2 Internal Rate of Return 3.3 Mutually Exclusive Projects 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutor-Marked Assignment 7.0 References/Further Reading 1.0 INTRODUCTION Managers usually face the challenge of balancing long-run and short-run issues.
They must systematically incorporate financial and non- financial aspects into their long-run planning decisions if they are to make decisions concerning the investment of capital funds.
This process is popularly known as capital budgeting.
Examples of such decisions are: • Shall we set up a new hotel, eatery, etc?
• Shall we replace a manual process with a mechanized one?
• Should we set up a plant to enable us to make and sell a proposed new product line?
The basic criterion for determining whether or not to undertake investment expenditure is the same as that for any business expenditure.
Money will be spent when we believe that the resulting benefit will recover the cost and show an adequate profit.
In this sense, the purchase of N10 million new eatery is the same as the purchase of N10 million shares.
189 TSM341 FINANCIAL ACCOUNTING AND MANAGEMENT FOR HOSPITALITY AND TOURISM 2.0 OBJECTIVES At the end of this unit, you should be able to: • explain the features of capital budgeting • describe the stages in capital budgeting • explain the various methods of investment appraisal • compare one project with another (i.e.
mutually exclusive projects).
3.1 MAIN CONTENT 3.2 Capital Budgeting Capital budgeting focuses on projects over their entire lives in order to consider all the cash flows or cash savings from investing in a project.
3.2.1 Features of Capital Budgeting The distinctive features of capital investment which make it worthwhile developing and applying a special set of techniques for appraising it are as follows.
• The sums involved are relatively large so that bad decisions may have very serious consequences; • The time scale over which the benefit will be received is relatively long so that a business has to live with any mistake for a considerable period; • The whole nature of a business and its discretion and rate of progress are ultimately governed by its overall investment programme; • Capital investment involves waiting for the recouping of expenditure.
Because money can be used to earn interest, waiting has a cost.
It is important to note that no matter how precise the calculation of costs and returns may be, they are no guarantee of investment success.
They inform judgement.
They do not replace it.
Some of the reasons for this are as follows.
• Uncertainty: we may have knowledge about the cost of a project, but we cannot know for certain what its future yield will be or 190 TSM341 FINANCIAL ACCOUNTING AND MANAGEMENT FOR HOSPITALITY AND TOURISM over what period of time these yields will continue.
An apparently correct decision may sometimes turn out disastrously because of the intervention of unexpected factors.
• Non-quantifiable factors: it is easy to build factors which can be measured financially into our calculations.
However, there are some decisions that we cannot easily attach monetary value to.
For example, it might be financially worthwhile to install machinery capable of performing more quickly and efficiently than an existing manual process.
It may, nevertheless, be to our disadvantage to do this, if the resulting redundancies lead to bad labour relations which will cause problems for years to come.
Again, it might be financially unjustifiable to install plant for treating noxious waste products.
We may, however, wish to do so in order to create for ourselves a better public image.
• Unawareness of all available opportunities: a truly optimum investment programme would require, amongst other things, complete knowledge of all the investment opportunities available.
This, we may not have.
We may invest in a particular project quite unaware that a better one was available to us.
SELF-ASSESSMENT EXERCISE 1 What are the features of capital budgeting that make it difficult to guarantee investment success?
3.2.2 Stages of Capital Budgeting Capital budgeting is the making of long-run planning decisions for investments in projects programs.
It is a decision-making and control tool that focuses primarily on projects or programs that span multiple years.
These planning decisions should be guided by the objectives of an organisation and its strategies.
Strategies describe how an organisation matches its own capabilities with the opportunities in the marketplace to accomplish its overall objectives.
The six stages in capital budgeting are as follows.
Stage 1 Identification stage.
This stage is to distinguish which types of the capital expenditure projects are necessary to accomplish organisational objectives which may be to increase revenue or reduce cost.
Stage 2 Search stage.
This stage is to explore alternative capital investments that will achieve organisational objectives.
191 TSM341 FINANCIAL ACCOUNTING AND MANAGEMENT FOR HOSPITALITY AND TOURISM Stage 3 Information acquisition stage.
This stage is to consider the expected costs and the expected benefits of alternative capital investments.
These costs and benefits can be quantitative or qualitative.
Stage 4 Selection stage.
This stage is to choose projects for implementation.
Organisations choose those projects which expected benefits exceed expected costs by the greatest amounts.
Stage 5 Financing stage.
This stage is to obtain project funding.
Sources of funding include: internally generated cash flow and the capital markets (equity and debt securities).
Stage 6 Implementation and control stage.
This stage is to get projects underway and monitor their performance.
When the project is implemented, the company must evaluate if capital investments are being made as scheduled and within the budget.
3.3 Methods of Investment Appraisal There are a number of techniques for appraising the investment projects.
They require different kinds of information and lead to different conclusions.
This raises the question of which method we should employ on any particular occasion.
In order to compare and exemplify the various methods of investment appraisal, let us set up an example.
Example A washing machine is available at a total cost, including installation, of N10, 000.
It is expected to have a life of eight years, and during that time, will produce net cash inflows as follows.
Years Net Cash Inflow 1 500 2 1,000 3 3,000 4 4,000 5 4,000 6 2,500 7 2,000 8 2,500 (including N1, 000 scrap value of the machine) 192 TSM341 FINANCIAL ACCOUNTING AND MANAGEMENT FOR HOSPITALITY AND TOURISM Please note that net cash inflow is not the same as profit.
It is revenue directly attributable to the project.
.
Its calculation thus specifically excludes any element of fixed cost apportioned from elsewhere in the business (i.e.
which would be incurred in any event) and depreciation, which is a restatement of the total cost of the investment.
Also, the scrap value of the plant, in this case, N1, 000 is added to the trading cash inflow of the final year.
In investment appraisal, we are attempting to resolve our investment decision into a simple question of this form: “our proposed investment promises us a series of cash inflows of Ny , Ny Ny , etc.
Are we 1 2 3 willing to pay the price of Nx for this benefit?
3.2.1 Pay Back Method The pay back method of investment appraisal is widely used in industry and is based on the following philosophy.
The commitment of funds to any project involves two things.
It involves foregoing the use of the funds in any other way so long as they are tied up and it involves the risk that the money so committed will be permanently lost.
Both factors are related to time.
The longer the funds are tied up, the longer before they can be re-used and, in general, the greater the risk of non-recovery.
The payback method is therefore based on management’s concern to be reimbursed for the initial outlay as soon as possible.
Overall profitability is left to take care of itself.
An arbitrary required payback period is determined by management.
With reference to our example above, the agreed payback period is three years.
Management is saying that it is willing to invest in any project which repays its initial cost within three years, but not if it takes longer than this.
Year Cummulative Net Cash 1 500 2 1,500 3 4,500 4 8,500 5 12,500 We stop at year 5 because the total cost of the washing machine (N10, 000) is more than repaid.
We can see that the payback is achieved in about 4½ years.
This exceeds the required payback period of 3 years.
We would therefore not invest in the project.
The payback method highlights liquidity, which is often an important factor in capital budgeting decisions.
Managers prefer projects with 193 TSM341 FINANCIAL ACCOUNTING AND MANAGEMENT FOR HOSPITALITY AND TOURISM shorter paybacks (more liquid) to projects with longer paybacks, if all other things are equal.
Projects with shorter paybacks give the organisation more flexibility because funds for other projects become available sooner.
Also, managers are less confident about cash flow predictions that stretch far into the future.
The major strength of the payback method is that it is easy to understand.
It is not affected by accrual accounting conventions such as depreciation.
Advocates of the payback method argue that it is a useful measure: (1) when preliminary screening of many proposals is necessary, and (2) when the expected cash flows in later years of the project are highly uncertain.
Two major weaknesses of the payback method are: (1) it fails to incorporate the time value of money, and (2) it does not consider a project’s cash flows after the payback period.
For example, a dish washer costs N37, 910 and it has a five year expected useful life and generates N10,000 uniform cash flow each year.
An alternative calculation of payback will be: Payback = Net initial investment Uniform increase in annual future cash flows = 37,910 = 3.79 years 10,000 Let us assume that another dish washer with a three year useful life and zero terminal disposal price, requires only a N30 ,000 net initial investment and will also result in cash inflows of N10,000 per year.
Payback = 30,000 = 3 years 10,000 The payback criterion would favour buying the N30, 000 dish washer because it has a shorter payback.
By itself, payback concentrates on the time it takes to recoup the initial investment.
It ignores profitability.
SELF-ASSESSMENT EXERCISE 2 Define carefully the payback period stating the major strengths and weaknesses.
194 TSM341 FINANCIAL ACCOUNTING AND MANAGEMENT FOR HOSPITALITY AND TOURISM 3.2.2 Average Rate of Return (ARR) This method recognises that the profitability of a project is an important factor in the investment decision and that this must be related to the amount of capital investment and to the period for which it is required.
A required rate of return is determined, usually by reference to the cost of capital.
For example, let us say that this rate is 15% per annum i.e.
a project will be favoured if it appears to yield 15% per annum or better on the funds committed to it.
With reference to our initial example: Total cash inflow 195,000 Less: initial investment 100,000 95,000 This is the amount the project earns over the eight years of its life and is equal to: 95,000 = N11, 875 per annum 8 The initial investment in the project was N100, 000.
The amount remaining invested at the end is nil (because the project has repaid the whole of its cost as well as yielded a profit).
The average amount invested can reasonably be regarded as half of the initial outlay, i.e.
N100,000 – 0 = N50,000.
The rate of return is 11,875 x 100 = 23.75% 2 50,000 Which exceeds the required rate of return?
We should therefore invest in this project.
The ARR method has the advantage that it takes into account the overall profitability of the project.
Its disadvantage is that it does not take into account the pattern of cash flows as opposed to their arithmetic total.
Since we are “waiting” for the return of our investment funds so that they can be invested profitably in other projects, we ought to favour projects which, other things being equal, give us their cash flows the earliest.
This leads us to the idea that money has a time value.
SELF-ASSESSMENT EXERCISE 3 What advantage does ARR have over payback method?
195 TSM341 FINANCIAL ACCOUNTING AND MANAGEMENT FOR HOSPITALITY AND TOURISM 3.2.3 Time Value of Money The whole notion of a rate of interest or cost of capital relies on this.
This implies that in order to induce us to forgo the use of money for a period of time, an amount has to be paid in compensation for the waiting period.
It follows that money receivable at different points in time is of differing significance.
The longer we have to wait for it, the less valuable a given sum is.
The extent of this is governed by the rate of interest.
Example Suppose that we require a rate of return on invested funds of 10% per annum.
A certain investment promises to pay us N10 in one year’s time.
The amount we would need to invest now to amount to N10 in one year’s time is easily calculated.
It is N10 x 100 = N0.909.
110 So N0.909 now and N1 in one year’s time can be regarded as equivalent.
N0.909 is the present value of N1 receivable in one year’s time.
The calculation can be done for any amount and for any time.
N10 receivable in three years time has a present value of: N10 x (100)3 = N7.51 1 (110) Rather than calculating, we can use what is known as the present value tables.
It gives the present values of N1 receivable in n year’s time given a rate of interest of x% per annum for a wide range of values of n and x.
This calculation of the present value of future returns is known as discounting.
There are two methods of investment appraisal derived from it, both coming under the general heading of Discounted Cash Flow (DCF).
They are: Net Present Value (NPV) and Internal Rate of Return (IRR).
NPV is calculated using the Required Rate of Return (RRR) which is the minimum acceptable rate of return on an investment.
The RRR is the return that the organisation could expect to receive elsewhere for an investment of comparable risk.
The RRR is also called the discount rate, hurdle rate, or (opportunity cost of capital).
When working with IRR, the RRR is used as a point of comparison.
The DCF has the advantage that it takes into account return of capital, profitability and the timing of cash flows.
196 TSM341 FINANCIAL ACCOUNTING AND MANAGEMENT FOR HOSPITALITY AND TOURISM SELF-ASSESSMENT EXERCISE 4 A certain project promises to yield annual cash inflow of N10, 000 for eight years.
Calculate the present value of this flow using a cost of capital of 17½% per annum.
3.2.3.1 Net Present Value Method The Net Present Value (NPV) method calculates the expected monetary gain or loss from a project by discounting all expected future cash inflows and outflows to the present point in time, using the required rate of return.
Only projects with a zero or positive net present value are acceptable.
This is because the return from these projects equals or exceeds the cost of capital (the return available by investing the capital elsewhere).
If all other things are equal, the higher the NPV, the better.
With reference to our initial example, determine the present value of each of the eight promised net cash inflows by reference to the table taking as our required return (cost of capital) 15% per annum.
Year Net Cash Inflow Discount Factor (Table) Present Value (N) 1 500 0.870 435 2 1,000 0.756 756 3 3,000 0.658 1,974 4 4,000 0.572 2,288 5 4,000 0.497 1,988 6 2,500 0.432 1,080 7 2,000 0.376 752 8 2,500 0.327 818 Total present value of project 10,091 Project should be accepted because the expected rate of return is > the required rate of return.
Although these have been taken from tables, they are very easily calculated if tables are not available.
In general terms, where r is the rate of discount and n is the number of years, the nth discount factor is given by: 1 (1 + r)n The total present value of N10, 091 signifies that there is a margin in favour of the N10,000 investment of N91.
This value is referred to as the Net Present Value.
Net Present Value = Present Value of Net Cash Inflows – Present Value of Cash Outflows.
197 TSM341 FINANCIAL ACCOUNTING AND MANAGEMENT FOR HOSPITALITY AND TOURISM 3.2.3.2 Internal Rate of Return In practice, the IRR method is rather less convenient to use, but should primarily lead to exactly the same result.
The use of this method requires the determination, by trial and error, of a rate of discount, which will equate the returns promised by an investment to its cost i.e.
which will create a net present value of nil.
With reference to our example, the IRR is obviously a little in excess of 15% per annum.
We could therefore “try” 15.1%, 15.2% and 15.3%.
This is shown below: Discount Factors Present Values Year Net Cash 15.1% 15.2% 15.3% 15.1% 15.2% 15.3% Inflows 1 500 0.869 0.868 0.867 435 434 434 2 1,000 0.755 0.754 0.752 755 754 752 3 3,000 0.656 0.654 0.652 1,968 1,962 1,956 4 4,000 0.570 0.568 0.566 2,280 2,272 2,264 5 4,000 0.495 0.493 0.491 1,980 1,972 1,964 6 2,500 0.430 0.428 0.426 1,075 1,070 1,065 7 2,000 0.374 0.371 0.369 748 742 738 8 2,500 0.325 0.322 0.320 813 805 800 10,054 10,011 9,973 Discount factor was calculated.
It can be seen that the nearest to the correct discount factor which we have tried is 15.2%.
Where a calculated IRR exceeds the cost of capital, the implication is that investment will be profitable and should take place.
An alternative “trial and error” method for calculating the IRR is to determine, from tables, two values known to be respectively too high and too low and then to interpolate between them.
This is shown below.
Discount Factors Present Values Year Net Cash Inflows 15% 16% 15% 16% 1 500 0.870 0.862 435 431 2 1,000 0.756 0.743 756 743 3 3,000 0.658 0.641 1,974 1,923 4 4,000 0.572 0.552 2,288 2,208 5 4,000 0.497 0.476 1,988 1,904 6 2,500 0.432 0.410 1,080 1,025 7 2,000 0.376 0.354 752 708 8 2,500 0.327 0.305 818 762 10,091 9,704 198 TSM341 FINANCIAL ACCOUNTING AND MANAGEMENT FOR HOSPITALITY AND TOURISM The difference in present value between 15% and 16% is N10, 091 – N9,704 = N387.
The cost of the machine is N10, 000.
This is N91 below the present value associated with a discount factor of 15%.
The IRR = 15 + 91 x 1% = 15.24% 387 SELF-ASSESSMENT EXERCISE 5 A certain project is expected to yield the returns given below over the next 5 years.
It would require an initial investment of N13, 500.
Determine its Internal Rate of Return.
Decide whether or not to invest in the project?
Year Returns 1 2,000 2 4,000 3 6,000 4 5,000 5 3,000 3.4 Mutually Exclusive Projects We have analysed, so far, in terms of the acceptability or otherwise of a proposed investment project where each is considered on its own merit alone.
We have said that all projects should be accepted if they meet our required payback period or give a positive net present value or an internal rate of return higher than our cost of capital, according to which method we are using.
The question of comparing one project with another has not arisen because ranking has not been important.
If projects A, B and C are all acceptable and we are going to undertake them all, then, it is now necessary to know which is the best and which the least good.
There are two cases of capital rationing and of mutually exclusive projects.
But, at this level, we shall be treating mutually exclusive projects alone.
Projects are described as mutually exclusive when the acceptance of one precludes the acceptance of the other(s).
If two investment projects are available, but cannot both be accepted, they must, in some way, be ranked.
Ranking according to IRR or NPV, may give different results.
Ranking according to NPV is the appropriate method to use as shown in this example.
199 TSM341 FINANCIAL ACCOUNTING AND MANAGEMENT FOR HOSPITALITY AND TOURISM Example Fresh Fruits Plc.
wishes to purchase an automatic packing machine for its products.
There are two alternatives.
One is the Philips Packing Machine which will cost N10, 000 and will last for 8 years.
The other is the Samsung Packing Machine which will cost N2, 500, but will last for only four years and will be more expensive to own.
In each case, however, there will be annual savings of N5, 000 over the present manual method of packing.
Annual running costs for Philips are N3, 000 and for the Samsung N4,125.
The company’s cost of capital is 10% per annum.
Solution By trial and error, the IRR for the Philips is 12% per annum and that for Samsung is 15% per annum (approximately in each case).
The Samsung will appear at first sight to be the better investment, but Philips will produce its return for much longer and that this then compensates for the lower rate.
The NPV (Philips) = (N5,000 – N3,000) x (0.909 + 0.826 + 0.751 + 0.683 + 0.621 + 0.564 + 0.513 + 0.467) – N10,000 = N668.
The NPV (Samsung) = (N5, 000 – N4,125) x (0.909 + 0.826 + 0.751 + 0.683 + 0.621 + 0.564 + 0.513 + 0.467) – N2,500 = N273.
We should therefore invest in Philips Packing Machine.
SELF-ASSESSMENT EXERCISE 5 Projects A and B are mutually exclusive.
A outranks B on IRR, B has a higher NPV than A, but each has the same payback period.
Which project would you favour and why?
4.0 CONCLUSION In this final unit, you have learnt that it is important for you to know that financial resources should be deployed to best advantage and so good investment decisions are vital to successful financial management.
Since the life of a project is usually longer than one year, capital budgeting decisions consider revenues and costs over relatively long periods.
200 TSM341 FINANCIAL ACCOUNTING AND MANAGEMENT FOR HOSPITALITY AND TOURISM 5.0 SUMMARY In this unit, you have learnt the definition of capital budgeting.
You now know its features, methods of investment appraisal and mutually exclusive projects.
6.0 TUTOR-MARKED ASSIGNMENT 1.
List and explain the stages of capital budgeting 2.
Name the methods of investment appraisal 7.0 REFERENCES/FURTHER READING Brockington, R. B.
(1987).
Financial Management.
Southampton: Guernsey Press Company.
Horngren, C. T.; Foster, G. & Datar, S. M. (2000).
Cost Accounting: A Managerial Emphasis.
New Jersey: Prentice Hall.
201
