 NATIONAL OPEN UNIVERSITY OF NIGERIA SCHOOL OF MANAGEMENT SCIENCES COURSE CODE: TSM 101 COURSE TITLE: UNDERSTANDING TOURISM  Course Code TSM 101 Course Title Understanding Tourism Unit Writer Dr. G. O. Falade National Open University of Nigeria Lagos Dr. G. O. Falade National Open University of Nigeria Course Developer Lagos Dr. G. O. Falade Programme Leader National Open University of Nigeria Lagos Course Co-odinator Mr. M. A. Gana National Open University of Nigeria Lagos NATIONAL OPEN UNIVERSITY OF NIGERIA NoneTSM 101 UNDERSTANDING TOURISM National Open University of Nigeria Headquarters 14/16 Ahmadu Bello Way Victoria Island Lagos Abuja Annex 245 Samuel Adesujo Ademulegun Street Central Business District Opposite Arewa Suites Abuja e-mail: centralinfo@nou.edu.ng URL: www.nou.edu.ng National Open University of Nigeria 2006 First Printed 2006 ISBN: 978-058-879-5 All Rights Reserved Printed by .................. For National Open University of Nigeria TSM 101 UNDERSTANDING TOURISM TABLE OF CONTENTS PAGE Unit 1 Tourism Phenomenon ........................................ 1-10 Unit 2 Tours.......................................................... 11-20 Unit 3 The Changing Trend .......................................... 21-29 Unit 4 Special Interest ................................................... 30-35 Unit 5 Historical Evaluation and Development (1) Need for the History of Tourism ....................... 36-47 Unit 6 Historical Evaluation and Development (1) The Silk Route ..................................................... 48-54 None TSM 101 UNDERSTANDING TOURISM UNIT 1 TOURISM PHENOMENON CONTENTS 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objectives 3.0 Main Content 3.1 Tourism Phenomenon 3.2 What is Tourism?
3.3 Tourism Concept 3.4 Defining Tourism 3.5 Tourism Products and Services 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutor Marked Assignment 7.0 References/Further Readings 1.0 INTRODUCTION Tourism and tourist are words, which are commonly heard or mentioned, in everyday life.
Pick up any newspaper and you will find some reference in tourism (e.g.
Tribune of every Wednesday/Friday of the week and Vanguard of Friday of every week) i.e.
in relation to government policy, tourist arrivals, products, destination, impact on economy, hospitality of the local people etc.
But how often have you attempted to understand the meaning of tourism or asked the question who is a tourist?
Well, this unit attempts to define for you the words "tourism" and "tourist" both technically as well as conceptually.
Then it TSM 101 UNDERSTANDING TOURISM goes on to comprehend the concepts related to tourism and its characteristics.
It also takes into account, the difference forms and types of tourism along explaining to you the terms like tourist destination and tourist product, etc.
knowledge of these aspects is a must for a tourism professional as well as for any one interested in pursing Tourism studies.
2.0 OBJECTIVES After reading this unit you will be able to:  Define tourism  Understand the tourism phenomenon  Explain the characteristic of tourism  Outline the reasons for the growth of tourism  Define the different motivations that determine the increasing diversity of tourism  Understand the origin and development of Mass Tourism and Package holiday 3.0 MAIN CONTENT 3.1 Tourism Phenomenon Tourism is concerned with pleasure, holidays, a travel and going or arriving somewhere.
These are the motivations that make people leave their "normal" place of work and residence for short-term temporary visits to "other" places.
Tourism is concerned with consuming goods and services.
For example, you need some mode of transport, some form of accommodation to stay and so on.
However, the only reason for the 2  TSM 101 UNDERSTANDING TOURISM consumption of such services and goods is that we have a pleasurable experience or that we enjoy ourselves.
A part of the enjoyment is in the fact that these goods and services are different from what we typically consume everyday.
Another aspect of our enjoyment is that we:  look at a set of different landscape, cultures and life styles, and  see different people and hear other languages, etc.
Because we are "going away" what we look at and experience becomes something out of the ordinary, something unique.
In fact, we do anticipate the new experience and these leads us to view it with greater interest and curiosity.
However, few of us realize that in the production of this pleasant experience, many professionals and experts help to develop and construct our viewing.
How this experience has changed and developed depends on a variety of factors like which:  historic period we are looking at  social groups we belong to  society we live in The tourist gaze is, therefore, on a "difference" i.e., the difference between the practice of tourism and other non-tourism social practices, like paid work and domestic life or like the difference between taking a bus to go for work and taking a bus to a tourist destination.
Tourism, as a significant social phenomenon, involves a temporary break with normal routine to engage with experiences that contrast with everyday life, with the mundane.
Almost all travel types-the explorer, the pilgrim, the monk, the merchant, the student, the missionary, the hermit, the refugee, the conqueror, the cure seeker, etc.
can be prototypes of the modern tourist.
3.2 What is Tourism?
Well, the term tourism comprises several social practices.
All these have the minimal common characteristic that they are different and they are departure from normal life.
These minimal characteristic help us to define tourism, which according to W.T.0 (World Tourism Organization) is the movement of people away from their normal place of residence and work for a period of not less than 24 hours and not more than I year.
Tourism in fact is a leisure activity because it coexist with its opposite, that is regulated and organized work.
This shows us that in modern societies, work and leisure are organized as separate and regulated areas TSM 101 UNDERSTANDING TOURISM of social practice.
They are located in specific places and periods of time.
Tourism involves the movement of people to, and their stay at various destinations.
This involves a journey and services like transport, accommodation, catering and viewing, etc.
the journey to and stay at a site is outside the normal place of work and residence for a short period.
There is a clear intention when "going away" "to return home".
We must remember that tourism sites are not connected with paid work and they preferably offer some contrast with sites where a person's work and residence are located.
A substantial proportion of the population engages in goihg away on holiday.
Hence, new socialized forms of the provisions for goods and services are developed in order to cater to the mass character of tourism practices.
The tourist is therefore, different from the traveler, because travel has an individual character whereas tourism has a mass character.
Tourism is directed at places chosen for the anticipation (often build on day dreaming and fantasy) of intense pleasure because such places are different to what we normally encounter.
Such anticipation is sustained through a variety of experiences, which influence our daily lives like file, T.V, fiction, magazines, records, videos, etc.
which constructs and reinforces our image of a tourist destination.
The tourist's gaze is directed towards a landscape, a town or an event by pointing out those features that separate it from everyday life.
Whilst many features are viewed because they are out of the ordinary, there is much more emphasis on the visual elements because we have seen if before through photographs, postcards, films, etc.
in fact we recapture the site through personal experiences.
Tourism, therefore, also involves the recognition and collection of signs that represent a reality of another time and another place.
For example, camel rides in the desert for a person who resides in the hills.
A number of tourism professionals emerge and develop these signs.
They attempt to create new and newer objects for the consumption of the tourist's gaze.
What they produce and why it becomes an object of tourism, or why it become popular depends on the competition between the travel trade for the attention of the tourist on the one hand, and on the other, the changing class, gender and generational distinctions of taste within the group or potential visitors.
For example, one may stay in a five star hotel or a guest house, one may take a pilgrimage or beach holiday, one may go on a package tour or take a trekking holiday alone.
Finally, tourism has also become a statues symbol in modern society and though to be necessary to ones health.
Today, 40% of free time is devoted to travel in developed countries.
429 billion in 1990 and by the year 2000 tourism services will probably be the largest sources of A TSM 101 UNDERSTANDING TOURISM employment in the world.
These statistics reflect the fact that many new tourists' sites are opening all over the world, and tourism is now a global phenomenon.
SELF ASSESSMENT EXERCISE Mention and discuss those things that motivate people to leave their normal place of work and abode for temporary visits to other places.
3.3 Concepts Film, pleasure and entertainment are concepts popularly associated with tourism.
Many writers like Boorstin and Baudrilland have said that because tourists travel in guided groups isolated from the host environment and people, because they are encapsulated in places, hotels and air-conditional buses, they remain in an "environmental bubble".
Such tourists look for western facilities wherever they go and therefore they participate in "pseudo-events" because they do not encounter the real world on the street level.
As consequences, tourist entrepreneurs and the local people produce displays for gullible tourists.
These, overtime and with the help of the media, become images which are the basis of illusions associated with the sites where tourism occurs.
Thus, there is a paradox in understanding tourism which is defined by its opposite, work and routine; yet it is engaged in reproducing the familiar (like hotel, etc.)
which insulate the tourist from the strangeness of the destination or the host environment.
The mass society tourist is located in a very secured and protected environment where this senses are necessary restricted.
The tourist never leans to decipher the complex and alien cultures which can not be simplified and mass produced easily.
Hence, we end up with a monotonous image of a uniform of tourism as hotel, beach and local colour.
But tourism is not only a mass phenomenon.
Cohen maintains that there are a variety of tourist types and modes of tourist experience.
Hence, it is necessary to:  Define the tourist  Understand how tourism emerges from a basic division between the ordinary/everyday and the extra ordinary.
 Explain the characteristics of the tourist product.
 List types of destinations and identify their attractions, and  Explain what is a tour.
TSM 101 UNDERSTANDING TOURISM 3.4 Defining Tourism Over the years, the definition of tourism has undergone a change along with the historical changes.
According to Hunziker and Krapf, tourism is "the sum of the phenomena and relationships arising from the travel and stay of non- residents, in so far as it do not lead to permanent residence and is not connected to any earning activity".
This definition emphasizes travel and stay, but excludes day trips, business trips, etc.
and the overlapping of these boundaries with other practices.
The League of Nations in 1937 recommended that tourism covers the social activity of those who travel for a period of 24 hours or more in a country other than the one a person usually lives in.
However, the limitation of this definition was that it excluded domestic and emphasized only an international tourism.
The Rome conference on Tourism in 1963 adopted the recommendation to replace the term "tourist" with the term "visitor" and defined tourism as a visit "to a country other than ones own or where one usually resides and works", for the following reasons.
1) Tourism is the activity of temporary visitors staying at least 24 hours for leisure, business, family, mission or meeting.
2) Excursion is the activity of a temporary visitor staying less than 24 hours but excluding people in transit.
The definition also excludes the domestic tourist, although it did recognize the day visitor.
The tourism society of Britain in 1976 proposed to clarify the concept of tourism by saying that "Tourism is the temporary, short-term movement of people to destinations outside the places where they normally live and work and their activities during their stay at these destinations, including day visits and excursion".
AIEST in 1981, refined the concept and held that "Tourism may be defined in terms of particular activities selected by choice and undertaken outside the home environment Tourism may or may not involve overnight stays away from home".
These definitions indicate that tourism has expanded in its range and scope.
The concept of tourism has broadened to include all forms of the phenomenon of leisure activity.
Today, we may define Mass Tourism as the quest of someone who travel to see something different and is dissatisfied when he finds • that things are not the same as at home.
This definition reflects the orientation of global tourism, which is concentrated in Western Societies where 60% of international tourists arrivals are received and from where 6  TSM 101 UNDERSTANDING TOURISM 70% of the tourists originate.
Because the control of tourism is centered in the West, the concepts associated with tourism are necessarily influenced by the social practices of these societies rather than the travel heritage of the non-western cultures and developing societies.
The movement of tourists from the place of origin to the destination is further described as:  International Tourism, when the travel is from one country to another, and  Domestic Tourism, when the travel is within the country i.e.
trips taken by a tourist within his/her own country or where the origin and destination are in the same country.
In international tourism you will come across two other items.
1) In bound: This refers to tourists entering a country 2) Out bound: This refers to tourists leaving their country of origin for another.
However, these terms apply in the case of outward travel only at its beginning.
We must remember that on the journey back a tourist is only returning to the place of residence and he cannot be termed as inbound tourist.
But at the same time an inbound tourist can also be an inbound tourist.
For example, you decide to go to Cuba.
From the point of view of Nigeria you will be described as an outbound tourist, but Cuba will describe you as an inbound tourist.
3.5 Tourism Products And Services In relation to tourism, very often you will come across terms like tourism products and services.
Here, we attempt to define them.
The purchase of a tour is a speculative investment by the tourist, who anticipates the pleasure the consumption of such a product will result in.
Tourist consumption and anticipation are related to services that after the basic necessities and comforts are provided, leisure activities are also organized.
However, it has often been said that selling tours is similar to selling dreams; for example, a tour is more than buying a more collection of services, like an aircraft seat, a hotel bed, meals and the opportunity to see the National Assembly Complex in Abuja.
The tourist is buying, temporarily, a strange environment including unique climatic and geographical features and intangible benefits like bargain, luxury service, hospitality, atmosphere, a culture and heritage.
The tourist product is therefore both a physical as well as psychological construction which is challenged to transform dreams into reality.
The TSM 101 UNDERSTANDING TOURISM problem in meeting such a challenge is that different cultures have different priorities and codes but the global tourism professional, requires a universal (often termed as western) standard of satisfaction.
Apart from the problem of quality control, there is always the element of change which can destroy the most well organized tour.
This can be due to natural or man-made reasons, accident or sudden and unforeseen circumstances.
Risks are higher in tourism services because these services are considered luxuries and often not given the same attention as essential services.
Local people often express hostility to tourism because they see it as an expression of (5) five Star Culture, extending the gap between their life style and that of the tourist.
For the producer of the service there are also risks.
Travel service consumed en route and at the destination.
They cannot be tested, see, sampled or compared in advance.
They depend on a reputation earned by the satisfaction of previous users and on advertising.
Services are also created in a particular historical and social context and are affected by a work culture.
Moreover, the supply of services is fixed and created in advance and the risk of under consumption has to be borne by the producer because travel services cannot be stored.
For example, an unused aircraft seat or an empty hotel room cannot be carried over to another day or time or place.
It has a value where and when it is offered for use.
Thus, the carrying capacity and demand for a service have to be carefully assessed and estimated.
For example, it is often claimed that one of the constraints for tourists movement in India is the shortage of airline seats.
To make up for this air taxis were introduced, however, they have displaced 20 percent of India Airlines traffic rather than meeting the shortage or generating new demand.
This creates a crisis situation for both India Airlines as well as air taxi operators along with a loss of 6.5 crores (Indian money) in foreign exchange.
In developing countries, the risks cannot be carried from one tourist season to another.
Apart from the demand/supply constraints, and socio-political factors, operators and providers of service are also affected by weather conditions (like hot weather and the monsoons).
They are also constrained by a lack of capital to invest in marketing.
In many cases, they depend to a large extent on the informal sector or what it termed as the tour or method of harassment.
However, the small scales operator depends heavily on the oral application and direct contact of the informal services of touts and brokers for his profitability.
SELF ASSESSMENT EXERCISE What do you understand by Tourism products and services?
Describe them briefly.
TSM 101 UNDERSTANDING TOURISM KEY WORDS Environmental Bubble: Isolated situation in which a tourist is placed, e.g.
in an air conditioned bus or a car tour where local weather conditions do not affect him/her.
Golden Hordes: The mass of tourists with money to spend.
Literary: Schedule Phenomenon: Happening encompassing different sectors of a group.
Pseudo-event: Happenings especially conjured up to meet the tourists' preconceptions.
Tourist Gaze: The way a tourist sees his/her tourist site.
Tourist season: The time of the year when arrivals of tourist at a particular destination are at a peak.
SELF ASSESSMENT EXERCISE 1) What is tourism?
2) Explain the meaning of the following: i) inbound tourist ii) outbound tourist ANSWERS TO SELF ASSESSMENT EXERCISES 1) The activity of temporary visitors staying at least 24 hours for leisure, business, family, mission or meeting.
Tourism involves the movement of people to, and their stay at various destination 2) i ) Inbound tourist: this refers to tourist entering a country ii) Outbound tourist: this refers to tourist leaving their country to origin for another.
4.0 CONCLUSION In this unit, you have been taken through tourism phenomenon, what been tourism is, concepts of tourism and the definition of tourism.
5.0 SUMMARY You have seen that tourism is defined in different ways.
It is crucial to note that the tourist has the understanding of coming back to the place of residence after being at the destination and having enjoyed the tourist products, attraction and services.
There are different forms of tourism and so also the types of tourists with their own behavioural TSM 101 UNDERSTANDING TOURISM characteristics.
Over the years, different concepts have emerged in tourism.
Tourism products and services play a vital role.
6.0 TUTOR MARKED ASSIGNMENT A tourist product can both be physical as well as psychological.
Explain 7.0 REFERENCES AND OTHER SOURCES Miles, C.W.N and Seabrooke, W. (1977): Recreational Land Management  TSM 101 UNDERSTANDING TOURISM uNrr 2 TOURS CONTENTS 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objectives 3.0 Main Content 3.1 Tours 3.1.1 Tourists 3.1.2 The Tourist Destination 3.2 Tourism: Forms and types 3.3 Future Trends 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutor Marked Assignment 7.0 References/Further Readings 1.0 INTRODUCTION As a follow up to unit 1, this unit goes to comprehend the concepts related to tourism, tours and its characteristics, different kinds of vacation and constraints that may work against the tourist interest as well as types and forms of tourism.
2.0 OBJECTIVES After reading this unit, you should be able to:  Know what a tour is  Appreciate how purpose of visit determines the nature of the tour  The tourist destination, and  The different types of tourism 3.0 MAIN CONTENT 3.1 Tours and Their Characteristics Tours and their characteristics is closely linked to the motivation of the tourist.
Motivation or purpose of visit it usually:  Holiday or vacation, including a visit with friends and relations  Meetings and conferences, including other business activities,  Health and sports,  Religion and culture, or  Special interests, including study tours, etc.
TSM 101 UNDERSTANDING TOURISM The purpose of visit determines the nature of the tours in the following ways i) Are you free to choose your constraint?
ii) Is price a constraint?
iii) Is time a constraint?
iv) Is quality a determining factor?
v) What facilities and services do you require?
Tours can be within national boundaries or in any place in the world.
Such a decision will have an impact on the country of both; the country of origin and the tourist's destination site.
Tours also focus on unique natural geographical features like the coastline, islands, mountain, health resorts, countryside, etc.
At such locations, the provision of tourist services and the pressure of tourists are bound to have impact on the environment, economy, local, social practices and on the people.
The time period tour includes will depend on factors like: TSM 101 UNDERSTANDING TOURISM  Holiday period  P r i c e  Attractions and activities  Single destination or multi-destination  Packaged itinerary or individual travel, and  Inclusive arrangements or special interest tours, etc.
In the case of an independent or tailor-made tour, the visitor buys services individually.
This, he does either by making reservations in advance, directly of through a travel agent or on an ad hoc basis during the tour.
The latter is called a walk-in arrangement which depends on availability.
A packaged or inclusive tour is an arrangement in which transport and accommodation are purchased at an inclusive price.
This means that the prices of individual's components of the services required by the tourist cannot be determined by the buyer.
Packages are assembled by tour operators who buy the individual elements in advance from the producers and the wholesales.
Because these services are brought in advance in large numbers, the tour operators buys at a discount price (20% to 30% lower than the market price).
He then sells individual and group tours either directly of through agents who are performing the retail function.
For this, travel agents earn a commission (20% to 10%).
Tourist services are also accordingly, diverse to suit all the aspects of demand.
For example: i) Transport services can be scheduled (run according to a time table) or chartered (according to demand).
ii) Accommodation can be in the formal (hotel) sector or the subsidiary sector (guest house, campsite, apartment or rent, etc.)
iii) Catering can be on meal plan which includes a variety of options.
For example, American Plan including 3 meals, Modern American Plan including breakfast and lunch or dinner and European Plan including breakfast only.
iv) Local transfers and sight-seeing can be organized by coach, taxi, etc.
for those who like to do things on their own, the recent a-car option is also.
SELF ASSESSMENT EXERCISE The time and period that a tour includes depends of certain factors.
Mention and discuss 5 of such factors.
TSM 101 UNDERSTANDING TOURISM 3.1.1 Tourists The tourists, apart from being a holiday maker or businessman, can also be in terms of region, nationality, socio economic class, age and sex.
Behavioural aspects like stage in the life-cycle, nationality and educational levels also help the producer of services to design products that fit specific target groups or market segments.
This termed as profiling the tourist.
Such a definitional refinement helps us to collect data on what the tourist is really looking for at the destination.
Such data also helps us to understand tourism and to see how tourism related practices differ between different markets.
Such information helps the industry to design products and develop strategies appropriate to the needs of the market.
Such data also enables activists, who may be local activists or networking with international groups to control the form of tourism being developed at a particular destination and to:  Intervene in the type of development being planned, and  Maximize the benefits from tourism and to minimize negative impacts.
3.1.2 The Tourist Destinations A destination is both a site and an event, and these two factors are the attractions.
In a site attraction, a location exercises appeal like the Zuma Rock, the Suntan Beach or the Methodist Cathedral.
With an event acting as a pull, tourists are drawn to a particular place because of what is happening at the location.
Where both site and event are place because of what is happening at the location.
Where both site and event are, attractions like the Eyo in Lagos, the Argungu Fishing Festival in Sokoto and the Jos wild-life Garden, the success of such a destination multiplies.
Destinations can be spread over a wide geographical area.
The attraction to a destination lies in the image it has, or the attractions it offers.
3.2 Tourism: Forms and Types Today, people are feverishly participating in tourism.
This may include short trips during the week, weekend breaks or longer journeys during holidays.
Old age pensioners have a dream of retiring to a place where the weather is good and the prices low.
Without any outside pressure, millions of people flock to destinations of their own free will.
Long lines of cars, crowded buses and trains and jumbo jets go all over the world.
As a result, the beaches become too small, shops and restaurants too crowded, sporting facilities and the environment degraded and worn  TSM 101 UNDERSTANDING TOURISM down with years of being admired and used, and the world shrinks.
For an increasing number of people, work is no longer the main purpose of life and this encourages tourism.
Modern tourism is one of the most striking phenomenons of our times and tourism offers us an opportunity to learn, to enrich humanity and to identify what may be termed as goals for a better life and a better society.
But conservationists want to change things.
They want to arrest the spread of the "landscape eaters" who have transformed the countryside with their mass migration.
Forms and types of tourism emerge within the context of changing social values.
For example, in modern society, the value of 'being' has been superseded by the value of 'having'.
Possession, property, wealth, egoism and consumption have become more important than community, tolerance, moderation, sensibility and modesty As a result, in all parts of the world:  Economy is characterized by increasing concentration of wealth, division of labour and specialization.
 Environment is being treated as if resources are renewable.
 The limits of eco-system are stretched without considering the negative aspects, and peoples' rights are constantly eroded to meet the needs of the power system, etc.
SELF ASSESSMENT EXERCISE What effect does Possession, Property, Wealth, Egoism, etc.
has on modern tourism?
Forms of tourism emerge from different fields of tension such as: work/rest, awake/asleep, exertion/relaxation, income/expenditure, job/family, freedom/necessity and risk/security.
Similarly, dirt, noise, rush, pollution and trouble are all key expressions of such tension.
The possibility of going away is very important in such a context.
The desire for tourism is therefore determined socially.
Governments promote tourism, people talk about their holidays, unions sponsored holidays, health insurance covers, visits to spas, tax rebates are given for holiday homes and corporations reward employees with travel instead of bonus money.
Seasonal pressures strengthen the urge to get away from home.
Annual vacations, the media, literature and fashion all strengthen the holiday mania.
The tourism industry whets the appetite with tantalizing offers of entertainment and pleasure.
The commercialization of recreation functions within the well-established principles of a free market economy.
In the past, in the erstwhile socialist countries, holiday homes and limited foreign travel were subsidized for workers.
In some countries of the world, for example, there is still a transport TSM 101 UNDERSTANDING TOURISM subsidy system called "the leave Travel concession" and most companies provide holiday homes for their workers, but tourism is primarily a private enterprise.
A study of tourist brochures indicates the successful design of a tourist visit: 1) Create a holiday mood by emphasizing informality, abandonment, serenity, freedom, pleasure.
2) Show time, standing still, romanticism and relaxation, peace and space.
3) Show something beautiful that is not available at home.
And typical holiday symbols like the sun, a beach umbrella, a plan fringed coastline, etc.
4) Show people from other cultures, always beaming, happy, friendly and idle.
All four ingredients form the tourism mix.
However, in today's context, the different types of tourism are as follows: 1) Rest and Recuperation Taking a rest from everyday life; relieve the stress of societies that have shifted from manual to sedentary work.
Tourism as diversion or compensation to holiday destination is what may be called holiday or vacation travel which is focused on resorts and beach holidays, both domestic and international.
2) E s c a p e Tourism as a mass flight from everyday reality to an imaginary world of freedom.
This flight takes place within the movements from centers to peripheries or in other words, a North-Shout migration.
3) Communication Spending quality time with family and friends, make new friends and acquaintances.
This mass tourism, in herds, enjoying the facilities of tourism enclaves.
4) Culture and Education Such tourism is based on sight-seeing to experience and see other countries of the world though not necessarily in depth.
TSM 101 UNDERSTANDING TOURISM 5) Freedom Tourism frees you from home and work and is directed towards facilities and comfort rather than experience.
6 ) H e a l t h Visit spas, go to sauras, undergo cures for chronic ailment, visit health clubs for workouts or do yoga i.e.
travel for health.
7 ) Special Interest Tours Is organized as per the special interests of the tourists ranging from medical, historical, archaeological and other interests to golf or fishing 8) Adventure and Wild Life Far away from modern civilization, with bearers and porters and mules, camels, elephants or jeeps, mixing trekking and hiking and camp life with the luxury of a first class hotel.
9) Convention Tourism To mix leisure with work, holiday convention or meetings at tourist destinations.
Different forms of tourism also give rise to different types of tourists.
1) The ridiculous tourist who is dressed in funny cloths and views everything through the lens of a camera.
2) The naïve tourist who is inexperienced in travel always asks unnecessary questions and has no language skills.
3) The organized tourist who feels at home with a guide and a group of fellow tourists.
4) The ugly tourist who behaves as if he owns the world.
5) The uncultured tourist who is a beach bum and spends his time lazing and eating.
6) The rich tourist who can afford anything, like to show prosperity and enjoy being waited upon.
7) The exploiting tourist who spends a holiday at the cost of people and takes advantage of their culture, hospitality and poverty.
8) The pollution tourist who demands that for his comfort, everything flattened of destroyed.
9) The alternative tourist who explore the few untouched corners of the world thus opening the way to mass tourism.
TSM 101 UNDERSTANDING TOURISM Assop Waterfalls, Plateau State 3.3 Future Trends A recent B.B.C.
programme entitled "Wish you weren't here" underlines the concern today at what the golden Hordes have done to the world environment and fragile communities and cultures.
There was a time the UN promoted tourism because of its economic benefits, because: 1) A transfer of wealth from the rich to the poor was possible.
2) Regional imbalances could be overcome in areas where there were no other development resources.
3) Provide employment to people with low educational and skill levels.
4) Give rise to economic growth with circulation of the tourist's dollar.
After four decades of organized Mass Tourism, today the option for the future is sustainable Tourism, or tourism controlled by the local people at their pace and in answer to their needs.
The essential aspect of sustainable tourism is the concept of carrying capacity, that is, a control on the number of tourists as well as the type of tourism to be developed.
Carrying capacity is a concept that has to keep in mind the needs of: n TSM 101 UNDERSTANDING TOURISM a) The environment b) The level of development both economic and social c) C u l t u r e d) Population and its needs in the present and in the future e) Tourism vs. other forms of economic activity.
SELF ASSESSMENT EXERCISE Mention 5 motivating factors/purpose for any kind of visit.
ANSWERS TO SELF ASSESSMENT EXERCISE Motivation or purposes of a visit are usually: 1) Holiday or vacation, including a visit with friends and relations 2) Meeting and conferences, including other business activities.
3) Health and sports 4) Religion and culture 5) Special interest, including studying tours, etc.
4.0 CONCLUSION Going through this unit, you've learnt things about tours, their characteristics, who is a tourist, the tourist destinations and the forms and types of tourism.
5.0 SUMMARY You have seen that people do not just travel except they are motivated to do so in different ways.
It is essential to note that some of the times, Potential tourists could face some constraints that may prevent them from carrying out their hearts desire.
Tourism has certain impacts on the environment as well as the economy.
Such an impact could be positive or negative depending on the degree of control.
While looking at the future trends, a variety of factors have to be accounted for.
For example, now there is emphasis on the Alternative or Sustainable Tourism as people are beginning to assert their rights and demand control.
6.0 TUTOR MARKED ASSIGNMENT Enumerate and explain at least 5 different types of tourism.
TSM 101 UNDERSTANDING TOURISM 7.0 REFERENCE/FURTHER READING Miles, C.W.N and Seabrooke, W. (1977): Recreational Land Management.
TSM 101 UNDERSTANDING TOURISM UNIT 3 THE CHANGING TREND CONTENTS 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objectives 3.0 Main Content 3.1 The Changing Trend 3.2 Purpose of Tourism 3.2.1 Sun, Sea, Sand and Sex 3.2.2 Leisure, Touring, Sight seeing, Culture 3.2.3 Visiting friends and relation 3.2.4 Business and incentive travel 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutor Marked Assignment 7.0 References/Further Readings 1.0 INTRODUCTION In Units 1 and 2, we discussed the different types and forms of tourism.
Tourism of today is no longer what it was 50 years back and it will TSM 101 UNDERSTANDING TOURISM change further in the years to come.
A crucial role is played by motivation in this process of change.
In fact, motivation or the purposes of a tourist considerably affects the various components of the Tourism Industry.
2.0 OBJECTIVES After reading this unit, you should be able to:  Outline the reasons for the growth of tourism,  Define the different motivations that determines the increasing diversity of tourism,  Understand the origin and development of Mass Tourism and package holidays.
3.0 MAIN CONTNET 3.1 The Changing Trend Tourism had transformed considerably from its earlier motivations, i.e.
mainly business and religion, by the 19th century.
In Europe and America it is now part of the life style of not only the aristocracy but also the merchants and the professional class.
It has come within the reach of the industrial work force as well.
Between the two World Wars, in the industrialized countries, the mass of the people had higher expectations and greater entitlements.
This was because of increasing incomes and holidays entitlements.
Technology brought the means of transport (particularly the automobile) within their reach and material conditions of life were much better than the days of depression with the post war economic boom.
In the 1960s the post war economic boom began to spread much more widely and international tourism began to reach mass markets around the globe.
Such changes were bound to have an impact not only on the nature but also on the numbers participating in touristic activity.
Mass Tourism, a phenomenon which we can see emerging in some advance countries of the world today, India as an example of the third world countries, was primarily a domestic business up to the 1950s in most of the countries.
International tourism formed about 5% of tourist activity in the 1930s and 40s.
By the 1970s, foreign holidays accounted for 20% of long vacations by Americans, Britons and Europeans.
The focus of Mass Tourism was the sea side resorts and spas in Europe and the National Parks and natural beauty around summer camps in America.
Traveling by rail or by car, the middle class tourist used  TSM 101 UNDERSTANDING TOURISM boarding houses or hospitality of friends and relatives or holiday camps to make the budget for the holiday extend.
Private operators provided cheap accommodation, mass catering with a range of amusement and entertainment possibilities at the site.
Britain, France and Germany were the leaders in this movement.
This early idea of "packaging" soon spread to the up-market hotels that began include swimming, tennis and dancing in their facilities.
Tents, caravans and chalets came up for those who wanted a less regimented and more flexible holiday plan.
The Club Mediterranean, a total resort concept that emerged for the need of a group of young French families looking for a complete holiday, soon spread to all regions of the world.
A total resort required tremendous commercial ability which the travel trade had acquired by the mid 20th century.
As suppliers of the tourist product they expanded their output and sharpened their marketing skills.
From the increasingly sophisticated market research emerged the revealing concept of motivation and its diversity or changeability amongst different groups of tourist.
Expertise in dealing -vith motivation led to the development of different types of tourism which involved large number of tourists.
A key role in this movement was played by the jet aircraft.
By the 1970s wide bodied jets with a capacity of 400 passengers reduced the cost of air travel and the mass tourist emerged at resorts all over the world.
Countries around the world began to notice the impact of tourism on the national and global economy.
Destinations began to make themselves up in the image of a particular market segment.
Those destinations that catered to the largest numbers soon become stereo-typed as "Tourist Ghettos" because they looked alike and offered facilities that were standardized.
Today, as new destinations are emerging, the international stereo-typed is giving way to ethnic types, which has an underlying uniformity with a view of local culture and identity.
SELF ASSESSMENT EXERCISE Explain the role of Technology in the development of tourism in the early days.
3.2 Purpose of Tourism You may ask questions, what motivates a tourist?
Why tourism?
Or what is the purpose of tourism?
These are pertinent questions and the answers are particularly relevant for those who are or intending to become tourism professionals.
el, TSM 101 UNDERSTANDING TOURISM 3.2.1 Sun, Sea, Sand and Sex This is known in American parlance as the 4S formula of tourism.
Sea bathing with access to a beach (sandy) and good weather (Sun shine) is an expectation of tourists who want to escape from cold temperature to tropical climates.
New fashion concepts also dictate the craze for a sun tanned skin over the pale complexion.
The current health faddism also dictates the use for activity over indolence.
Overcrowding, which appeals further away to destinations in Africa and Asia.
For example, you may hear such comments at a beach "Oh!
How peaceful it is, lovely.
I hope it does not become crowded like the one back home" Many analysts have described this form (4S) as "Tourism in a Ghetto".
They do so to emphasize the artificiality of a created reservation which is made to measure in the touristic image or touristic gaze.
Included in this category are hotel complexes, holiday tours and hiss resorts.
Natural and scenic beauty is merely a backdrop to playing the same games, reading the same newspaper, watching the same T.V shows, and eating the same food.
Local serving personnel are perhaps the only unique ingredient of such tailor make resorts and are considered sufficient to represent the country in which a particular resort is located.
The model of such a type is the "club med" which is often described as the most honest touristic formula.
Although sneered by the cultural critic because it incorporates many actual motives and states quite openly that it aims at complete relaxation "it is the idea of paradise, a garden of Eden, in which people are free and unconstrained and everybody can be happy in their own way".
This is real life, and such life is available in the most exclusive regions of the world in enclaves where the tourist can abandon himself to pursue leisure undisturbed.
In this holiday theater based on glamour, glitter, fun entertainment, sport and buffets, a holiday becomes a reprieve from daily life, which is unreal.
The show opens up to lightening views of culture for sight seeing and performances by local women and men.
At times these remain meaningless rituals to the tourists.
Yet, they expose the performers to a state of corruption that is often justified by the money it earns them.
For example, Liz and Steward join thousands of Western tourists who visit the East every year.
They are both 18 and have saved up the whole year for their 2 week vacation.
They are determined to enjoy themselves and to relax.
They plan to see ancient monuments or visit bazaars to shop and spend lavishly on exotic bargains.
They have already spent a good amount on fashionable holiday wardrobes, cameras, personal stereos and designer sun glasses.
They are both sociable and chatty and would like to meet young men and women wherever they go.
They are excited at the thought that they will be away from family and other /c1  TSM 101 UNDERSTANDING TOURISM social controls.
They also want to return with an excellent suntan and lying on a beach or poolside.
The people at the destinations they visit might be poor, living much harder lives and working longer hours, perhaps in tourism related services to earn a living.
Many may be conservative and religious.
They may frown at certain activities that Liz and Stewart consider normal holiday behaviour and their dress codes will be different.
Many among them may object the freedom of the men and women to socialize together.
Yet, they may tolerate it or turn away their eyes because for the local people, hospitality, which was once a source of honour has now, became a means of earning a living.
They now view the tourists as wealthy and extravagant.
In recent times, the 4S's formula has been expanded to include golf, a sport which is extremely popular in the more affluent countries of the world, and particular in Japan.
The Japanese have set targets for out bound tourists and in 1993, 15 million Japanese took off for golfing holidays all over the world.
Hawaii and Australia are the most fovoured destinations, mixing beach and golf facilities.
The game is very expensive in Japan and there is the space limitation too.
Because of this demand all Asian countries are now multiplying golf courses at every suitable location.
Malaysia is setting a target of 122 courses by 1994.
Many tourism experts condone golf tourism as being environmentally friendly.
However, in Japan itself there have been several studies indicating that golfing greens pollute the underground water facilities.
The colouring and chemicals used to maintain the green areas are as harmful as industrial effluents.
Studies in Thailand also indicate that culturally women caddies double as prostitutes to earn an extra income, since most of them are from agricultural communities that are very poor.
3.2.2 Leisure, Touring, Sightseeing, Culture Such tourists like to wander, not content to remain in one place of complex, but preferring to stay in a different place every night or so.
This is a kind of cramming or crash course of notable countries, monuments, people, places and culture.
The motivation is both self education and self esteem.
The camera is an essential ingredient of such tourists whose 'touristic lense view' is considered to be more authentic than reality.
Often the framing of the destination via the tourist gaze is the visible pressure that motivates such tourists towards touristic itineraries.
The destinations visited by such tourist are more varied and widespread than the 4S.
The linear or modal itineraries also require a much better transport network and capacity and hotels have to provide their best TSM 101 UNDERSTANDING TOURISM services particularly check-in/check-out and room services for frequent guest/room charges.
Although the interest segments may vary, the demand for services is invariably the same.
A tendency develops to create "circuits" on "mild run" routes on the basis of infrastructural strength as well as local support to the daily turnover of tourists.
Such tourists therefore also fall into the mass package category.
3.2.3 Visiting Friends and Relations (VFR) This form is a strong motivation for domestic tourism in majority of developing countries.
You see this in every day life.
For example, Popoola wants to visit his friend at Lagos.
He also decides to see all the tourist attractions in Lagos.
He may also utilize a day to go to Aguda to meet his classmate James and also see the National Theatre of Iganmu.
Similarly, Veronica in Nigeria wants to visit her friend at Abuja.
She also decides to see all the tourist attractions in Abuja like the National Assembly complex, the International Conference Center, Abuja Gardens, etc.
This segment is of great importance to the transport sector.
But it is not considered economically significant by the providers of accommodation, food and beverage services.
This is so because they stay and eat with their host i.e.
a friend or relative.
At times when people have none of their own they try to find one through someone.
These tourists do not exercise freedom to choose their destinations, but do show an interest in the tourist attractions that the town or city offers.
For example, a visit to a friend in Lagos also offers beaches, amusement park and shopping complexes.
The VFR tourist makes use of the surface infrastructure for tourism in much the same way as the business traveller and often participates in linear or modal itineraries along with domestic and international tourists.
Tourists often use friends and relations as hosts to visit areas of interest.
In Nigeria, we have seen an interesting combination of VFR and LTC to subsidize the cost of transport and accommodation so that there will be enough money to spend on sightseeing, leisure, recreation and shopping.
SELF ASSESSMENT EXERCISE What effects do you think visiting friends and relations has on hospitality industry - the hostels'?
TSM 101 UNDERSTANDING TOURISM 3.2.4 Business and Incentive Travel Business travellers needs often overlap with those of the holiday maker.
The only difference is that business trips are not directed towards touristic centers or resorts, rather their demand is directed to centers of trade and commerce or diplomacy.
They may demand special services like communication and secretarial facilities, meeting and convention facilities, car rental and accommodation, with less emphasis on recreational facilities, although swimming pools and health clubs are popular services today.
A special area of interest to touristic destinations is conference, fairs, and exhibitions.
Today, there many organizations that feel that their executives are more creative and productive in a resort atmosphere.
Hence, the number of corporate conferences is on the increase.
Public and Private Sector, associations and professional bodies, trade unions and political parties are also customers for convention-cum-tourism complexes.
The needs for communication and specialization have led to annual meetings of associations and professional bodies not only to meet and discuss new ideas and strategies but also to exhibit new products, new trends or product lines.
Fairs and exhibitions are a reflection of the health of an economy and give an opportunity to the participants to sample some of the local tourism offers.
An area of emerging importance to the tourism industry is incentive travel or travel of a touristic nature as a reward for some special achievement or contribution of an employee to the firm.
Most employees consider a paid holiday as a desirable perk because their standard of living ensures that there is no consumer durable that they don't have or can't have.
International travel is however something not more than 10% to 15% can afford.
Secondly, the firm's incentives is always of a higher quality and standard than what an employee can afford on his own budget terms of services, distance and the length of stay at a resort.
Most tour operators find the incentive tour attractive because it includes up-market rates with people who may not have the discrimination tastes of the upper crust.
Such services often overlap with mass tourists who are directed towards resorts or on the sightseeing circuits.
The Indian Association of Tour Operators (IATO) considers the incentive tour market an important segment for a long haul destination like India.
A similar association like the of India in Nigeria is the National Association of Nigerian Tour Operators (NANTO).
TSM 101 UNDERSTANDING TOURISM Key Words Linear Itineraries Schedules of tourist which include rapidly changing places of stay, travell and sightseeing.
Niche Tour Operators Specialized tour operators who share their clients concern for conserving and preserving areas of tourism from the destructive efforts of mass tourism.
Roots Tourism Tourism which brings people settled abroad to their places of origin.
Tourist Ghettos Standardized tourist accommodation and accompanying facilitating mass tourism.
SELF ASSESSMENT EXERCISE Explain what is meant by the 4S formula in Tourism.
4.0 CONCLUSION This unit has taken you through: the changing Trend, Purpose of Tourism, the 4s formula, VFR and Leisure, sightseeing and culture.
5.0 SUMMARY People travell and tour because of difference motivations.
People may travel] to escape from their daily environment or to seek information.
It is possible that one may travel to satisfy many motives at a time rather than any single motive.
ANSWER TO SELF ASSESSMENT EXERCISE The 4S formula stands for Sun, Sea, Sand and Sex.
Sea bathing with access to a beach (sand) and good weather (sun shine) is an appreciation of tourists who want to escape from temperature to tropical climate.
6.0 TUTOR MARKED ASSIGNMENT Explain the kinds of tourist association with Leisure, Touring, Sightseeing and culture and the activities such like to engage in.
TSM 101 UNDERSTANDING TOURISM 7.0 REFERENCES/FURTHER READINGS.
Miles, C.W.N and Seabrooke, W (1977): Recreational Land Management.
TSM 101 UNDERSTANDING TOURISM  TSM 101 UNDERSTANDING TOURISM UNIT 4 SPECIAL INTEREST CONTENTS 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objectives 3.0 Main Content 3.1 Special Interest 3.2 Alternative Tourism 3.3 Other Determinations 3.3.1 Psychological 3.3.2 Socio-political 3.3.3 Economic 3.3.4 Time 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutor Marked Assignment 7.0 References/Further Readings 1.0 INTRODUCTION In Unit 3, we discussed the changing and purpose of tourism.
Motivations not only determine tourists' behaviour, but are being critically analyzed to determine the future needs of tourism.
Hence, it is necessary for tourism professional or learners of Tourism Studies to know why people tour/travel.
Tied with this is the question why people opt for a particular destination or why a specific destination attracts tourists?
This unit takes into account, the special interest or taste of tourist and at the same time examines alternative tourism.
2.0 OBJECTIVES After reading this unit, you should be able to:  Analyze the factors that influence the demand for tourism, as well as the decision-making process for individuals, and  Determine the relationship between motivation, destination and tourist product.
3.0 MAIN CONTENT 3.1 Special Interest In contemporary culture there is a dissolving of the boundaries between high and low cultures as well as between different cultural forms such as TSM 101 UNDERSTANDING TOURISM tourism, art, education, photography, T.V, music, sport, shopping and architecture, etc.
All these forms lend themselves to the area of Special Interest in tourism which deviates from Mass Tourism because it does not consider people within a particular destination to be similar to each other.
With shared taste and characteristics, special interests in the end are to be determined by the providers of services.
However, the increasing and changing power of different social classes also determines the importance of these areas of cultural production for Special Interest Tourism.
As the collective power of the working class declined and the service and middle classes increased after the post world war period new forms of tourism were generated in the west.
The new cultural economy that these classes created related to people consciousness, disposition, tastes and dislikes.
Special Interest Tourism reject "natural" enjoyment as coarse, vulgar and servile and replaces it with refined, disinterested and gratuous pleasures that emphasize culture and art as the essence of the difference between the new power-elite and the old rich and the working class.
Studies have shown that such tourists enjoy good work and market conditions as well as educational credentials.
They are primarily in the 30 to 40 age group.
They share many of the preferences of intellectuals, like an interest in the most legitimate aspects of culture.
Their interests include museums and folk art, sport, mountain climbing or walking hours.
Many writers describe their taste for "ostentatious poverty" which is seen in their habit of dressing casually, liking bare and homely interiors and a cultivated relationship with nature.
Special interest tourists need not be in middle salaried category alone.
In Media, Advertising and Design areas, they have a very strong commitment of fashion, change style.
Their morality seeks pleasure as an ethic, and as a taste for novelty.
They look down on the Candy floss image of the traditional holiday camp and resort because for them it is in the bad taste.
They go towards health, food, vegetarianism, heritage and natural pastures like walking, cycling, swimming and fishing.
In Britain, we have seen a campaign for Real Holiday as against the rise of the package tour.
The special interest tourist equates Mass Tourism with mass production in things like beer, bread and ice-cream, instead of real things, and wants a return to the authentic taste and flavour of the individual way of doing things.
The essence of the Real Holiday Campaign is that: a) It involves a visit to a destination well away from the masses like Maldives, Bolivia or Lakshadweep.
Thus, it open up the whole world to the possibility of tourism, and b) The real tourist will make use of the specialist agent or operator rather than a few major companies who do not promote a TSM 101 UNDERSTANDING TOURISM discriminating independent form of travel.
The small niche product will promote not touristic trips but voyages of discovery.
Special interest tourists have a reading list of useful books on different countries.
They look for travel rather than tourism; they stress on individual choice, avoiding the packed maker, the need to be educated.
They go to the countryside and invoke a differential past which has been constructed with elements which never perhaps existed together historically.
They function according to what could be termed as a Tourism Bill of Rights, which respects nature, the rights of the host populations and their customs and culture.
For such tourists stately homes, areas or regions are rehabilitated as tourist attractions; factories have been turned into museums; garden festivals and theme parks are created in castles, industrial sites and ecological spheres.
Craft demonstrations turn theme/heritage sites into experiences where people can watch, learn and participate in a renaissance activity.
In such cases, they know that tourism has benefited or saved what might have otherwise been completely lost.
Such tourists also participate in cleaning the environment by holidays spent in clearing waste and debris on beaches and mountains slopes, and protecting wild life.
Niche tour operators can also bring pressure, like their clients, on local governments to insist on conservation.
This is done to ensure that mass tourism does not destroy the beauty of the destination, its natural attributes and customs.
They promote traditional hand made crafts as souvenirs, accommodation in the vernacular architecture and textiles as well as local food and beverages.
However, sometimes special interest tours and tourists can also stereo-type what is classified as authentic or real or typical about a destincion.
For example, American visiting Europe often feels like international refugees in a slow queue towards an unseen goal.
"Push, push, push These monuments are all the same.
I haven't met a single local person.
How can I when we are on this schedule.
You'd think we'd have a night off, but no, we have to go to a performance".
Such are the phrases commonly heard.
Often, in season, crowds are so large that tourists don't get a good view of the spectacle and they really get to see the spectacle in their photographs.
SELF ASSESSMENT EXERCISE Discuss the requirement of a special interest tourist.
TSM 101 UNDERSTANDING TOURISM 3.2 Alternative Tourism Alternative tourists like to do things differently.
They want to be less with other tourists and more with the living cultures.
They aim to avoid using special 'tourist' accommodation, transport and other services.
They prefer to use or share the services of the local population.
In this way they hope to experience some aspect of their lives.
Many tourists choose alternatives because they are concerned about the negative impact which Mass Tourism can have on a destination.
Tour operators can specialize in such forms by focusing on people and their culture rather than providing created comforts.
Such trips can be of an extended duration and can cost less than the traditional two week vacation, but they can be high priced.
Travell is with "local friends" and the purpose is to come to ones own understanding of political, social and religious traditions.
Destinations are out-of-the way villages and tribal hamlets.
Hotels and homes are characterized by friendly atmosphere and cleanliness.
Transport is crammed with locals going to market with their wares on camels or donkeys, boats in back waters or treks in the mountains.
India is a popular alternative destination.
It is "subtle mix of ancient and modern, ritual and urban, filled with local colour and vitality:.
Nigeria also can become a popular alternative destination if her rich cultural heritage is given deserved promotion.
3.3 Other Determinants Besides the motives mentioned in the earlier sections there are also certain other determinants of tourism.
3.3.1 Psychological Is tourism desirable?
Is it a good thing to have for the tourist and the destination?
Is it a justifiable means to an end?
As a break from work or as a medical need, tourism provides relaxation in an environment that is completely different to the home surrounding.
In that sense, it is a psychological break.
Colleagues, neighbours and friends however, influence our choices and pressure to conform is indeed great.
It is also fashionable to take a holiday at a certain time of the year or to a certain destination.
Fashion in tourism is close to fashion in clothes.
There can also be security in habitually taking the same holiday to a favourite hills or beach resort.
In fact, tourism buying can be as customary as any other brand loyalty.
TSM 101 UNDERSTANDING TOURISM 3.3.2 Socio-Political Many societies encourage tourism as a form of rejuvenation.
Many states give a tourism entitlement to their employees.
In some countries trade unions include visits to spas for over-worked or sick workers through a medical insurance scheme.
Paid holidays also encourage participation in tourism.
The political system also encourages certain preferences for holiday destinations as well as activities.
This is done by choosing tourist destinations for holding conventions or conferences.
3.3.3 Economic An important factor is disposable income or freedom from any money constraint.
Tourism is psychologically and socially desirable as a consumer objective and the possession of the requisite means to satisfy the desire for tourism must be there.
In the West, when a person's income rises by one unit, they spend 11/2 units on tourism.
This indicates a high propensity to travel.
Where incomes are not high and money is concentrated in a few hands, the propensity to travel is likely to be far less.
Business and incentive travell is also likely to be constrained by the money constraint which can be affected by economic depressions or recession.
Governments can encourage outbound tourism by their tax policies and the permission to take foreign exchange out of the country.
The price of tourism in relation to other consumer expenditures is also important consideration.
Special offers can, along with discounts, often make tourism a more attractive option than staying at home.
3.3.4 Time Vacations are traditionally linked to tourism activity.
Many institutions have increased breaks in the calendar rather than just single holidays so that people can avail the opportunity of free time to participate in leisure activity.
These well regulated breaks in Europe in spring, summer and winter have encouraged people to take not one but perhaps two holidays in a year.
For example, people with school going children tour mainly during summer or winter vacations in the schools.
The tour taken during the summer vacations may be longer when compared to one during winter.
Price and time have a great impact on tourism demand.
The tourism industry adjusts its tariffs with the seasons demand to encourage tourism as well as to increase profits.
There are other pressures like business, family, religion, educational and social that motivates tourists.
Similarly, conferences and seminars, 34 TSM 101 UNDERSTANDING TOURISM weddings, funerals or family reunions, or visits to centres of pilgrimage are factors that are supplementary or secondary feeders of tourism.
In many cases, facilities like accommodation, catering or special events and discounts etc also act as "pull factors" to encourage tourism or attract tourists.
SELF ASSESSMENT EXERCISE Advance 2 reasons for a campaign for Real Holidays in Britain.
4.0 CONCLUSION So far, in this unit, you have learnt about special interest, alternative tourism, and other tourism determinants.
5.0 SUMMARY A change in motivation or say different motivation has brought in new trends in tourism like special interest or alternative tourism.
Knowing the motives of tourist help the tour operator/tourism professional to offer better services to the client and it is always better to ask for motivation and accordingly suggest the destination.
ANSWER TO SELF ASSESSMENT EXERCISE a) It involves a visit to a destination well away from the masses like Maldives, Bolivia or Lakshadweep.
Thus it opens up the whole world to the possibility of tourism.
b) The real tourist will make use of the specialist agent or operator rather than a few major companies who do not promote a discriminating independent form of travel.
6.0 TUTOR MARKED ASSIGNMENT Why is alternative tourism considered the most positive motivation for tourism?
7.0 REFERENCE/FURTHER READINGS Miles, C.W.N and Seabrooke, W (1977): Recreational Land Management.
iS  TSM 101 UNDERSTANDING TOURISM UNIT 5 HISTORICAL EVALUATION AN) DEVELOPMENT (1) NEED FOR THE HISTORY OF TOURISM II/ii iht.
Ittr CONTENTS 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objectives 3.0 Main Content 3.1 The need for the history of tourism 3.1.1 Statistical records 3.1.2 Secondary sources 3.2 Periodisation and Concepts 3.3 Ancient Period 3.4 Early Empires 3.4.1 Egyptian Civilization and Phenomenon 3.4.2 The Persian Empire 3.4.3 The Greeks 3.4.4 The Romans 3.4.5 India 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutor Marked Assignment 7.0 References/Further Readings 1.0 INTRODUCTION The moment we mention history, the general assumption is that we want to know about the past.
But few ask this question, why we intend to study the past?
Well, we study the past because our present has evolved out of it, and to plan a better future.
We have to critically analyze the past as well as the present.
However, different methods, approaches and TSM 101 UNDERSTANDING TOURISM inter-presentations are involved in this exercise.
Ideological leans and interest also determine the course of history writing.
For example, the trend that dominated the European approach to the writing of history, for a long time, emphasized on unique event in the life of circle of a particular region.
They were viewed from the point of view of the power controlling the State.
Therefore, the history of the world was seen as a history of the rulers, princes and the aristocracy.
There came another stage when social scientist tries to re-orient methodology in history by adopting the methods of the physical sciences.
Hence, historical methods were challenged to assert that all people have a history and different areas of the world have different histories.
Soon there developed the theory of historical materialism to show that history proceeded through inevitable process of change from lower or higher forms of social organization.
There existed a dialectical relationship between man and nature, and man's use of nature as well as the manner in which he was to produce what he needed for civilizing his life.
It was therefore possible to talk of history of the people rather than of the ruling class.
In the present context, the above mentioned methodologies are also being questioned.
Here we are not going into the debate of various methodologies by passing any volume judgments.
The idea is to make you aware of the fact that there are different views, methods and trends in history.
This Unit deals with the history of tourism over the years.
It takes into account, the various sources that are used to analyze this history, keeping in view the time period i.e.
periodisation.
The transition from travel to modern tourism has also been dealt with.
Why a tourism professional should study the history of tourism is another aspect dealt with in this unit.
2.0 OBJECTIVES After reading this unit, you should be able to:  Understand broadly how the history of tourism came to be written.
 Familiarize yourself with the main source used for writing the history of tourism.
3.0 MAIN CONTENT 3.1 The Need for the History of tourism The history of tourism was for a long time the history of European tourism, the assumption being that tourism was most developed in Europe.
However, there are economics, statistics, scientific  TSM 101 UNDERSTANDING TOURISM Methodology, anthropology and sociology to develop on Inter- disciplinary approach to the history of tourism.
Yet, their methodologies was limited in time as the statistical study of tourism is of recent origin, but they have identified sources that can be used to reconstruct the history of a period for which the statistical basis may not exist.
As a result, we can apply this method to develop the history of tourism on a global as well as national scale.
The main-stream of objective to study of the history of tourism is to understand the phenomenon in a particular society at a particular time We do so in order to know the factors that encourage tourism development as well as the factors that discourage the growth of tourism.
Moreover, a study of the history of tourism can help us to illustrate a dynamic model of tourism development.
We can evaluate the role of tourism as well as establish concepts that help us to understand its impacts.
We, therefore, do not only reconstruct the past or an event of characters but also develop generalizations that are more useful in understanding the present nature of the tourism phenomenon.
The history of tourism also help us in developing the theoretical framework within which the data on tourism can be verified.
To avoid simple generalizations, the data of the history of tourism has to be carefttlly assessed.
In early history we have archaeological evidence of inns, hotels, villas and transport but such information is fragmentary and often covering periods of thousands of years.
Moreover, interdisciplinary information was not always available in all periods and in all countries.
For example, the French pioneered the history of tourism but looked only at the holiday pattern of the aristocracy, the British looked at key events and factors like standard of living, free time, cheap transport, spas and sea-side resorts, and linked them to growth of industry, labour force, social legislation and local customs.
But today, we look at tourism as a system.
In this the physical, economic, technical, environmental, socio-political and cultural factors are studied to understand the links between the past and the present.
And all this is used for tourism for future development.
The History of tourism has made an important breakthrough in two areas: 1) Identification of sources of data.
2) Use of both written and oral history A critical examination of the historical process always highlights news representative within which a particular field of interest can be viewed.
The establishment of the history of tourism also helps in establishing the credibility of tourism as an academic discipline (which in Nigeria is still TSM 101 UNDERSTANDING TOURISM in infancy).
The sources for the history of tourism are very diverse and related to the time context for their validity.
For example, the sources used to know about the ancient period are: 1) Literary records 2) Inscriptions 3) G r a f i t t i 4) Papyras receipts 5) S e a l 6) Archeological evidence including painted pottery 7) Diplomatic records 8) Archives, both private and public 9) Oral history and folk culture, both traditional and personal, etc.
3.1.1 Statistical Records There are primary source and are of recent origins.
Statistic or numerical data begin to be collected only after it was recognized that tourism has an important economic impact.
Before 1914, tourism statistic did not exist, although secondary sources like health, safety, police, migration, taxation and census records were used to make assumptions on the development of tourism.
Since 1920, the statistical base of tourism has been increasing, in 1921, Britain began to collect tourism statistics and by 1945, most countries were doing so.
The volume of tourism statistics grew with the emergence of the international union of officials of tourism organization have achieved a great standardization of the data, although its reliability is often questioned.
This is because there are at least 42 definitions of tourism, and tourist in use around the world.
Prior to 1920, the data base of travel was taken from railway records, postal authorities and wherever possible, Passport and Visa authorities.
From such records, it was possible to:  Reconstruct the volume of people who travelled  The time of the year they travelled, and  The places they visited.
The census report and civil service commission dealing with paid leave have also contributed to information regarding the holiday pattern of the salaried employees.
Thus, there is a range of data from which information regarding tourism can be collected.
Since tourism is a multi-disciplinary activity, the sources of data are varied but such data may not be comparable in all cases.
TSM 101 UNDERSTANDING TOURISM SELF ASSESSMENT EXERCISE List all the sources used to know about the ancient period.
3.1.2 Secondary Sources Under this category come the: 1) Personal documents that includes diaries, journals and letters of educated travellers, academics and intellectuals.
2) Mass communications which include newspapers, journals, advertisements, guide books, magazines, etc.
which have been used to inform and persuade the public.
These resources have been studied to form a picture of tourism such as itineraries, important events and holiday patterns.
They can be used as cross-referencing materials.
3.2 Periodisation and Concepts With the passage of time, the class of people involved in tourism have changed.
As tourism becomes more democratized, the nature of the facilities also becomes more standardized if not universal.
Using the concepts of the emergence of the leisure class to distinguish tourism form other forms of travel, we can democratized, the nature of the facilities also becomes more standardized if not universal.
Using the concepts of the emergence of the leisure class to distinguish tourism from other forms of travel, we can establish six periods in the history of tourism.
1) Ancient Era 2) Imperial Era 3) Pilgrimage 4) The Grand Tour Era 5) The Transition Era 6) The Modern Era The following concepts were commonly used during all periods: i) Motivation: the value of new experience and the transformation of travel from survival to an improvement in the quality of life.
This includes: a) Curiosity: moving from the known to the unknown.
TSM 101 UNDERSTANDING TOURISM b) Anticipation: what you hope to find, seed and do.
To look for something and evaluate every new experience.
Holiday: the word has two sources a ) R e l ig i o n b ) S e c u l a r c ) In Europe, a day was set aside, at the end of a week cycle, for religious rituals and a day was called a Holy day.
In time, saint day and certain other observances were added to the number of holidays when no work was done and everyone celebrated.
d ) The Secular tradition was a part of the imperial system when the state granted holidays to celebrate imperial glory on these holidays, no work was done and the people participated in feasting and fun.
Public games and spectator sports were the highlights on such occasions.
In time, the religious and secular combined and the day of rest become a Part of all societies.
Mode of Travel was the state of the art in terms of transport networks and routes, vehicles, cost of travell, documentation and safe passage wayside facilities and conveniences to the traveller.
iv) Tourism impacts: the influence of tourism not only on the life-style of the people, but in bringing about changes in consumption and production as well as wealth.
3.3 Ancient Period Inscriptions, seals and cave/rock paintings etc are evidence of travell in the period.
Such evidence have suggested that was both difficult and dangerous.
There was no concept of a safe return.
Over land and sea journey were undertaken, but travel was slow, time consuming and route networks were not well developed.
The cost of travell was high because wayside facilities were rarely available.
Human beings were still subject to the power of nature, and travell was seasonal.
Yet, these significant developments encouraged travel!
: i) The creation of specific paths and routes used primarily by traders and pilgrims and perhaps adventurers.
ii) Development of specialized vehicles for traVel over land or water.
TSM 101 UNDERSTANDING TOURISM iii) Growth of urban centers and later cities along river banks and coastline such centers are known to have been established in Mesopotamia, China and India.
The growth of cities indicated the need for political and economic contacts and the role of couriers, carriers and caravans became important.
As travell followed a pattern of networks, resting places and food resources were provided along these routes.
Soon we see the outpost growing into market town or a commercial center that increased the range and scope of travell to distant parts of the known world.
Hence, the increase in contacts between the different parts of the world, the nature of consumption and travell began to change.
As a consequence, specialization began to emerge.
For example, wagon for goods and chariots for passengers.
With specialization in vehicles there was an improvement of paths and routes, with paving and distance marketers as well as trees fro shade.
Better routes led to increased knowledge of the fabled wealth and prosperity of distant lands.
The consequences were many, like emergence of wars of conquest or trade and commerce.
3.3 Early Empires In the West, tourism became established in the Egyptian empires and reached its zenith in the Roman period.
In the East, the costal empires in China and the Mauryan Empire in India were known for providing extension facilities to the travelers.
Roads networks and transport were systematized into imperial high ways, secondary roads for trade and village paths, infrastructure for travel like caravan serais, inns, taverns and panthagor were common Wells were dug, security pickets were placed at convenient distance.
SELF ASSESSMENT EXERCISE Enumerate how many periods that can be established in the history of tourism.
By this time, there was a distribution between travel and the phenomenon of tourism.
Whereas, facilities along the roads were rough and often provided by the State at no cost, well-to-do travelers enjoyed special facilities.
They were accompanied by kitchen staff, servants, to look after luggage of the household, tents, animals, foods and other stores, water supply, etc.
the evidence of such elaborate arrangements indicates a certain sophistication in the ability to travell in styles.
The traveller not only enjoyed the journey, but had home comforts at the TSM 101 UNDERSTANDING TOURISM destination.
The stranger was known to bring prosperity and consume local services and products.
All Asiatic cultures have the tradition of courtesy of the stranger.
Folkclore, folktales and a variety of literary works were told and ideas exchanged among travelers.
3.4.1 Egyptian Civilization and Phenomenon The Egyptian civilization attracted many tourists.
The light house of Alexandria was considered one of the seven wonders of the Ancient world.
Here, we see the genesis of nascent tourism related to curiosity and pleasure.
Herodotus, the Greet traveler, has written about journey's enlivened by women playing on caste vets and men playing the flute, while together the rest of the company stand and clapped together during the voyage.
On arrival at the destination there was a celebratory feast, often with a sacrifice for thanks giving.
There was a lot on wine drinking and festivity at the end of the journey.
Grafitti and massage on the walls were symbolic of the fame of Egypt's monuments.
Between April and November, many tourist travelled long distances to see the glorious monuments of Egypt.
They returned with souvenirs to show off to friends at home.
But tourism was seasonal and travell was taken when the weather was pleasant.
The real adventures, however, were the Phoenicians who extended the boundaries of the known world to the Atlantic in the West and Africa in the South from 11th century B.0 on sands.
They also developed overland facilities and used their maritime skills to bridge rivers and develop trunk routes.
They were also the first to use money as a form of exchange, which helped the traveller to lighten his load.
No longer was it necessary to carry servants and supplies as it was possible to buy food and services along the way.
3.4.2 The Persian Empire The Persian improved the travell infrastructure because their empire expanded over a long area.
The designed roads and developed carriers wagon with four wheels and covered overhead.
Along with merchants, who now travelled all along the Mediterranean, the phenomenon of tourism also became established.
3.4.3 Greeks New dimension of tourism were developed by the Greets who had extended the known world East of Africa.
Their maritime expertise was based on the growth of the city states along the sea coast.
This was TSM 101 UNDERSTANDING TOURISM because the mountains in the internal were not conducive to the development of land routes.
Their contributions to the development of tourism were several: i) They established the system of exchange of currency as the currency of some city state was accepted outside the Greek states.
ii) The Greek language became the common language in the Mediterranean.
iii) The Greeks hosted festival to attract travellers from all over the world.
One important festival was the Olympic Games held to display creative athletic skill in honour of the God Zeus.
.
iv) The Greek theatre was also renowned and people came from far and near to see Greek tragedies and comedies.
These were a reflection on the manners and philosophy of the time.
v) Scholars came to Greece to debate with its philosophers and to exchange medical skills with physician and men of science.
vi) The city states became attractions for visitors.
Athens was a renowned destination then as now.
It had hospitality facilities that provided food, accommodation and entertainment like floor shows, dancing girls, and gambling.
vii) The Greets introduced the custom of living a proxeuros, a native guide who advised tourist on where to go and how to travel safely.
3.4.4 The Romans The Romans had a keen admiration for Greek manners and life style.
However, they refined most of the new developments introduced by Greeks through their remarkable sense of organization.
They had under their control (both politically and culturally) the largest empire in the West.
For a long period, a Roman Legions brought peace and prosperity to many lands and people.
As a result, not only the Roman elite, but also the trading middle class began to build villas along the coastline and in the world luxurious.
Artifacts from various corners of the world.
Tourism thrive in this period for the following reasons: i) Roman coins were the official currency all over the empire.
ii) The empire were served by an excellent and planned network of roads, called the Appiah ways and water ways were also in popular use in all parts of the empire.
iii) Greek and Latin became the official languages of the empire which stretched from Scotland in the West, to the Euphrates in the East.
TSM 101 UNDERSTANDING TOURISM iv) As the wealth and prosperity of Roman citizen increased, they were motivated by pleasure, curiosity as well as an interest in the cultures of the people they brought under their control.
v) They developed spectator sports as a relief from boredom.
Games and gladiatorial contest were popular events.
vi) Sight seeing trips and excusions took the tourist to Greek temples, sanctuaries and works of art.
Egypt and Asia minor (modern Turkey) were renowned for their magnificent structures and became popular destinations.
Unnamed scholars had created an itinerary of the seven Wonders of the World to which Roman visitors were attracted.
vii) Travel to mineral spring or what today, we refer as health tourism was also and important activity.
The springs were closely associated with shrines and drew pilgrims as well.
viii) Literary reference made certain naturally beautiful place an attraction for the educated travelers.
3.4.5 India In India, during the early period a sophisticated agricultural economy made the export of cash crops and important trade link.
Because of the predominance of trade routes over-head crossing between Asia and Europe, trade tours were an important feature of Indian community life.
Caravanserais were therefore an important development in the period.
From hymns and epic poems, we learn that sporting events and rituals sacrifices were also popular festive occasions.
Insurance and safe passage for goods, regulation of prices, weight and measures and the use of gold, silver and copper as rate of exchange also indicate a well developed mode of trade and travel.
At this time, the Buddhist sangha established the tradition of the pilgrimage, when monks went from village to village and court to court preaching the value of the middle path.
Rest houses or panthgars were provided for the mendicant travellers.
Several expectations crossed from Greece via Persia or Mesopotamia to India.
But travelers' accounts are few.
Greek accounts mention that in India, chariot roads were well laid out and horses, elephants and camels were a common mode of transport.
Trees for shade, wells, rest houses and security were also well organized.
The Arhtashastra details the importance of the travel infrastructure for the stated classification of routes and type of vehicles.
This is an indication that there was a well developed mode of travel in India for the military, the commercial traveller and the civilian.
Travell on land, water ways was also under state protection and regulation.
In cities, bazaars provided access to good brought from the hinterland.
Foreigners were accommodated in serais at the city gates where all services were provided to them.
There  TSM 101 UNDERSTANDING TOURISM was strict control over the movements of travelers.
They had to carry to note for safe passage form the one territory to another.
For their entertainment, taverns and dancing halls were allowed, but again, inspectors ensured that the conduct was not unruly; gambling was licensed and was source of revenue for the state.
Travelling for pleasure on the rivers and to the hills was a tradition started by the royal courts.
But such movement attracted all those who had business at the court to move with it from the heat and dust of the cities to the rural calm of the summer retreat.
An example worth sitting here is that of Mughal emperors.
They had great love for nature and traveled extensively.
They contributed towards what today we call resort development.
SELF ASSESSMENT EXERCISE 1) Why is it necessary to study the history of tourism?
2) What benefit do we derive from the introduction of statistical data in the history of tourism?
4.0 CONCULSION In this unit, you have been able to learn about the history of tourism, statistical records, periodisation and early empires.
5.0 SMMARY 1) A history of tourism developed mainly through indirect sources in the early period 2) It was only with the onset of 20th century that statistics and information on tourism began to be directly collected.
KEY WORDS Euro centric: A view point which takes into account, only European benefits, ideas and attitudes, etc.as a way of looking at the world.
Hinter lands: Areas after main-stream of urban activity with which normally the urban trade or industry try to force a link.
This is done either for marketers or supply of raw materials.
ANSWERS TO SELF ASSESSMENT EXERCISE 1) It is necessary to study the history of tourism in order to understand the phenomenon in a particular society at a particular time.
To know the factors that encourages tourism development.
2) From such records it is possible to: TSM 101 UNDERSTANDING TOURISM 3.2 Pilgrimage We have seen that wish fulfillment was an important catalyst that had historically influence travell.
The human community, despite its highly developed capability was always faced with problems that defied human solutions.
From anthropological symbols to the development theology, we see the appeal of the supernatural that has been greater than the laws of nature.
The pilgrimage (tirth yatra) was therefore a journey undertaken for betterment on the spiritual and material plane.
The key elements of the pilgrimage are belief and knowledge within a particular cultural context.
In traditional societies, a pilgrimage earned god's grace and moral leadership in the community because sacred rituals and texts sanctified certain places associated with diving revelation.
This was true of all religions.
Oracles housed in hot springs, river and banks along with a veneration of nature were early forms of the pilgrimage.
Different religions (Christianity, Islam & Judaism) are similar associated with sanctuaries and relics of their martyrs and saints.
Pilgrims visited distant shrines associated with their beliefs.
The pilgrimage was a release from poverty, war, sickness, persecution and misery beyond the control of human beings.
Pilgrims always traveled in a throng and were on the road for a long period of time.
They used the facilities of merchants and sanctified the major fairs, which were located close to shrines sacred rivers and tanks.
Monasteries also provided refreshment and rest to the pilgrim.
In many cases, people went on pilgrimage not out of devotion but because they enjoyed travelling through unknown lands in order to experience the novelties on the way.
The pilgrims added to our knowledge of geographical and knowledge of what the world had to offer.
They were often adventurer and explorers as well as being men of knowledge and culture.
In the age of imperialism many traditional beliefs were undermined, but the pilgrimage provided a resource to those who wanted to preserve their cultural identity.
Today, sociologists have boarded the concept of the pilgrimage to include non-sacred activities like travel to homes of modern "idols" and "opinion leaders" (film stars and other) rare eco- systems and environmental or ethnic regions.
The search for ones roots is yet another form of pilgrimage that has inspired many across the world to undertake a journey back home.
TSM 101 UNDERSTANDING TOURISM In a country like India where for the mass of the people tourism may be economically unfeasible, the pilgrimage is a vital living experience.
With a higher personal income and better education, there is an increasing secularization on beliefs and pleasure components are being added to the familiar pilgrims' routes and itineraries.
Consequently, monasteries, temples and shrines have now begun to advertise special tours because the economic benefits of pilgrim/tourists have become alluring for these trusts.
SELF ASSESSMENT EXERCISE Explain the characteristics associated with different religions during the pilgrimage.
3.2 Grand Tour The term is popularly understood to describe a circuit of Western Europe understand by a wealthy social elite for culture, education and pleasure.
It is frequent reference point in the history of tourism in Europe.
Most modern studies have a conventional image of the tutor, without recognizing that it was the first extensive movement of tourist for which we have primary source like letters, journals and diaries, of tourists.
These sources indicate that any extensive movement of tourist is brought about by a particular social and cultural environment and each country can develop its own perspective on the nature of the Grand Tour.
The impact of such a tour on art and intellectual life, social and economic history, as well as literature indicate that the aristocracy was perhaps most visible.
However, it is middle class both merchant and scribe, who have recorded the passage of the tourist, while the artisan has passed on his craft and skill in the search for a master.
There are several debatable assertions regarding the Grand Tour that it followed a prescribed route and was bisurel in place.
Now, we have evidence of no set pattern being followed and also ,raveling as fast as possible.
It is also questionable that the Grand Tour was at essential part of a diplomatic training or the rounding off of a spell at Oxford or Cambridge.
Was it the result of the secularization of religion?
Was the decline of the tour due to the changing cultural values with the increase in the size of the middle class?
The idea of the Grand Tour, as an extensive itinerary for tourist to follow owes something to all false factors in the course of its development.
We can mention the characteristic of the Grand Tour as follows: 1) The Grand Tour can be in terms of class, which would determine the places visited and the mode of travel.
For example, the  TSM 101 UNDERSTANDING TOURISM nobility would follow the coast.
The aristocracy and high officials would follow suit as well as visit renowned centers of learning.
2) The Grand Tour can be defined by the destinations on the itinerary, but such a definition would limit the classes involved in extension travell.
3) The Oxford English dictionary defines the Grand Tour as a Tour of the principal cities and places of interest in Europe, formally said to be an essential part of the education of young men of "good birth" and "fortune".
This definition beside bring Euro- centric, has class limitations and has been broadened to suggest the tutor was if certain places and cities of Western Europe undertaken primarily, but not exclusively for education and pleasure.
Reasons for undertaking the Grand Tour were also diverse: career, education, culture, literary, health, scientific, business and economic.
At different times one or more of these motivations could have been the primary one, depending on the social status, cultural environment and trends in transport and accommodation.
5) The Grand Tour itinerary was closely linked to the availability of to trends in fashion as well as facilitation.
The timing was also related to seasonal variations as well as events and activities of the concerned individuals.
Similar trends affected the length of stay at different destination.
6) An emergent tourism industry also began to direct tourism flow in the 19th century as commercial facilities were required to supplement the informal and formal arrangements that merchants, pilgrims and tourists had commonly used in earlier times.
Thus accommodation in inns, tavern and rented rooms became common particularly in the cities.
Regular transport services were established and guides as well as porters.
Cycling and walking tours also gained in popularity.
Finally banking arrangements through exchange notes were made to guide added facilities to the tourist.
The stage was accommodation, catering and entertainment to the visitor.
The trained manpower also existed.
Recreation of facilities like tenths, cricket and golf clubs, theatres and libraries are common features of such resorts.
That was how India got herself ready to be launched on the world tourism scene.
TSM 101 UNDERSTANDING TOURISM SELF ASSESSMENT EXERCISE Mention 3 characteristics of silk route 4.0 CONCLUSION By going through this unit you have learnt about the silk route, the pilgrimage and the grand tour.
5.0 SUMMARY  Trade and pilgrimage played an important role in tourism traffic in the modern times.
 The growth of modem technology, rising incomes and modem entrepreneurship contributed to the emergence of modern tourism.
ANSWER TO SELF ASSESSMENT EXERCISE  Stages of the journey were short.
 Travel was generally in winter because the extreme topography and climate made the route one of the most hazardous and yet in terms of wealth most rewarding.
 Navigation was done by the stars when not following the course of a stream.
6.0 TUTOR MARKED ASSIGNMENT The grand tour, no doubt played a significant role lit tourism development.
Enumerate and explain briefly reasons for undwitaking the Grand Tour TSM 101 UNDERSTANDING TOURISM 7.0 REFERENCE AND FURTHER READINGS Miles, C.W.N and Seabrooke, W. (1977): Recreational Land Management
