 NATIONAL OPEN UNIVERSITY OF NIGERIA SCHOOL OF BUSINESS AND HUMAN RESOURCES MANAGEMENT COURSE CODE: TSM 142 COURSE TITLE: TOURISM AS AN INDUSTRY  TSM 142 COURSE GUIDE COURSE GUIDE TSM 142 TOURISM AS AN INDUSTRY Course Developer/ Writer Dr. G. O Falade National Open University of Nigeria, Lagos.
Programme Leader Dr. G. O Falade National Open University of Nigeria Victoria Island, Lagos Course Co-ordinator Mr. M. A. Gana National Open University of Nigeria, Lagos.
NATIONAL OPEN UNIVERSITY OF NIGERIA ii  TSM 142 COURSE GUIDE National Open University of Nigeria Headquarters 14/16 Ahmadu Bello Way Victoria Island Lagos Abuja office No.
5 Dar es Salaam Street, Off Aminu Kanu Crescent Wuse II, Abuja Nigeria e-mail: centralinfo@nou.edu.ng URL: www.nou.edu.ng Published by: National Open University of Nigeria 2008 First Printed 2006 ISBN: 978-058-433-1 All Rights Reserved iii  TSM 142 COURSE GUIDE CONTENTS PAGES Introduction………………………………………………….. 1 Assignment File…………………………………………....... 1 Final Examinations and Grading……………………………... 1 - 2 Working through this course…………………………….…… 2 Tutor-Marked Assignment ………………………………...... 2 - 3 Conclusion……………………………………………..…….
3 iv  Introduction TSM 103: Tourism as an Industry discusses how the tourism phenomenon takes the shape of tourism industry.
Some of the units discuss the Tourism System in relations to Demand-Supply Determinations and constraints.
After defining certain concepts like Pull and Push etc.
it discusses further abut the Demand-Led system and supply related problems along with tourism impacts in brief.
Your will also come across the debate regarding the nature of tourism Industry.
It goes on to list its various constituents in brief as they have been separately discussed in independent units.
Different types of tourism organizations at national and international level, representing varied groups and interest have also been discussed.
In some of the units, you will come across discussions on various regulations as related to tourism, importance of statistics and measurements in tourism.
Their relevance to tourism industry in relation to forecasts and planning.
Assignment File The assignment file will be made available in this file, you will find all the details of the work you must submit to your tutor for marks.
The marks you obtain for these assignments will count towards the final mark you obtain for this course.
Any further information on assignments will be found in the assignment file.
Assignments will normally attract 40% of the final grade, while the formal exam also attracts 60%.
Addition of the assignments and the final exam add up to 100%.
The assignment policy of the University as stated in the student handbook should be observed.
Application for extension should be submitted to the check with his/her tutor to is posted to the tutor, it is the responsibility of the students to check with his/her tutor to confirm the receipt of such assignment so posted.
As a precaution you are advised to keep a copy of each assignment you submit.
At the end of every 4 units i.e.
at the end of unit 4, 8 and 12 you should turn in answers to the Tutorial Marked Assignment (TMA) questions.
You are advised to be very systematic in following the instruction as pertaining to your course of study.
Final Examinations and Grading The final examination of Tourism will be question papers of 2½ - 3 hours duration and has a value of 40% as formerly stated of the total course grade.
All areas of the course will be examined.
As a result, it is very important you read through and through the whole course material  TSM 142 TOURISM AS AN INDUSTRY as many times as possible as mere permutation may disappoint you.
You might find it useful to review yourself-tests, TMA assignments and comments on them before the exam period.
The series of course under ‘Foundation Course’ in Tourism are 100 level, of either first or 2nd semester courses.
They all are two (2) credit course.
They are available to all students taking the B.Sc.
in Tourism studies.
They are also suitable for any one who is interested in knowing what tourism is, particularly those studying courses in Hospitality management generally.
Working through this Course Before you can have a satisfaction of the mind that indeed you’ve completed the course, you ought to have read through all the study units contained therein, in addition, read the set books and read other materials provided by the University.
The National Open University of Nigeria (NOUN).
Each unit as has been said earlier on contains self assessment exercises, and at certain points in the course, you are supposed to submit assignments for assessment purpose, especially the TMA assignments.
At the end of the course there will be a final examination to test your master of the course.
Tutor-Marked Assignment There are Tutor-Marked Assignments in this course.
You are strongly advised to attempt and submit all assignments.
Each assignment counts towards your total course mark.
When you have completed each assignment, send it together with a TMA form to you tutor.
Make sure that each assignment you turn in reaches your tutor on or before the deadline given.
If for any genuine reason, you can not complete your work on time.
Contact your tutor before the assignment is due to discuss the possibility of an extension for you.
Extension will not be granted after the due date unless in exceptional circumstances backed up with good reasons.
Below are some salient points that could of help to you, while working through this course: 1) Reading the course guide thoroughly.
2) Organize a study schedule.
Note the time you are expected or should spend on each unit and how the assignments relate to the units.
3) Once you have created your own study fail is that they get behind with their course work.
ii  TSM 142 TOURISM AS AN INDUSTRY 4) Review the objectives for each study to confirm that you have achieved them.
If you feel unsure about any of the objectives, review the study material or consult your tutor.
5) After completing the last unit, review the course and prepare yourself for the final examination.
Conclusion Final Advise Organize how to manage your time.
Do every thing to stick to it.
The major reason a lot of students fail is that they take things for granted and procrastinate, only to be rushing unnecessarily towards exam period.
If you yet into difficulties with your schedule, do not waste time to let your tutor know before it will be too late to help you.
When you are confident and satisfied that you’ve achieved a unit’s objectives, you can then move on the next unit.
Proceed unit by unit through the course, pacing your studies and making the whole exercise easy for yourself.
Good luck as you enjoys your reading.
iii  TSM 142 TOURISM AS AN INDUSTRY Course Code TSM 103 Course Title Tourism as an Industry Course Developer/ Writer Dr. G. O Falade National Open University of Nigeria, Lagos Programme Leader Dr. G. O Falade National Open University of Nigeria Victoria Island, Lagos Course Co-ordinator Mr. M. A. Gana National Open University of Nigeria, Lagos NATIONAL OPEN UNIVERSITY OF NIGERIA iv  TSM 142 TOURISM AS AN INDUSTRY National Open University of Nigeria Headquarters 14/16 Ahmadu Bello Way Victoria Island Lagos Abuja office No.
5 Dar es Salaam Street, Off Aminu Kanu Crescent Wuse II, Abuja Nigeria e-mail: centralinfo@nou.edu.ng URL: www.nou.edu.ng Published by: National Open University of Nigeria 2008 First Printed 2006 ISBN: 978-058-433-1 All Rights Reserved v  TSM 142 TOURISM AS AN INDUSTRY CONTENTS PAGES Unit 1 Tourism System Demand Led ……………........ 1- 8 Unit 2 Supply Related Problems ……………………… 9 - 16 Unit 3 Constituents of Tourism and Tourism Organizations………………………………….. 17 - 26 Unit 4 Tourism Regulations…………………………... 27 - 46 Unit 5 Tourism Regulations……………………………47 - 57 vi  TSM 142 TOURISM AS AN INDUSTRY UNIT 1 TOURISM SYSTEM DEMAND LED CONTENTS 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objectives 3.0 Main Content 3.1 Concepts 3.1.1 People and Their Environment 3.1.2 Pull and Push 3.1.3 Demand Led System 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutor-Marked Assignment 7.0 References/Further Readings 1.0 INTRODUCTION By tourism system we make that conceptual approach which helps to 'identify the dynamic elements of tourism.
The boundaries of tourism are extremely flexible and can be confused with leisure and recreation activities.
This unit goes on to explain the tourism system in its totality.
It is touched on the demand led systems.
2.0 OBJECTIVES After reading this unit, you should be able to: link the historical changes in tourism concepts as well as touristic activity through the identification of Demand-led system and constraints; and Identify the role of the linkages and system of Demand-led system in terms of the tourist and the destination in the process of consumption of goods and services.
3.0 MAIN CONTENT 3.1 Concepts Tourism is being systematically viewed as a framework in which the theory and practice link up with each other to address the satisfaction of all those concerned with the functioning of the system.
The dynamic element of the Tourism system is its historical potential for development and resulting benefits.
However, the system operates with a global economic environment along with national priorities.
These are 1  TSM 142 TOURISM AS AN INDUSTRY often not understood in a common perspective.
The different perceptions can act as .constraints on the developmental potential of a destination.
Today, the tourism debate centre on the dynamic of the Tourism phenomenon where perceptions of the receivers are somewhat different to that of the tourists.
The consumers are not always sensitive to the host, nor are they of major importance to the host public placers say "the foreigners is' nobody's friend", or that "they are very free with our hospitality but very careful with their dollars" similarly, many a time tourists abuse symbols of local pride and standards of local services.
Tourists generally assume that they are being cheated because they know that bazaars run on bargaining.
Tourism system has a four-tier framework shown below: HISTORY CONCEPT PHENOMEON OF PRINCIPLIES, POTEMTIAL TOURISM Tier - 1 GEOGRAPHY DEMAND SYSTEM SUPPLY ATTRACTION INFRASTRUCTURE LINKING COMPONENT SUPERSTRUCTURE Tier - 2 TOURIST TRANSPORT PROPENSITIES COMMUNICATION CONSTRAINTS PROMOTION, INFORMATION BEHAVIOUR TRAVEL AGENT/OPERATORS MANAGEMENT Tier - 3 POLICY PLANNING EDUCATION MARKETING FINANCE IMPACTS ORGANISATION HOST TOURIST GOAL MAXIMISATION Tier - 3 ECONOMIC SOCIO-CULTURAL ENVIRONMENTAL SELF-ASSESSMENT EXERCISE 1 Explain the relationship between Tier 1 and Tier 1 and Tier 2 of the Tourism Framework in the diagram given to you.
2  TSM 142 TOURISM AS AN INDUSTRY How far does the phenomenon of tourism balance between exp the tourist and the resident population depends on the: Interaction between the support system of the resident and the tourist, and Perceptions of both groups regarding their right to have access to tourist oriented products as well as resident oriented products.
This means that the, tourism system must-estimate the carrying capacity so that slogans to promote destinations will not have to exclaim "Get there before it disappears.
The system therefore has to be "managed" so that everybody's expectations are capable of being realized.
How the system is managed will indicate the nature of the impacts of tourism on the industry, the host population, and the tourist.
The broader goals will be the economic, social and cultural changes that the managers of tourism (the state and the private sector) have envisaged along with the expectations of the residents of the area where tourism is actually located.
Time Work Leisure Tourism Implications Education, Training Time Work Survival Recreation Business Travel Leisure Tourism PLEASURE Work is understood to be necessity for survival just as recreation and leisure are necessary for coping with routine life.
Yet, time is finite and often institutionally determined or determined by the process of satisfying both private and public needs.
The location of tourism within this complex relationship is both a matter of social development and custom, which are then reflected in the working of the system.
3  TSM 142 TOURISM AS AN INDUSTRY 3.1.1 People and their Environment The following issues emerge within a Tourism system in relation to the people and their environment.
1.
Finite Resources both time and money determine opportunity and are generally not unlimited.
2.
Action the potential for discretion in the use of time and money exists and yet obligations act as constraints.
3.
Facilitation is an aid to discretionary action but within the possibilities offered by travel/journey components and support services.
4.
Results both pleasure and utility are desired in all life-world situations, including tourism.
Beneficiaries both host and guest, since the process of tourism demands the participation of both groups for its success even in the most controlled and contrived touristic sites and events.
Each of these issues creates problems which have to be resolved and taken care of.
3.1.2 Pull and Push The resolution of these problems is achieved through what are called the 'pull' and 'push' factors in the Tourism System.
TOURISM EXCHANGE SUPPLY DEMAND 1.
Carrying Capacity 1.
Freedom to travel 2.
Resources 2.
Information 3.
Technology 3.
Propensity 4.
Labour 4.
Constraints 5.
Capital 5.
Distribution Channel 6.
Policy 6.
Transport 7.
Security 4  TSM 142 TOURISM AS AN INDUSTRY PULL PUSH HOSTS GUESTS Government Intermediaries Employment Groups Business Individuals NGO's Special Interest Groups Presenters Receivers The tourism system influences governments, industry, business and even the households of common people.
That is why tourism is no longer ignored by policy makers or in the economic and social policy debates.
In this connection, it is important to understand the present global Tourism System.
In the last two decades, tourism has been contributing 6% of world output, one in' 15 jobs and 1% of capital investment.
The WTO (World Tourism Organization) asserts that tourism is at the leading edge of the service sector and that the future of the industry is bright.
It can double its contribution to world output, increase jobs by 33% and capital investment can jump by 80%.
The centres of gravity of tourism are also shifting from Europe to the Pacific Region which will account for more than 35% of travel by the year 2000 (as per WTO forecasts).
Tourism will continue to globalize, privatize and consolidate in the last decade of this century.
However, this decade has been declared of the "value decade", where: Input costs are rising Revenue are low due to competition, and Travelers are demanding value for money.
This means that loyalty for destination will be undermined by bargain hunting.
As quality goes down, the compatibility of tourism with human and physical environments is being questioned.
In fact then of the very values on which tourism have developed in the modern era, with world wide anti-tourism networks.
The success of any destination does not depend only on the richness of the tourist product, but on the effectiveness of the Tourism System 5  TSM 142 TOURISM AS AN INDUSTRY which determines the packaging and marketing of the product.
An example of this and approach is the creation of a new appeal.
Today, Golf Tourism is a prime draw for the world's highest spending travelers.
China; which is making a major bid for a premier position in World Tourism, has chosen golf as one of its major systematic interventions.
The Chinese-are planning 400 new golf courses in the next 15 years.
Thailand which had-no golf courses 15 years ago now has 50 of international standards.
India has a very old golfing tradition and many of its clubs are more than a hundred years old.
The system then introduces push factors that ensure that the problem of land use will be effectively resolved by employment and evaluating a job in tourism services as of more value than in self-employment in any traditional sector.
This evaluation in the name of progress and development has critiques as well as supporters.
SELF-ASSESSMENT EXERCISE 2 Explain the significance of 'pull' and 'push' to the growth and development of tourism.
3.1.3 Demand Led System Because demand for tourism can be postponed or can often remain at the level of wish fulfillments, the need and objectives of the tourists are often given exclusive Importance by policy makers.
One can say that product behaviour and use of resources, technology, labour and capital on the supply side are often utilized poorly.
When the environment for the tourism system is Demand led, tourism tend robe outward oriented, looking more to the satisfaction of the tourist rather than the resident.
An example to explain this is Indian tourism, which has by and large, ignored the 63.3 million domestic tourists.
This is because in the global framework of tourism success, what counts is the share of the world tourist market.
With Europe as her (India) historical priority therefore, in a demand led situation, she (the country of India) is concerned that Belgian tourists find it expensive to visit India because they have to fly via Paris.
In that circumstance, the absence of direct flight, to India is a constraint.
Hence the system demands that if tourism demand is to be satisfied, then our example on India must follow an "open skies" policy.
Still basing our example on India, the India tourist product, though rightly famed for its richness and remarkability, is found wanting in terms of infrastructural strength and diversity.
(This is very similar to Nigerian situation that is also very rich in resources but yet at the infancy of development) Since Third World destinations are seen as 6  TSM 142 TOURISM AS AN INDUSTRY destinations only, the standards of infrastructure and superstructure are evaluated in European terms.
Third World Governments also see Domestic Tourism as a subsidy oriented development and the growth of out bound tourism as an activity which must be kept in check.
Nigeria usually has more outband than inbound tourists, without mincing words, this is a failure as far as Nigeria's policy is concerned.
In fact all countries tend to see only the international perspective in tourism because of the foreign exchange component and marginalize all other aspects.
Factors that shape demand for tourism are therefore examined in the international context like: 1. Leisure time holidays, vacations, retirement’s age, shrinking work, weekend.
2.
Life cycle stage time and money available to finance tourism.
3.
Increase mobility cost and accessibility t air and automobile transport 4.
Work patterns flexibility of time.
5.
Affluence increased real incomes.
6.
Women in the work force 7.
Attitudes to marriage 8.
Increased amenities to simplify home chores 9.
Trend towards smaller families, higher education and higher life 'expectancy.
10.
Increasing urbanization and migration.
To encourage the full potential of these factors it is expected that destinations should: Promote market exchange rate (devaluation) and control inflation Re-orient the business cycle Relax visa controls, encourage tourism education and language skills Use technology (like air-conditioning) to counter climate.
Ensure safe health conditions and control pollution (international standards of hygiene), and Resolve political disputes to ensure stability so that tourists fee can be secured.
Many of these aspects undermine the integrity of nations and the security of the local people as many destinations are now reporting tourism related crimes.
Whereas suggestion for tourism police are forth coming, ways of controlling drug and sex abuse or disturbing the peace and offending local people by dress and behavioural attitudes has never been assessed as a constraint, nor are many measures suggested for redressal of tourist generated tensions.
The tourist is always seen as the victim and the residents as an aggressor.
7  TSM 142 TOURISM AS AN INDUSTRY At present, the hospitability model creates real benefits for the consumer without protecting the destination, which is really a non-renewable resource.
SELF-ASSESSMENT EXERCISE 3 Explain in 2 sentences how you think there can be a balance between a tourist visiting Nigeria from London.
4.0 CONCLUSION Going through this unit, you ought to have been able to link the historical changes in tourism concepts as well as touristic activity by identification of demand-led system as well as identify the role of the linkages as far as tourist destination is concerned.
The tourism system is, therefore, working out of the tourism phenomenon within, first, the constraint of a Demand Led system which is often problematic given the function of market forces especially in popular destinations of the world where demand is always on the increase as a result of the pulling effects.
ANSWER TO SELF-ASSESSMENT EXERCISE 3 1.
Interaction between the support system of the resident and the tourist (support systems are those products on ground to play host to the tourist at the destination).
2.
Perceptions of both groups regarding their right to have access to tourist oriented products as well as resident oriented products.
6.0 TUTOR-MARKED ASSIGNMENT Discuss certain issues that could emerge within a tourism system in relation to the people and their environment.
7.0 REFERENCES/FURTHER READINGS Lundberg, David (1990).
Tourist Business.
New York.
Falade, GO.
(2000).
Understanding Tourism in Nigeria.
JIS Printing Press Ibadan, Nigeria.
8  TSM 142 TOURISM AS AN INDUSTRY UNIT 2 SUPPLY RELATED PROBLEMS CONTENTS 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objectives 3.0 Main Content 3.1 Supply Related Problems 3.2 Tourism Impacts 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutor-Marked Assignment 7.0 References/Further Readings 1.0 INTRODUCTION This unit is a continuation of unit I that discusses the demand-led systems.
It continues explain the tourism system in its totality.
The models offered by different experts have also been dealt with.
Lastly, the unit gives a brief description of tourism impacts.
2.0 OBJECTIVES After reading this unit, you should be able to: critically examine the issues of Tourism Management in terms of the state, the entrepreneur, the tourist and the community; and understand the concept of tourism impacts.
3.0 MAIN CONTENT 3.1 Supply Related Problems The commercialization of culture removes the world of leisure from the world of work.
This removal and then concentration of leisure in vacation's amusements, games etc, creates the normless holiday environment.
(No rules, no codes, no behavioural codes future).
In such a situation, it becomes a very difficult problem to provide the facilities that the high spending tourist wants.
The foreign tourist who insists on European food, coffee and soft drinks with his meals, hot running water (36 gallons per person, per day), air conditioning, air services etc., will ignore a destination that does not provide these facilities within which the holiday activity has to be pursued.
Since the major economic, social, technological and cultural components of demand are located the metropolitan countries, it is not surprising-that tourism allover the world is created I their image.
However, the tourist is also a victim of the 9  TSM 142 TOURISM AS AN INDUSTRY sophisticated promotion of a tourist product by creating an image of the destination that creates a new kind of demand.
Tourism Image can be looked at as a: Personal process which helps us to determine what type of holiday to take, and Particular strategy of a tour operator or a travel agent.
This is what can be called destination "mythology" through which a tourist is ensured by unreal picture of a foreign destination.
The mythology is based on what may be med the "bliss formula’.
For example, Thomas Cook and Kuoni (tour operators) promoted Kenya and Gambia with almost identical use of the bliss formula: sun drencluded wast, exciting dense jungles and great rivers, pulsating tribal drums and dances, scenes from a Tarzan epic, sum bathing and exploring all from the comfort of a Western hotel.
There has been a change in the approach to understanding the nature of tourism in a more qualitative manner.
Today, there are many types of tourism who are neither ‘superficial in twists’ nor ‘modern pilgrim’.
Valene Smith has Created Seven Typologies: 1) Explorer few in number, looking for discovery and involvement 2) Elite individually created visits to exotic places 3) Off-beat -wanting to get away from the crowds 4) Unusual -seeking physical, danger or isolation 5) Incipient mass -single or small groups using some shade services 6) Mass package tour market desiring tourist enclaves.
7) Charter mass travel to destinations which have standardized western facilities.
The Host Feels the Impact of each of these Categories to a Different Degree Eric Cohen has created a typology based on the meaning tourism has for the tourist rather than the impact it has on the host, or the opportunity each type provides to the travel trade: 1) Recreational -to relieve the stress of works 2) Diversionary escape from boredom and routine 3) Experimental -a modem pilgrim looking for authenticity in other societies, because it has been lost in one's own society.
4) Experimental to experiment with alternative life styles 10  TSM 142 TOURISM AS AN INDUSTRY 5) Existential- finding a new spiritual centre as a result of a touristic experience.
These generalizations help us to clarify both what tourism does for us and how to judge what kind of tourism is acceptable to us.
There is enough evidence to suggest that the aspirations of Western tourists do not match the priorities of many Third World governments or the aspirations of the host people.
In order to maximize income these priorities can be: i) Creating mass tourism enclaves (for example.
beach resort in Goa), ii) Turning the trade to a small up-market component (incentive tours), iii) Encouraging mass tourism with maximum visitor host contact, iv) To have a mix of all the three models.
How we realize our priorities is however determined by powerful external factors, like the decision making process and competition.
Motivation (attitudes.
values.
needs) is one factor that influences decision-making.
Yet it is not a simple concept as there are four motivational categories: physical, cultural, personal status, and prestige Secondly, decision making is often not rational because information is never complete or is tailor made.
1) Desire- the initial period when a need to travel is felt.
2) Information books are collected: friends, travel agents are visited and cost/time/evaluation and alternative are weighed.
3) Decision -choice of destination, mode of transport, accommodation and activities 4) Preparation -tickets, bookings, money, documents, clothing and journey.
5) Satisfaction and Evaluation before, during and after the trip and likely influence future decisions.
It is very difficult for a destination developer to intervene in decision making except the first stage.
In case it is done, such an intervention is often at a very high cost.
Mar Third World countries do not have the means to enter the competition on equal terms.
In such a situation, the state intervenes to set the parameters of development and before or can 11  TSM 142 TOURISM AS AN INDUSTRY see the impact of policy a certain approach in the race for tourism is institutionalized Therefore all destinations do not have the same historical experience nor do they have the same role in global tourism development.
A simple time scale model will show l how the relationship between the industry, the host population and the tourist changes with development.
Time Phasing 1) Discovery when a new destination begins to attract attention 2) Local response when national entrepreneurs respond to new income generating opportunities or policies that direct investment to a particular field.
3) Institutionalization when the industry is taken over by large foreign companies.
This is the experience of Indonesia which is being promoted as a model for all Asia countries.
This view considers only inbound tourism as a policy success and outbound tourism as a failure tourism policy because it does not view outbound tourism as a income generating activity.
Experience however proves the opposite and there are several national entrepreneur who would like to capitalize on the outbound market, There is nothing to recommend the Maldivies experience, where luxury resorts came up in 40 small islands in the wake of a new airport which could handle wide-bodied aircraft.
There was a relatively minor involvement of the local people in this development.
Erik Cohen suggests that much depends on the history of tourism in a particular destination.
Where tourism grows originally and the industry begins in a small way it is likely t4 follow the three stage model on the other hand where tourism is introduced from the outside.
There is institutionalization in the begin going itself.
Here a reverse pattern develops with groups in the host country attempting to regain control to deinstitutionalize tourism.
Alternatively, Third World chains can emerge, like the Oberoi, which penetrate the global system from the peripheral supply elements.
The worldwide expectations fall into five categories: 1) Attractions natural man-made and cultural or ethnic 2) Transport easy access, particularly to world air routes 3) Accommodation – the commercial sector, the supplementary sector and the informal private sector 4) Support Services shops, banks, medical aid and other resident oriented products.
12  TSM 142 TOURISM AS AN INDUSTRY Infrastructure roads, railways, airports, electricity, sewage disposal and water is required to provide support services and facilities.
Even where these services are provided, would be tourists are attracted by low co safety, security and stability.
Therefore all destinations have to promote these posi1 elements.
However, about one-eighth of the total travel market is attracted by bud destinations even where the country adapts to market trends in providing the essential supply elements.
In recent years, there had been "visit --years" organized in several Asian countries, as a one time attempt to attract larger number of visitors.
Malaysia, which had a successful year, achieved it at a high cost by paying-off agents and operators around the world bring tourists to their country.
In the following year, numbers were down again; Malaysia is once again advertising a "Visit Malaysia Year" to raise the tourist arrivals.
You might wonder why a destination would go to such lengths to attract the international tourists and that brings us to the mythology of impacts.
3.2 Tourism Impacts The justification that tourism is economically good for a destination often ignores integrated nature of the system of underdevelopment.
There is a heated debate on pros and cons of tourism.
To look at economic development in isolation from developmental context is to accept the needs and values of the modem tourists as a universal justification.
All the studies which propagate tourisms, economic benefits, although sophisticated, do not address the fact that there are complex interactions, between tourism and other sectors of the economy.
For example, in most mod tourism projects there has always been a conflict of land use and environmental dam; through hotel construction, tourist pressure and waste disposal.
However, this can attributed to mismanagement of tourism rather than tourism itself.
Secondly, Third World countries do not estimate leakages on the tourism account correctly.
The outbound and inbound expenditures are correlated, without counting infrastructure and support costs or the import content of tourism services.
Today, with management contracts and franchises on the increase, the leakages are likely to greater.
With the increasing privatization, foreign companies will begin to operate within the country to siphon off a share of the local expenditure.
Add to this, the impact of devaluation and the recent debate between tour operators and hotels in Nigeria over the issue of dual tariffs is an example of this.
Hotels w charging a higher naira (Nigerian money) equivalent to foreign tourists which, however the standard dollar tariff.
13  TSM 142 TOURISM AS AN INDUSTRY Such a practise was considered unfair by the 11 operators and the tourists who represented to the government to abolish the dual tariff.
This problem remained to be solved in Nigeria up till now.
The social impact of tourism is equally complex.
Whilst the international understanding and goodwill ideology wants tourism to be promoted at any cost, social, effects are not exactly invisible.
Sex tourism, drug peddling and bride buy have become closely inter-linked, particularly in third world countries with some form to tourists.
Thailand, Nepal, Srilanka and India have clearly seen the negative impact of such tourists.
In certain cases, the curio trade had encouraged the vandalisation of architectural heritage and art objects.
This has happened despite the legal structure prohibiting such commerce.
Even trade in banned items like Rhinos and tiger claws and ivory (in Ivory Coast and Nigeria) have encouraged the continuation of paching.
However, many wildlife tourists are considered to be a preserving factor by the travel trade.
There is also the practice of illegal trade in hard currency.
Such activities turn a section of the local population into pimps, touts and black marketers.
Sometimes tourists may provide the market for such activities.
SELF-ASSESSMENT EXERCISE 1 What do you think the government can do to so1ve the problem arising from the Conf1ict of land use and environmental damage in tourism development?
Finally, there is 'the demonstration effect.
This is in terms of translating all codes a behaviour of tourists as "modem" or "progressive'.
Their dress and manners are adopted by those who are either in close contact with the tourist or young people who live in tourist destinations.
But, perhaps, the greatest impact is the cultural erosion that takes place in functional tradition that turns-into a pop tradition by transforming the content of a culture into its symbols or ethnic markers.
These are generally visual and relate to origin, names, architecture, landscape and people in their daily lives and in their rituals.
These ethic stereotypes are created by many travel agents through their brochures.
The process of marketing images of exotic places and people, the brochures draw upon a small set of ethic markers to provide a conceptual framework through which the tourist “learns” while abroad.
The ethnic reconstruction then becomes the index of authenticity and the 14  TSM 142 TOURISM AS AN INDUSTRY ethic stereotype becomes confirmed in the eye of the tourist because it is easily recognized.
Such ethnicity is touristic and is weakened by being exploited.
It is an expression of the very contradictory nature of international tourism on the one hand and, the common identification of the tourist culture which is understood as Western culture, on the other hand.
This leads to artificial or real preservation of local ethnic groups and attractions so that they may be consumed as touristic experiences.
For the people themselves, who have been transformed into "things", the change that has occurred now has economic and political implications.
Tourism policy makers, professionals and researchers have to take these implications into account for the systematic and healthy development of tourism.
SELF-ASSESSMENT EXERCISE 2 Mention 6 factors that shape the demand for tourism 4.0 CONCLUSION Now that you’ve gone through this unit, you should be able to critically examine the issues of tourism management in terms of the state, the entrepreneur, the tourist and the community and in addition understand the concepts of tourism impacts.
5.0 SUMMARY Alternative systems suggest that the values of the Tourism system beget its problems and therefore, tourism should not be demand led but supply led.
Tourism exchanges are often power exchanges and to invest control of tourism, ifs negative forms should be resisted.
This will lead to a healthy development of tourism, doing away with its mismanagement that leads to negative forms.
Others have called this approach as pseudo-change, Critics of planned tourism and tourism policy advocate a system that considered the problems of tourism impacts which should determine the constraints of tourism development.
Keywords Devaluation: - reducing a currency to a lower fixed value in.
relation to another currency.
15  TSM 142 TOURISM AS AN INDUSTRY Multiplier Effect: - more than proportionate increase in relation to investment.
ANSWER TO SELF-ASSESSMENT EXERCISE 2 1) Leisure Time: holidays, vacations, retirement age, shrinking work, weekend.
2) Life Cycle Stage: time and money available to finance tourism.
3) Increase Mobility: cost and accessibility to air and automobile transport.
4) Work Patterns: flexibility of time, 5) Affluence: increased real chores.
6) Increased amenities to simplify home chores 6.0 TUTOR-MARKED ASSIGNMENT Enumerate and explain the five points of Cohen mentioned in section 3.1. i.e.
meaning tourism has for the tourist.
7.0 REFERENCES/FURTHER READINGS Lundberg, David (1990).
Tourist Business.
New York.
Falade, G.O.
(2000).
Understanding Tourism in Nigeria.
JIS Printing Press Ibadan, Nigeria.
16  TSM 142 TOURISM AS AN INDUSTRY UNIT 3 CONSTITUENTS OF TOURISM AND TOURISM ORGANISATIONS CONTENTS 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objectives 3.0 Main Content 3.1 Tourism Industry 3.2 Constituents 3.2.1 Primary/Major Constituents 3.2.2 Secondary Constituents 3.3 Tourism Organisations 3.4 International Organisations 3.4.1 WTO (world Tourism Organisation) 3.4.2 Other Organisations 3.4.3 Government Organisations in Nigeria 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutor-Marked Assignment 7.0 References/Further Readings 1.0 INTRODUCTION The tourism of today is the outcome of the combined efforts of its various constituents.
There are possibilities of more constituents being attached in the future.
In fact, what we may define as Tourism Industry is a mix of the output and services of different industries and services.
- This unit begins with theoretical discussion on tourism being described as an industry.
It goes on to identify and list its various constituents.
However, their description is confined to a brief discussion as most of them have been independently discussed in individual units.
The unit also takes into account some of the important organizations that have emerged over the years in tourism at national as well as global levels: A first hand knowledge of these is a must for tourism professionals and researchers in the areas.
2.0 OBJECTIVES After reading this unit, you should be able to: understand why tourism is being called an industry; know about the various constituent of the Tourism Industry; learn about the Interdependence of Its various constituents; and familiarize yourself with various type of tourism organizations.
17  TSM 142 TOURISM AS AN INDUSTRY 3.0 MAIN CONTENT 3.1 Tourism Industry There have been debates, arguments and writings as to whether Tourism could be ascribed the status of an industry.
Yet, there is no doubt .that once tourism is mentioned as an industry a number of complexities -arise.
Scholars too have offered different views in this regard.
For example, Neil Leiper has attempted to sum up the debate in his article "Defining Tourism and related concepts: Tourist, market, Industry, tourism system" (VNR's Encyclopaedia of Hospitality and tourism, New York 1993): The views that have been taken into account are of A..J. Burkar, Kaiser and Hebber, Kaul and Leiper: 1) Bukart and others recognized Tourism Industry that is: Comprised of a broad range of business and organizations that are related to "Virtually all areas of economy.
and The components include all suppliers of goods and services; which the tourists require.
Hence, on the one hand, tourism industry comes up as a huge industry where as on the other "it also leads to perceptions of a highly fragmented industry", It is based on the assumption that "tourism" expenditures reflect the existence and scale of tourism industry" and does not take into account how certain "business are managed in relation to tourists or to one another".
2) Kaiser and other have advocated that there "is no such thing as tourism industry".
What happens is a collection of several industries that functions 3) Leiper has taken an intermediate position.
Accounting to him the “tourism industry comprises those organizations” that are in the business of providing goods and services to meet the distinctive need of some identifiable collection of tourists”, and "Cooperate with one another to some degree, in doing so".
This places some organizations like travel agents.
Tour operators, guides etc within the scope of tourism while leaving others aside.
This could be like the difference between a shop at an airport opened especially for travelers and the one in a city market that caters to anyone.
Without further going into the debate we may sum up for you that because of the economic impacts involved, profits, employment generation, earning of foreign exchange etc; more and more countries 18  TSM 142 TOURISM AS AN INDUSTRY are declaring tourism as an industry: adopting policies and making plans for it, forming regulations and giving incentives.
It is also worth mentioning here that in many developed countries.
tourism is now being referred to as a service rather than an industry.
This is so because these countries have reached a stage of perfection in terms of infrastructural development and the emphasis is on the consumption of services.
On the contrary, the developing countries like Nigeria are still struggling to create infrastructural facilities and a lot still need to be done.
Hence, tourism is an industry for us rather than just being a service.
3.2 Constituents The constituents of tourism industry are varied ranging from small scale business operating at local levels to multinationals.
For example, a fast food counter at an airport is a component of the Tourism Industry as IS an airline or a hotel, for it has its own serving purpose for the tourists.
Moreover, these different components arc closely linked to each other.
This linkage is there in spite of the competition within one set of constituents.
For example, Hotels A and X are competitors, but both are dependent on tourist arrivals through the airline.
And Airlines Y and Z are competitors and so on.
In fact, very often it's a chain of linkages and modem tourism is a result of the intermixing and combined effort of the various constituents.
Let us list for you the primary and secondary constituents that make the tourism industry.
3.2.1 Primary/Major Constituents Under this, we list the very essential constituents.
1) Transport Well, you need a mode of transport to travel or to suggest one to your client if you are a travel agent or a tour operator.
Further, the travel depends on the availability of seats etc.
today, the travel industry is a highly developed industry with its various branches in the areas of roads, rail, air and water.
2) Accommodation A tourist not only travels but also stays somewhere.
And here comes in accommodation.
It could be different types i.e.
from cottages of tourist lodges to a house, boat or a five star hotel.
19  TSM 142 TOURISM AS AN INDUSTRY 3) Catering, Food and Entertainment Well, a tourist has to eat also and here comes the role of catering and food.
Restaurants, fast food joints and ‘bukateria’ all play a role in this regard with different cousines to other, different forms of entertainments are provided as attractions at the destinations.
4) Intermediaries The intermediaries constitute the travel agency, tour operator and guide services.
The constituent which correlates all the components of tourism is the travel agent/tour operator who has accumulated knowledge, expertise and contacts with providers of services.
He is a useful and invaluable intermediary between the traveller and the supplier of tourist services i.e.
airlines, transport companies hotels and auto-rental.
The functions of the travel agency depend upon the scope of activities it is involved in and also the size and the location.
The agency has specialized departments each having to perform different functions such as: a) Providing travel information b) Preparation of itineraries c) Liaising with providers of services d) Planning and costing tours e) Ticketing.
f) Providing foreign currency g) Insurance etc.
Some of the travel agents are also tour operators who manufacture tourism products.
They plan, organize and sell tours.
They make all the necess'4ry arrangement e.g.
transports, accommodation, sight seeing, insurance, entertainment and other allied services and sell tour, mountain tour, adventure tour or a pilgrimage tour.
These tours are escorted and include transportation, meals, sight seeing, accommodation and guide services.
The escort or the group leader is responsible fat: maintaining the schedule of the tour and for looking after all the arrangements.
The guide service playa vital role in tourism as a tourist feels comfortable when the essence of the culture is explained- especially when it is done in his own language.
20  TSM 142 TOURISM AS AN INDUSTRY 5) Government Departments/Tourist Information Centres/ Tourist Organizations SELF-ASSESSMENT EXERCISE 1 Mentions the categories of tourism services that falls under intermediaries.
3.2.2 Secondary Constituents Today, there are a variety of services (formal and non forn1al) that constitute the tourism mix or directly and indirectly related to tourism.
For example, banks don't come under the tourism industry, but they cater to tourist through traveller’s cheques or credit cards.
Similarly, insurance companies offer short-term safety or accident policies to tourists.
Here is the list of such certain constituents.
i.
Shops and Emporiums: - These sell various products to tourists.
Many State governments have opened the emporiums in other state also.
ii.
Handicrafts and Souvenir: - certain handcraft and souvenirs industry today are totally dependent on tourists for their sales.
iii.
Local Taxi/Transportation (e.g.
Kabukabu, buses etc) iv.
Hawkers v. Communication Services: at the destination (e.g.
NITEL book) vi.
Touts and Brokers vii.
Advertisement Agencies 1) Publishing Industry; i.e.
publisher who publish travel guides, brochure magazines, postcards etc.
2) Artists, performers, musicians etc.
who perform for the entertainment of tourists.
In the United Nation study on "The economic impact of tourism in India".
The segments having receipts from tourism employment due to tourism, are mentioned as: 1) Hotels and restaurants 2) Railway transport services 3) Transport services 4) Shopping 5) Food and beverages 6) Wool, silks, syn.
Fibre textiles 7) Wood and wood products except furniture 8) Leather and leather products, 9) Mental products except machinery and transport equipment 21  TSM 142 TOURISM AS AN INDUSTRY 10) Music manufacture industries Trade 11) Trade 12) Other services 3.3 Tourism Organizations Over the years, a number of organizations have emerged in tourism.
They have played vital role in tourist policy formation, planning, promotion, infrastructure and resort development, protecting the rights of tourists, negotiation, etc.
factors like importance of tourism in generating foreign exchange, employment prospects; national interest and accordingly influenced their growth and functions.
These organizations exist in public sector as well as private sector and at different: level i.e.
global, National, State and Local.
For example, World tourism organization Nigerian Tourism Development Corporation, African Travel Association etc.
a recent addition has been of some NGO's devoting full time to; issues concerning tourism the NCF (National Conservation Foundation), Lekki; Lagos.
Different segments oft] industry also have their own organizations to defend and promote their rights like t] Travel Agents Association or tourist Guides Association.
SELF-ASSESSMENT EXERCISE 2 Enumerate and explain some factors that promote tourism as analyzed under 3.3 above.
3.4 International Organization/Private Sector World international tourism organizations have been formed which represent government as well as the private sector.
It is difficult to discuss every such organization, hence we mention about a few ones here.
3.4.1 WTO World Tourism organization (founded 1975) is an intergovernmental body.
It is a successor to the International Union of official Travel Organization (IUTO) which existed from 1947 to 1975. as a 'United Nations, specialized agency, the WTO's membership comprises 113 of the World's Governments and over 170 affiliate members (International and Regional tourism organizations) from the travel and tourism industry.
WTO Headquarters are at rid Spain) and, it’s three 'functions’ are: 22  TSM 142 TOURISM AS AN INDUSTRY WTO secretariat (permanent office at Madrid) General Assembly (meets every two years) Executive council (meets twice a year) The fundamental aim of the organization shall be: “the promotion and development of tourism with a view to contributing to economic development, international understanding, peace, prosperity and universal respect for, and observance of, human rights and fundamental freedoms for all without distinction of sex, language or religion.
The organization shall take all appropriate action to attain this objective.
In pursuing this aim, the organization shall pay particular attention to the interests of the developing countries in the field of tourism".
WTO's Activities Included: i.
Technical Cooperation As an executing agency of the United Nations Development Programme (UNDP), WTO provides assistance to governments on a wide range of tourism issues.
frqxp sustainable tourism development, investment need and technology transfer to marketing and promotion.
Over 600 projects have been fielded since 1980. ii.
Education and Training Education and training is one of the major building blocks on the travel and tourism industry.
WTO offers a variety of programmes, including "distance learning", courses, which have been organized with Purdue University and Sorbone.
Other projects include the establishment of training centres and publication pf a .Directory Tourism Education and Training Institutions.
iii.
Environment and Planning The goal of sustainable tourism development underlies WTO's work in environment and planning.
Activities include participation in forums on tourism and the environment, such as the Rio Earth Summit and the Globe Seminars in Canada.
WTO has also developed a global programme of clear beaches for tourism, based on the European community's Blue flag Programme.
Several publications, including three joint reports with the United Nations Environment programme, provide vital input on tourism planning in resorts, communities and national parks.
23  TSM 142 TOURISM AS AN INDUSTRY iv.
Facilitation and Liberalisation WTO works towards the removal of barriers to tourism.
Activities in this area include promotion of improved access to tourism for the handicapped, research on computer reservations systems, involvement with the General Agreement on Trade and Tariffs (GATT) process, assistance on health and safety issues.
v. Marketing and Promotion WTO continuously monitors and analyses travel and tourism trends in over 165 countries, which provide invaluable data for strategic planning and marketing.
Equally important has been the 1991 WTO Ottawa conference on Touri5 which established global definitions of tourism.
In this way, a substantial base was created, the uniform measurement of tourism flows.
vi.
Publications WTO also has a number of publications.
They are: Year book of tourism statistics Compendium of tourism statistics (annual) Travel and Tourism barometer (quarterly) Directory of Tourism educations and training Institutions.
An integrated approach to resort development, Guidelines: development of National Parks and protected area for tourism.
Tourism carrying capacity Sustainable Tourism Development: Guide for local planners, and World tourism forecasts to the year 2000 and beyond.
SELF-ASSESSMENT EXERCISE 3 Mention and explain 3 of WTO activities 3.4.2 Other Organizations Besides, WTO, there are a number of organizations at the international level give brief details about some of them.
i. IATA The International Air Transport Association (IATA), is a non governmental (and membership consists of practically all air carriers.
The active members in international operations whereas the Associate membership consists of domestic airlines.
IATA aims: 24  TSM 142 TOURISM AS AN INDUSTRY At encouraging the development of reliable, regular and economic air t the benefit of travellers.
To foster air commerce and study the problems their in, and To research the problems and issues related to the industry Founded in 1945, the activities of IATA have increased over the years services and roles include: Setting rates on global routes agreeable to member airlines, Planning of time tables for international flights, Standardizing and coordination of certain services like baggage checks reservations etc.
In addition, IATA also provides statistical data on international air travel and acts as a clearing house for ticket coupons.
ii.
UFTAA Universal Federation of Travel Agents Association was founded in 1966.
Its members are national organizations and regional organizations.
It aims representing the travel agency industry and travel agents at different forums and negotiates on their behalf.
4.0 CONCLUSION Different authorities / scholars define tourism as an industry differently.
In this unit, arguments with regard to tourism as an industry were discussed; primary and secondary constituents were explained as well as tourism organisations as they relate to economic activities of a nation.
However, the focus should be on the services it provides.
5.0 SUMMARY In this unit, you learnt about: Tourism as an industry, Various constituents of the tourism industry, and Tourism organisation.
25  TSM 142 TOURISM AS AN INDUSTRY ANSWER TO SELF-ASSESSMENT EXERCISE 1 Bukarts View: - Comprised of a broad range of business and organizations that are related to "Virtually all areas of economy.” The components include all suppliers of goods and services which the tourists require.
Leiper’s View:- The business of providing goods and services to meet the distinctive needs of some identifiable collection of tourists.
Cooperate with one another to some degree in doing so.
6.0 TUTOR-MARKED ASSIGNMENT Mention 5 out of secondary constituents of tourism and explain the usefulness /significance of each of them.
7.0 REFERENCES/FURTHER READINGS Lundberg.
David (1990).
Tourist Business.
New York.
Falade.
G.O.
(2000).
Understanding Tourism in Nigeria.
JIS Printing Press Ibadan, Nigeria.
26  TSM 142 TOURISM AS AN INDUSTRY UNIT 4 TOURISM REGULATIONS CONTENTS 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objectives 3.0 Main Content 3.1 Inbound Outbound Travel Regulations 3.1.1 Passport and Visa Requirement 3.1.2 The Visa System 3.1.3 Entry Permit 3.2 Economic and Health Regulations 3.3 Requirements for Obtaining Machine Readable Passport (MRP) 3.4 Environmental Protection and Conservation 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutor-Marked Assignment 7.0 References/Further Readings 1.0 INTRODUCTION It is an essential requirement on the part of tourism professional to obtain and master tourism comprehensive information on the regulations that affect tourism both directly and indirectly.
Also important is the passing of this information on to the itinerant tourists.
This will help to annul their misfounded fear regarding Nigeria as a prospective destination.
In addition this will enable them to know about and respect the regulations during their stay in Nigeria.
In this unit our aims is to provide you with important information in this in this regard.
2.0 OBJECTIVES A tourism professional it is imperative on you to know all those legal and quasi-legal regulations that concern the tourist trade this country.
The objectives of this unit are to give you all important information that relates to the: inbound outbound travelers; economic regulations concerning such travelers; health regulations of the travelers; law and other regulations in place in the country; and regulations concerning environmental protection in force in the country.
27  TSM 142 TOURISM AS AN INDUSTRY 3.0 MAIN CONTENT 3.1 Inbound Outbound Travel Regulations A Traveller who is also a tourist is governed by the laws and regulations in force in the country which he visits.
As tourism professional, there fore, it is of vital concern to you are well versed in such regulatory controls that will affect your prospective clients.
It.-is only then that you will be able to provide them with all the necessary information As tourism professional dealing with outbound tourists, it is important also for you to obtain information about regions which your clients are intending to visit (i.e.
if you are, travel agent).
3.1.1 Passport and Visa Requirements It is extremely important for all the visitors (except from' ECOWAS countries) from above to posses a valid passport issued by their respective countries before they enter Nigeria.
There ate kinds of visas as listed below, available to foreign nationals.
Entry visa, Tourist visa Business visa The outbound travellers will seek visas from the embassies/consulates of respective countries they intend to visit.
Most of these officers are located either in Nigeria's new capital which is Abuja or in Lagos the former capital.
3.1.2 The Visa System 1) The Visa System is designed for the purpose of assisting the Immigration Authorities in the proper administration of the regulations regarding the entry of Aliens into Nigeria.
For this purpose Nigerian Consular officers and Foreign Service and British Passport Officers who are acting on behalf of the Government of the Federal Nigeria can conveniently be described as out posts of the Immigration Authorities.
The System is also of advantage to Aliens in that the refusal of a visa would deter, from undertaking a journey, those who may not be satisfy the Immigration requirements and spare them the inconvenience of being refused permission to land.
2) The grant of a visa is no guarantee that the recipients will be allowed to land country for which it is issued.
The visa is issued 28  TSM 142 TOURISM AS AN INDUSTRY subjects to compliance Immigration Laws on arrival and the final authority in regard to the permission to land rests with the Immigration Officer at the port of arrival.
3) To achieve successfully the objects of the visa system it is necessary when with applications for visa that: (a) The visa instructions contained in the summary of visa regulations should carefully complied with as well in the spirit as in the letter; (b) Cases should be subject to a careful examination so that the full facts to the intended journey can be ascertained (in this connection] interview is often of primary importance since during it, an applicant may admit facts which he has purposely omitted from his written application; (c) All cares in which doubt exists should be referred to the Dir Immigration with the full facts as to why the case is referred; (d) No exceptions to any of the Regulations should be made without reference to the Director of Immigration.
Entry Visa Application 4.
All applicants for visa are required to complete a visa application form (Imm.
22) and submit it to the Immigration Officer-in- charge of the visa section to get their valid passports, 3 passport - size photograph and the appropriate visa fee.
5.
The visa application form shall be submitted in triplicate in respect of applications requiring references.
6.
All applications for return visa for Nigeria are required to be supported b from the employers of such Aliens certifying that the applicants are returning to their employment and that the employer accepts immigration responsibility applicants repatriation from Nigeria under the provisions of the Immigration Act and Regulations.
(Sec.33(2) Imm.
Act (Sec.
(14a) Imm.
Reg 7.
Where an applicant resides in an area outside the jurisdiction of the visa office, the application shall be referred to the Director of Immigration for clearance.
8.
Applications will only be accepted from persons who are actually in Nigeria at the time of application.
There have been instance of 29  TSM 142 TOURISM AS AN INDUSTRY friends submitting applications for return visas on behalf of persons outside Nigeria.
This sort of thing is not permitted and persons outside Nigeria must make application to the Director of Immigration, Lagos, through the appropriate representatives abroad.
9) All applications received shall be checked against the Suspect Index and passed to the Senior Immigration Officer for instructions together with the details of the Suspect Index and in the case of person resident outside the visa issuing area shall include the reply from the Director of Immigration.
SELF-ASSESSMENT EXERCISE 1 Explain purpose of Visa system to: a) Nigerian Government b) Aliens Visas for Common Wealth and Dominion Countries 1.
The following Independent Commonwealth Countries are representatives of these countries: United Kingdom and Dependant Territories....... High Commissioner for the United Kingdom.
P.M.B 2I36.
Kajola House.
62 64 Campbell St. Lagos.
Australia... … … … … … High Commissioner for Australia, Investment House, 21 25 Broad St. Lagos.
Canada... … … … … … High Commissioner for Canada, New Niger House, 4th Floor Tinubu St. Lagos.
Ghana... … … … … … High Commissioner for Ghana, 21 23 King George Road, Lagos.
30  TSM 142 TOURISM AS AN INDUSTRY India... … … … … … High Commissioner for India, 107 Awolowo Road, Ikoyi -Lagos.
Gambia... … … … … … High Commissioner for Gambia, 162 Awolowo Road Ikoyi – Lagos.
Kenya... … … … … … High Commissioner for Kenya.
53 Queen's Drive, Ikoyi-.
Lagos.
Malaysia... … … … … … High Commissioner for Malaysia, Kofo Abayomi St., Anifowoshe St. Victoria Island, Lagos.
Zambia… … … … … … High Commissioner for Zambia, 11 Keffi St. S. W. Ikoyi Lagos.
Sierra Leone… … … … … … High Commissioner for Sierra Leone 192 Awolowo Road, P. M. B.
2854 Lagos.
Trinidad and Tobago…… … … … … High Commissioner for Trinidad and Tobago, Plot 825, 192 Awolowo Road, P,M.B.2854 Victoria Island, Lagos.
1.
Application in respect of other independent Commonwealth countries Republic of South African will continue to be dealt with by the Director of Immigration, Lagos in accordance with the instructions contained in the summary Regulations.
31  TSM 142 TOURISM AS AN INDUSTRY Reference of Applications 2.
Applications referred to the Director of Immigration should be submitted in duplicate together with a covering letter containing the following information: (a) Reasons for the case being referred (b) Whether or not there is any local objection.
(c) Passport particulars and Immigration Status in Nigeria.
When an application has been referred, the visa should not be granted until a reply authorizing the visa has been received.
The Visa 3.
A Valid Visa as Defined by the Immigration Act Means: “An impress or endorsement by any means on a travel document, purporting to be by or on behalf of the Government of Nigeria subject to compliance with any requirements prescribed by the Immigration Authorities at a port of entry and v. specified time and for the number of journeys states therein”.
It is a stamped impression on an Alien's Passport, travel document or occasionally other documents and with inked insertions usually containing the following: (a) Serial Number (b) Place of issue (c) Type of Visa (d) Territory for which valid (e) Period of validity (f) Endorsements and/or reference number of that authority (g) Signature of issuing officer (h) Date It may also be literally described as an authority given by the Government of a country or her representative to a foreigner (Alien) for the purpose of allowing such person to enter the country.
Types of Visa 4.
(i) Ordinary Visas: (a) Transit Visa to enable an Alien to pass through Nigeria enroute to a further destination; (b) Single Journey Visa a visa valid for a single entry into Nigeria; 32  TSM 142 TOURISM AS AN INDUSTRY (c) Multiple Journey Visa (A visa valid for any number of Journeys stated to and from Nigeria for a period of validity not exceeding twelve months).
(ii) Diplomatic Visa: Issued only to Head of Mission no fee charged and is granted only by Nigeria Missions abroad.
(iii) Gratis Courtesy Visa: No fees charged.
Issued to persons who do not qualify for diplomatic visa but who are foreign Government official travelling on official business.
It may be granted in cases where it is considered undesirable to accede to an application for a Diplomatic Visa, but where it is desirable on grounds of international courtesy to facilitate a journey.
5.
It must be emphasized that gratis courtesy visa, as opposed to diplomatic visa; should be dealt with in accordance with the standing visa instructions.
Endorsements 6.
The period of the validity, of the visa, both in the matter to time or the number of journeys must not be confused with the period of the Aliens permission stay in the country to which he is travelling.
7.
When a visa is issued after reference, it should be endorsed with any endorsement included in the letter or telegram of authority.
Visa for Two or More Persons Travelling on the Same Passport 8.
In the case of a passport held by a man in which are included the particulars of his life wife and/or minor children under the age of sixteen years of age or by a woman in which are included the particulars of her minor children under the age of sixteen years, only one visa should be affixed and one fee charged.
The visa should be marked "Accompanied by Wife" or "Accompanied Children" (giving Christian Names) or: "Holder only" as the case may be.
9.
Where occasionally children over sixteen years of age are included in a parent's passport, a separate visa should be affixed and a separate for levied for each such child.
33  TSM 142 TOURISM AS AN INDUSTRY 10.
If the passport includes the particulars of a servant or other persons not members of the family, a separate passport must be produced and an endorsement made on the family passport that the person in question is not included in the visa authority.
Man and Wife Man and Minor 16 One Visa Man and Child over 16 Two Visas Wife and minor 16 One fee Wife and Child over 16 Two fees.
11.
When an Alien whose passport has less than twelve months on run is entitled to a yearly visa, it is not generally necessary to reduce the length of the visa in consequence.
Should a new passport be subsequently obtained, the yearly visa be transferred to the new passport for the unexpired period without pay me further fee.
Both the old and new passports should be produced and the cancelled on the expired one.
Iron Curtain Nationals and Stateless Persons: 12.
All applications for visas by Iron Curtain Nationals (see para.
26) and Stat persons must be referred to the Director of Immigration.
13.
No visas are required by holders of valid United Nations Laissez- Pass travelling on official business covering not more than three months.
Visa Application Outside Nigeria 14.
Visas outside Nigeria are issued by Nigerian Embassies, Missions and Consulates abroad, and in any country where there is no Nigerian representative by Br Embassies, Missions and Consulates in accordance with the instructions contained in paragraphs 25 to 30 of this chapter.
15.
Transit visa may be issued without references to all aliens (with the exception those listed in paragraph 26 for the purpose of passing through Nigeria provided that: (a) They are in possession of onward tickets for a destination beyond Nigeria; (b) Their entry into a country beyond Nigeria is assured.
In cases of nationals of countries listed in paragraph 26 they may be granted transit visa for 48 hours only without reference.
When transit visa is granted without references 2 copies of the visa application forms should be immediately despatched to the Director of Immigration.
34  TSM 142 TOURISM AS AN INDUSTRY Short Visit Visa 16.
Visa endorsec S/105 C may be issued without reference, for a period of 90 day, subject to local security clearance to all aliens with the exception of nationals of following countries: Albania, Bulgaria, the Chinese Peoples Republic, U.S.S.R., Czechoslovakia, , German Democratic Republic, Yugoslavia, Hungary, Israel, Poland, Rumania, United Arab Republic, North Korea and Vietnam or Stateless Persons.
Provided that: (a) The applicant is a bona-tide businessman or tourist and not a person seeking employment or intending to take up employment in Nigeria; (b) The applicant is a regular resident of the country in which he is applying for a Visa; (c) That his intended stay in Nigeria will not exceed a total of 90 days, (if he is likely to-exceed this period the application must be referred): (d) That he is in possession of a return or onward transportation ticket from Nigeria and adequate funds for his maintenance in Nigeria: (e) In all such cases, a copy of the visa application form must be forwarded to the Director of Immigration by airmail together with a minute of the action taken.
17.
In addition to the above, Gratis Visas maybe granted irrespective of nationality for a period not exceeding 90 days as follows: (a) Applications from Diplomats, their particulars must, however, be sent by Cablegram to the Director of Immigration and the special branch (Telegraphic Address "Placid Lagos".
); (b) Applications from members of Government of Foreign countries: applicants in this category will be required to satisfy the visa office that they arc going to Nigeria at the invitation of one of the Federal or State Ministries in connection with official business.
Visa should be issued Gratis; 35  TSM 142 TOURISM AS AN INDUSTRY (c) United Nations Officer travelling on official business.
Visas should be endorsed S/l 05/C and 2 copies of the visa application should be forwarded to the Director of Immigration, in the case of persons listed in paragraph 26, the particulars must in addition be sent by Cablegram to the Director of Immigration and to the Special Branch.
18.
Visas may be issued to Diplomats and Consular Officers duly accredited to Nigeria without any stipulation as to time limit.
19.
All other applications including applications by Stateless Aliens must be referred to: The Director of Immigration, Private Mail Bag 12532.
Lagos, Nigeria Telegraphic Address (MIGRATION LAGOS).
All other cases must be referred and authority from Lagos obtained before a visa is given.
Applications not Immediately Granted 20.
Whenever a visa is not ranted at the time of application the "Visa applied for" stamp should be affixed to the passport or other travel documents of the applicant.
(i) While under no circumstances should a passport be stamped “Visa for Nigeria (or otherwise as the case may be) refused” it is important that at the same time as an application for a visa which is not immediately granted is made, the passport should be endorsed “Visa for ……… (Country) applied for on ………………… (Date)”.
(ii) Failure to affix the "Visa applied for" stamp to the passport of an applicant who visa application has been refused, referred or withdrawn in the knowledge that would have to be refused may embarrass another control and lead to their granting visa to an applicant whose original application may subsequently be refused by the Director of Immigration (or corresponding authority elsewhere).
If the visa subsequently granted it should be placed immediately under the "Visa applied for stamp.
If the application is withdrawn, the stamp should be cancelled with the words "Application withdrawn".
36  TSM 142 TOURISM AS AN INDUSTRY 21.
Where the "Visa applied for "stamp has not been cancelled or a visa subsequent issued, it is safe to assume that the application has been refused or referred and the circumstances of the case should be ascertained from the previous control.
This may be done by telegram at the applicant's expenses.
22.
If, however, the visa issuing officer is satisfied that there has not been a refusal or a reference and the case is otherwise satisfactory the visa may be granted notwithstanding that the "Visa applied for" stamp is not followed by a visa cancellation.
SELF-ASSESSMENT EXERCISE 2 Explain the kinds of Visas you've read about in this section.
Record Book 23.
A manuscript record book of the visas issues shall be maintained and shall contain the following information: 1.
Visa number 2.
Nationality of person to whom visa issued 3.
Place and date of issue of passport.
4.
Number of passport and date of expiry, 5.
Name of person to whom visa is issued; 6.
Type of visa issued 7.
Country for which visa is issued 8.
Fee charges 9.
Receipt No Fees 24.
The visa fee is levied at the standard rate except where the Alien’s Government charges Nigerian citizens a different fee, when reciprocity, according to the Nationality is practised.
Fees are accounted for by the issue of official treasury receipts, the amount of the fees charged being inserted together with the receipts number underneath the visa in the passport.
A cash showing receipts will be maintained and all visa fees received paid to the Treasury under the appropriate Revenue Head and Sub-head.
Visa Returns 25.
A monthly return will be submitted to the Director of Immigration of all visas for Nigeria under following headings: 37  TSM 142 TOURISM AS AN INDUSTRY 1.
Entry Visas 2.
Re-entry Visas 3.
Transit Visas 4.
Multiple Visas A separate return regarding visas issued for and on behalf of Commonwealth countries shall be rendered monthly.
26.
A return of revenue collected shall be submitted monthly to the Director of Immigration.
Visa Abolition Agreement 27.
Governments of two or more countries may agree to abolish the application of visa system between their nationals.
Where doubt arises instructions should be sought for in the summary of Visa Regulations.
3.1.3 Entry Permit 1.
A valid entry permit is defined in the same words as a valid visa according to the Immigration Act except that whilst visa relates to aliens, entry permit relates to Commonwealth Citizens.
Entry Permit System 2.
The Entry Permit Systems is designed to assist the Immigration Authorities in the proper administration of the' Regulation concerning the entry or admission of Commonwealth Citizens into Nigeria.
For this purpose, Nigerian Consular Officers in Nigeria Missions and Embassies abroad and If British Passport Officers who are acting on behalf of the Government of the Federation of Nigeria cap conveniently be described as outposts of Immigration Authorities.
3.
The system is of immense advantage to Commonwealth Citizens desirous of travelling to Nigeria in that refusal of an entry Permit would deter, from undertaking a journey, those who may not be able to satisfy the immigration requirements and spare them the inconvenience of embarrassment of being refused permission to land.
4.
The grant of an entry permit is, however, no guarantee that the recipient will be allowed to land in the country for which it is issued.
The entry permit is issued subject to compliance with the Immigration Laws on arrival and the final authority in regard to 38  TSM 142 TOURISM AS AN INDUSTRY the grant of permission to land rests with the Immigration officer at the port of arrival.
5.
To achieve successfully the objects of the entry permit system, it is necessary when dealing with applications for entry permit that: (a) The entry permit instructions contained in the summary of entry permit regulations should be carefully complied with as well in the spirit as letter; (b) Cases should be subject to a careful examination so that the full facts re to the intended journey can be ascertained (in this connection interview is often of primary importance since during it, an applicant may admit facts which he has purposely omitted from his written application (c) All cases in which doubt exists should be referred to the Director Immigration with the full facts as to why the case is referred.
(d) No exceptions to any of the Regulations should be made without reference to the Director of Immigration.
Entry Permit Applications: 6.
All applicants for entry permit are required to complete an entry permit application form (IMM.
22A) and submit to the Immigration Officer-in-charge of the Permit Section together with valid passports and three passport size photographs.
7.
The Entry Permit application form shall be submitted in triplicate in respect entry permit applications requiring reference.
Re-Entry Permit for Nigeria 8.
All applications for re-entry permit for Nigeria are required to be SUPPOI letters from the employers of such Commonwealth Citizens certifying tI applicants are returning to their employment and that the employer f immigration responsibility for the applicant's repatriation from Nigeria un provisions of the Immigration Act and Regulations, endorsed with any endorsement included in he letter or cablegram or telegram of authority.
Entry Permits for Two or More Persons Travelling on the Same Passport 9.
In the case of a passport held by a man in which are included the particular: wife and or minor children under the age of sixteen years of age or by a woman in which are included particulars of 39  TSM 142 TOURISM AS AN INDUSTRY her minor children under the age of sixteen years only one entry permit should be affixed.
The entry permit should be) "Accompanied by wife" or Accompanied by children" (giving Christi names) or "Holder only" as the case may be.
10.
Where, occasionally, children over sixteen years of age are included in a passport, a separate entry permit should be affixed for each such child.
11.
If the passport includes the particulars of a servant or other persons not men the family, a separate passport must be produced and an endorsement mad, family passport that the person in question is not included in the entry permit authority.
Transfer of Entry Permits 12.
When a Common wealth citizen whose passport has less than twelve months to run is entitled to a yearly entry permit, it is not generally necessary to reduce the length of the entry permit in consequence.
Should a new passport be subsequently obtained, the yearly entry permit may be transferred to the new passport for the unexpired period.
Both old and new passports should be produced and the entry permit cancelled on the expired one.
13.
No entry permits are required by holders of valid United Nations Laissez-Passer if travelling on official business and wish to enter Nigeria for period: of not more than three months.
Entry Permit Application Outside Nigeria 14.
Entry Permits outside Nigeria are issued by Nigeria Embassies, Missions and Consulates abroad, in accordance with the instructions contained in paragraph 21 to 30 of this chapter.
Short Visit Entry Permits 15.
Entry Permits endorsed "CW/YEARSERIAL NUMBER" may be issued to all Commonwealth Citizens without reference to the Director for a period of 90 days, subjects to local security clearance, provided that: (a) That applicant is a bona-fide businessman or tourist and not a person seeking employment not intending to take up employment in Nigeria; 40  TSM 142 TOURISM AS AN INDUSTRY (b) The applicant is regular resident of the country in which he is applying for Entry Permit; (c) That his intended stay in Nigeria will not exceed a total of 90 days.
(if he is likely to exceed this period the application must be referred); (d) That he is in possession of a return or onward transportation ticket from Nigeria and adequate funds for his maintenance in Nigeria; (e) In all such cases a copy of the Entry Permit application form must be forwarded to the Director of Immigration by airmail together with a minute of the action taken.
16.
Entry Permits may be issued to Diplomats and Consular Officers duly accredited to Nigeria without any stipulation as to time limit.
Applications not Immediately Granted 17.
Whenever an entry permit is not granted, at the time of application the "Entry Permit Applied for" stamp should be affixed to the passport or other travel documents of the applicant.
18.
While under no circumstances should a passport be stamped “Entry permit for Nigeria (or otherwise as the case may be) refused” it is important that at the same time as an application for an entry which is not immediately granted is made, the passport should be endorsed "Entry Permit for…………….
(country) applied for on ………………..(date)2.
Failure to affix the "Entry Permit applied for" stamp to the passport of an applicant whose entry permit application has been refused, referred or withdrawn in the knowledge that it would have to be refused may embarrass another control and lead to their granting an entry permit to an applicant whose original application may subsequently be refused by the Director of Immigration (or corresponding authority elsewhere).
19.
If the entry permit is subsequently granted it should be placed immediately under the "Entry Permit applied for" stamp.
If the application is withdrawn the stamp should be cancelled with the words" Application withdrawn".
20.
Where the "Entry permit applied for" stamp has not been cancelled or an entry permit subsequently issued, it is safe to assume that the application has been refused or referred and the 41  TSM 142 TOURISM AS AN INDUSTRY circumstances of the case should be ascertained from the previous control.
This may be done by telegram at the applicant's expense.
21.
If, however, the entry permit issuing officer is satisfied that there has not been a refusal or a reference, and the case is otherwise satisfactory the entry permit may be granted notwithstanding that the "Entry Permit applied for" stamp is not followed by an entry permit or cancellation.
Record Book 22.
A manuscript record book of the entry permits issued shall be maintained and shall contain the following information: 1.
Entry Permit number 2.
Nationality of person to whom entry permit issued 3.
Place and date of issue of passport 4.
Number of passport and date of Expiry 5.
Name of person to whom entry permit is issued.
6.
Type of entry permit issued.
7.
Country for which entry permit issued.
Fees 23.
No fees are charged.
Entry Permit Returns 24.
A monthly return will be submitted to the Director of Immigration of all entry permits issued for Nigeria under the following headings: 1.
Entry Permits 2.
Re-entry Permits 3.
Transit Entry Permits 4.
Multiple journey permits A separate return regarding entry permit issued for and on behalf of Common wealth countries shall be rendered monthly.
SELF-ASSESSMENT EXERCISE 3 Mention the kinds of information that is usually contained in a manuscript record book of the entry permits.
42  TSM 142 TOURISM AS AN INDUSTRY 3.2 Economic and Health Regulations Economic The Nigerian Immigration rules and regulation allows a minimum of US $500.0 to be carried (or in hand) for outbound travellers for an individual that has business visa, the amount allowed can be more than $500.000' for tourists/students,U$500 is allowed.
Health Any Nigerian travelling outside the country is expected to be vaccinated and have what is referred to as "yellow card".
The yellow card is prove of sound health or immunization against certain diseases that may prohibit the carrier from entering some countries of the world.
3.3 Requirements for Obtaining Machine Readable Passport (MRP) Checklist Fresh Application for MRP (Standard Format) Applicant 1 A Birth Certificate/Sworn Affidavit or Age Declaration 2 Marriage Certificate or Sworn Affidavit of Marriage (in case of Married women) 3 A letter of Consent from any parents in case of a child under 17 years of age 4 A letter of Consent from the husband, in case of married women 5 A letter of Indigeneship from your home Local Government Area or State Liaison 6 A letter of Residency in the FCT from the Chairman of the FCT: Areas Council where you reside.
Or 7 A letter of Introduction from your 'Head' of Department if you are a worker, working and residing in the FCT our your parents' place of work.
8 Two current passports --sized photographs of the Applicant Evidence of payment of a fee of N 5, 100:00 in Bank Draft from UBA -Garki Branch A completed Guarantor's Form B21 in case of Adults.
(Gotten from the Immigration Authorities): Lastly, if an when all the above have been produced, you will be given application form and a file will be opened for you.
43  TSM 142 TOURISM AS AN INDUSTRY A.
Application for Re-Issue (MRP Standard) Applicant 1 As in A3 and 4 above, plus letter of request for re-issue from the applicant or his sponsor.
2 photocopy of Relevant pages of the passport to ere-issue an submission of the Passport to be re- issued together with the Application form 3.
A current passport-sized photography of the applicant 4 N5, l00:00 Applicant fee in Bank Draft from V.B.A Garki Branch.
3.4 Environmental Protection and Conservation There is a close, inseparable relationship between environment and tourism.
The Collins Gem English Dictionary (New) describes environment as "external conditions and surroundings in which people, animals or plants live" Tourism is an activity (in whatever form) carried out on the planet earth anywhere around the globe, so it makes use of the environment and all that are therein.
The majority of the tourist attractions are provided by the physical environment (both nature and manmade).
The state of environment quality in any area is of paramount importance to tourism activities.
A very neat, beautiful environment is already an attraction and an aesthetic appeal to tourists.
The state of environmental protection, care and conservation had been appauling in several of our cities in the past.
As a result of this, the government, during one of the military regimes had to introduce compulsory environmental sanitation day the aim was to set aside, few hours of a Saturday morning for general cleaning.
I was to create awareness and instill the spirit of cleanliness in every individual.
The need for a healthy environment can not be over emphasized.
Government Proposed Strategies 1.
All tourism development should be properly located and designed according to principles set forth in the National Tourism Development Master Plan, and the guidelines of the relevant town planning and tourism development agencies of the government.
2.
All tourist facilities including hotels, restaurants and resorts should apply proper sewage and solid waste disposal techniques.
44  TSM 142 TOURISM AS AN INDUSTRY 3.
The uncontrolled exploitation of land (saw milling, mining and explosive etc) that exists in the tourism zones must be stopped.
4.
Awareness campaign on sound utilization of forest and wildife resources for socio-economic development with due regard to conservation objectives should be the practice.
5.
All the historic and traditional sites must be conserved and developed with visitor facilities.
6.
Measures are to be taken to control all environmental health problems.
7.
In appropriate cultivation and grazing practices should be stopped to avoid soil erosion and environmental degradation.
8.
In addition to using sound environmental planning principles, the formalized techniques of environmental impact assessment (EIA) and environmental management must be applied.
9.
Appropriate horticultural practice should be undertaken in all designated tourism Development zones.
SELF-ASSESSMENT EXERCISE 4 A student friend has approached you to give him some information concerning Nigerian economic and health regulation for a student travelling to London for summer vacation Advise him.
4.0 CONCLUSION Going through this unit, you're learnt about inbound-outbound travellers, economic regulations concerning such travellers, health regulation, law and other regulations.
5.0 SUMMARY All countries of the world has rules and regulations that guide movement of people that goes out or comes into such a country and particularly visitors/tourist as it is concerned in this case.
It is very necessary for an individual or group tourist to find out necessary and relevant information about any destination before travelling there to guard against embarrassment.
45  TSM 142 TOURISM AS AN INDUSTRY 6.0 TUTOR-MARKED ASSIGNMENT Enumerate 10 requirements for a Fresh application for a Machine Readable Passport (MPR).
7.0 REFERENCES/FURTHER READINGS Lundberg, David (1990).
Tourist Business.
New York Falade, G. O.
(2000).
Understanding Tourism in Nigeria.
JIS Printing Press Ibadan, Nigeria.
46  TSM 142 TOURISM AS AN INDUSTRY UNIT 5 TOURISM REGULATIONS CONTENTS 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objectives 3.0 Main Content 3.1 Statistics: Definition and Uses 3.2 Statistical Measures 3.3 Need for Tourism Statistics 3.3.1 Understanding the Perspectives 3.3.2 Development and Planning 3.3.3 Evolving Marketing Strategies 3.3.4 Facilitating Investment Decisions 3.4 Problems of Measurement 3.5 Methods of Measurement 3.6 World Tourism Arrivals and Receipts 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutor-Marked Assignment 7.0 References/Further Readings 1.0 INTRODUCTION Tourism statistics are gathered and published by every country today.
The WTO further collects it from all countries to make global appraisal and projections.
Certain basic information is made available to us via these statistics which relate to different fields.
At their face value some of it may appear to be useless or unnecessary.
However, in reality they are relevant in many ways.
This Unit, after defining statistics and measurements, highlights the need for tourism statistics.
It also introduces you to the type of statistics collected and its relevance to tourism industry.
You can use them in relation to your enterprise or job.
This can be done at macro as well as at micro levels.
2.0 OBJECTIVES After reading this Unit you will be able to: define statistics and statistical measurements; appreciate the need for tourism statistics; and know about the problems of statistical measurement in relation to tourism statistics and the methods of measurement.
47  TSM 142 TOURISM AS AN INDUSTRY 3.1 Statistics: Definition and Uses The word 'statistics' is used both as singular and plural nouns.
In the plural sense, it refers to numerical facts pertaining to a body of objects or people.
As a singular noun, it stands for the science that deals with the methods of collection of data and of the ways of analyzing them and drawing inferences.
Statistics is a useful tool for the measurement of any quantitative phenomenon.
One such tool is finding of averages.
For example, one can measure the average height for students in a class or the average number of visitors to a monument per day, the average number of guests arriving at a hotel per day or the average turnover of a souvenir shop at a tourist place.
In the foregoing illustrations all the students in a class, all the visitors to a monument, all the guests arriving at a hotel or the turnovers for every day are called the population in statistical studies.
However, statistics cannot be used for the measurement of qualitative phenomenon like the colour of a person or the taste of oranges.
3.2 Statistical Measures The most commonly used statistical measures for assessment and comparisons are: Totals confidence intervals Averages Indices.
Quartiles and fractiles rate and ratios Variances and deviations coefficients, and Point estimates multipliers The totals refer to the count of all the units or the aggregate of all the values of the units in the population or the sample.
For example, the number of tourists who visited a particular place during a year and the total expenditure incurred by them at the place of visit are ‘totals’.
The aggregate of all the units in a system or region is called the population and a part of it is called a sample.
This list of all the visitors to a particular monument in a day constitutes a population and a few of the tourists selected for a survey on the same day make a sample.
An average is the most representative value of a sample of units or the population most commonly used averages are arithmetic mean, median, mode, geometric and harmonic mean and are known as measures of central tendency.
48  TSM 142 TOURISM AS AN INDUSTRY The arithmetic mean is the value per unit.
It is obtained by dividing the 'total value’ by the total number of units.
The average duration of stay of tourists at a particular place, average expenditure per tourist, etc., are best measured by using arithmetic mean.
Median is the middle most value if all the units are arranged in ascending or descending order.
It is useful for the measurement of average room tariff and occupancy'ra1 hotel rooms.
Mode is the most frequently occurring value amongst all the values.
While planning certain facilities like conference halls, river rafting equipments etc., it is important to judge the most common size or the groups demanding such facilities.
The mode value is thus a very useful measure in such cases.
Geometric Mean is the nth root of the product of all the values of observations in a study.
Harmonic mean is the reciprocal of the arithmetic mean of the reciprocals of the observed values.
Quartiles and Fractiles are the values of the variables corresponding to one- fourth and one-tenth of the cumulative frequencies after arranging the values in, ascending or descending order.
The Variance and Deviations are known as measures of dispersion.
They provide valuable information on the reliability of averages and other estimates.
The common measures of dispersion are ranges, quartile, deviation, mean deviation and coefficient variation: Range is the difference between the largest and the smallest value assumed by a variable.
It is often used in tourism sector to indicate the variation in hotel tariff, expenditure levels and duration of stay of tourists, Quartile Deviation is one-half of the difference between first and third quartiles Mean deviation about median is the arithmetic mean of the absolute values deviations of observations from median, and Variance is the sum of square.
); of deviation of the observed values ratio of standard deviation to the arithmetic mean is the coefficient of variation.
Standard Deviation is the square root of variance.
The percentage ratio of standard deviations to the arithmetic mean is the coefficient of variation.
Point Estimates are the likely values of a population parameter obtained from a sample of observations.
For example, the average 49  TSM 142 TOURISM AS AN INDUSTRY expenditure per tourist in a place is normally obtained as a point estimate by surveying a sample of tourists.
Confidence Intervals are the intervals in which the value of a population parameter is expected to lie with a specified level of confidence or probability.
These are also obtained from a sample of observations as in the case of point estimates.
Indices are dimensionless quantities used to measure changes over a period of time and geographical regions.
The indices normally being used are price indices, growth indices, seasonally indices etc.
Tourist price indices are often worked out to measure the changes in prices as applicable to tourists.
Growth indices are used to measure the past trends in tourist traffic, receipts etc.
Seasonality indices of tourists arrivals are used to formulate marketing strategies and resource management decisions.
Rates indicate value per unit item or growth per unit time.
The rates of growth are often expressed in percentage terms.
Ratios are fractions expressed usually in percentages.
Coefficients are also dimensionless quantities used to measure certain phenomenon or relationship.
For example, correlation coefficient is used to measure the degree of linear relationship between two or more variable and regression coefficients are used to predict the value of one variable based on the values of other variables.
Multipliers are certain numbers used to obtain total impact or value by multiplying the estimated direct impactor sample value respectively.
SELF-ASSESSMENT EXERCISE 1 What do you understand by statistics?
3.3 Need for Tourism Statistics Tourism is a social phenomenon with significant economic consequences.
The measurement of its volume and distribution along with its impact on specific geographic areas is, therefore, important for: having a proper perspective of the tourism sector, and planning its future development The specific objectives of having tourism statistics are to: 50  TSM 142 TOURISM AS AN INDUSTRY Provide a proper perspective for the activity to guide policy decisions.
Provide an objective basis for development planning Provide quantitative information for evolving marketing strategies.
and Facilitate investment decisions.
3.3.1 Understanding the Perspectives In order to have a proper perspective of tourism in relation to any particular destination or region, it is necessary to evaluate its magnitude and significance.
While the magnitude is measured in terms of volume of tourist traffic, its significance is evaluated in terms of tourism receipts, value added tax revenue employment, etc.
The basic measurement of volume is 'tourist visits' or 'tourist arrivals'.
It is the total number of tourist arrivals at the given destination over a period of time usually whole year.
The second main volume statistics is the average length of stay which is measure terms of days or nights at the destination.
It provides a general indication of the nature tourist traffic and the demand for tourist accommodation.
The best single overall indication of the magnitude of tourist traffic to any destination is the total tourist days or nights.
It is obtained by multiplying the tourist arrival figure with the average length of stay.
The value of tourism to an economy is mainly reflected in the tourist expenditure at destination or the tourism receipt.
It encompasses expenditure on a wide variety items, ranging from the purchase of consumer goods and services inherent in travel stays to the purchase of small durable goods for personal use as well as souvenirs gifts for family and friends.
In the case of international tourists, the payments made in respect of journeys to, from the destination normally do not accrue to the destination.
They are therefore included in the statistics of tourism receipts.
However, fare payments by foreign visitor to national carriers for international transport represent income to the country visited.
They are, therefore, evaluated separately and included in the tourism receipts.
The tourist expenditure in the case of domestic tourists includes the cost of travel and from destinations as well as expenditure at the place of visit.
It is, thus, the total amount spend by tourists while away from 51  TSM 142 TOURISM AS AN INDUSTRY home including advance payments on S1 items as fares and accommodation.
The average expenditure per tourist or per day is obtained by dividing the total tourist expenditure by the number of arrivals or the number of tourist days.
While global estimates of tourist expenditure provide a general indication of the value of tourism to economy, the averages provide general indications of the type and quality of the tra1 to a destination.
The statistics of value added, tax revenue and employment due to tourism are obtained through industry surveys.
The difference between the total value of output at ex-factory price and the value of material inputs is termed as value added.
It is the sum total of factor payments in the form of rent, wages and salaries, interest and profit.
The indirect taxes accruing to the Government from tourists and tourism related industries and other tourism related industries constitute direct employment due to tourism.
The employment generated in other sectors of the economy due to the multiplier effect of tourism is termed as indirect employment.
3.3.2 Development and Planning The planning for the development of tourism infrastructure involves an objective assessment of the existing demand or various tourism products and their levels of supply.
It is also necessary to make realistic forecasts of both demand and supply based on past trends and policy guidelines.
The demand can be either actual or potential.
The demand which has already fructified into tourist visits is the actual demand and that which is yet to be fructified is potential demand.
The demand statistics, particularly tourist arrivals and tourist nights, have to be complied by type of accommodation, means of transport, places visited and facilities availed to estimate the demand on specific .tourism products.
Potential demand is usually assessed in terms of travel plans of target populations, positive response rates to advertisements, levels of awareness etc.
through market surveys at the source markets.
The most important consideration in the planning of tourism projects in specific locations is the capacity to absorb tourism.
It is assessed through various methods like tangible resource limits, tolerance by host population, satisfaction of visitors, excessive rate of growth or change, cost-benefit analysis and systems approach.
The application of any of these methods for the measurement of carrying capacity requires massive data on tourist consumption patterns, resource constraints, changes in the behavioural patterns of local population, satisfaction 52  TSM 142 TOURISM AS AN INDUSTRY levels of visitors etc.
Such data are usually gathered through special surveys of both the host community and the visitors.
3.3.3 Evolving Marketing Strategies Tourism marketing is a follow-up of planning and development to maximise the economic gains from tourism.
The identification of marketing segments, product positioning and evolving of effective communication and marketing strategies are the essential elements of a marketing plan.
The preparation of such marketing plans involve the collection and analysis of large volumes of data on various aspects including global trends, market segments, tourist profiles, destination features, strengths and weaknesses of the product etc.
The global trends on international tourism are usually obtained from the publications of international agencies like World Tourism Organization, Pacific Asia Travel Association etc., and those of the originating countries.
The trends on domestic tourism are obtained through tourist surveys or periodical statistical reporting systems.
The market segmentation analysis involves the segmentation of total volume of tourist visits and nights by country/place of origin, purpose of visit and psychographic groups.
The formations of psychographic groups are based on their demographic profiles and behavioural patterns.
The statistical variable usually being analyzed in this regard include demographic particulars like age, sex, education, occupation, nationality, country/place of residence, ethnic origin; personal habits like taking package tours, participation in sports and games etc; and travel habits like taking package tours.
travelling with family and friends, accommodation and means of transport used, participation in local events, travel planning and motivations.
The destination features in terms of attraction and facilities available and types of tourisms visiting along with the strengths and weaknesses of tourism products offered by a destination or country also need to be assessed for directing product development and marketing policies.
3.3.4 Facilitating Investment Decisions Investment in any industry, including tourism, is always based on 'perception' of return on investment and pay back periods.
The calculation of these parameters with a reasonable degree of accuracy requires statistical data on profitability of-existing units, occupancy rates, industry profiles etc.
These statistics are usually collected through surveys of existing units.
53  TSM 142 TOURISM AS AN INDUSTRY 3.4 Problems of Measurement The measurement of tourism phenomenon poses several problems.
The identification of tourist from other travellers and the local population is a major task in the case of both international and domestic tourists.
The problem is more severe in respect of domestic tourist as there are no border controls and administrative checks in their movements.
International and domestic tourists are usually differentiated with the help of travel documents like passports; Visas and embarkation/disembarkation cards.
These documents are, however; not designed for the sole purpose of collecting tourism statistics and as such their use is often restricted by other agencies and definitional problems.
Very often, cooperation of tourists is required to gather statistics through surveys.
The reliability of such measurements thus depends on the responses given by the tourists.
A major problem in the measurement of economic impact of tourism is that the industry itself is not well defined.
The tourism industry consists of several segments which cater to both tourists and the local population.
It is also invariably not possible to make definite allocations between the two groups of consumers.
Special statistical programmes are therefore required to resolve, these problems, of identification and allocation.
3.5 Methods of Measurement The statistical measurements of tourist flows and their impact are generally obtained by surveying the visitors or the tourism production units at one or more of the following places: Place of visit or destination Points of travel between the destination and the origin The usual place of residence.
The different kinds of surveys/studies that can be carried out in each of the above places are the following: i) Surveys/Studies at Destination Counting by controlling the visitors at tourist sites.
Surveys of visitors at tourist sites Census and registration of accommodation units Survey of tourism production units.
54  TSM 142 TOURISM AS AN INDUSTRY ii) Surveys at Points of Travel (Between the Destination and the Origin) counting by administrative controls at the entry points survey of passengers at the entry points survey of passengers at some points along their journey iii) Survey at the Usual Place of Residence Household surveys of residents in the country Survey of companies, public administration units and institutions.
Survey of tourism intermediaries like travel agents, tour operators, air taxi operators, tourist transport operators etc.
The choice of anyone or a combination of the above methods for the estimation of volume of tourism has to be based on the ultimate use of such estimate, operational convenience, levels of accuracy desired and resources available.
However, the methods generally used are enumeration and surveys of visitors at the entry points, surveyor census of accommodation units and household surveys of residents.
The first method consists of counting the visitors from travel documents like embarkation/disembarkation cards at the entry points.
It is widely used in the case of international tourists.
The surveys of tourists at the entry points at the time of their departure are useful for obtaining profiles and behavioural patterns of international tourists apart from obtaining the total count of such visitors.
Surveys or census of accommodation units are also often being employed for obtaining estimates of number of visitors and duration of stay' of both international and domestic tourists at various places of visit.
The household surveys are particularly useful for assessing the volume and distribution of domestic tourism, though they are often costly and time consuming.
Tourist expenditure statistics are obtained either by surveying the tourists or indirectly from the accounts of hotels, restaurants and other providers of tourism services.
The receipts from foreign tourists can also be estimated from the records of banks on foreign currency exchanges.
3.6 World Tourist Arrivals and Receipts Systematic measurement of tourist traffic is a recent phenomenon.
It began only towards the beginning of twentieth century when the volume of international tourist traffic began to reach significant proportions.
The measurements were, thus, confined only to international visitors.
The countries which emerged as tourist destination and started, estimating 55  TSM 142 TOURISM AS AN INDUSTRY the traffic in the beginning of the century were Austria, Switzerland and Italy.
The foreign visitors received by these countries during 1929 were estimated to be 2, 15 and 1.25 million respectively.
The global .estimates of tourist arrivals and receipts are, however, available only from 1950.
The total arrivals during that year were about 25.28 million who spent US $2.1 billion.
There has been a phenomenal growth in tourist traffic since then and the year 1992 recorded a total of 476 million world arrivals with an estimated receipt of US $ 2.1 billion; According to WTO's latest figures the historic half billion mark was achieved in 1993.
SELF-ASSESSMENT EXERCISE 2 Which of the following statements are right or wrong?
Mark or i.
Tourism receipts statistics include payments made in respect of journey to and from the destination by international tourists.
ii.
Average expenditure is obtained by multiplying total expenditure by number of arrivals.
iii.
Multiplier effect of tourism is called indirect employment iv.
Tourist surveys are done to know the trends in domestic tourism.
4.0 CONCLUSION Now that you’ve gone through this unit, you should be able to define statistical measurement and appreciate the need for tourism statistics.
5.0 SUMMARY This unit has familiarized you with the relevance of statistics and measurements in tourism It has bearings on future plans, destination development, indirect employment etc.
It also acquainted you with the most commonly used statistical measures Problems faced in measuring tourism statistics were also touched upon in the unit to give you an idea of the limitations faced in this regard.
Key Words Accrue: To come naturally Dispersion: Scattering Encompass: to bring within the fold' Fractions: Parts of a whole Fructify: Bear results 56  TSM 142 TOURISM AS AN INDUSTRY Harmonic: Quantities which are in arithmetical progression Magnitude: Amount, Parameter: Measurable feature Perspective: View from a particular point Regression: Background movement Variable: That can be adapted SELF-ASSESSMENT EXERCISE 3 Mention the ten (10) most commonly used statistical measures for assessment and comparisons.
6.0 TUTOR-MARKED ASSIGNMENT Enumerate the different kinds of survey that can be carried out concerning a visitor/tourist at: 1) Place of visit or destination.
2) Points of travel between the destination and the origin 3) The usual place of residence ANSWER TO SELF-ASSESSMENT EXERCISE 3 1) Totals 2) Averages 3) Quartiles and fractiles 4) Variances and deviations 5) Point estimates 6) Confidence intervals 7) Indices 8) Rate and ratios 9) Coefficients 10) Multipliers 7.0 REFERENCES/FURTHER READINGS Lundberg, David (1990).
Tourism Business.
New York.
Falade, G.O.
(2000).
Understanding Tourism in Nigeria.
JIS Printing Press Ibadan, Nigeria.
57
