 NATIONAL OPEN UNIVERSITY OF NIGERIA SCHOOL OF SCIENCE AND TECHNOLOGY COURSE CODE: AEM 201: COURSE TITLE: PRINCIPLES OF AGRICULTURAL EXTENSION.AEM 201: PRINCIPLES OF AGRICULTURAL EXTENSION.
COURSE DEVELOPER : PROF. J. O. OKUNLOLA DEPT.
ARIC.
ECONOMICS & EXTENSION, FUT AKURE, NIGERIA COURSE EDITOR : DR G.M, OLUJIDE UNIVERSITY OF IBADAN, NIGERIA PROGRAMME LERDER : DR. N.E.
MUNDI SCHOOL OF SCIENCE & TECHNOLOGY NOUN LAGOS COURSE COORDINATOR : MR. SAMUEL AWOLUMATE SCHOOL OF SCIENCE & TECHNOLOGY NOUN LAGOS, NIGERIA.
NATIONAL OPEN UNIVERSITY  INTRODUCTION: Agricultural Extension is very important in dissemination of Introduction on innovation or new technologies to the clientele.
It is important to improve farmer’s method of production and enhance farm output.
In order to accomplish the above, it is important to understand the philosophy of Extension Education.
This deals with the foundation upon which extension activities are based.
It is the propelling forces that determine why certain actions are taken; it is related to nature of human life and guides behaviour.
The basic philosophy is to help farmers to help themselves in the identification and finding solution to the problems on his farm and home.
Principles of agricultural extension involve the factors that guide the activities of Agricultural Extension and how decisions are taken.
The principles propel extension activities and programmes which are planned to motivate the farmers to adopt the introduced technologies.
This involves understanding of the scope of agricultural extension itself, so that there could be deep understanding of the roles expected from all those who are involved in extension activities.
THE COURSE This course guide tells you briefly what to expect from reading this material.
The study of principles of Agricultural extension is not only of academic importance, but it is the basis of our understanding and appreciation of the principles that guides information dissemination to the clienteles.
Studying principles of Agricultural is line studying agricultural productions in its entirety.
This is because adoption of new technology involves a lot of socio-psychological process.
There are different stages of adoption, however, all hinges on the method and techniques utilized in introducing the innovations to the farmers.
The course started with the understanding of meaning of extension.
This is because adequate knowledge of the meaning of agricultural extension helps to understand what principles of Agricultural extension entails.
The scope and objectives of Agricultural extension are also discussed.
This is to provide the required understanding of limitations of agricultural extension process.
In Nigeria, funding of agricultural extension is basically from the various tiers of government.
The country still operates a Public extension system, therefore government plays significant role in agricultural extension.
The various roles of government in providing the required technical and economic services to the farmers.
It also emphasized conditions that are required for the development of effective agricultural extension services.
The course emphasize the importance of the principles of starting where the people are, why the clientele should determine their own problems and find desirable solution to the problems.
The principle of interest and need was also discussed and while mutual trust and respect are key factors in Agricultural extension.
Agricultural extension work is voluntary and local leaders are also involved.
This is to enahance local participation in decision making and sustains the technology that is being utilized.
Extension also involves working with the whole family as all the members are critical to effective agricultural production.
The use of subject matter specialist and various teaching methods cannot be underscored in extension work.
This is to help farmers in solving their production problems and effective understanding of what they are learning.
The course discussed the characteristics of extension agents and their roles.
The extension agents are the key personnel in extension work.
It is therefore important to have a deep understanding of their roles and requirements for such position.
Extension work requires effective communication work.
The elements of Agricultural extension communication determine the teaching methods to be used and approaches to extension work.
The ultimate is to have effective and extension programme for increased level of farmers production.
COURSE AIMS The aim of this course is very simple.
The course aims to provide an understanding and appreciation of principles of Agricultural Extension in propelling effective agricultural extension process.
COURSE OBJECTIVES In addition to the aims above, this course set to achieve some objectives.
After going through this course you should be able to: Understand the meaning of Agricultural Extension and the role of government in Agricultural Extension.
Distinguished between Agricultural Extension and formal education.
Understand the principles of agricultural extension as it relates to operational modalities of extension.
Define and know the roles of Extension agents in agricultural extension work.
Know the communication principles and its relationship with Agricultural extension work.
WORKING THROUGH THE COURSE The course requires that you spend quality time to read the content.
The content of this material is comprehensive and requires you spending good time to study it.
This accounts for the great effort put into its development in the attempt to make it very readable and comprehensible.
Nevertheless, the effort required of you is still tendentious.
I would advice that you avail yourself the opportunity to attending the tutorial session where you would have the opportunity of comparing knowledge with your peers.
THE COURSE MATERIAL You will be provided with the following materials.
Course guide Study Units In addition, the course comes with a list of recommended textbooks which thouh are not compulsory for you to acquire or indeed read, are necessary as supplements to the course materials.
STUDY UNITS The following are the study units/modules contained in this course: Module 1: The meaning of Agricultural Extension.
Module 2: The principles of Agricultural Extension (Part 1 – 3) Module 3: The Extension agent and Rural Community comprising of 5 Units Module 4: Communication principles and stages.
The first module consists of 5 units.
This involves the meaning of extension.
It furthers discuss the scope of Agricultural extension and the need for Agricultural extension in overall agricultural development in Nigeria.
The second module introduces the principles of Agricultural Extension.
The five units in the module discussed twelve extension principles.
The first principles discussed the need to start extension work at the level where the farmers are.
In module 3, the concept of extension agent and rural community was introduced.
In the unit, you will learn about the extension agents and rural community what rural community entails and their characteristics.
The issue of development of rural communities in Nigeria was also discussed.
In module 4, you will be exposed to communication principles and stages.
It contains elements of Agricultural Extension communication and group approach to extension communication.
You will also learn that contribution of communities’ methods is the best in extension work and that the communities also utilize oral media method of communication.
TEXT BOOKS The following textbooks are recommended for further reading: (cid:1) Rolling N (1997) Extension Role in Sustainable Agricultural Development in Improving Agricultural Extension.
A reference Manual FAO Rome.
(cid:1) William SKT, Fenlay T. M. and Williams C.C: A manual for Agricultural Extension Workers in Nigeria.
Les.
Shyraden Press, Ibadan Nigeria.
(cid:1) World Bank 1990: Agricultural Extension: The next step.
Washington D. C. (cid:1) De wilde J. C. : Tropical Africa.
John Hopkins Univeristy Press.
(cid:1) Food and Agricultural Organisation: Improving Agricultural Extension – A refrence Manual.
Rome.
(cid:1) Olayide S. O., Ogunfowora D: Essay S, Idaahaba F. (1985): Elements of Rural Economics.
Scot Allan & Co Essex.
England.
ASSESSMENT There are two components of assessment for this course.
The Tutor Marked Assignment (TMA) and the end of course examination.
TUTOR MARKED ASSIGNMENT The TMA is the continous assessment component of your course.
It accounts for 30% of the total score.
You will be given 4 TMA’s to answer.
Three of these must be answered before you are allowed to sit for the end of course examination.
The TMA’s should be given to you by your facilitator and returned after you have done the assignment.
END OF COURSE EXAMINATION The examination concludes the assessment for the course.
It constitutes 70% of the whole course you will be informed of the time for the examination.
It may or not coincide with the University semester examination.
SUMMARY This course intends to provide you with some underlying knowledge of principles of Agricultural extension.
By the time you complete studying this course, you will be able to answer the following type of questions: (cid:2) What is Agricultural extension and the function of agricultural extension.
(cid:2) Distinguish between formal education and agricultural extension.
(cid:2) What are the principles of agricultural extension?
(cid:2) What are the characteristics of extension agent?
(cid:2) How are communication principles related to the principles of agricultural extension.
(cid:2) What are the elements of agricultural extension communication?
(cid:2) Why do we need to study extension principles for effective extension work.
I wish you success in this course.
In particular I hope you will be able to appreciate the importance of agricultural extension and its principles in effective agricultural extension work.
I hope you will enjoy this course.
Best wishes.
TABLE OF CONTENTS Module I Introduction Unit 1: The Meaning of Extension Unit 2: Scope and objectives of Agricultural Extension Unit 3: The need for Agricultural Extension and Role of Government Unit 4: Agricultural Extension and Formal Education Unit 5: Goal and Functions of Agricultural Extension Module 2: The Principle of Agricultural Extension Unit 1: Philosophy of Agricultural Extension Unit 2: Principles of Agricultural Extension (PART 1) Unit 3: Principles of Agricultural Extension (PART 2) Unit 4: Principles of Agricultural Extension (PART 3) Unit 5: Principles of Extension and Research Extension Farmers Linkage Module 3: The Extension Agent and Rural Community Unit 1: Definition of Extension Agent/Characteristics of Extension Agent Unit 2: The Role of Extension Agent Unit 3: Rural Community and Characteristics Unit 4: Components of Rural Community Unit 5: Development of Rural Communities IN Nigeria Module 4: Communication Principles and Stages Unit 1: The concepts of Extension Communication Unit 2: Elements of Agricultural Extension Communication Unit 3: Principle of variety of teaching methods Unit 4: Group Approach in Extension Communication Unit 5: Mass Method and Oral Media Utilization in Agricultural Extension MODULE Unit 1:The Meaning of Agricultural Extension Table of Contents 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objectives 3.1 Definition of Agricultural Extension 3.2 Nature of Agricultural Extension 3.3 Types of Audience 3.4 Importance of Agricultural Extension 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutor Marked Assignment (TMA) 7.0 Reference and Further Readings 1.0 Introduction This unit is very important as it provides the foundation and general understanding of the course as whole.
The Unit will make you to be aware of the various definitions of Agricultural Extension, nature of agricultural extension and types of audience.
It is also important to you because it will help you to understand the subsequent units.
2.0 Objectives At the end of the unit, you should be able to: (1).
define agricultural extension (2).
Identify carefully the nature of agricultural extension (3).
State briefly the purpose of agricultural extension 3.1 Definition of Agricultural Extension What comes to your mind when the word agricultural extension is mentioned?
When you check up the word “extension” in the dictionary, it is stated as “extended or projected”.
Agricultural extension involves exchange knowledge to the end users, however, on the simplest level; Agricultural extension could be defined as voluntary out of school educational programme for clientele consisting of the relevant contents, principles and procedures.
It also involves dissemination of information on innovation or new technology to the clientele.
Agricultural Extension is also regarded as “the body of knowledge which accumulates experience and research findings with respect to extension and borrows insights from other disciplines and field of endeavors which seems pertinent to extension (Rolling, 1997).
Extension as a science has wide scope of involvement which is not limited to information exchange alone.
It includes everywhere information on new technology or interaction with clientele is mentioned.
Exercise 1.1 1.
Mention three key words in the definition of agricultural extension.
(a).
……………………………………………………….. (b).
……………………………………………………….
(c )……………………………………………………….. 3.2 Nature of Agricultural Extension Agricultural Extension has two dimensions (a).
Educational dimension (b).
Communicational dimension Education Dimension involves the change agent (extension worker) attempting to work on the clientele’s psychology through the use of effective teaching methods to improve the knowledge and develop the skill of the clientele (former) as he acquires knowledge on improved practices to enhance has production and marketing activities (Williams, et al 1981).
The nature of education is for action, problem and oriented or centred, hence it is different from the formal education.
Communication Dimension: This involves dissemination of information to the clientele on new technologies or innovation.
It also involves exchange of ideas that could provide basis for research or feedback on the use of previous innovation.
The methods of communication could be through the use of individuals, group or mass method.
Therefore, extension is involved in dissemination of useful information through the appropriate methods to the clientele.
Exercise 1.2: (i).
Mention two nature of agriculture extension (ii).
List the three methods of communication in Agricultural Extension.
3.3.
Types of Audience in Agricultural Extension It should be noted that agricultural Extension serves as intermediary between research/scientist and the clientele.
The clientele is referred to as the end- users of information which the extension personnel deal with.
In the case of agriculture, it could be the farmers, community leaders of women who are involved in the processing and utilization of agricultural products.
Clientele in any set up could be: (a).
Heterogeneous or (b).
Homogenous Heterogeneous audience is made of those who are young, old, literate and non-literate, large scale farmers, small scale farmers, low economic status, high economic status, etc.
In agricultural extension, the audience is mostly heterogeneous.
Homogenous audience consists of a set of individuals with common characteristics.
They may all be young, or old, literate or non-literate.
In general they have a common denominator/factor that binds them.
The type of audience determines the type of extension methods and materials to use in extension work.
3.4 Importance of Agricultural Extension While living in the midst of rapid scientific and technological development, many of the farmers in the rural communities still employ traditional methods of production.
In Nigeria there is a lag of over 20 years between the discoveries of new farming practice.
In order to shorten or bridge this gap as well as make the rural communities part of the dynamic social order where rapid change is characteristic, an extension service among the rural community is needed (Olayide, et al.).
Agricultural extension is also needed to help the clientele obtain information on sources of input and credit facilities that would enhance their level of production.
In order to have a cultural compatible, socially acceptable and economically feasible technology, extension services is important to guide research development.
This is because; extension will give feed back to the scientist/researcher on the development technology so as to help improve upon the earlier developed technology.
Despite the fact that farmers are encouraged to increase their level of production, the issue of marketing outlet is important.
Agricultural extension provides information to the farmers on marketing strategy to use to maximize their profit while it also introduce to the farmers, market opportunities to help dispose off their products as at when due.
4.0.
Conclusion In this unit, you have learnt what agricultural extension is about, that it involves dissemination of information on new technologies to the clientele.
You have also learnt about the scope of agricultural extension.
You must also recall that agricultural extension has educational and communicational dimension and that agricultural extension is to help farmers improve their level of production and income.
5.0 Summary The main point in this unit includes the following: 1.
Agricultural Extension involves extending knowledge to the clientele.
2.
Agricultural Extension involves educational and communicational dimension.
3.
Heterogeneous and Homogenous audience constitutes the clientele in agricultural extension.
4.
Importance of agricultural extension includes increase in farmer’s level of production, information on strategic marketing and effective feedback on innovation to research/scientist.
Answer to the Exercise Exercise 1.
(i).
Voluntary (ii).
Out-of –school (iii).
Clientele Exercise 1.2 1.
Nature of Agricultural Extension i.
Educational dimension ii.
Communicational dimension 2.
Method of Communication i.
Individual ii.
Group iii.
Mass 6.0 Tutor Marked Assignment 1.
Explain the importance of Agricultural Extension to Nigerian economy 2.
Write short notes on Heterogeneous and Homogeneous audience 3.
Write short notes on communication dimension of Agricultural Extension.
7.0 References Encarta Reference Library DVD 2005 Edition.
Rolling N (1997); Extension Role in Sustainable Agricultural Development in Improving Agricultural Extension A Reference Manual.
FAO Rome.
S. K. Williams, T. M. Fenley, C. Ebun Williams (1981); a Manual for Agricultural Extension Workers In Nigeria.
Published by Les Shyraden, Ibadan Nigeria.
Unit 2: The Scope and Objectives of Agricultural Extension Table of Contents 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objectives 3.1 Scope of Agricultural Extension 3.2 Objectives of Agricultural Extension 3.3 Limitations to the task of Agricultural Extension 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutor Marked Assignment 7.0 References and Further Readings 1.0 Introduction In the last unit, Agricultural Extension was defined as Extension of knowledge to the clientele.
The nature of Agricultural extension was also considered.
IN this unit the scope of agricultural extension will be discussed.
We will also consider the objectives of agricultural extension and reasons for limiting agricultural extension work to communicational and educational role.
2.0 Objectives At the end of the unit, you should be able to: 1.
Understand the task of agricultural extension 2.
The objectives of agricultural extension 3.
Why the task of agricultural extension was limited to what it is.
3.1 Scope of Agricultural Extension Agricultural Extension is the primary process through which farmers learn reasons why they must change their attitude and practice.
It is also to be noted that it does not involve only farmers with direct production i.e cultivation practices only but those who are involved in processing and marketing of agricultural products.
Extension often emphasizes working with people rather than for them, selects for adjustment those problems which people themselves recognize and also teach people to recognize as problems, conditions which they have previously felt little concern as well as the possible solutions.
Thus extension work teaches people to recognize what to want and how to work out ways of satisfying these desires.
Extension work does not only involves taking of research findings to farmers but it also take the farmer problem to the researchers and help formulate activities designed to meet the ever-increasing problems facing rural communities.
Agricultural extension also involves leadership development in the communities.
This is because it worked with the whole family and involves a participatory approach where learning by doing concept is involved.
In view of the nature of extension work it requires leadership.
Hence agricultural extension utilizes leaders from among the people, in view of this it helps to imbue principle of leadership in the people.
Community development is another area which agricultural extension is involved.
This is by mobilizing members of the communities to improve their collective resources when will invariably affect their production systems.
Youth development is also critical area of Agricultural extension involved.
The youth, are encouraged to form themselves to clubs and organizations so that they can exchange ideas and become useful to themselves and their communities.
It is also discourage rural-urban migration and retain labour for agricultural product work.
Extension also lays emphasis on character change in terms of attitude of the people so that individuals will progress to higher standards of accomplishment and living in an increasingly complex society.
Extension is also involved in home making (domestic science) and other aspect of rural living since it helps to bring wholistic development.
Exercise 1.
1 1.
List two key issues in the scope of Extension (a).
…………………………………………………………… (b).
………………………………………………………….. 2.
Extension helps youth to……………………………… 3.2 Objectives of Agricultural Extension Agricultural extension has a focus of working with the people rather than working for the people.
This is because it has the aim of building the capacity of the clientele to be resourceful and developing the ability to take initiatives.
The task of agricultural extension is to help rural people utilize science or innovations that are tested and viable to in their day-to-day activities so that they could be better off.
The task of extension is also to inbuilt in the clientele ability to identify their problems, prioritize such and and work out how solve such problems.
This will also involve ability to work as a team i.e.
building team spirit in the people.
In summary, the task of extension work is to help rural families in particular to apply science to the day-to-day routine of farming, home making and other aspect of rural living.
3.3 Limitations to the task of Agricultural Extension Some of the limiting factors to agricultural extension work in Nigeria include the problem of inadequate supporting services.
This relates to insufficiency of farm inputs to the farmers and when supplied not timely to back up the technologies being introduced to the farmers.
There is the problem of low morale among the extension officers due to poor pay and lack of conducive working environment.
Since the withdrawal of World Bank funding of the Agricultural Development Projects (ADP’s) in Nigeria some state governments have not been able to fund extension services the way it should be.
The use of inadequate training for staff and farmers despite changing trend in extension approaches is still a source of limitation.
There has not been effective utilization of participatory approaches in most instances, thus limiting the participation of farmers.
The weak linkages between extension organizations, research institutes, universities and other stake holders in the agricultural sector is a problem.
The consequence is that there has not been cohesive coherent and focused research tailored toward solving the peculiar needs of the farmers.
Extension farmers’ ratio in Nigeria is about 1:1722 which is high.
Lack of adequate attention to extension services in recent times has increased the ratio.
The problem has led to situation where many farmers are unreached and unaware of new technologies that would enhance their performance.
Financial support to extension work has been grossly inadequate.
Government and related agencies have not been funding extension work effectively.
There are no adequate budget provisions to purchase equipment and materials required to carry out extension work.
This has effect on the morale of the extension workers and also limits the extent to which they could carry out their activities.
It is to be noted that there is still the problem of effective evaluation of most agricultural extension programmes.
When programmes are completed they are poorly evaluated and this has led to repetition of past mistakes.
Exercise 1.2: State four limitations to effective agricultural extension services in Nigeria (a).
………………………………………………………………………….
.
(b).
………………………………………………………………………….
.
(c )………………………………………………………………………… … (d)……………………………………………………………………… …….
4.0 Conclusion Agriculture has the task of extending frontiers of knowledge to rural people.
It emphasizes working with the people rather than for them, empowering them to identify and solve their problems, enhance youth, community and leadership development among the people.
However, it is limited by poor funding, inadequate training and lack of effective evaluation of implemented programmes.
5.0 Summary The main points in this unit include: (1).
Agricultural Extension is restricted to importing knowledge and skill in the rural people.
(2).
Developing the clienteles leadership ability (3).
Enhancement of youth development in communities.
(4).
Extension work with the people rather than for the people (5).
Extension is limited by problems of inadequate support services (6).
Problem of low morale among extension workers (7).
Weak linkages between extension, research of other stakeholders (8).
Poor funding of extension services 6.0 Tutor Marked Assignment (1).
Mention two tasks of Agricultural extension (2).
Discuss two limiting factors to agricultural extension work (3).
How has inadequate funding affected agricultural extension work 7.0 References and further readings S. K. Williams, T. M. Fenley, C. Ebun Williams (1981): a Manual for Agricultural Extension Workers in Nigeria.
Published by Les Shyraden , Ibadan Nigeria.
Unit 3: The need for Agricultural Extension and the Role of Government in Extension Work Table of Contents 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objectives 3.1 Importance of Agricultural Extension 3.2 Support System in Extension 3.3 The role of government in Extension Work 3.4 Conditions conducive to development of effective Extension services 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutor Marked Assignment 7.0 References and further Readings 1.0 Introduction In the last unit we discussed the scope of Agricultural extension; the objectives of agricultural extension were also mentioned while the unit ended with discussions on factors limiting effectiveness of agricultural extension.
In this unit, growth will be mentioned; the support system in agricultural extension will be discussed while the role of government in extension work will also be explained 2.0 Objectives After going through this unit, you should be able to: (i) Understand the importance of Agricultural Extension service to economic growth (ii) Explain vividly the support system in Extension (iii) Discuss the role of government in Extension work (iv) Clearly state the conditions conducive to development of effective extension system.
3.0 Importance of Agricultural Extension in Agricultural Development A basic role of agricultural extension is that of helping to improve the performance of those who are involved in primary food production.
This is because it disseminates information that enhances their current practices.
This involves a shift from the traditional resource based methods of production to a new science based methods.
Specially, agricultural extension performs these important roles: (1).
The role of Educational Development: This is by educating the clienteles on how to maximize the utilization of their resources and available services.
This is achieved through development of farmer’s skills and attitudes in the clienteles so as to benefit from improved technology.
(2).
Extension is also important in its role as vacuum filler: Most of the farmers are not aware of the sources of input, credit facilities or markets for their products.
These are limiting factors to farmer’s cultivation practices and income.
The role of extension in helping farmers to get information on sources of input and credit facilities, marketing strategies and available market for their products has gone a long way to improve farmer’s production and their standard of living.
(3).
Agricultural development depends on evolvement of new technologies.
Technologies could be developed, but if it does not get to the end users it is useless.
In national development extension provides the linkage between the farmer and researchers.
Extension helps the researchers/scientists to embark on researchers that are culturally compatible, technologically acceptable and economically feasible (Okunlola et al, 2005).
(4).
Extension is important in creating awareness leading to growing interest in concepts of sustainability and environmental management.
This will go a long way in integrating sustainability elements in agriculture and material resources management.
The consequence is that it helps increases economic, social and ecological risk (Kroma M, 2005) (5).
One of the basic problems of farmers is in the area of decision making.
Extension services focus on equipping farmers with marketing and investment information and training them to make decisions concerning aspects of agricultural prices, management practices and social issues.
Exercise 1.
1: (1).
Mention 2 roles of agricultural extension in economic development (2).
Extension services focus on…………………………………and ……………………………… 3.2 Support System in Extension The roles of agricultural extension could be effectively performed only if the following activities which make up the support are provided.
(1).
Extension team: Extension activities are carried out through team work.
This is important because the tasks to be carried out are enormous and as such many people are involved.
An extension support team is made up of (a).
Administrators who provides the necessary arrangement for logistics support and materials requires for conducive working environment.
(b).
Researchers who evolve solutions through their finding to farmers problems.
(c ).
Subject matter specialist: They help interpreting research findings to extension agents and farmers, they also help in diagnosing the problem that arise from the application research findings and provide solutions to such problems.
(d).
Extension agents: They communicate research findings or innovations to the end users while also feed the research scientist back on field outcome of the new technology.
(2).
Production of Materials and Teaching Aids: Extension audience is heterogeneous hence; different teaching materials and aids are used to ensure that the learners understand and accept the technology being introduced to them.
(3).
Essential Inputs and Credits Facilities: It is important that the farmers have access to required inputs to back up new technologies being introduced to them, the credit facilities are also needed to purchase some of the inputs.
(4).
Training Facilities and Training Programme – Extension services requires training and re-training , the extension agents have to be constantly trained while the farmers too must be trained regularly to keep them abreast of developments.
It is therefore important that a good training programme must be available while the facilities to accomplish such programmes must also be there.
3.3 The Role of Government in Extension Work Extension activities take different forms in different countries.
In advances countries where agricultural production is usually carried on a large scale and farms are operated mainly for profit, farmers either individually or in groups, do hire advisers or farm management specialists to help plan and advise on the most efficient farm of organization.
In addition, the government may create agricultural extension services which provide technical and economical services to the farmers.
It is also to be noted that in some of the developed countries extension activities involves the commercial firms supplying the bulk of agricultural inputs which is being used in farming.
Some of the farms too are prompted to engage in trial demonstrations on both provide and company farms so that the farmers could see the effectiveness, technical and economical advantages of their products.
Such demonstrations are also tailored up with follow-up activities to teach the farmers how to use and /or adapt the practice to the farmer’s farms (Ogunfowora, 1981).
It is to be noted that in many of the developing countries, extension services is exclusive responsibility of the government.
The public extension system dominates information dissemination to the clientele.
This could be attributed to the poor status of the farmers at they are mostly small scale farmers with very poor demand for farm input, thus limiting the extent to which firms supplying agricultural inputs could be involved.
With the above, it is important that government should develop programmes and activities which could enhance or mar the efficiency of extension activities.
Although in Nigeria recently there is emerging involvement of some Non- Governmental Organization and some International agencies.
In view of the fact that extension services provision is dominated by government.
It is the responsibility of government to provide well trained and agile extension workers who will carry out extension functions.
The number of extension personnel provided and supported would determine the extension – farmer ratio.
If the ratio is high, efficiency of extension services will be poor and consequently farmer’s level of production will be low.
It is important that government should create conducive environment for effective extension work.
This is by providing the extension workers the required equipment like teaching aids, trees of transportation, sufficient inducement and material benefits which can induce good work performance.
Prompt payment of salaries and specially packaged allowances would motivate the workers to greater performance.
With the nature of extension work, constant training is required.
Therefore, government should make adequate provision for the training of the extension workers, it is important that the extension personnel should be organized for the workers to keep them abreast of developments in the technology world.
This is because the quality of extension worker will determine the effectiveness of this delivery.
The extension worker needed to know and understand new technologies both in terms of technical and economic perspective.
In order to enhance adoption of new technologies, government should make adequate provision for farm inputs which would be affordable and easily accessible to the farmers.
The establishment of Agriculture input services as a back up to Agricultural Development Programme (ADP) (extension organ of government) in most states of Nigeria would assist in meeting this required need.
However, it should be made functional and work closely with the ADPs to know the required input to back up innovation being introduced to the farmers.
In national policy formulation, the importance of extension should be stressed.
This is because national policy on agriculture which is the determinant of agriculture operation will go a long way to affect extension services.
There should be appropriate linkage between managers of extension programme and policy makers to have a viable agriculture extension programme.
Extension services is a sector that is prone to regular budget cut, Adequate budgetary provision should be made for extension work to facilitate implementation of extension programmes.
Maintenance of good personnel and running effective extension system requires large resources.
Hence, there should be adequate budgetary provision to meet such demands.
It is also important for you to know that, the possibility of improving agricultural product in the rural area lies within the framework of improving the infrastructure facilities serving agriculture.
If there are good road network and transportation facilities, it will be easier to reach the farmers, transport input and farm outputs.
Establishment of rural credit opportunities for the farmers will help promote adoption of innovation.
Presently government is trying to accomplish this, through the establishment of Nigeria Agricultural Credit and Rural Development Bank (NACRDB) but the limit of operation is low.
There should be legislation to compel financial institutions give credit facilities to the farmers taking into cognizance storage and processing facilities should also be provided by government to help extension work.
This is because if the farmers adopt new technologies and their level of production is enhanced but if there are no storage and processing facilities level of wastage will increase and it may discourage increased production in subsequent years.
3.4 Condition Conducive to Development of Effective Agricultural Extension Services It is important that there should be a national policy that is wholistic and adequate for smoother operation of extension services.
This will provide the basis for any extension programme that is planned.
It must also help defend extension against encroachment by ministries seeking to use its staff for non- extension purposes (World Bank 1990).
Adequate sources of technical information for finding solution to the problem of the people should be place.
This is because without information on new technologies the role of extension services would be incomplete.
There should be availability of trained people that is adequate to provide the needed personnel for extension work and other related services.
This is because trained personnel are needed for effective linkage between researchers and farmers.
Presently the extension-farmer ratio is high and well trained personnel are required to reduce the ratio and bring new technologies closer to the people.
Adequate auxiliary services of technical information for finding solution to the problems of the people should be in place.
This is because without information on new technologies the role of extension services would be incomplete.
There should be availability of trained people that is adequate to provide the needed personnel for extension work and other related services.
This is because trained personnel are needed for effective linkage between researchers and farmers.
Presently the extension-farmer ratio is high and well trained personnel are required to reduce the ratio and bring new technologies closer to the people.
Adequate auxiliary services such input supply, credit, transportation, marketing, veterinary services, without which extension teaching will likely be ineffective should be provided.
An environment that is conducive to continue agricultural and rural development which include things like incentive for production, political stability and a land tenure system which ensures that the producer has fair share of the benefit accruing from improvement in farm practices should be available.
There should be strict compliance with the educational role that is expected of agricultural extension.
Deviation from this role will affect the implication of extension programme as designated to help alleviate the problems of the rural people.
Exerecise 1.3: List roles of government in Agricultural Extension development (a).
……………………………………………… (b)……………………………………………….. (c )………………………………………………… (d)………………………………………………….. 4.0 Conclusion Importance of Agricultural Extension to the development of the country cannot be understood if the farmer’s level of output has to be improved.
It is also important that the extension team, materials and administrative support for effective extension services should be in place.
It is inevitable that government should also play significant role at promoting extension activities in the rural areas.
This is because it is necessary that adequate legislation, funding and adequate auxiliary services be provided.
5.0.
Summary The main points in this unit include: Extension role in Education development, create accessibility to inputs by clientele, creating awareness in sustainable environment development, enhancement of farmers decision making skill.
Extension team, materials and teaching Aids, Training and training facilities are needed for effective extension work.
Government has a role to play in creating technical and economic environment that is conducive for extension work, provided well training extension personnel and adequate farm input to support technology which is being introduced to farmers.
6.0 Tutor Marked Assignment 1.
Mention three roles of government in agricultural extension development  2.
Discuss two support systems in Agricultural extension work 3.
Mention two factors that is conducive for agricultural extension work.
7.0 Reference and Further Readings World Bank (1990): Agricultural Extension: The next step, Policy Research and External Affairs, the World Bank, Washington, 1990, pp.
28-29.
S. K. Williams, T. M. Fenley, C. Ebun Williams (1981).
: A Manual For Agricultural Extension Workers In Nigeria.
Published by Les Shyraden, Ibadan Nigeria.
Okunlola J. O. and Ajayi, M. T. (2005): Analysis of Fruits and Vegetables Marketing in Akure South Local Government Area, Ondo State, Nigeria.
Journal of Applied Tropical Agriculture Vol.
10, No.
1 2005 (Nigeria 60% contribution).
MODULE 1 :UNIT 4: AGRICULTURAL EXTENSION SYSTEMS Table of Contents 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objectives 3.1 Necessary Conditions for Agricultural Extension to evolve 3.2 Approaches to Agricultural Extension 3.3 Peculiarities of Agricultural Extension Education and Formal Education 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutor Marked Assignment 7.0 References and Further Reading 1.0 Introduction: Agricultural Extension began to assume its current form with the rise of “scientific” agriculture in the industrializing countries of Western Europe in the late nineteenth century (World Bank 1990).
It should be noted that the first national Extension services were established in Japan in 1893 and the United States in 1914; while United Kingdom established its own in 1946, Israel in 1948 and India in 1952.
In most developing countries, national agricultural extension services stated after the attainment of independence from colonial masters.
Although, there has been patches of regional research programmes titled towards enhance production of beneficial crops for exportation to the colonial masters’ home country.
This dictated the initial forms of agricultural extension system approach.
In specific terms, some of the approaches include.
2.0 Objectives After studying this unit, you should be able to do the following: (1) Discuss the concept of Extension education (2) Differentiate between Agricultural extension education and formal education 3.1.1 Profit-Oriented Extension This is mostly based on a single commodity or small ranges of clearly defined commodities usually cash drop or livestock geared to export markets.
The system is operated in such a way that it is on commercial basis that provides for government backing through provision of inputs to back up provision but with the establishment of a quasi-agency to manage the marketing.
For example in Nigeria, initially, marketing boards were established for the cash crops.
There was cocoa marketing board, cotton marketing board etc.
The marketing boards regulate prices of the products.
In this type of approach, the extension personnel is involved in providing the technical information that will assist in improving the level of production of the crop.
3.1.2 Integrated/Multi Sectoral Rural Development Approach This involves improvement of agricultural production as well as rural infrastructural development.
The underlying concept is a typically multisectoral approach.
The extension system involves introducing farmers to new crops, distributing seeds, fertilizers and other inputs while also been involved in provision of facilities like rural feeder roads and provision of electricity.
Integrated approach is implemented in the form of large scale and foreign funded projects aiming at alleviating mass poverty in rural areas on the basis of a simultaneous (Rauch 1993).
At the second phase level of Agricultural Development Project (ADP’s) establishment in Nigeria, the organization were involved in provision of technical services for agriculture as well construction of rural feeder roads to encourage transport of inputs to ferry and evacuation of farm products.
The broad focus of multipurpose services makes it difficult for extension agents to focus adequately on extension work amidst many other tasks.
3.1.3 Specialized Extension Services The aim at specialized services is to provide different and consistent extension advice in line with national extension goals across the agricultural sector.
It involves development of professional extension agents whose tasks are limited to provision of technical advice based on new technologies to clientele.
They are excluded from other services.
3.1.4 Ministry based Extension System In most developing countries, public extension system moved fairly beyong their original commodity, and rural development tasks to specialized services that concentrated on agricultural extension work alone.
However, the workers are based in the Ministry of Agriculture of respective regions/state.
In this system, it was discovered that each crop or unit of production (e.g.
livestock) has his or her own extension agent.
The consequence is that a farmer may be visited by two or more extension agents in a day thus affecting his production.
3.1.5 University Based Extension System This involves extension system where the universities build information network systems to bring new findings on crop breeding, protection and management practices and disseminates such to the farmers.
It involves universities having a multidisciplinary extension who are engaged in adaptive research training and consultancy.
Regular workshops are held which unite university staff and outside farmers and package of practices are evaluated.
In Nigeria, the University of Ibadan was once involved in Badeku Village, Project, and University of Ife now Obafemi Awolowo University embarked on Isoya village projects.
Research findings were disseminated to farmers in these communities and their neighbourhood.
The Federal Universities of Agriculture, Abeokuta and Makurdi have cooperative extension centers where they are into cooperation with farmer’s group on information dissemination and improved cultivation practices.
3.1.6 Animation Rurale This involves the use of voluntary collaborators called animateurs who are trained by the ministry of Agriculture officials.
Their task was to initiate discussions within the community on local needs and objectives thus empowering the people to dialogue with the state.
They also integrate government plans to the villagers and initiate dialogue with the state (De-wilde, 1967).
3.1.7 Privatized Extension System This is a new concept which is being advocated to improve the current poor public extension performance.
It involves different forms, such as outsourcing extension and contracting out.
This involves the farmers having extension personnel to provide them with the necessary information that will help their production.
It is believed that it will bring efficiency and accountability.
It would also give room for pluralistic mix the NGO’s semi autonomous bodies and private companies will be involved in providing extension services to rural clientele.
3.2 Peculiarities of Agricultural Extension Education and Informal Educations Extension Education involves voluntary participation based on farmer’s volition and willingness.
Willingness is predicated on the judgment of the worthiness and or interest in the improved practices or innovation.
In extension programme there is no coercion, it is based on the interest of the participants.
In formal education there is a high level of compulsion and set standards that must be fulfilled.
In Agricultural extension the teaching is informal due to the heterogeneous audience and the fact that the education process takes place in clientele’s place.
Agricultural extension education is out of school, it does not require the use of classroom, farmers field is the classroom where demonstration could take place.
Results and method demonstration are also used to secure clientele’s understanding.
The audience of Agricultural extension is heterogeneous.
It involves various categories of people, aged, youths, literate, non-literate, society status, small scale and large scale farmers etc.
This has necessitated the use of various teaching methods which include, individual, group, mass method backed with effective teaching aids.
In formal set up, the groups are specific and there are criteria developed to bring all of them under various categories.
Agricultural extension is problem oriented.
It addresses specific problems that are based on the needs of the clientele and in most cases; these problems are prioritized to reflect the felt need of the people.
In formal education course content or curriculum and developed and it is rigid and fixed not based on clientele’s need.
4.0 Conclusion The Unit has discussed the various approaches to extension education.
It reveals the transition process that agricultural extension has passed through from concept to practices.
The Unit also showed that extension education has some peculiarities such as voluntary participation, integrated/multipurpose rural development approach among others.
5.0 Summary The main points in this unit are as follows: (a) the approaches of Agricultural Extension are: • Profit oriented extension approach • Ministry based/public service extension approach • Integrated/Multipurpose rural development approach • Specialized extension services • University based extension system • Privatized extension system (b) Agricultural Extension is different from formal education because: i.
It is voluntary ii.
Deals with heterogeneous audience iii.
Teaching is informal iv.
Problem oriented 6.0 Tutor Marked Assignment (i) Mention three types of Extension system and discuss 2.
(ii) What are the differences between extension education and formal education?
7.0 References and Further Reading Rauch T. (1993): Regional rural development RRD update: elements of a strategy for implementing the RRD concept in a changed operational context.
Eschiborn: Deutsche Gelleschaft fur Technische Zusammenarbent (GTZ) De Wilde J. C. (1967): Experience with agricultural development in Tropical Africa: Vol.
1.
The case studies.
Baltimore, John Hopkins University Press.
Unit 5: Goals and Functions of Agricultural Extension Table of Content 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objectives 3.1 Goals of Agricultural Extension 3.2 Functions of Agricultural Extension 3.3 Lessons learnt in Agricultural Extension 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutor Marked Assignment 7.0 References and Further Reading 1.0 Introduction Extension science serves as practices and as a body of knowledge from which practitioners derive their professional insight, in informal policy formulation, programme implementation and assists extension system to attain higher performance.
There is no profession that has not profited from extension services in one way or the other.
This unit considers the functions of agricultural extension system and the lessons learnt in Agricultural extension.
2.0 Objectives After studying this unit, you should be able to: (a) Understand the specific functions of agricultural extension (b) Learn some of the lessons from agricultural extension education 3.0 Functions of Agricultural Extension It is important that the end users should know the specific functions of agricultural extensions.
Specifically the functions of agricultural extension are: (a) It prepares and stimulates the farmers’ state of mind to make them accept new technologies being introduced to them.
For example most farmers’ always find it difficult to take risk; hence they prefer to continue with their traditional methods.
Extension with knowledge of psychology tries to convince the farmers to accept the innovations being introduced to them.
(b) Extension disseminates research result to the farmers and takes the farmers reaction to the usage of new technologies to the researchers.
The feed back system enables the researchers introduce technologies that are economically viable, technically feasible and culturally compatible.
(c) Provision of farm management advisory services to the farmer so that they can efficiently and effectively combine all factors of production for good result.
The aim is to enable farmers improve their present level of production by doing the right thing at the right time.
(d) Extension is not involved in provision of credit and input facilities.
However, it helps farmers to organize support services such as how to obtain credit facilities, best strategies for marketing their products, how to form cooperative societies etc.
(e) Extension gives advice on the wise use and conservation of national resources.
This is because extension has the responsibility of environmental sustainability and it is important to educate the farmers in this area so that the environment is adequately protected.
(f) It helps in the development of good family living; this is in relation to the enlightenment and information being given to households on certain domestic practices and attitudinal ways of bringing up children.
(g) Extension helps with youth development.
This is by organizing various youth programmes and formation of youth clubs such as young farmers club and other activities that could help both physical and psychological development of the young ones.
With the various youth programmes it could be possible to reduce rural-urban migration, most especially when the young ones are exposed to sustainable livelihood activities that they could embark upon.
(h) In view of the fact that extension education is heterogeneous it functions by training the youths and adults on leadership development.
Leadership development is essential in agricultural extension because it involves local participation and as such local leaders are needed.
3.1 Goals of Agricultural Extension Goals lead the actions of individuals, groups and organizations.
While pointing towards a future state, they are influenced by post experience.
Goals usually reveal the interests of stakeholders and these various with specific reference to life situations, power position and development of philosophies.
The features of a system, such as its organizational structure, choice of clientele, operational design and methods used are directly influenced by its set of goals and must be evaluated in terms of their contribution to goal achievement.
In agricultural extension system, members of rural communities, extension and other development personnel researchers and staff of supporting organizations are involved.
The ultimate is technology transfer and human resource development, suggesting a rather narrow technical or a broader socio-economic view of development.
4.0 Conclusion In this unit, we have discussed the functions of Agricultural extension.
As you are now aware, it is the function of extension to prepare the minds of farmers towards accepting new technologies, disseminate research results to farmers and take feed back to researches, provide farm management advisory service and develop good family living among others.
5.0 Summary The main points in this unit are as follows: (a) Extension functions include • preparing and stimulating farmers state of mind to accept new technology • disseminate research result to farmers and take feed back to researches • provide farm management advisory services • organic support services • develop good family living • youth development • leadership development 6.0 Tutor Marked Assignment (1) Mention and explain three functions of Agricultural Extension (2) What are the lessons learnt from Agricultural Extension services 7.0 References and Further Reading S. K. Williams, T. M. Fenley, C. Ebun Williams (1981): a Manual for Agricultural Extension Workers in Nigeria.
Published by Les Shyraden, Ibadan Nigeria.
World Bank (1990): Agricultural Extension: The next step.
Policy Research and External affairs, the World bank, Washington, 1990, pp.
28-29.
MODULE 2: Unit 1: Philosophy of Extension Education Unit 2: Principles of Agricultural Extension (Part I) Unit 3: Principles of Agricultural Extension (Part II) Unit 4: Principles of Agricultural Extension (Part III) Table of Contents Unit 5: Principles of Extension and Research Extension Farmer Linkage Unit 1: Philosophy of Extension Education Table of Content 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objective 3.0 Philosophy of Extension Education 3.1 Local Leadership and philosophy of Agricultural Extension 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutor Marked Assignment (TMA) 7.0 Reference and further Reading 1.0 Introduction The Unit on philosophy of Extension education is to make you be aware of the basic and several philosophies behind agricultural extension activities.
This is important so that you can understand why agricultural extension is involved in the activities.
It is presently carried out and why it is limited in scope to communication and educational roles.
The objectives below specify what you are expected to learn after going through this unit.
2.0 Objectives At the end of the unit you should be able to: (i) State briefly the importance of the philosophy in guiding actions of Extension Personnel.
3.0 Philosophy of Extension Education  The basic philosophy of Agriculture extension is to help farmers help themselves.
This is with respect to identification and finding solutions to the problems on his farm and home.
It is important that the extension personnel is guided by this philosophy so as to know what to do and help the clientele enhance their decision making ability and optimum utilization of his scarce resources.
Extension agent should know that the philosophy is based on the concept of involvement and participatory approval.
This is because the process of developing the skills of the farmers through learning by doing will promote sustainability and extension work.
Involvement of people is to help them develop their skill to adopt practical application of such skill to analyze their problem, use such to better solve their own problem.
It should also be noted that once the skill and ability of the farmers are developed, the capacity of the farm families would have been built not only to deal with their own problems but to meet new opportunities.
Once the farmers are skillfully empowered, their ability to adopt new technologies will increase while their income and standard of living will become enhanced.
The basic philosophy of agricultural extension therefore is to build in the concept of self reliance in the farmers.
It is also to discourage the farmers from depending on agricultural extension for the technical or production requirements.
The ultimate of extension work is to build in the process where the farmers will be able to take initiations at solving their problems as it arises.
This could also involve farmers forming themselves into groups, societies and seeking for linkage-opportunities which will provide the technical information that is required.
3.1 Local leadership and philosophy of Agricultural Extension Agricultural extension aims at helping the farmers to build themselves up to take decision and initiatives that will solve their problems.
While this facet is acknowledged, it is important that the role of local leadership in the attainment of extension functions and sustenance of extension principles should not be underscored.
Leadership is a very important concept which is been very much misunderstood (Williams et al 1983).
It is very important when issues of change are involved.
Digors (1955) says a leader is an individual whose ideas and actions influence the thoughts and behaviours of others.
Kesley and Hearne (1963) assisted that the local leader is an accepted grout member who moves the group toward its goal.
In the concept of fulfilling extension philosophy there is the need for utilization of the local leaders.
The extension worker cannot do all the work himself and new practices are readily accepted by local people when their leaders accept them.
This is crucial because before farmers can accept to utilize any technology despite the fact that it is for their own good, it must first of all be adopted.
So therefore the leaders are needed for legitimation.
It is important the farmers capacity should be enhanced but the needs and interests of the farmers should be properly identified.
The local leaders are in position to mobilize the farmers though participatory; approach to identify the needs and prioritize such.
Using local leaders for extension work gives the extension agent multiplier effect.
This is because the leaders will assist the extension agent reaching many more farmers that he would not get to.
Once the extension personnel trained the leaders well, they will assist him to spreading the information using the approach of “teach one teach all”.
Despite the fact that extension is out to help the farmers, certain specific characteristics should be possessed by the leaders.
This includes: • Group Oriented individual • A person with high sense of responsibility • A person who is considerate and tolerant • Emotionally stable • Has interest in the attains of the group • High sense of compliance • Empathy • Integrity and • Faith.
In order to sustain the philosophy of agricultural extension through the use of local leaders, there should be adequate training and assistance for them.
The leaders should be carefully trained on feeling methods, subject-matter, principles and leadership problems among themselves.
While working with the lay leaders, the professional leader (extension worker) should work with the local leaders to the extent that the local leader should be able to ask “how can I do this job better”.
This is an indication that the farmer is reading to improve his standing and prestige with his followers.
4.0 Conclusion This Unit has explained to you the philosophy of agricultural extension and the role of local leaders in the fulfillment of agricultural extension philosophy.
5.0 Summary The main points include: The basic philosophy of agricultural extension is to help farmers to help themselves.
The role of local leaders in mobilizing farmers’ towards awareness and adoption of new technologies.
The multiplier effect of the role of local leader in the dissemination of information.
The characteristic of local leaders such as group oriented individual, integrity, high sense of responsibility, emotional stability etc.
6.0 Tutor Marked Assignment What is the philosophy of agricultural extension?
Mention and discuss four specific roles of local leaders in extension work.
7.0 References and further Reading L. C. Kesley and C. Hearne: cooperative extension work (3rd edition) Comslvik Publishing Associates New York.
Rigors P: leadership or domination, Ploughton Muffin Publishers New yor 1955  Unit 2 Principles of Agricultural Extension (Part I) Table of Content: 1.0 Introduction 0.0 Principle of starting where the people are 3.1 Principle of helping farmers to determine their problems 3.2 Principle of interests and needs 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutor Marked Assignment 7.0 References and Further Reading 1.0 Introduction Unit 1 has established the philosophy of agricultural extension, however, the philosophy could only be attained if it is based and operated on some of the principles discussed in this unit.
2.0 Objectives After studying the unit, it is expected that you should be able to: (a).
understand the principles of starting extension work at the farmers level (b).
Empowering the farmers decision making ability (c ).
Base extension work on farmers interests and needs.
3.0 Principle of starting where the people are This is very fundamental to successful extension work: It is important that the extension personnel should work at the level where the farmers are.
If the purpose of agricultural extension is to improve the standard of living of the people, it is therefore important that whatever is to be introduced should start at the level of understanding of the farmers.
The farmers have various economic, social and educational levels.
Extension work is heterogeneous, and that is why Extension various methods are been used to enhance the farmer learning ability.
It is therefore important that, to effectively disseminate information on new technologies to the farmers, the extension must know the farmers conditions.
It means personal contact with the local condition and it’s Environment, an understanding of social structure, the habits traditions, attitude and economic statues of the people and society (Williams’s et.al).
If there is adequate information on the status of the farmer and their present level of operation, the extension personnel will be able to inform researcher/scientist appropriately when developing new technologies.
For example, if some equipment are developed and manufactured at an exorbitant cost, it would be very difficult for most of the farmers to accept and utilize such technologies.
In Nigeria, most of the farmers are small scale farmers with low income, hence has a limit to technologies they could adopt.
In a situation when most of the farmers are illiterates and of low social status, an understanding of this situation will enable the extension agent to know how to disseminate information to such category of people.
These may be the need to simplify the technology, or combine various teaching methods while trying to disseminate information on such technologies to the farmers.
It is also important that the extension personnel should know the local (name) units to enhance his dissemination of information to the clientele.
The use of the local units/names for discussion will go a long way to increase accessibility of the clientele to technology.
A thorough understanding of the clientele conditions will give the agent understanding to introduce to the researchers technologist that could suit the farmers conditions.
3.1 Helping farmers to determine their problems It is the philosophy of extension to help the farmers help themselves.
In order to accomplish this, the extension agent should work with the people to understand how to determine their own problem.
The concept of problem analysis should be taken seriously, so that the clientele can distinguish between what is a problem.
A problem has diverted consequence arising from the situation.
The basic idea behind the principle is to stimulate the thinking ability-of the clientele.
This is because the extension agent only encourages the clientele to learn how to solve their own problems.
The extension personnel does not solve the problems of its clientele but only guides them on how to solve their problems.
If the extension agent should attempt to solve the problem for the clientele, it will amount to him imposing his idea on the people and this should not be the ideal, it contradicts the philosophy of agricultural extension.
The principle helps to build in sustainable practices in the clientele.
It does not make them to rely on the extension personnel absolutely.
If this skill is developed in the clientele where there is problem it would be possible to link logically and address the issue.
In circumstances that require the involvement of the people, the clientele will know how to mobilize and initiate discussions aimed at solving such problem, it will also help inbuilt in the farms ability to effectively monitor and evaluate programme.
They will be able to diagnose why projects fail and other suitable solutions to the failure.
3.2 Principle of Interest and needs Extension is voluntary.
The clientele is not covered to accept anything.
It is based on farmer’s volition and willingness is predicted on the judgment of the worthiness of improved practices on innovation.
It is therefore important that extension should have adequate knowledge of the farmer interests and needs.
Needs could be classified as felt and unfelt needs.
The felt needs of the farmers in particular should be knows as this is what would arouse the interests of the address his needs.
For example a farmer that has the problem of Quela Quela bird’s infestation of his farm would be more interested at that particular period in any technology that would remove the birds than opportunity to apply for agricultural loan.
Interests of the farmers relate to the area of need that they are desirous of solving at a particular time.
Understanding of the farmer interest helps to save cost and time in Extension work.
It “enables the Extension agent to go straight and address paramount issues.
4.0 Conclusion The unit has discussed three principles that are farmers specific situation and that has a lot of implication on successful extension work.
5.0 Summary The highlights of this section principle of Extension agent knowing the conditions of the clientele for proper planning and information dissemination.
It also involves empowering the farmers to attain good level of logical thinking so as to be able to solve their problem.
6.0 Tutor Marked Assignment (a).
State the three principles discussed in this unit and explain why they are important for successful extension work.
Unit 3: Principles of Agricultural Extension (Part II) Table of Contents 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objectives 3.0 Principle of Mutual Trust and Respect 3.1 Principle of Voluntary involvement 3.2 Principle of working with the whole family 3.3 Heterogeneous nature and teaching methods 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutor Marked Assignment 7.0 Reference and Further Reading 1.0 Introduction The last unit discussed has is principle of agricultural extension.
In this unit, four more principles of agricultural extension would be discussed.
This unit promised to be exciting as it further strengthens the personal character sties built up of effective extension work.
Thus after studying this unit certain things will be required of you.
They are listed in the objectives below:  2.0 Objectives At the end of the unit, you should be able to: (a).
State four more principles of agricultural extension (b).
Understand why extension works with the whole family (c ).
The heterogeneous ……….
3.0 Principles of Mutual Trust and Respect: It is very important to know that in human relationship mutual trust and respect is critical.
Two people who are not friendly cannot work together, in a situation where there is no respect there cannot be harmony and peaceful co-existence.
Similarly in extension work, the clientele and he extension agent should respect and trust each other.
The extension agent has the sole responsibility of giving respect to the farmers by acknowledging their level of understanding.
He should realize that the farmers are knowledgeable as they have been successfully carrying out farming activities over the years to the best of their ability.
Therefore, he should not view the famers as people without intelligence.
Although they may not be aware of modern farming practices, but that does not mean that if they have the privilege of learning the practices they would not utilize such.
Therefore farmers should be respected for their own knowledge.
It is important for the extension personnel to understand to a reasonable extent how they have been coping with their peculiar problem over the years.
Therefore, they should be respected for this.
The extension agent on the other side should also be credible in the presence of the farmers this is by keeping to his promises and not involving himself in activities outside his main functions.
For example, he should not involve himself in selling inputs such as fertilizers, agrochemicals to the farmers.
There is need for the extension agent to exhibit high level of competence in his work.
The farmers expect much from the extension agent and as such he should develop-himself to meet the farmers need.
However, in circumstances where the extension agent could not handle the issues, he should be sincere with himself and the farmers and hence should consult with the subject matter specialist.
3.1 Principle of Voluntary Involvement Extension specifically is a process that involves changing human behavior through communication.
It is not possible to change the behavior of an unwilling individual.
It is only when the clientele is willing and accepts what is being introduced to him that extension could make any impact on the project.
Coercion does not help in project implementation and sustainability; therefore, extension principle should base on voluntary involvement of the clientele.
Participatory approach is being encouraged so that both the clientele and the extension agent would have a common goal and will work towards achieving the stated objectives.
In view of the above, extension should provide the maximum opportunity for the people to work on programmes that have been determined by them and the extension agents working together.
If the clientele are not involved in the planning of the programmes or need identification, they may not be interested in such programmes.
3.2 Principle of Working with the Whole Family In communities of Africa, agricultural production involves the whole family.
Apart from the physical involvement of members of family by providing farm labour for cultivation purposes others are also involved in processing transportation and marketing influences adoption or rejection of new technologies.
The above provides spine of reasons why extension should work with all members of the family i.e.
men, women, young, old, rich and poor.
The family should be regarded as a working unit both at the domestic front and in the field.
Extension work should be earned without regard to religious, race or political beliefs.
It is important while working with the rural people that they should be treated as rational beings who are capable of making their own decisions.
Extension personnel should also be deal with the related problems of these groups as much as they could.
The extension worker should note that involvement of the whole family could assist with respect to the acceptance of his message, this is because members of the family could be at various age, educational and economic level.
This could have subjected the family members to various information sources thus increasing their level of awareness for example, the illiterate member of the family have access to newsprints such as handbills, bulleting, special public loans etc.
which provides additional sources of information.
4.0 Conclusion The unit has introduced you to principles of mutual trust and respect, voluntary involvement, working with the whole family.
5.0 Summary The main points include: (i).
Extension agent should respect the knowledge of the people and should work with them in a way that they would respect him.
(ii).
There is no coercion in Extension work.
The clientele works with extension agent out of his own volition.
(iii).
The whole family is involved extension work (iv).
Extension involves the use of different teaching methods due to its heterogeneous nature.
6.0 Tutor Marked Assignment (a).
Explain the principle of Mutual trust and respect.
(b).
State two reasons why extensions should work with the whole family.
7.0 Reference and Further Readings Sources A. T. Mosher: An Introduction to Agricultural Extension, Agricultural Development Coral, New York.
Unit 4: Principles of Agricultural Extension (Part 111).
Table of Contents 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objectives 3.0 Principles of fact and knowledge 3.1 Principle of working with Specialist 3.2 Principle of Periodic Evaluation 3.3 Principle of Educational responsibility 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutor Marked Assignment (TMA) 7.0 Reference and further Reading 1.0 Introduction With the last three units you must have been able to understand the basic principles of Agricultural Extension.
This unit will discuss four other principles that are required for successful extension practices.
The objectives below specify what you are expected to learn from the unit.
2.0 Objectives At the end of the unit you should be able to: 1.
State the importance of working with specialist in Extension 1.0 Principles of Extension based on the facts and Knowledge: Extension involves extending relevant and useful information to the population at large.
The dissemination of relevant information and advice to the farmers is based on availability of innovations to enhance their production.
Extension deals with the facts that emanate from experimentation and adaptation of findings.
Therefore the developments of impact points are based on the tested findings which will be of utmost importance to the farmers.
It is important therefore that any new technology to be introduced to the farmers should be based on absolute facts that will not affect the farmers who naturally are not willing to take risks.it is in view of the above that whatever extension does are found to be proved both at the experimental level and on the field.
Therefore extension personnel; must ensure that whatever information that must be disseminated is well tested and based on empirical facts.
The reason why the above has to be done is because if the farmers find out that the information being disseminated to them has not improved their output or is not better than their previous practices, they may become discouraged and the same time it will erode their trust and respect for the extension personnel; and this would have a lot of implication on extension work in the area.
1.1 Principles of Working with trained specialist As stated in 3.0, extension is based on facts and knowledge.
In order to establish the fact and acquire knowledge the specialist/ experts are involved.
Ignorance on the part of extension agent about his responsibility or inadequate knowledge of the information to be disseminated will have considerable effects on his work.
Hence, it is essential that the extension personnel should work with the trained specialist and use well trained people who can solve the problem of the clientele and prove adequate linkage with research institutes.
Presently, with the training and visit, the system, provides the opportunity for the extension agent and subject matter specialist to meet monthly for the technical Review meeting(MTRM).At the meeting, the experts now gives advice on the problems, develop impacts points that the extension agent will disseminate to the farmers for the next one month.
The extension agents are also free to consult with the specialists where there are problems.
Another area is the situation where there are women-in- agriculture(WIA) programme, this is a situation where experts train women in the area of nutrition and processing of food crops.
For example, at the onset of dissemination of information on soybean, women specialist had to train the extension agents: who also organize programmes for women farmers on the best method for processing the commodity.
Apart from the above, the trained specialist could also participate in the adaptive phase/ stage of research, which provides the extension had-on-experience of innovation that increase their expertise.
1.2 Principle of periodic Evaluation Monitoring is an on going, continual exercise which is very important in Extension work .It is not only the extension agent who are interested, the funding agencies, both locally and internationally are also interested, this is because failure of extension programme has a lot of implications as could affect extension work in future.
Apart from monitoring which is on going, it is also important thet evaluation of such programmes should be carried out.
Evaluation is important as it is useful in guiding educational programmes and teaching efforts towards improving the lots of the farmers.
This is because evaluation will help to determine the effectiveness of the extension programmes, specific direction to be followed and areas of emphasis in future.
However, evaluation of the extension programmes will help to determine the subject and weakness of such programmes for planning in future.
In view of the above, it is important to appraise periodically extension programme to find the relevance of the programme at a particular period.
This is to know if such programme are keeping with existing changes/ condition of the community, it will also help to know if the method of the extension personnel used is effective or not.
At the end it will also help to see whether the objectives of the programme are being achieved.
1.3 Principle of Educational Responsibility Extension is educational in function though assisting people to make their own decisions among various alternatives put before them.Extension should not be involved in civic responsibilities or other assignments that could affect the trust and respect of the people.
In many developing countries, because of lack of basic institutional facilities to handle the supply of inputs extension has no alternative but to combine this with its educational function.
Hence, it has been involved with the distribution of seeds, fertilizers and fungicides as to the detriment of its educational function.
The consequences of such actions are mistrust which could arise due to failure to successful delivery of such materials.
The diversion would also affect the extension agent from concentrating on his primary responsibilities.
Therefore, the principle states that extension should be strictly based on its educational responsibilities.
2.0 Conclusion In this unit, you have learnt about some principles of extension based on facts and knowledge, principle of working with specialist, principle of periodic evaluation responsibility of extension agent.
3.0 Summary A summary of the major points in this unit is that (a) Extension principle of fact and knowledge based on the need for extension to use empirical facts and well proven technology (ii) Principle of working with specialist as the main source of knowledge being disseminated to the farmers (iii)Principle of periodic evaluation.
This is to assess the performance of the extension activities (iv) Principle of educational responsibility which restrict extension worker to the performance of only educational role.
4.0 Tutor Marked Assignment (i) List three principle of extension mentioned in this unit (ii) Discuss the principle of periodic appraisal and working with specialist.
MODULE 2 : Unit 5 Research Extension Famer Linkage Table of Content 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objectives 3.0 Concept of technology in Agricultural Extension 3.1 Categories of Extension 3.2 Research-Extension-Farmers Linkage 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutor Marked Assignment 1.0 Introduction What is Research-Extension Farmers Linkage?
Why is it important?
2.0 Objectives At the end of the unit, you should be able to i.
Understand the concept of research-extension-farmers linkage ii.
What technology entails iii.
Identify the categories of Technology iv.
Importance of technology in improving production capacity of Farmers 3.0 The concept of Agricultural Technology Technology is the application of knowledge for practical purposes (Swason) 1997).
Technology is to help improve human conditions, the natural environment or to carry out other socio-economic activities.
Technology can be classified into two major categories: (1)Material Technology where knowledge is embodied into a technological product such as tool, agrochemicals equipment, improved plant varieties or hybrids, improved breeds of animals (e.g.
semen from progeny-tested slues used for artificial insemination) (2) Knowledge-based technology such as technical knowledge management skills, and other processes that farmers need to successful grow of crop or produce animal produce.
It should be noted that transfer of material technology to farmers generally involves the production, distribution and sale of seeds, implements, agrochemicals, and other production inputs.
Therefore the transfer of technology process is simpler than training and disseminating technical knowledge and management skills to large numbers of poorly educated farmers who operates in different ecological zone.
Most knowledge based technologies such as improved crop or livestock management practices, integrated pest management (IPM) and soil and water management practices are generally taught through vocational training programme for rural young people or disseminated through a public funded Extension system.
Therefore, material and knowledge based technologies are generally closely interviewed.
3.1 Categories of Technology In order to understand the different roles that research extension, input supply dealers and other system actors should play in the technology development and transfer process.
It is essential to differentiate between categories of technology.
Each category of technology follows different types of channel such as new technology is developed and transferred to farmers.
However, the common types of technology being transferred to the farmers are in these categories.
Crops Technology Genetic (Improved varieties of hybrids) Crop Management practices Plant Protection Cropping Systems Livestock Technology Genetic (breed improvement) Livestock Management Practices Animal health practices forage or range management.
Other types of Technology Farming Systems Soil and water Management practices Farm Mechanization Agro forestry Post-harvest technology Farm management It is important to note that different types of crop or livestock technologies have both hardware and software components.
For example a new crop variety, as type of material technology, cannot fully be exploited without having a complimentary set of agro economic or crop management practices, including pest management.
Likewise, improved breeds of livestock generally require higher levels of management, including nutrition, housing and preventive health practices.
Therefore, the functional relationship or linkages, both within and across different categories of technology, must be carefully examined in identifying constraints that limit the flow of technology.
3.2 Research-Extension-Farmer linkage Research and extension are two vital parts of the agricultural support services.
The research programmes had to be designed in such a way that is in touch with the farmer’s problem.
This is why it is important that there should be sufficient cooperation between extension agents works with the farmers to identify their problems and areas of needs which serves as input for Research as shown in the table.
RESEARCH-EXTENSION-FARMER A two-way communication from the farmers to the extension agents to the research and the from reaserch to extension agents to the farmers.
Communication among the three different groups requires an unstanding of the needs and levels of education of all three (Baharsjah(1985) To promote agricultural developments, information must reach the farm level in a useable form.
Researchers traditionally are not the best equipped to transform their results u=into a form understandable to the farmers.
Therefore, a major role of extension agents is to translate this information into culturally compatible and socially acceptable recommendations, adapted to the farmers level of understanding and resources.
In the Research-Extension-Farmers Linkages, there are two models.
In the first research and extension are in the same institution.
In the United States the two functions are located in the land grant universities where specialist often have both research and extension assignment.
They may also teach in the facility.
This system assumes that the farmers are well educated, have good communication facilities, are relatively few in number with large holdings and are supported by a viable commercial sector that provides them with inputs and knowledge.
In the second model, the research and extension institution are separate because of the nature of agricultural sector, the number of people and the traditions of the country.
In Nigeria, the research and extension are in separate institutions.
The extension services are resident in the state Agricultural Development Projects (ADPs), the ADP’s link up with the research institutions and the university while they are also effectively linked with the farmers.
This is because the training and visit system is still operational in Nigeria.
Hence, the extension agents visits farmers fortnightly get the impact points monthly after the monthly technical review meetings (MTRM) involving researches/experts, subject matter specialists and extension personnel.
The unit has discussed what technology entails and the importance of technology in improving the production capacities of the farmers.
You were also made to understand that there has to be effective linkage between-Extension-Farmers before any feasible impact could be made on the people.
4.0 Conclusion The unit has discussed what technology entails and the importance of technology in improving the production capacities of the farmers.
You were also made to understand that there has to be effective linkages between Research-Extension farmers before any feasible impact could be made on the people.
5.0 Summary The key issues discussed in this unit include Technology is the application of knowledge for practical purposes There are two types of technology (a) Material technology (b) Knowledge based technology Technology in agriculture are classified to 3 categories crop technology Livestock technology Other types of technology There is a continuous between Research Extension Farmers  6.0 Tutor Marked Assignment (a) Explain the Research Extension Farmers Concept (b) Why is agricultural technology important to Nigerian economy 7.0 References and Further Reading Swanson B. E. (1970) Strengthening Research-Extension-Farmer Linkage in Improving Agricultural Extension Swanson B.E., Benl/c R. B., Sofranko A.I., F.A.O.
Rome recommendations, adapted to the farmers level of understanding and resources.
Baharsjah S. (19X5): Improving Research-Extension Linkage The Indonesian Experience in Research-Extension-Farmer, Two-way continuum for Agricultural.
Development.
Eds Cernea mm, Coulter J.K., Russel F.A.
World Bank Washington, D.C. USA MODULE 3: Unit 1: Concept of Agricultural Extension Unit 2: Rural Community and Characteristics Unit 3: Components of Rural Community Unit 4: Development of Rural Communities in Nigeria Unit I Concepts of Agricultural Extension 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objectives 3.1 Roles of Extension in rural development 3.2 Support systems for effective agricultural extension agent operations 3.3 Requirements for effective performance of agricultural extension agents in rural developments.
4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutor marked assignment 7.0 References and textbooks for further reading 1.0 Introduction: In agricultural extension the role of the extension agents could not be underscored as they are closest to the farmers.
The Unit will make you understand the role of extension agents in rural development, the requirements for the extension agents effective performance and the support system in extension work.
This is important to enable you understand the key players in extension work.
2.0 Objectives: After studying this unit it is expected that you should be able to: (1) Understand the role of extension agents in rural development (2) State the support systems in agricultural extension (3) Understand the requirements for extension agents to function effectively.
3.1 The Role of Extension agents in rural development Extension agents are very important in agricultural development process.
Specifically, the basic role of extension agents is that it helps in the improvement of those who are involved in primary food production.
This is because it involves a shift from the traditional resource based method of production to a new science base method.
The science based methods involve the adoption of new varieties, new cultural practices, use of agrochemicals and other capital – intensive inputs.
Before these new technologies are adopted, the farmers need to be aware of them and learn how to use them correctly in their farming environment.
Specifically, agricultural extension performs these roles: • It serves the role of educational development.
The extension agent educate the farmers through the dissemination of information on innovation on how best to use the resources and services available, develop the right attitude and skills that would help client’s production.
• Extension agent serves as vacuum filler.
The extension agents help in the area of input supply to the clientele.
This is because when new technologies are introduced, it had to be backed up with inputs which may not be within the reach of the farmers, the extension agents help to direct the farmers to where the inputs could be obtained, he also helps to organize them to groups so that they can benefit from economics of large scale.
He also helps the farmers to obtain information on financial sources which they may not be aware of.
Extension agent also serves as a channel for communicating new ideas, technology or innovations to the clientele.
Extension fills the gap between the research and farmers.
He ensures that the researches to be culturally compatible, economically feasible and sociologically acceptable to the people.
• Extension agent serves as farmers trainer for decision making.
Essentially the extension agent focus on equipping farmers with marketing and investment information and training them to make decision concerning those aspects of agricultural prices and economic situation.
This is with a view of enhancing their level of income.
• It is the role of extension agent to mobilize farmers to form groups and associations.
This is with a view of making farmers to work together and also enhancing their capital base as they can pull resources together to obtain inputs and other materials required for production and processing.
* Extension agent holds to develop the potentials of the farmers especially the youth to become leaders.
This is because he selects some of the farmers as contact farmers who provide leadership in their various groups.
The performance of these roles by the extension agents help to enhance cultivation practices of the farmers and their ability to use modern techniques which invariably increases their income and standard of living.
3.1 Support System For Effective Extension Agents Operation Agricultural extension can successfully perform the roles stated above only if the following activities are provided, since he cannot work in isolation of other factors.
1) Comprehensive Team: A team approach is an essential tool for implementation of extension system.
A team consists of the following: (a) Administrators who would be responsible for providing conducive working environment necessary to facilitate other members of the tem.
The administrators organize the logistic support like vehicles and equipment that is needed and also hygiene factors that motivates the extension agent.
(b) Researchers: Extension cannot work without the researchers.
They are the thrust of innovation.
Extension agents inform the researchers about the farmers’ problem and the researcher uses his expertise to study and come up with solutions to the problem.
It is the solution that constitutes improved technology which is disseminated to the farmers for adoption.
Therefore, extension agent cannot thrive without the researchers.
(c) Subject Matter Specialists (SMSs): In the Training and Visit System of extension the subject matter specialist position is very important.
They are experts in specific areas of specialization who relates directly with the extension agent and plays a key role during the monthly Technical Renew meetings where “impact points” are developed for the farmers.
The SMSs helps in interpreting researcher findings to the extension agents and farmers.
They also help in diagnosing the problems that arise from the application of research findings and provides solution to such problems.
They also work closely with the researchers since they are on ground in the same organisation with the extension agents.
2) Production of Training Materials and Aids: The farmers who are the grassroots beneficiaries of the extension teaching team are largely illiterate.
To facilitate the dissemination of information to the different teaching methods had to be adopted.
This is because they are also heterogeneous in nature i.e.
different age groups, social status, educational level etc.
It is therefore important to utilize teaching techniques that will suit various categories of the farmers.
Therefore, to facilitate the dissemination of information several teaching aids such as film strips, posters, flannellograph, fliers, visual aids are used.
In view of the above there is the need for an organized body charged for the production and distribution of these materials to be in existence.
3) Provision of Essential Inputs, Capital and Credit Facilities: Extension agents’ roles are limited to communication and educational roles.
Therefore, he cannot distribute input or provide credit facilities to the farmers.
It is therefore important that for farmers to have access to improve technology there should be a ground for agro services.
In some states of Nigeria, there exists Agricultural Input Supply Companies (AISC) who provides the inputs to the farmers to back up the technology being introduced to them by the extension agents.
4) In-Service Training Programme: The extension agents had to be trained regularly to update their knowledge and keep them abreast of new technologies.
This will not only improve their performances but on the long run enhance their credibility and integrity with the farmers.
5) Evaluation of Extension Programmes: Every programme output needed to compare with the objectives, using the evidences on ground so as to be able to know the targets are met and objectives achieved.
This is of utmost importance as it will provide a factual base for the modification of any aspect of the programme that is not in lie with the desired results.
3.2 Requirements for Effectiveness of Extension Agents in Rural Development With the key roles of extension agents in rural development work, it is important that the following factors should be considered for the extension agents to perform their duties effectively.
1) The extension must have appropriate educational background.
This is required to enable him understand what to do, why he must do it as the level of skill gap be very low.
The background is important as it provides the background to whatever work he will do and also the framework for updating his skills.
2) The extension agent must have belief in what he is doing.
If the extension agent does not have belief in what he is doing, definitely his level of interest and zeal will be low.
It is therefore not possible for such extension agent to make success of what he is doing.
The interest and ability to face challenges are quite important.
3) There should be constant training for the extension agents.
The extension agents should have opportunities for in-service training, and regular professional training so as to update their skill and enhance their credibility and integrity with the farmers.
4) The extension agents should be provided the required materials such as training aids and materials for effective teaching and demonstration to the farmers.
5) It is important that good condition of service must be in place to motivate the extension agent for optimum performance.
There must be room for career progression while opportunity for self development must be provided so a to encourage the extension agent to be committed to his work.
6) The required extension tem must be in place and made functional so as not to frustrate the efforts of the extension agents.
The extension agent cannot work without the researchers, subject matter specialist and effective administrators.
It is therefore important that the team should be available so that the necessary conductive environment for effective performance could be provided.
7) Financial support to extension agents should be adequate.
This is because no extension work could be carried out if not well funded.
Extension training, establishment of demonstration plots and movement of the extension worker requires money as such, funding should not only be available but should be available as at when required.
8) The issue of wide extension farmer ratio should be given adequate consideration.
In situations where there exists 1:3000 extension to farmer ratio may not augur well.
The extension agent may not be able to effectively manage such ratio with the available resources.
It is therefore important that minimum extension to farmer ratio should be maintained.
9) The extension agents’ performance should be constantly objectively evaluated.
This is to assess the performance of the extension work and help advice appropriately in areas where he needed to improve.
4.0 Conclusion In this section you have been made to understand the roles of extension agents, the support system that must be in place for the extension worker to operate effectively.
You have also learnt that what is required to make the extension agent effective in the performance of her duties.
With this unit, you must have realized some factors that must be functional for effective rural development in Nigeria.
5.0 Summary In this unit you have learnt • The specific roles of extension agent are rural development work.
• The support systems such as extension team (administrators, researches subject Matter specialists) production of teaching materials and aids, provision of inputs and training programmes that must be available for effective extension agent operation.
• Requirements for effectiveness of extension agents in the performance of his duties.
6.0 Tutor Marked Assignments 1.
Mention 3 roles of extension agent.
Explain one of the roles.
2.
List the elements in support system of extension work.
3.
State for requirements for effectiveness of agriculture extension agent.
References and further Readings S.K.
Williams, T.M.
Fenley, C.E.
Williams (1981): A manual for Agricultural Extension Workers.
Published by Les Shyraden, Ibadan, Nigeria.
Unit 3: Rural Community and Characteristics Table of Contents 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objectives 3.0 The Concept of Rural Community 3.1 Definition of Cultural Elements in Rural Community 3.2 Characteristics of Rural Community 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutor Market Assignment (TMA) 7.0 References and Further Readings 1.0 Introduction The Unit focused on rural community and its characteristics.
This is with a view of Giving you the opportunity to understand the concept of rural community and the definition of the cultural elements in rural community.
In the unit you will also learn about the characteristics of rural community and the peculiarities of the rural communities.
2.0 Objectives After completing this unit, it is expected that you will (i) Understand what rural community entails.
(ii) Define the cultural elements in rural community (iii) Appreciate the characteristics of rural community.
3.1 The Concept of Rural Community There have been various approaches to the definition of ‘rural’.
Rural community had been defined or classified on the basis of population, infrastructural facilities of occupation.
It should be realized that all these factors are important in the classification of communities.
The America Bureau of Census adopted the use of number of inhabitant in a place to classify communities.
The Bureau stated that a population of 2,250 and above are urban area while lesser population are classified as rural, however, this did not take into consideration other factors.
In Nigeria, the National Population Commission asserted that population of below 20,000 is rural, however this is too simplistic to help understand rural in Nigeria.
All the various index should be considered while classifying communities.
This include (a) Population size (b) Population density (c) Proportion of people involved in agriculture as primary source of income (d) Infrastructural facilities (e) Primary level of social interaction.
The rural communities invariable are of small population size, population density is low, they are mostly involved in agricultural production fishing and pastoral occupations have their own peculiar recreation modalities.
The level of infrastructural facilities is also why poor in the rural communities lacked electricity, portable water, all season motorable roads, educational facilities, health facilities etc.
These are key elements that effect level of production, income and standard of living.
The peculiarities and the aforementioned factors affect poverty level of the people in the rural area.
Studies have shown that majority of those in rural areas of Nigeria live below the poverty line.
The consequence is that with high population of the rural dwellers living in the ambits of poverty and the rural population constituting majority of the country’s population, for any meaningful development to take place in the country, the rural sector should be taken into consideration, since it is basis for primary production and one of the largest sources of labour for production.
3.2 Definition of Cultural Elements in the Community.
3.2.1 Society: This involves collection or active gathering of people in meaningful social relationships.
These relationships is from different perspectives, it could be cultural, religious, economic or political.
It also involves group of people sharing common culture, like the Ibibios, agedes, etc.. Social System: This is a group of people who interacts and as such develops mutual relationship that influences the behaviour of each other on a permanent basis in the long run.
It consists of various institutions that specifically have goals or purposes.
3.2.2 Family: This is a social unit from which an individual emerges from biological or by adoption.
A family comes into existence when a man (not a boy) and woman comes together taking the traditional and cultural laws of the land into consideration to become husband and wife, with such companionship leading to procreation.
Therefore, the father, the mother and products of consummation (children) living together under one roof constitutes the family.
It is expected that they eat together, take a decisions together and have common social enterprise.
3.2.3 Status: This is a position or start in the system of social relationship.
The level of prestige and honour that it brings may influence the characteristics of such wealth, education, position in the society, political strength, marriage, leadership, experience or learning etc.
In some societies it is flexible while in some societies it is fixed like the Indian cost system.
3.2.4 Power: This is the ability of a person or group of persons to realize their own will ever against resistance from any quarter.
There are two major types.
(i) Authority: which is the power that comes voluntarily from the consent of the people.
It is tied to particular position and not to the individual himself e.g.
Obi, Eze, Oba, etc.
(ii) Influence: This is the control over others, which is not based on a person’s position but in the individual themselves.
This may be due to his age, achievement/pas activities etc e.g.
an ex-president.
3.2.5 Institutions: Social institutions are an enduring interrelated complex of norms, roles, values, beliefs, sanctions and relationship that change and regulate behaviour to meet human needs.
Institutions have a abstract aspect (i.e.
norms, values, beliefs and sanctions) and a structure i.e.
the organization of persons or functionaries who bring into action the abstract as well as the set of material instruments used to translate them into actuality/reality.
Attitude: This is a particular feeling towards something.
3.2.6 Socialization: This is the process through which the social and cultural heritage is transmitted to the individual in the process of growing up.
It could be a case of a new student who came in, to school and changed his/her way due to interaction with other people.
3.2.7 Social Control: This is the process by which deviance is eliminated or people made to conform to socio-cultural values, beliefs and customs of the society.
There are formal way e.g.
police and informal ways like gossips, public disgrace.
3.2.8 Culture: Consist of artificial objects, institutions and modes of life or thought which characterize a group.
It is a way of life which include knowledge, belief, art, moral, law and custom of the people.
3.2.9 Beliefs: This is what is accepted to be true, regardless of how it was found.
It is any cognitive proposition about any aspect of the universe that is accepted as true e.g.
the traditional oracle in Yorubaland like Ifa, and deities like Sango, Oya, Ogun, etc.
It is important for extension workers to know and appreciate this aspect of the clientele.
Beliefs are divided into superstition which is derived from ignorance or fear of the unknown e.g.
children should not stand up while eating because the food will go to the leg and taboos which are objects or practices forbidden because of beliefs attached to them e.g.
banning people in a community from eating yam until yam festival has been carried out.
3.2.10 Norms: These are rules or standards which govern behaviour.
They constitute social expectations of what is normal, required or acceptable behaviour in given situation.
They provide the criteria for judging behaviour.
Norms are the most critical elements in the understanding and prediction of social and communication actions.
The consistency that is found in the behaviour of the rural people comes from adherence to norms.
The sub-units of norms are folkways, mores and law.
Folkways are customary practices or ways of behaviour to meet daily situations.
It includes customs, which are passed down from previous generations and which new additions are made.
It ranges from trifling act ands behaviour to the most serious.
Violation of folkways does not lead to punishment e.g.
greetings of elders in the morning in Yoruba land by prostrating for him.
Folkways are subdivided to fashion which are practices that undergo rapid changes e.g.
dressing and custom which are relatively permanent like naming ceremony, marriage, etc.
Mores are norms, which are indispensable to a social group’s welfare.
The violation of mores is believed to endanger social existence.
Mores are the popular habits and traditions; while an individual may disobey ordinary folkways with impunity, he cannot violate the mores without incurring punishment.
Mores influence the moral conduct of the people.
Conformity to m ores brings discipline to the society e.g.
punishing those who steal by exposing them to public disgrace law are codified or written norms.
3.2.11 Values: These are ideas, principles, standards held by the society as to what is important or good or what is worth working for.
They are considered desirable and thus highly cherished.
It is a function of mindset e.g.
the wearing of locally made cheap and simple dress like tie and dye clothes (adire).
3.3 Characteristics of Rural Communities The rural people are entrenched in their traditional ways of life despite the changing trend and dynamic nature of the society.
This could be adduced to their lack of awareness of emerging trends and the opportunities in other areas of the society, even when they are aware they may not have access to such opportunities.
Specifically, these are the prominent features of a rural community: 3.3.1 Occupation: Agricultural production which includes production, livestock rearing, fish and recently olericulture (snailery) are the primary occupation of the rural people.
Some are also involved in food processing like gaari, palm oil etc.
They use mostly simple tools for their activities due to their financial position.
3.3.2 Size of Community: With the definition of ‘rural’ they are small in size with little population pressure.
This is important because the rural farmers require large areas for cultivation.
There is also low population density which is a great opportunity for intimate social relationship which prevents psychological isolation.
3.3.3 Composition of Rural Communities: This could be described in form of age, sex, marital status, level of education and religious affiliations among others.
3.3.3.1 Age: According to Jibowo (2000) the population of children in the rural population is larger than that of the urban population; it also has a lower population in the age category of 15-44 with higher proportion of its population above the age of 45.
3.3.3.2 Sex: The rural area is characterized by both male and female but the male dominates the female.
Characteristically here is restriction to female activities and leadership in most household.
The male heads the family and takes most decision.
3.3.3.3 Marital Status: Marriage is highly cherished in the rural community.
This is a position that is highly revered, there is set rules about purity before marriage and married people are respected as they are classified into a higher status than the single.
It is regarded as sign of maturity and being responsible.
3.3.3.4 Religion: In the areas they are mostly traditional worshipper but with the emerging trend and the high growth rate of evangelism where the rural area is of great target, Christianity and Islamic religions are rapidly penetrating the rural areas with many being converted.
It is a common feature to have shrines and designated area for idol worshipping in the rural areas.
3.3.3.5 Educational Level: In most rural area the level of illiteracy is high.
This could be attributed to lack of educational facilities such as schools and equipment required for conducive learning.
3.3.4 Environment: In the rural areas the people are exposed to physical or in organize environment and have access to these natural forces.
The farmer operates in the open area under the influence of rain, sun and wind and there is good relationship between their survival and the natural forces.
The physio-social environment or material culture is low in the rural area as there are low presences of buildings, machines, pipe-borne water, electricity, computer etc.
The bio-social environment is homogenous as there are few human beings of difference races and nationalities.
3.3.5 Social Stratification: The social classes are few because the opportunities to modify their social position are limited.
The rural people also exhibit less social mobility and social interaction.
The level of social interaction is low because ability to meet with different people from other tribes, races regularly in rare.
Presence of a visitor, particularly of a different race to a remote rural district could create curiosity mingled with suspicion.
There is also high degree of togetherness among the people this is because members of a given rural society are more often from related kinsmen of similar occupation, education, income and other attributes.
They live together in community of ‘fate’.
4.0 Conclusion  From the above discussion, it could be concluded that rural people are of low population size, low density, diverse and rich cultural values.
They also exhibit high level of solidarity and are mostly farmers.
5.0 Summary The unit has discussed the concept of rural community, various cultural elements in the community such as culture, institutions, society, and socialization.
The characteristics of rural communities such as occupation, size, environment and social stratification were discussed.
6.0 Tutor Marked Assignment (T.M.A) 1) Define rural community 2) List five (5) cultural elements in a community 3) Discuss one of the cultural elements 4) Mention three (3) characteristics of rural community.
7.0 References and Further Reading Ekong, E.E.
(1988): An Introduction to Rural Sociology Jumak Publishers Ltd. Ring Road,, Ibadan.
Fadipe, N.A.
(1970): The Sociology of the Yoruba, Ibadan University Press, 1970.
Jibowo, O.
(2000): Essentials of Rural Sociology, Gbemi Sodipe Press Ltd. Unit 4: Components of Rural Community Table of Contents 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objectives 3.0 Main Body 3.1 The Concept of Community 3.2 Extension Agent and Social Process in a Community 3.3 Extension Work and Community Leaders 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutor Marked Assignment 7.0 References and further Readings 1.0 Introduction: In the previous unit you have learnt about the concept of rural community and Its characteristics.
In this unit, you will be taught about the components of rural community, the concept of community, the process of social systems in a community and extension work in rural community.
A good understanding of this concept will enhance your understanding of the work of Extension agents in the community.
It is also important for you to understand the component of a community so that effective social work could be carried out in such communities.
2.0 Objectives: At the end of the unit you will be able to: (a) Understand the concept of a community (b) The type and modus operandi of social process in a community (c) Appreciate the work of extension workers in a rural community 3.0 The Concept of Community (a) Community as a solidarity institution (b) Community as a primary interaction (c) Community as an institutional distinct 3.1.3 Community as a Solidarity Institution: It is a sphere or institutions of society whose function is to produce solidarity.
Such include ethnic groupings, voluntary organisations of various kinds and residential groups.
3.1.2 Community as basis of Primary Interaction The definition is based on the interaction among people and the existence of close relationship among them.
It is interpersonal interaction characterized by informal primary relationship.
3.1.3 Community as Institutional distinct groups: A community is a group of people who share a range of institutions (economic, political and social) on the basis of belonging to some familiar social category.
Community refers to a segment of the people who tends to interact with one another in overlapping friendship network to share similar interests and outlook and to participate in common institution.
Some schools also belief that communities are societies but not all societies are community.
From the content of society, community is viewed as segments of population who are differentiated from others because of their common participation in specific institution and their interaction with one another in friendship and kinship relationships.
Therefore, community exists among persons, sharing similar social status, ethnicity or other characteristics and that common formation and commercial relationship results from competition for economic, political or social interest.
Community could also be regarded as a collectivity of actors who share a limited territorial area as the bases for carrying out the greatest share of their daily activities but with localized population which is interdependent on a daily basis and which carried on a highly generalized series of activities in and through a set of institutions which provided on a day-to-day basis the full range of goods and services necessary for its continuity as a social and economic entity.
3.2 Extension Agent and Social Process in a Rural Community In the community, the extension agent must understand the operational modalities of the people and their life style before he can carry out his assignments successfully.
This is because the process of interaction among people in the rural area is not static, it is dynamic.
In a community some members might come together to build a market at a particular point while others may disagree and go ahead to establish their market in another location, the consequences could be competition and hostility.
There could also be a situation where a culture dominates and absorb other culture through assimilation like in most female colorized country like Cote’d’voire, Bukinafaso where the peoples original way of life has been taken out by French culture.
In some Nigerian communities both English cultur4e and the people’s original culture were blended leading to accumulation when the component of a culture is uniformly distributed throughout a society, the process is called homogenization.
In view of the above, extension agents must live and work with the people so that he can have in-depth understanding of their way of life and how to deal; with them.
The specific social process include: 3.2.1 Competition: In the context of competition it involves opposition and cooperation.
Opposition involves struggle of one against the other in the attempt to achieve something good while cooperation is the unification of the efforts of one with the other in the attempt to attain a goal.
3.2.2 Accommodation This is the adjustment by a person or group to a conflict or threat, resulting in the recognition and acceptance of the relation which define the status of a person or persons in the group or a large organization.
Subordination and super-ordination accompany accommodation with people.
At home, the father is the leader, in his absence the mother while absent the eldest child.
The existing pattern of accommodation enables people to accept their status in a group.
ASSIMILATION: This is the process by which people of diverse culture and racial organs achieve enough social solidarity in the same geographical territory.
An immigrant for example is assimilated when he has acquired enough cultural traits of the new society to get along smoothly with others.
E.g.
in Yoruba communities some Ibos and Hausas have been assimilated into Yoruba sub-culture.
3.2.3 Accumulation This involves the acquisition of new cultural traits by individuals or groups and utilization of these in their new pattern of living.
It has no biological connotation.
For example the introduction of battery cage system into agriculture has influenced significantly the practice of backyard poultry farming in Nigeria.
3.2.4 Social Mobility  This is the movement of a person or cultural traits from one social group or class to another.
While the movement from one group to the other without any influence on the individual societal; class is called horizontal mobility.
Social mobility is often accomplished by increase in characteristics such as income, education, prestige, authority and occupational change.
In the rural area there is limited level of social mobility.
This could be due to most rural people unwillingness to take risk.
3.3 Community Leaders and Agricultural Extension In Nigeria today, the community leaders are performing many function to promote agricultural extension work.
Specifically the community leaders do the following: Education: They help to inform others after being educated on how to utilize a technology/innovation.
It is a matter of teach one, teach all.
Legitimisation: The community leaders approve new programmes which are brought into the community for implementation.
The approval of the leaders implies that such ideas are accepted or rejected in the community.
Planning: Community leaders always serve as the head or chairmen of committees set up to place rural development programmes.
Programme Execution: They take an active part in carrying out rural development programmes in their communities.
Specifically, they contribute money, landed properties, time and energy.
They also organize, supervise, and motivate other people to carry out rural development programmes and to contribute their resources to the programme.
Spokesmanship: Community leaders speak on behalf of their communities with government officials and others outside the community.
They also represent the community in extra-local meetings.
In less important instances, they select other community residents to represent them in meetings outside the community so that they can concentrate on dealing with pressing local issues.
The local leaders perform other crucial functions in extension work which include: (a) support locally for extension activities (b) Increase in the amount of extension teaching that can be done.
(a) The local leaders provide the strong basis for members of the community to be willing and ready to accept the technology being introduced to them by the extension worker.
In most cases they lead the local people to provide facilities such as farm land for demonstration plots.
They therefore facilitates a process where, new practices are more readily accepted by the rural people when its leaders adopt them.
(b) It is not possible for the extension worker to do the job he is expected to do all by himself.
He needs assistance.
The extension worker identifies and train local leaders or innovation while the local leaders in-turn train members of their group or community on the technology.
The consequence is that a multiplier effect is created and a principle of teach one teach all adopted.
4.0 Conclusion The unit has presented what a community is, the social process in the community and the roles of community leaders in extension work.
Discussions in the unit have exposed you to basic things that an extension worker should know in a community where he works.
5.0 Summary The unit discussed the concept of community, extension agent and social process in a community with extension work and community leaders.
It is expected that a study of this unit would have made you understand the content of social system in a community.
6.0 Tutor Marked Assignment (i) Define a community (ii) List 3 elements of social system (iii) What are the specific roles of community leaders in extension work 7.0 References/Textbooks for further Readings Ekong, E.F. (1988): An Introduction to Rural Sociology, Jumak Publishers Ltd. Ringroad, Ibadan.
Fadipe, N.A.
(1970): The Sociology of the Yoruba, Ibadan University Press, 1970.
Jibowo, O.
(2000): Essentials of Rural Sociology, Gbemi Sodipo Press Ltd. Module 3, Unit 5: DEVELOPMENT OF RURLAL COMMUNITIES IN NIGERIA 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objectives 3.0 Problems of Rural Community Development in Nigeria 3.1 Strategies to overcome rural development in Nigeria 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutor Marked Assignment 7.0 References/Books for further Readings 1.0 Introduction Having discussed the concept of rural communities and its composition with the relationship between extension workers and rural development, it is important that you should have adequate knowledge about the problems affecting development in the rural areas of Nigeria.
This is important so as to further understand the need for effective extension system.
2.0 At the end of this unit you will be able to: (a) appreciate the problems confronting the rural areas in Nigeria (b) understanding constraints to development activities in the past (c) understand what is to be done to alleviate such problems 3.1 Problems of Rural Community Development in Nigeria Rural development involves the transformation of the rural community into a socially, economically, politically, educationally, orderly and materially desirable condition with the purpose of improving quality of the rural population.
Efforts to stimulate rural development in most part of Nigeria have failed to take into account the complex nature and structure, of life and living such environments.
Hence most plans fail from the outside or are met with resistance in the rural communities.
In some cases, specific projects are spelt out which in the end will only succeed in dislocating the intricate structures of the rural economies.
It is therefore important to understand the organizational problems.
Problems of rural economies are multivariable in nature and have constituted itself into formidable web of problems that could be classified into five categories.
(a) Natural Problems: There are some of the problems that are not manmade.
This is related to problems in the ecosystem which has brought limitations imposed by physiographic factors such as complex topography, aspect, nature of the rock structure, the pattern of lowlands and the framework of the river system (Olayide, et.
al, 1981).
There are also problems created by climatic factors such as temperature, humidity, nature of precipitation, direction of prevalent and or variable wind.
In order to solve the natural problems, it requires a full knowledge of and the limitations imposed by the ecosystem.
There is also the need to assess how far the ecosystem can be realistically tampered without unleashing dangerous consequence on rural economies.
(b) Social-Cultural Problems: In Nigeria, there are many complex societies that ethnic groups are really complex.
In view of this, there are complex and intricate sets of cultural universe such as social norms, values, traditions, customs, tastes, rites and psychological orientation to change.
All these affects adoption of view techniques and acceptance of changes in social settings.
(c) Politico-Administrative Problems: Over the years the increasing complexity of governmental role is pseudo-planned, pseudo-socialized and pseudo-capitalistic which has led to politico-administrative bottlenecks that defines meaningful as well as permanent solutions.
In Nigeria, political instability and constant change in policies has affected programme planning and implementation in the rural areas however lack of stable and broad based long term national plan towards rural areas has been the fundamental problem.
(d) Organisational Problems: There have been failed attempts to crystallize rural development problems within specific organizational goals.
In most cases the orientation of organizations set up to develop the rural areas does not give room for self-belongingness and the consequence is lack of participatory approach which ends up making the projects unsustainable.
(e) Economic Problems; Many projects of rural development are founded on the rocks of economic problems and/or bottlenecks.
This group of problems has many facets.
First there is the problem of attaining and/or ensuring optimal resource mix.
This is in term of optical alleviation of such productive resources of land, labour, capital water and management.
There is the difficulty of ensuring as well as attains the optimum even under modern systems of production let along under the prevalent traditional system of production in rural Nigeria.
Second, there is the problem of investment rate as well as difficulty of ordering investment projects or setting priorities among projects in the process of rural development.
Third, there is the problem of effectuating and management of projects to attain set targets in the plans of rural development.
It is therefore important that a fool-proof solution should be designed to solve these problems.
3.2 Strategies to develop rural areas in Nigeria A lot of effort is being made at revamping our developing the rural communities in Nigeria.
This could be attributed to the fact that over 70% of Nigeria live in the rural areas and re within the ambit of poverty.
It is therefore important that for any meaningful development to occur strategies should be evolved that will encourage infrastructural and economic development of the rural communities.
The need to strategize for rural community development is important so as to improve income distribution between the rural and urban areas.
(i) Encourage full and proiductive employment in the rural community.
This is to change the situation in which many rural people are under-employed and operate only at the subsistence level, to that in which they apply their full productive capacities and generate commensurate profit from their efforts.
(ii) Increased food production to help the standard of living of the people.
In view of the above, the following could be done specifically to improve development in rural communities.
(i) there should be absolute committed to rural development by all strata of government and planners.
(ii) There should be a strong statistical base for effective planning.
The problem of planning on faulty statistics should be avoided.
In the past, this has been the case and the outcome of projects planned and implemented on wrong statistics is not always peasant.
In most cases it ends up as colossal waste.
(iii) Participatory approach should be used for project initiation, planning and implementation.
All the stakeholders should be carried along to ensure that the fact needs of the people are addressed.
The use of this approach will also enhance sustainability of such projects.
(iv) Participatory Monitoring and evaluation should be introduced as this will provide systematic way of determining programme accomplishments, facilitating effectiveness and efficiency (v) Rural development programme planning should be holistic, it should not concentrate only agricultural production to the neglect of the other sectors.
There should be strategies to develop other sectors since each sector complement the other.
(vi) There should be adequate provision of resources and infrastructure before embarking on any project.
This is to avoid products of abandoned projects.
There are other broad strategies which had been adopted for rural development by many developing countries, Williams (1978).
These are: (a) Community development approach which aims at utilizing the rural people to development themselves through self initiative and motivation with minimum assistance from government.
It involves community members in planning and implementing programmes for their own development.
It stimulates government and other development agencies to provide technical advice and materials in planning and implementing the project.s (b) Agricultural Extension Approach: This aims at assisting the rural farmers to attain development by disseminating information to the farmers on new technology so that they could adopt it, improve their level of income and their standard of living.
It has its own techniques which include the use of demonstration plots, visual and audio visual aids and other methods.
(c) Integrated Rural Development: This combines the development of the various areas of the rural society including agriculture, education, health, nutrition, rural electrification, rural water and crop simultaneously.
The strategy involves mobilization and motivation of rural people in all the activities.
Generally, approaches of rural development include: - situation analysis - formulation of objectives - planning - implementation - evaluation and reconsideration.
4.0 Conclusion In this unit you have learnt about the problems of developing rural areas in Nigeria with the specific strategies that have been used and that is been used.
With the study, it will become easier for you to understand problems of rural development in Nigeria.
5.0 Summary The unit has discussed problems of rural development in Nigeria from a broad perspective, which include organizational problems, economic problems, socio- cultural and politico-administrative problems.
The unit also discussed strategies to adopt in embarking of rural development programmes.
6.0 Tutor Marked Assignment: (1) Mention 3 problems of rural development in Nigeria.
(2) Explain two strategies for developing rural areas in Nigeria.
7.0 References/Further Readings: Ekong, E. (1988): An introduction to rural sociology, Jumak Publishers Ltd. Ibadan.
Jibowu, O.
(2000): Essentials of Rural Sociology, Gbemi Sodipo Press Ltd., Abeokuta.
Williams, S.K.T.
(1978): Rural Development in Nigeria, University of Ife Press, Nigeria.
MODULE 4: COMMUNICATION PRINCIPLES AND STAGES UNIT 1: The Concept of Extension Communication UNIT 2: Elements of agricultural Extension Communication UNIT 3: Variety of Teaching Method UNIT 4: Group Approach in Extension Communication UNIT 5: Mass Media and Ora Media Utilization in Agriculture Unit1: The Concept of Extension Communication 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objectives 3.0 Meaninig of Extension communication 3.1 Scope and Nature of Extension Communication 3.2 Characteristics of Communication in Extension 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutor Marked Assignment 7.0 References INTRODUCTION : The concept of Extension Communication is to make you aware of the extension communication.This is important so that you can understand the meaning of extension communication , the extent of extension communication and the nature bof extension communication.
A good understanding of the unit enhances your understanding in the subsequent unit of this module.
2.0 OBJECTIVES At the end of the unit , you should be able to: (1) Understand what Extension Communication is; (2) Scope and nature of Extension Communication ; (3) Characteristic of Communication is extension.
3.1 Meaning of Extension Communication Commuincation is derived from the word communis meaning common.
It is conscious attempt to share information and ideas with others.
it could be considered as a means by which information is passed from the source s to receiver with the intention of bringing some changes on the part of the receiver.
In Agricultural Extension Information disseminated to improve the knowledge, develop the skill of the receiver and change their activities.
It should be noted that extension communication forms the basis of the principles of Agricultural Extension as it changes the people to be attentive so that information being disseminated , individuals may progress to higher standard of accomplishment and living in increasingly complete society.
Agricultural Extension communication therefore involves methods of planning and packaging information to bring about changes in farmers behavior and farming practices.
3.2 Scope and Nature of Extension communication Agricultural Extension Communication involves all facets of agriculture such as crop production , animal production ,soil management , environmental conservation , food processing and farm mechanization where there are information to disseminate to enhance the production capacity of those involved.
Extension communication also involves the management and strengthening of linkages of agricultural research-Extension –Farmer.
Generally by its support .
dissemination of information that could support improved production capacity.
The nature of agricultural extension communication is entrenched in utilization of improved technology by the end users who are less knowledgeable .
It involves getting the clientele / audience to understand the innovation that is being promoted and adoption of such innovation to enhance farmers’ production and income.
Agricultural Communication also requires that different information received require different offerings in communication design and approach since clientele technological needs differ.
Therefore , specific audience requires peculiar or unique strategies for communicating with them.
3.3 Characteristics of Communication It is important that communication in extension should be a two- way process .
It must communicate ideas which are clearly and accurately stated.
Communication must also be organized and very logical so as to attain the objectives of such information dissemination .
It is important that the receiver must cooperate in communication or else the process would not be complete.
There must be use of correct words and symbols to conform to local customs, and pattern.
Communication must also assume some social responsibilities.
This is by ensuring that issues or technologies that could be injurious to the farmers are carefully handled and mitigated.
4.0 Conclusion: The unit has introduced you to the concept of Extension Communication and that no principle of Agricultural extension could work without effective communication technique in place.
5.0 Summary.
The main points discussed in this unit include; The meaning of Agricultural Extension The nature and scope of Agricultural Extension The Characteristics of agricultural extension communication The need to have effective agricultural extension communication technique to attain the objectives of principles of agricultural extension.
6.0 Tutor Marked Assignment (1) What is the meaning of Agricultural Extension.
Reference / Books for further reading AgbamuJ.U : Essentials of Agricultural Communication in Nigeria.
Malthouse Press Limited, Lagos , Nigeria  Unit 2: Elements of Agricultural Extension Communication Table of Content 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objectives 3.0 Characteristics of extension communication 3.1 Elements of Extension Communication 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutor Marked Assignment 7.0 References 1.0 Introduction This unit will discuss communication process as an essential element in the extension education process which it is important for you to know and be knowledgeable in.
This is because the elements of communication are key factors in communication process and university life.
It gives people opportunity to express their minds, exchange ideas, feelings or impressions so that each gains a common understanding of the meaning, intent and use of the message.
2.0 Objectives: At the end of the study, you will be able to: (cid:2) Understand the characteristics of communication in extension (cid:2) Know the elements in extension communication (cid:2) Appreciate how the elements influence communication process 3.1 Characteristic of Communication in Extension 1) In Agricultural Extension communication is two-ways.
The extension agent communicates with the farmers while the farmers also give him feed back on innovations that has been introduced to them.
2) Communication in Agricultural Extension is to communicate ideas.
The extension again must know and receive the impact point which is accurate, clear and appropriate for the farmers.
3) Communication must be organized.
Materials and equipment to be used must be carefully arranged so that it can be cohesive and proceeds step by step and gives facts in logical sequence.
Presentations should also be organized to cover the essential areas.
Extension worker should be timely and address the issue in articulate form.
4) Receiver must cooperate in communications.
It is important that the extension should present materials of communication in such a way that the clentiele will want to cooperate by listening, or watching, and responding to such messages.
If the extension agent can stimulate the clientiele he will be eager to come again.
5) It should be noted that there are some standards of culture that affects the success of a communicator.
This include: the use of correct words and symbols and knowledge or their meaning: Conform in to local customs and courtesy; conform to local authority patterns.
Be in good taste, not offend, don’t talk do*** 6) Communicator must assume some social responsibility.
Ideas that are communicated may have unexpected and sometime harmful effect.
For example the extension worker encourages the use of chemicals in pests and disease control, some could be toxic to human beings.
The worker is obligated to make some that the uses of such materials fully understand how to handle them and avoid side effects of such to themselves and their families.
Thoughts should also be given to social changes that may follow the introduction of some new practices.
All these must be considered in communication.
3.2 Major Elements in Extension Communication This is the key factor influencing the effectiveness of the communication as he is the initiator of the communication process.
It is important for the person to have confidence of the end beneficiaries.
This is because the people, whom he wishes to communicate with, will want to know some things about him and this has effect on his credibility.
The credibility of the communicator affects the attitude of people to him.
His credibility depends on: (i) His technical ability/skills (ii) The confidence/trust the people have in him.
It is important that extension organisation should ensure that the extension workers are adequately trained and that they are competent to disseminate information to the clientele.
A good communicator should have the following qualities: (a) Effective understanding of the audience.
This is having indepth knowledge of their interests and needs, the most sustainable message and means of communication, its contents and how to present it.
(b) Has interest in the audience and their welfare.
Understand how his message can help, and how he himself could improve update his skill.
(c) Prepares his communication carefully using the most appropriate materials and devices to elicit interest and ensure a successful reception of the message, and ensure a successful reception of the message, (d) Speaks concisely and clearly, (e) Use simples language that is easily understood by the people, (f) Appreciates the need for a mutual understanding between the teacher ands the learner.
(g) Appreciates the need to be time conscious in all he is doing so as to avoid a situation whence the clientele will loose interest in the learning process.
3.2.1 Factors that leads to poor extension communication by the communicator (a) Inability of the communicator to develop credibility or competence.
(b) Failure of the communicator to have an in-depth understanding of the people and the environment while he works.
This includes the cultural universe of the people.
(c) The communicator not starting from the area of needs and interests of the clientele.
(d) Failure to appreciate the need to keep to time of appointments and not been innovative.
(e) Not giving full information to the clientele, if the communicator gives half information as it relates to the learners problems he may be causing more problems rather than solving the problems.
3.2.2 Message This is the information that a communicator wishes to pass across to the audience.
In agricultural extension it could be the innovation that is being introduced to the clientele.
The message is very important the way it is package, it should be accepted by the receiver, understood and motivating.
It is important to stress that the information must be in line with the needs and interests of the farmers.
(i) In packaging messages, it is important that the message must be in line with the needs and interests of the group receiving the message.
(ii) Be simple timely, accurate and factual.
(iii) Be appropriately organized and should start from simple to complex perspective.
3.2.3 Channels of Communication This is the means or avenue of disseminating the messages.
There are varieties of ways by which messages are channeled for effective and successful response.
The various channels area listed: (1) Individual methods:  - Farm and Home Visit - Office calls - Telephone calls - Correspondence - Result demonstration (2) Group Contact Method - Method Demonstration - Result Demonstration - General Meeting - Lectures - Group Discussion - Workshops - Field or Farm walks - Excursions (3) Mass Media - Publications - Bulletins - Circulars - Leaflets - Exhibits and poster - Agric shows - Cinema - Radio and T.V  - Internet 3.2.4 Receiver The receiver is the audience who decodes the message.
In agricultural extension, the receivers could include the farmers, processors and other end users of information.
The receiver begins the feed back process and also serves as the last person in the communication process.
3.2.5 Diagrammatic representation of communication process Source Message Channel Receiver The diagrammatic representation above shows a view of the process of communication as it takes place in agricultural extension.
The mode of communication is very important from the point of view of educating the farmer.
Every message has a source and the channel (method) through which the message is sent to the receiver (farmers).
Noise represents distractions that could hinder the message.
There are other factors that could affect communication.
This includes factors like knowledge of the subject matter by the communicator and social cultural factors.
4.0 Conclusion In this unit we have discussed the elements of communication and factors to consider in effective communication.
The elements were discussed in details so as to enable you understand what to expect during agricultural communication.
5.0 Summary The main points in these units are: (i) Characteristic of communication in extension (ii) Major Elements in Extension communication (iii) Factors that leads to poor extension communication by the communicator.
(iv) Communication process.
6.0 Tutor-Marked Assignment 1) Write short notes on the communicator.
2) Draw a schematic diagram of extension process 7.0 References/Further Readings: Williams S.K., Fenley J.M., Williams C.E.
(1983): A manual for Agricultural Extension Worker in Nigeria.
Fenley, J.M.
and Williams, S.K.
: Communications in Extension as developed for Western, Nigeria.
MANR Training Bulletin No.
1, August, 1962.
Lai Oso and Adebayo L. (1990): Communication and Rural Development in Nigeria.
Millenium Investment Limited.
Pp 170.
Unit 3: Principle of Variety of Teaching Methods Table of Contents 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objectives 3.0 Principle of Communication and Extension Teaching Methods 3.1 Principle of Variety of teaching methods 3.2 Extension Teaching Methods(i) – Individual contact approach.
3.3 Farm and Home Visit 3.4 Office Calls 3.5 Telephone Calls 3.6 Result demonstration 3.7 Internet Services 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutor – Marked Assignment.
7.0 References and further readings 1.0 Introduction In module 4, Unit where we discussed elements of communication, we mentioned that the receiver is very important in the communication process and that the message is actually directed towards him and that the channel of communication is very important.
The approach to get the message across as discussed is what would be further discussed in details in this unit.
After studying this unit you are expected to have achieved the objectives listed below: 2.0 Objectives After studying this unit, you should be able to: 1) Understand the principle of variety of Teaching Methods 2) Discuss extension teaching methods 3) Explain individual contact methods in detail.
3.0 Principle of Varieties Extension Teaching Method 3.1 Principle of Varieties of Teaching Method One of the principles of agricultural Extension is that extension should use variety of teaching methods in training the rural people.
This is because the audience in extension is heterogeneous desires.
The use of different methods wills also enhance learning experience as shown in a study carried out in U.S. on response to a number of teaching methods.
The result is shown below: Table 1: Response to a number of teaching methods used Methods % of people who changed behavrious Demonstration only 35 Demonstration, radio and lecture 64 Demonstration, radio, lecture, new articles and group 86 discussion Demonstration, radio, lecture, news articles, group 98 discussion, field trip role, playing more or slides and reading  Source: A.T. Mosher: An introduction to Agricultural Extension Agricultural Developments Council/New York.
3.2 Extension Teaching Method and Individual Contact There are many factors that determine the type of extension method to use.
If the extension personnel makes a careful and continuous analysis of his technique and felt there is need for change be could go ahead.
The following factors could also influence extension method to be used: - Nature of subject matter - Amount of extension personnel to be used for the programme - Assistance to be expected from local leaders.
Individual Contact Method: This is an approach that involves contact with the farmers and holding personal discussion/or teach new techniques.
This method gives opportunity for mutual confidence and trust, a pre-requisite to greater reception of new ideas.
3.3 Farm and Home Visit This involves personal visits to the farm or homes of the farmers to hold personal discussion and/or disseminate information to farmers on new techniques.
It is important that the extension agent understand why he is visiting and the visiting should be significant and important to meet the needs of the clientele.
The visit provides the extension workers the first hand knowledge of discussion with the farmers and understanding their situation.
Home and farm visit also builds self confidence in the farmer and promotes good public relations of worker and extension service to the public.
The major limitation to the practice is that it requires a large amount of workers time and there could be a misunderstanding of such visits by some farmers.
3.3 Office Calls This is not so effective in Nigeria., It involves the farmers visiting the office of the extension work to discuss their needs and problems with him.
In \case where there are large scale farms, the extension personnel can also visit the farmers in their farm office to disseminate information to him.
3.4 Telephone Calls This aspect of extension method has been in operating in the developed world but due to poor infrastructural facilities in Nigeria, it was costly.
With the recent development and GSM in the country it is a method of communication that is now desirable, it involves the farmer calling on extension work at moments when information are required and also the extension worker calling on the farmer to arrange meetings and disseminate other information the correspondence makes response to be immediate after request is received, it makes correspondence to be concise, clear, and faster.
3.5 Result Demonstration This is a procedure which is carried on by an extension worker to prove the advantages of, and building confidence in a practice or series of practices to recommend to the farmers.
It should be noted that based on the confidence in extension workers, the clientele have more belief in what the extension worker recommends most especially when it is practical and based on initial local practice that has been improved upon de to research.
3.5.1 (A) Plan for the demonstration - Decision on what areas of extension programme requires demonstration - Planning and sourcing for the required materials.
- Strategies to increase the confidence of the clientele in the practices.
- Keeping the result demonstration in line with the programme objectives.
- Decide on what kind of local proof will be needed to enhance learning.
- Decide on how many repeats of the demonstration will be needed and where they will be given.
(B) Prepare for the demonstration - Act all the required materials - Incorporate one or two method demonstration meetings to create interest and show how the practice is done.
(C) Complete the demonstration - See that all final steps are taken at the demonstration.
- Summaries the data to be able to interpret it in terms of local farm practices.
- Use as many visual aids and charts as possible.
The use of result demonstration will help in starting new practices and gives the extension worker confidence in what he is recommending moreso, the farmers have participated in the demonstration.
3.6 Internet Facilities This is one of the fastest means communication.
It could involve the extension agent sending mails, documents, instruction guides etc.
to the farmers.
The farmers could also send information to the extension agent through this channel.
The farmer and extension agent could also chat on internet.
This is one of the fastest means of communication and getting across to the farmers.
This only limitation is the problem of limited internet facilities in rural Nigeria and ability of the farmers to use these facilities in view of their low level of education.
Conclusion: he unit has discussed the individual contact method of agricultural extension.
You must have learnt how Farm and Home Visit, office calls, telephone calls, result demonstration and internet facilities are being utilized to facilitate information dissemination between the extension agent and the farmers.
4.0 Summary The main points in these units are: o Importance of individual contact approach o Technique and importance of Farm and Home Visits, Office calls and Telephone calls o Methods demonstration o Utilization of Internet Services for Extension contact.
5.0 Tutor Market Assignment 1) List four individual contact methods in agricultural extension 2) Explain two of these methods 6.0 Reference Books for further Reading Williams S.K, Fenley, J.M., Williams, C.E.
(1983): A manual for Agricultural Extension Worker in Nigeria.
Fenley, J.M.
and Williams, S.K.., Communications in Extension as developed for Western, Nigeria.
MANR Training Bulletin No.
1 August, 1962.
Unit 4: Group Approach in Extension Communication 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objectives 3.0 Group Approach in Extension Communication 3.1 Method Demonstration 3.2 General Meetings 3.3 Visual Aids 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutor Marked Assignment 7.0 References/Books for further Readings  1.0 Introduction In the last unit, you must have learnt the various ways by which the extension worker communicates with individual farmers.
It is pertinent to note that in agricultural extension, the work is not limited to few farmers but various groups of farmers.
The groups of farmers must be reached and the extension worker using groups’ approaches will make the work faster and cheaper.
In this unit you will discuss the above in details.
2.0 Objectives At the end of the study of this unit, you should be able to: o Understand the concept of group contact method o Effectively discuss method demonstration o Know how to conduct general meetings 3.0 Group Contact Methods This is an approach which involves the extension worker disseminating information to a group of farmers at the same time using different techniques.
The choice of group approach to use depends on many factors such as level of education, age, the subject matter or the type of innovation, the resources (Personnel and Materials) available, the stage of infrastructural development etc.
It should be realized that no single method is effective, a combination of factors have been found to be most effective.
3.1 Method Demonstration This method is conducted by the extension worker or experts or well trained individual to impart skill in a group of people.
It is a method specifically to teach “how to do it”.
Various skills such as how to spray for insect or disease control, how to apply; fertilizer, how to adjust a cultivator, and how to organize a farm youth club.
It should be noted that method demonstration is a combination of learning and doing things.
It involves the farmers setting instructions and been involved in the actions.
In order to accomplish method demonstration the following steps should be taken: (a) Plan the method demonstration by: (i) Determine the subject matter areas in which to give demonstrations (ii) Decide on what skills to be taught and how many times it is to be repeated.
(iv) Decide on and select the equipment to be used.
(b) Recharge the demonstration: There is the need to carry out a ‘mock’ demonstration before the day so that necessary corrections could be made ahead of time.
This is because failures, apologies and excuses will distract farmers from the demonstration.
(c) Present the demonstration: Carry out the demonstration involving all the farmers, carry out the procedures in calm and well composed manner.
Allow questions and permit the farmers to be practically involved.
(d) Follow up the method of demonstration After the exercise, it is important to get feed back on the teachings of the clientele so that appropriate follow up could be planed.
This is also important probably some points were not available locally and the farmer needed information.
Generally, Group demonstration is important because it involves seeing, hearing, discussions and stimulated learning which enhances learning.
The method is very good provided the extension worker has a deep understanding of what to do and how to do it.
3.2 General Meetings (a) The above could be in form of lectures.
This is a one-way process and does not give room as such for demonstration.
It is therefore important that the extension agent makes it a two communication; therefore the extension worker should: (i) Encourage discussion, he should invite questions and comments so that this could help others too.
(ii) Visual aids and other materials should be effectively utilized.
(b) Group Discussion This is a process that involves two or more people who pool their knowledge and feelings through mutual agreement and clarify the issue under consideration.
The group discussion should be facilitated to identify needs and clarify the farm situation.
(c) Excursion In order to further strengthen the client4ele to be confident about the innovation, tours could be organized so that the farmers could visit places where innovations to be introduced are already in practice.
It will also afford them the opportunity to discuss with other farmers in the environment and be enthusiastic to adopt.
The following phases of extension excursion should be noted.
(i) First plan the excursion.
• Decide what extension education topics are to be emphasized, • Which kinds of externsion practices are available to enhance favourable results.
• What materials would be needed like transport facilities.
• How long to stay at each location.
• What presentations will be done at each location • What kind of publicity is to be carried out.
• Establish a time table • Get all set before the day.
4.0 Conclusion The unit has discussed the group approach that is commonly used in agricultural extension.
This includes farm demonstration.
Group discussion and excursion.
These factors will help to make you understand the group methods that could be used to reach the clientele.
5.0 Summary The main points discussed in this unit are: (cid:1) Explanation on group approach in Extension communication (cid:1) Method demonstration (cid:1) General meetings – Group discussion and excursion 6.0 Tutor arked Assignment (1) List the group contact methods discussed in this unit (2) Explain two of the methods 7.0 Reference Books for further reading Ogunfowora, O.
(1981): Educating Rural Communities for Progress in Elements of Rural Economics eds.
Olayide, S.,O., Ogunfowora, O., Essang, S. and Idsachaba, F.P.
265-278.
Ibadan University Press, Ibadan.
Lai Oso and Adebayo, L. (1990): Communication and Rural Development in Nigeria.
Millennium Investment Ltd., P. 170.
Unit 5 : Mass Method and Ora Media Utilization in Agricultural Extension Table of Contents 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objectives 3.0 Mass methods and Oral Media in Extension Communication 3.1 Mass methods of communication in extension.
3.2 Audio Aids – Radio, Telephone 3.3 Audio Visuals aids – Television, Sound movies, Radio-Vision 3.4 Visual Aids – Still pictures, slides, transparencies, multi – movie 3.5 Print Media 3.6 Ora media 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutor Marked Assignment 7.0 Reference Books for further readings 1.0 Introduction Communication will always be a distinctly personal art, as no two persons communicate alike.
A means for reaching large number of farmers at the same time is through the mass method.
In this unit you will learn the approach being used in extension services.
Unlike the last unit where the group method to a greater extent involves face to face communication, this technique involves no face to face contact.
2.0 Objectives At the end of the study of this unit, you should be able to: • Appreciate the importance of mass communication method in agricultural extension.
• Learn the various mass communication techniques.
• Understand the concept of ora media.
3.0 Mass Media Method This is a method of reaching out to a large audience through preparation of bulletins, circulars, and leaflets.
Agricultural shows are also an effective means of reaching out to many people with extension mewssage.
Posters, exhibiting area also useful method while electronic media like Radio and Television are also very useful.
3.1 Audio Aids Radio Presently this is man’s most universal mass medium of communication (Mc Anny F. 1972).
The use of this medium has 4 advantages while include: (i) Time: It covers large area of land without or with electricity (ii) The cost of production is low while the reception cost is low (iii) Effectiveness: There is considerable evidence to show that radio has been effectively used for instruction in formal school setting and for out of school purposes.
(iv) Localness: Radio localizes the rural development effort.
Broadcasting in the local language as it is being done in many agricultural extension programme reinforce local values and provide a voice for the audience through a more appropriate feedback mechanism.
Radio broadcasting is extension work has different strategies of utilization this include: (a) Open broadcasting: Broadcasting to an unorganized audience at times in different languages to achieve a specific purpose.
(b) Radio Schools: This involves Organising listeners to listening groups to receive message on innovation at a particular period.
(c) Instructional Radio: This is used for learning while specific areas are broadcast on the air for the clientele to carry out the instructions to enhance her work.
(d) Radio Rural Forum: This is made up of regular or weekly (agricultural) programmes which are planned towards specific issues that relates to areas of need.
The interested groups are informed ahead of time and they know about the period of broadcast, they may also get back to the producer through the slated address during the programme.
Such feed-back could determine the content of the next programme.
Some of the programmes evaluated have been found to be effective (Okunlola and Jimoh, (1994).
Radio is important for dissemination of information in rural Nigeria because: • It transcends the barrier of illiteracy as it reaches people without discrimination • It is individualistic, and so has that personal tough which lends support to attitude and opinion change.
The use of Television in Extension work is through instructional television and the establishment of viewing centres for the rural inhabitants.
Such viewing center not only makes for increased access but also provides opportunity for the people to come together and discuss programme content and message intentions after viewing.
3.5 Visual Aids This relates to sense of seeing, it includes still pictures, slides, transparencies, silent movies, three dimensional objects, graphics, lettering chalkboards, bulletin.
The use of visual aids in agricultural extension has the following advantages: (cid:3) It helps overcome language difficulties (cid:3) It helps people remember more of the message: makes the topics come alive: gives mental images.
(cid:3) To give the same message to many people at once (cid:3) To help the extension worker – once you have prepared a visual aid it will continue to serve as long as you need it.
Points to consider in making a Visual Aid (cid:3) Plan ahead – think of places where it will help illustrate the message (cid:3) Makes it simple, clear and brief (cid:3) Show continuity of action before and after (cid:3) Utilise local resources as much as possible 3.5.7 Projected Equipment: There are many types of projected equipment that is used in extension work.
This include overhead, opaque, slide, film strip, film project, multi-media projector.
The projectors make teaching effective as it displays objects that could enhance learning, the teacher can also conveniently face the audience.
3.6 Print Media The print media have an enduring characteristic which neither radio nor the television has.
It can be read and re-read at convenience thing allowing for further understanding of message contents.
It can be store away from future use, thus making for the preservation of materials that are considered important for future reference.
Some of the print materials include bulletins, leaflets and posters.
3.7 Ora Media In Nigeria, there are two major types of communication: - Oral Communication and modern mode of communication based on print and electronic media.
The oral communication method is a traditional method which includes the concept of the town carrier, songs, poets, etc.
There are five basic traditional methods of information dissemination and those are: (i) Town crier (ii) Folk tales (iii) Songs (iv) Comic plays (v) Ewi (Poetry) (vi) Traditional Festivals Town Carrier: They are individuals select by the king to disseminate information in the town.
The town crier normally cut the attention of the people quickly as they in most instances abandon whatever they are doing tyo listen to him.
Invariably the people comply with the direction he gives.
Town criers speak the language of the people and he is given the respect which is due to the king.
Folktales: It is a form of story telling which could be disseminated in agriculture to summit the message to be disseminated.
The stories could easily lead to attitudinal change and adoption of new technology.
Songs: It is a traditional method of information dissemination.
Songs are better appreciated and it is a key means during home points.
Ewi (Oral Poetry): It is a traditional way of conveying information that is meant to have a lasting impact.
Oral poems are composed, for any occasion.
Traditional Festivals: They are mostly connected and utilized to break even.
It permeates the younger ones quickly and command respect.
4.0 Conclusion In the unit you have learnt the various techniques of media approaches in disseminating information to farmers.
This could be along the traditional and modern teaching.
5.0 Summary In the unit you have learnt: • The concept and utilization of Audio aids, Visual and Audio Visual aids • What oral media entails • Importance of oral media 6.0 Tutor Marked Assignment (i) List 3 methods of mass media approach (ii) Explain what Visual aids are: (iii) Mention all the types of oral media you know and build it up.
\
