 NATIONAL OPEN UNIVERSITY OF NIGERIA SCHOOL OF SCIENCE AND TECHNOLOGY COURSE CODE: BIO 217 COURSE TITLE: General Microbiology 1 Course Code: BIO 217 Course Title: General Microbiology Course Developer/Writer: Mrs. O.
A. F. Ilusanya Department of Microbiology Olabisi Onabanjo University, Ago-Iwoye, Ogun State, Nigeria.
2 Contents Page Introduction……………………………………………………………………………….
1 What You will Learn in this Course……………………………………………………… 1 Course Aims…………………………………………………………………………… Course Objectives……………………………………………………………………… Working through this Course…………………………………………………………… The Course Material……………………………………………………………………… Study Unit………………………………………………………………………………… Presentation Schedule……………………………………………………………………… Assessment………………………………………………………………………………… Tutor-Marked Assignment………………………………………………………………… Final Examination and Grading…………………………………………………………… Course Marking Scheme…………………………………………………………………… Facilitators/Tutors and Tutorials…………………………………………………………… Summary…………………………………………………………………………………… 3 Introduction General Microbiology (217) is a first semester course.
It is a three credit degree compulsory course which all students offering Bachelor of Science (B.Sc.)
in Biology must take.
Microbiology is a branch of biology which involves the study of microorganisms and microorganisms can be defined as living organisms which cannot be seen by the unaided eyes.
These organisms include bacteria, fungi, algae, protozoa and viruses.
Microorganisms are numerous in nature and have some characteristics which make them ideal specimens for the study of numerous fundamental like processes which occur at the cellular level in all living organisms.
In microbiology, study of microorganisms is done extensively by observing their life processes while they are actively metabolizing.
Microorganisms have a wider range of physiologia and biochemical potentials than all other organisms combined.
Some are able to utilize atmospheric nitrogen for the synthesis of proteins and other complex organic nitrogen compounds.
The study of microorganisms is applicable to all aspects of human endeavour including, medicine, food, agriculture conserving human and animal reaction combating diseases and used also as biological weapons.
Some organisms are friends while others can be regarded as foes to human beings (beneficial and harmful).
What you will learn in this course In this course, you have the course units and a course guide.
The course guide will tell you what the course is all about.
It is general overview of the course materials you will be using and how to use those materials.
It also help you to allocate the appropriate time to each unit so that you can successfully complete the course within the stipulated time limit.
The course guide also helps you to know how to go about your Tutor-Marked Assignment which will form part of your overall assessment at the end of the course.
Also, there will be regular tutorial classes that are related to this course, where you can interact with your facilitator and other students.
Please, I encourage you to attend these tutorial classes.
This course exposes you to microbiology a very important and interesting field in Biology.
Course Aims The course aims to give you a understanding of microbiology which an important branch of Biology.
Course Objective 4To achieve the aim set above, there are objectives.
Each unit has a set of objectives presented at the beginning of the unit.
These objectives will give you on what to concentrate / focus on while studying the unit.
Please read the objective before studying the unit and during your study to check your progress.
The Comprehensive Objectives of the Course are given below.
By the end of the course/after going through this course, you should be able to: • Identify the different components of the microbial world; • Explain the historical aspects, relevance and scope of microbiology; • Explain the general characteristics of the different groups of microorganisms; • Describe microbial growth and reproduction and methods of controlling microbial growth; • Give a systemic classification of bacteria, fungi, viruses etc.
; • Explain the causes of microbial variation and hereditary; and • Describe some biogeochemical cycles in nature.
Working through this course To successful complete this course, you are required to read ach study unit, read the textbooks materials provided by the National Open University.
Reading the referenced materials can also be of great assistance.
Each unit has self-assessment exercises which you are advised to do and at certain periods during the course you will be required to submit your assignment for the purpose of assessment.
There will be a final examination at the end of the course.
The course should take you about 17 weeks to complete.
This course guide will provide you with all the components of the course how to go about studying and hour you should allocate your time to each unit so as to finish on time and successfully.
The Course Materials The main components of the course are: 1.
The Study Guide 2.
Study Units 3.
Reference / Further Readings 4.
Assignments 5.
Presentation Schedule Study Unit The study units in this course are given below: 5Module 1: Introduction to Microbiology Unit 1: Historical Aspects of Microbiology Unit 2: Scope of Microbiology Unit 3: General Characteristics of Microbiology Unit 4: Growth and Reproduction of Microbiology Unit 5: Sterilization and Techniques.
Module 2: General Characteristics of Microorganisms Unit 1: General Characteristics of Microorganisms of Bacteria Unit 2: General Characteristics of Microorganisms of Fungi Unit 3: General Characteristics of Microorganisms of Viruses Unit 4: General Characteristics of Microorganisms of Algae Unit 5: General Characteristics of Microorganisms of Protozoa Module 3: Microbial Growth, Reproduction and Control Unit 1: Microbial Growth Unit 2: Measurement of Microbial Growth and Factors that Influence Microbial Growth Unit 3: Sterilization Methods In Module One, the first unit focuses on the meaning of microbiology, microorganisms as alls, and the different groups of microorganisms, and the domains in which they are placed.
Unit two deals with the historical aspects of microbiology.
The third unit focuses on the relevance and scope of microbiology.
The fourth unit focuses n the use of difference microscopes to study microorganisms while the fifth unit gives a brief survey of microorganisms as friends and foes.
Module Two is concerned with the general characteristics of microorganisms.
Unit one, two, three, four and five in this module deals with the characteristics, morphology, distribution and importance of bacteria, fungi, viruses, algae and protozoa respectively.
In Module Three, unit one focuses on microbial growth and reproduction, unit two deals with measuring microbial growth and factors that influence microbial growth.
Unit three and four deal with different physical and chemical methods of controlling microbial growth.
Units one, two, three and four in Module Four deals with the systemic classification of microorganisms.
In Module Five, unit one is on microbial variation and hereditary, unit two focuses on biogeochemical cycling of nutrients in nature.
Each unit is made up of a week or two weeks.
Lectures and include an introduction, objectives, reading materials, self-assessment questions, conclusion, summary, tutored- marked assignments (TMAs), references and other reading resources.
6There are activities related to the lecture in each unit which will help your progress and comprehension of the unit.
You are required to work on these exercises which together with the TMAs will enable you to achieve the objectives of each unit.
Presentation Schedule There is a time-table prepared for the early and timely completion and submissions of your TMAs as well as attending the tutorial classes.
You are required to submit all your assignments by the stipulated time and date.
Avoid falling behind the schedule time.
Assessment There are three aspects to the assessment of this course.
The first one is the self-assessment exercises.
The second is the tutor marked assignments and the third is the written examination or the examination to be taken at the end of the course.
Do the exercises or activities in the unit by applying the information and knowledge you acquired during the course.
The tutor-marked assignments must be submitted to your facilitator for formal assessment in accordance with the deadlines stated in the presentation schedule and the assignment file.
The work submitted to your tutor for assessment will count for 30% of your total course work.
At the end of this course, you have to sit for a final or end of course examination of about a three hour duration which will count for 70% of your total course mark.
Tutor-Marked Assignment This is the continuous assessment component of this course and it accounts for 30% of the total score.
You will be given four (4) TMAs by your facilitator to answer.
Three of which must be answered before you are allowed to sit for the end of course examination.
These answered assignments be returned to your facilitator.
Your expected to complete the assignments by using the information and material in your readings references and study units.
Reading and researching into you references will give you a wider via point and give you a deeper understanding of the subject.
1.
Make sure that each assignment reaches your facilitator on or before the deadline given in the presentation schedule and assignment file.
If for any reason you are not able to complete your assignment, make sure you contact your facilitator before the assignment is due to discuss the possibility of an extension.
Request for 7extension will not be granted after the due date unless there in exceptional circumstances.
2.
Make sure you revise the whole course content before sitting or the examination.
The self-assessment activities ad TMAs will be useful for this purposes and if you have any comment please do before the examination.
The end of course examination covers information from all parts of the course.
Course Marking Scheme Assignment Marks Assignments 1 – 4 Four assignments, best three marks of the four count at 10% each – 30% of course marks.
End of course examination 70% of overall course marks Tota 100% of course materials.
Facilitators/Tutors and Tutorials Sixteen (16) hours are provided for tutorials for this course.
You will be notified of the dates, times and location for these tutorial classes.
As soon as you are allocated a tutorial group, the name and phone number of your facilitator will be given to you.
These are the duties of your facilitator: • He or she will mark and comment on your assignment.
• He will monitor your progress and provide any necessary assistance you need.
• He or she will mark your TMAs and return to you as soon as possible.
(You are expected to mail your tutored assignment to your facilitator at least two days before the schedule date).
Do not delay to contact your facilitator by telephone or e-mail for necessary assistance if • You do not understand any part of the study in the course material.
• You have difficulty with the self assessment activities.
• You have a problem or question with an assignment or with the grading of the assignment.
It is important and necessary you acted the tutorial classes because this is the only chance to have face to face content with your facilitator and to ask questions which will be answered instantly.
It is also period where you can say any problem encountered in the course of your study.
Summary General Microbiology (217) is a course that introduce you to the microbial world around us.
8 Study in Biology is a field of very important to your welfare or well beings in both positive and negative ways.
Microorganisms are celluar and acellular (viruses) entities which are capable of life processes found in plants and animals.
On completion of this course, you be have an understanding of basic knowledge of microorganisms, the history of men and women who contributed to the this field of study by their discoveries during their research works, the general characteristics of microorganisms, microbial growth and reproduction how the microorganisms are classified or placed in different groups, the mechanisms of variation and hereditary in microorganisms and the role of microorganisms in cycling elements in our environments.
In addition you will be able to answer the following questions: • What is microbiology • What are microorganisms • Identify the different groups of microorganisms and their general characteristics • Explain the relevance and scope of microbiology • Differentiate between phonetic classification and phylogenetic classification.
• What are point mutations?
• What are frame shift mutations?
• Describe the four phases of the growth curve in a closed system.
The list of questions are expected to answer is not limited to the above list.
Finally, you are expected to apply the knowledge you have acquired during this course to your practical life.
I believe you will agree with me that microbiology is a very interesting fields of biology with a wide application to life.
I wish you success in this course.
9Course Code: BIO 217 Course Title: General Microbiology Course Developer/Writer: Mrs. O.
A. F. Ilusanya Department of Microbiology Olabisi Onabanjo University, Ago-Iwoye, Ogun State, Nigeria.
10MODULE 1: INTRODUCTION TO MICROBIOLOGY UNIT 1: COMPOSITION OF THE MICROBIAL WORLD 1.0 Introduction Microbiology is the study of microorganisms.
These are organism too small to be seen clearly by the unaided eyes.
Microorganisms include bacteria, fungi, algae, protozoa and entities at the borderline of life that are called viruses.
The cell is the fundamental unit of life.
Most microorganisms are unicellular, in unicellular organisms all the life processes are performed by a single cell.
However, some are multicellular, having more than one cell.
This unit examines the definition of microbiology, types of microbial cells, the different groups of microorganisms and the domains in which they are placed and why viruses are not placed in any of the domains 2.0 Objectives By the end of this unit, you should be able to: (a) define the term microbiology (b) list the groups of organisms classified as microorganisms.
(c) distinguish between prokaryotic and eukaryotic cells.
(d) explain the distribution of microorganisms into domains.
(e) state the characteristics of the microorganisms in each domains.
(f) state the characteristics of viruses 3.0 Definition of Microbiology Microbiology is the study of microorganisms.
3.1 Microorganisms Microorganisms are organisms too small to be seen clearly by the unaided eyes.
They are very small life forms so small that individual microorganisms cannot be seen without magnification.
They include fungi, bacteria, algae, protozoa and viruses.
Some microorganisms however like the eukaryotic microorganisms are visible without magnification.
Examples are bread moulds and filamentous algae.
3.2 Microorganisms are cells The cell is the fundamental unit of life; a single cell is an entity, isolated from other cells.
Two fundamental different types of cells exist among microorganisms, they are Prokaryotic and eukaryotic.
3.2.1 Prokaryotes These microbial cells lack membrane bound nucleus and organelles.
3.2.2 Eukaryotes Possesses a membrane-bound nucleus and organelles.
3.2.3 Differences between prokaryotic and eukaryotic cells There are notable differences between prokaryotic and eukaryotic cells.
These are shown in detail in Table 1.
11Table 1: Differences between Prokaryotic and Eukaryotic Cells Features Prokaryotic cell Eukaryotic cell Plasma membrane Present Present Internal organelles Absent Present (membrane bound) Genetic(hereditary) DNA as a single circular DNA as multiple molecule bacteria chromosome not linear chromosomes enclosed in a nucleus enclosed within a nucleus.
Site of Cytoplasm and, in some Cytoplasm and energy(ATP) cases, plasma membrane or mitochondria or generation photosynthesis membrane chloroplasts.
Source: Atlas et al., (1995) Figure 1(a): A Prokaryotic Cell Figure 1(b): A Eukaryotic Cell Source: Microorganisms in Our World by Atlas R. M. (1995) 12Activity A 1.
Define the term: Microorganisms.
2.
Compare and contrast prokaryotic and eukaryotic cells.
3.3 Classification Systems for Microorganisms 3.3.1 The five kingdom system of classification Based on cell type and mode of nutrition there was an establishment of the five kingdom system of classifying organisms in which we have: kingdoms, 1.
Monera 2.
Protista 3.
Fungi 4.
Planta 5.
Animalia Microorganisms except for viruses, which are accellular and have their own classification system, were placed in the first three kingdoms.
3.3.2 The three domains system of classification Presently through advances in cell biology, biochemistry and genetics, microorganisms are now placed into three domains, each of which comprises of various kingdoms.
The domains are: 1.
Bacteria (prokaryotic – “true bacteria”) 2.
Archaea (prokaryotic – “ancient bacteria”) 3.
Eucarya (eukaryotic) 3.4 Domain Bacteria 1.
They are prokaryotic.
2.
They are single celled organisms.
3.
They lack membrane bound nucleus and organelles.
4.
Most have cell wall that contains peptidoglycan.
5.
They are found in the soil, water and air and on other living organisms.
6.
Some are harmful while others are beneficial to man.
3.5 Domain Archaea 1.
They were formerly known as archaeobacteria.
2.
They are prokaryotic.
3.
They are single celled organisms.
4.
They lack membrane bound nucleus and organelles.
5.
They lack peptidoglycan in their cell walls.
6.
They have unique membrane lipids.
7.
Some have unusual metabolic characteristics e.g.
methanogens which generate methane gas.
8.
Many are found in extreme environments.
133.5.1 Domain archaea is distinguished from bacteria based upon 1.
Differences in ribosomal RNA sequences.
2.
The absence of cell wall peptidoglycan.
3.
The presence of unique membrane lipids.
Activity B 1.
List the three domains under microorganisms are classified.
2.
List three characteristics each of the following domains i. Bacteria ii.
Archaea iii.
fungi 3.6 Domain eucarya The major groups of microorganism in this domain are protists and fungi.
3.6.1 Protists These groups of microorganisms are unicellular algae, protozoa, slime moulds and water moulds.
3.6.2 Algae 1.
They are simple organisms 2.
Mostly unicellular 3.
They are photosynthetic together with cyanobacteria.
4.
They produce about 75% of the plant’s oxygen.
5.
Commonly found in aquatic environment.
6.
They are primary producers in food chains in aquatic habitat.
3.6.3 Protozoa 1.
They are unicellular.
2.
Eukaryotic organisms and animal like.
3.
They are usually motile.
4.
Some are free living while some are pathogenic.
3.6.4 Slime moulds They are protists which have different forms at different stages of their life cycles.
At a stage they are like protozoa and at another stage like fungi.
3.6.5 Water moulds These are found on the surface of fresh water and moist soils.
They feed ondecaying vegetation such as logs and mulch.
3.6.6 Fungi 1.
These are microorganisms that range from unicellular forms like yeasts to moulds and mushrooms which are multicellular with thread like structures called hyphae.
2.
They absorb nutrients from their environments.
3.
Many play beneficial roles while others cause diseases in plants, animals and human.
143.7 Viruses 1.
They are acellular entities (non cellular).
2.
They lack the fundamental structure of living cell but only carry out functions of living organisms when in living cells 3.
They are the smallest of all the microorganisms(10,000 smaller than a typical bacterium).
4.
They can only be seen by the electron microscope.
5.
They cause many diseases of plants, animals and humans.
6.
Entities are not placed in any of the domain but are classified on a separate system.
They cause many diseases of plants, animals and humans.
4.0 Conclusion Microbiology is the study of microorganisms, most of which are unicellular while some are multicellular.
Presently, they are classified under three domains.
Viruses are classified under a separate system because they function only as living things when present in living organisms.
5.0 Summary In this unit we have learnt that: • Microbiology is the study of microorganisms.
• Microorganisms are organisms too small to be seen with the unaided eyes.
• Microorganisms include: bacteria, fungi, algae, protozoa and viruses.
• Microorganisms may be prokaryotic which lack a membrane bound nucleus or eukaryotic which have a membrane bound nucleus but undifferentiated tissues.
• Microorganisms are grouped into three domains: bacteria, archaea and eucarya.
• The domain bacteria and archaea are simple and prokaryotic microorganisms.
While the domain eucarya consists of the protists and fungi which are eukaryotic microbes.
• Viruses are acellular entities and are not placed in any of the domain but are classified on a separate system.
6.0 Tutored-Marked Assignment 1.
Define the term microbiology.
2.
Distinguish between a prokaryotic and an eukaryotic cell.
3.
What are the differences between Bacteria and Archeae?
4.
Why are viruses not placed in any of the domains?
7.0 References/Further Readings Atlas, R.M.
(1995): Microorganisms in Our World.
Mosby Year Book.
Inc. Pp5-13 Medigan, M.T., Martinko, J.M., Dunlap, P.V and Clark, D.P.
(2009).
Brock Biology of Microorganisms; Pearson Education Inc. 12th edition.
Pp 2-6 Pelczar, M.J., Chan, E.C.S and Krieg, R.N (2001): Microbiology; Mc Graw-hill, 5th edition.
Pp 1-17 Willey, J.M., Sherwood, L.M and Woolverton, C.J (2008).
Prescott, Harley and Kleins.
Microbiology.
7th ed.
Boston Bur Bridge, IL: Mc Graw Hill Higher Education.
Pp 1-3.
15UNIT 2: HISTORICAL ASPECTS OF MICROBIOLOGY 1.0 Introduction The history of microbiology is the story of men and women who developed a technique a tool or a concept that was generally adopted in the studying of microorganisms.
It is also the history of events and metamorphosis of microbiology as a science.
In this unit we will be studying stages in the development of the science of microbiology, some early scientists and their contributions to the field of microbiology.
2.0 Objectives By the end of the unit you should be able to: (a) explain how microorganisms where discovered (b) discuss the concept of spontaneous generation and the experiment that were performed to disprove the concept.
(c) Discuss Kosh’s postulate and how they are used to establish a link between a suspected microorganisms and the disease.
(d) Discuss the discovery of microbial effect on organic and inorganic matters (e) Explain development of microbiology in this century?
(f) Explain the era of molecular biology?
3.0 Discovery of microorganisms The advent of the microscope permitted the studying of microorganisms.
The first microscopes were simple ground glass lenses that magnified images of previously unseen microorganisms.
Among the first to observe is previously unseen and invisible microbial world were Robert Hooke and AnthoneyVan Leewenhoek 1.
Robert Hooke (1635-1703) an English Mathematician and natural historian * He coined the term “cells” to describe the “little boxes” he observed in examining cork slices with a compound microscope.
* He was the first to make a known description of microorganisms.
* He made microscopic observation and the earliest description of many fungi.
* Various species of fungi were clearly identified in his drawing and recorded in his book Micrographia Figure 1: Robert Hooke’s Detailed Diagram of Fungi made in 1667 16Source: Microorganisms in Our World by Atlas R. M. (1995) 2.
Anthony Van Leeuwenhoek (1632-1723) lived in Delft, Holland.
He was a draper and an amateur microscope builder.
• He learned lens grinding as a hobby and made over 100 simple microscopes each capable of magnifying an image about 300 times.
• By using simple microscopes, he observed microscopic organisms which he called ‘animalcules’.
• He discovered bacteria in 1676 while studying pepper water infusion and reported his observations in a series of letters to Royal Society of London which published them in 1684 in English translation.
• He made sketches of the different shapes of bacteria • He was the first person to publish extensive, accurate observations of microorganisms.
• He is known as the father of bacteriology.
(a) (b) Figure 2: (a) Antony Leeweenhoek (1632-1723) holding one of his microscopes.
(b) Leeweenhoek’s Microscopes and Some of the Sketches of Bacteria from Human Mouth.
Source: Microorganisms in Our World by Atlas R. M. (1995) After Van Leeuwenhoek’s death, the study of microbiology did not develop rapidly because microscopes were rare and interest in microorganisms was not high.
Scientists then were debating the theory of spontaneous generation.
3.1 The Spontaneous Generation Conflict The concepts spontaneous generation state that living organisms could develop from non living matter.
The proponents of the concept of spontaneous generation claimed that living organisms could develop from non living or decomposing matter.
171.
Francesco Redi (1626-1697) challenged this concept by showing that maggots on decaying meat came from fly eggs deposited on the meat, and not from the meat itself.
• He carried out a series of experiments on decaying meat and its ability to produce maggot spontaneously.
• He placed meat in three different containers, one was not covered, and the second was covered with fine gauze to exclude flies.
• Flies laid egg on the uncovered meat and maggot developed.
• The two other two meats did not produce maggots.
Spontaneously flies were attracted to the gauze-covered container and laid their eggs on the gauze, these later produced maggots.
Hence it become evident that the generation of maggots resulted from the presence of fly eggs and that meat (a non living matter) did not spontaneously generate maggots as previously believed.
2.
Louis Jablot (1670) conducted an experiment in which he divided a hay infusion that had been boiled into two containers: a heated container that was closed to the air and a heated container that was freely open to the air.
Only the open vessel developed microorganisms.
This further helped to disprove abiogenesis.
3.
John Needham (1713-1781) showed that mutton broth boiled in flasks and then sealed could still develop microorganisms, which supported the theory of spontaneous generation.
4.
Lazzaro Spallanzani (1729-1799) showed that flasks sealed and then boiled had no growth of microorganisms, and he proposed that air carried germs to the culture medium.
He also commented that axternal air might be needed to support the growth of animals already in the medium.
The latter concept was appealing to supporters of spontaneous generation.
5.
Louis Pasteur (1822-1895) was a Professor of Chemistry.
He devised a series of swan necked flasks known as Pasteur-flasks, filled the flasks with broth and heated the broth to sterilization.
After cooling, the flasks were opened to the air, but bends on the neck of the flasks prevented microorganisms from falling on the broth and contaminating it rather the microorganisms fell on the neck of the bottle.
Pasteur proved that no growth occurred because dust and germs were trapped on the wall of the curved necks.
If the neck were broken, growth will occur.
By these experiments he disproved and defeated the theory of Spontaneous generation.
The defeat of spontaneous generation: pasteur’s experiment with the swan necked flask.
18 Figure 3: The Defect of Spontaneous Generation .Pasteur’s Experiment with the Swan Necked bottles Source: Brocks Biology of Microorganisms by Madigan et al., 2008 Apart from the defeat of the concept of spontaneous generation, • Pasteur’s work led to an effective sterilization method which involve holding juices and milk at 62.8oC (145oF) for 30minutes known as Pasteurization.
• He discovered that alcoholic fermentation was catalyzed by Living Yeast Cells.
• He developed vaccines for the diseases anthrax, fowl cholera and rabies between the periods of 1880-1890.
• As a result of his research on rabies, he become a legend and the French government built the Pasteur Institute in Paris in 1888 originally established as a clinical centre for treating rabies.
But is now a major biomedical research centre for antiserum and vaccine production.
• He postulated the Germ Theory of Disease which states that microorganisms are the causes of infectious diseases.
• Pasteur’s work ushered in the Golden Age of Microbiology.
Activity A 1.
Explain Anthony van leuweenhoek’s contribution to the discovery of microorganisms.
2.
How did louis Pasteur defeat the theory of spontaneous generation.
19 3.2 The Recognition of the Role of Microorganisms in Disease 1.
Agostino bassi (1773-1856) showed that a silkworm disease was caused by a fungus.
2.
M. J. Berkerley (ca.
1845) demonstrated that the great potato blight of Ireland was caused by a fungus.
3.
Joseph lister (1872-1912) developed a system of surgery designed to prevent microorganisms from entering wounds.
He implemented the use of sterile surgical instrument, and used carbolic acid (phenol) during surgery and on wound dressings.
4.
Robert Koch (1843-1910) • Robert Koch was a German Physician.
He was the first to directly prove the role of microorganisms in causing diseases.
He established the relationship between Bacillus anthracis and the disease it causes anthrax.
• Using mice as experimental animals, he demonstrated that when a small amount of blood from a diseased mouse was injected into a healthy mouse the healthy mouse quickly developed anthrax.
From this work he developed Koch’s postulates.
5.
Koch’s postulates are: • The suspected disease causing organism should be present in all cases of the disease and absent from healthy animals.
• The suspected organism must be cultivated in a pure culture away from the animal body.
• The isolated organism must cause the disease when inoculated into a healthy susceptible animal.
• The organism must be re-isolated from these experimental animals and cultural again in the laboratory after which is should still be the same as the original organism.
20 Figure 4:_Diagramatic illustration of Koch’s postulate Using these principles, he discovered causative organisms of anthrax (1876), tuberculosis (1882) and cholera (1883).
• He was the first to grow bacteria on solid culture media to get pure culture hence he developed the pure culture concept and developed different solid media.
• Koch’s discovery of solid culture media and pure culture concept supplied the most needed tools for the development of microbiology as a field of science.
• For his contribution on Tuberculosis, he was awarded the 1905 Nobel Prize for Physiology or Medicine.
Today, “Molecular Kosh’s postulates” have been established in light of advances in the molecular biology of pathogenic microbes.
6.
Edward Jenner (ca.
1798) used a vaccination procedure to protect individuals from smallpox.
21 7.
Emil Von Behring (1854-1917) and Shibasaburo kitasato (1852- 1931) induced the formation of diphtheria tetanus antitoxins in rabbits which were effectively used to treat humans thus demonstrating humoral immunity 3.3 The Discovery of Microbial effects on Organic and Inorganic Matter 1.
Martinus Beijerinck (1851-1931) • Martinus Beijerinck was a Professor at the Delft Polytechnic.
• He isolated the first pure culture of many soil and aquatic microorganisms, including sulfate reducing and sulfur oxidizing bacteria, nitrogen fixing root nodule bacteria.
• He described the first virus and the basic principles of virology.
2.
Sergei Winogradsky (1856-1953) He proposed the concept of chemo-lithotrophy, (the oxidation of inorganic matter.)
He worked with soil bacteria and discovered they could oxidize iron, sulphur, ammonia, to obtain energy.
He also studied anaerobic nitrogen fixation and cellulose decomposition.
He published many scientific papers and a major monograph, Microbiologic du sol (Soil Microbiology).
• Beijerinck and Winogradsky pioneered the use of enrichment cultures and selective media.
3.4 The Development of Microbiology in This Century Microbiology established a closer relationship with other discipline during the 1940s because of its association with genetics and biochemistry.
1.
George W. beadle and Edward L. Tatum (ca.
1941) studied the relationship between genes and enzymes using the bread mould, Neurospora.
2.
Salvadore Lurai and Max Delbruck (ca.
1943) showed that mutations were spontaneous and not directed by the environment.
3.
Oswald T. Avery, Colin M. Mcleod, and Maclyn McCarty (1944) provided evidence that deoxyribonucleic acid (DNA) was the genetic material and carried genetic information during transformation.
3.5 Era of Molecular Microbiology • Began in the 1970s.
• Advancement in the knowledge of bacterial physiology, biochemistry and genetics.
• Genetic manipulation which involves the transfer of DNA from one organism into another or a bacterium and the protens encoded by the DNA harvested led to the development of the field of Biotechnology.
• DNA sequencing revealed the phylo genetics (evolutionary) relationships among bacteria which led to revolutionary new concepts in microbial systematic.
• In 1990s.
DNA sequencing gave birth to the field of genomics.
224.0 Conclusion The study and development of microbiology as a field in science became possible due to the works and the contributions of men who discovered microorganisms, disproved the theories of spontaneous generation and established the relationship between microorganisms and disease among other things 5.0 Summary 1.
Robert hooke (1635-1703) and Anthony van leeuwenhoek (1632-1723) contributed to the discovery of microorganisms through the use of microscope.
Experiment by Francesco Redi and others disproved the theory of spontaneous generation.
2.
Louis Pasteur defeated the theory of spontaneous generation 3.
Robert Koch developed postulate to establish relationship between a suspected microorganism and disease.
4.
Serge Winogradsky and Martinus Beijerinck discovered microbial effect on organic and inorganic matter both of them pioneered the use of enrichment culture and selective media.
5.
George Beadle and others contributed to the development of microbiology.
6.
In the twentieth century, era of molecular microbiology began in the 1970s and led to the field of biotechnology.
7.
In the 1990s, DNA sequencing gave birth to the field of genetics.
6.0 Tutored-Marked Assignment 1.
Explain Anthony van leeuwenhoek contribution to the discovery of microorganisms.
2a.State the concept of spontaneous generation.
b Explain the steps involved in using Kosh postulate to establish the link between a suspected microorganism and a disease.
7.0 References and Further Readings Atlas, R.M.
(1995): Microorganisms in our World.
Mosby Year Book.
Inc. Pp6-7 Medigan, M.T., Martinko, J.M., Dunlap, P.V and Clark, D.P.
(2009).
Brock Biology of Microorganisms; Pearson Education Inc. 12th edition.
Pp 10-23.
Pelczar, M.J., Chan, E.C.S and Krieg, R.N (2001): Microbiology; Mc Graw-hill, 5th edition.
Pp18-36.
Willey, J.M., Sherwood, L.M and Woolverton, C.J (2008).
Prescott, Harley and Kleins.
Microbiology.
7th ed.
Boston Bur Bridge, IL: Mc Graw Hill Higher Education.
Pp 6-12.
23UNIT 3: THE RELEVANCE AND SCOPE OF MICROBIOLOGY 1.0 Introduction Modern Microbiology is a large discipline with different specialized areas.
This is because the entire ecosystem depends on the activities of microorganisms and microorganism influence human society in countless ways.
Microbiology has a great impact on Medicine, agriculture, food science, ecology, genetics, biochemistry and other fields.
In this unit, we shall examine the different aspects of microbiology and their relevance to human life.
2.0 Objectives By the end of this unit, you should be able to (a) define microbiology (b) state the two branches of microbiology (c) identify the different areas of study in basic and applied microbiology 3.0 The Main Branches of Microbiology Microbiology has two main branches: 1.
Basic 2.
Applied Both branches intertwine and are complementary to each other.
3.1 The Basic Aspect of Microbiology: The basic branch of microbiology is concerned with the study of the biology of microorganisms.
Fields of study here include: 1.
Bacteriology: this is the study of bacteria.
2.
Mycology: The study of fungi such as yeasts and molds.
3.
Algology: The study of algae 4.
Protozoology: The study of protozoa; a branch of protozoolgy called parasitology deals exclusively with the parasite or disease-producing protozoa and other parasitic micro and macro organisms.
5.
Microbial Cytology: Studies the structures of microbial cells.
6.
Microbial Physiology: studies the nutrients that microorganisms require for metabolism and growth and the products that they make from nutrients.
7.
Microbial Genetics: focuses on the nature of genetic information in microorganisms in microorganisms and how it regulates the development and functions of cells and organisms.
8.
Microbial Ecology: the study of microorganisms in their natural environment.
It also studies the global and local contribution to nutrient cycling.
In addition, it employs microorganisms in bioremediation to reduce pollution.
9.
Microbial Taxonomy: this is the study of the classification of microorganisms or the grouping of microorganisms.
10.
Biochemistry: deals with the discovery of microbial enzymes and the chemical reactions they carry out.
Activity A 241.
List five (5) basic areas of research in microbiology and state what each area entails.
3.2 The Applied Aspects of Microbiology The applied aspect of microbiology deal with practical application of microorganisms to solve problems related to diseases, water and waste water treatment, food spoilage and food production.
The various fields of study in applied microbiology include: 1.
Medical Microbiology: Studies the causative agents of diseases, diagnostic procedures, diagnostic procedures for identification of the causative agents and preventive measures.
2.
Agricultural Microbiology: This is the study of microbial processes in the soil to promote plant growth.
It involves the study of soil microorganisms which has led to the discovery of antibiotics and other important chemicals.
It also deals with the methods of combating plant and animal diseases caused by microbes, methods of using microbes to increase soil fertility and crop yields.
Currently much work is being done on using bacterial and viral insect pathogens to substitute chemical pesticides.
3.
Industrial Microbiology: this is the large scale growth of microorganisms for the production of medicinal products such as antibiotics and vaccines; fermented beverages; industrial chemicals; production of hormones and proteins by genetically engineered microorganism.
4.
Aquatic Microbiology And Marine Microbiology: deals with microbial processes in lakes, rivers, and the oceans.
It also examines issues that concerns water purification; microbiology examination; biological degradation of waste.
5.
Public Health Microbiology: is closely related to medical microbiology.
It deals with the identification and the control of the spread of communicable diseases.
It involves monitoring of community food establishments and waste supplies so as to keep them safe and free from infectious agents.
6.
Immunology: deals with how the immune system protects the body from pathogens and the response of infectious agents.
It also involves practical health problem such as the nature and treatment of allergies auto immune diseases like rheumatoid arthritis.
7.
Food And Diary Microbiology: deals with the use of microbes to make foods such have cheese, yoghurt, wine and beer.
It also deal with the methods of preventing microbial spoilage of food and the transmission of food borne diseases such as Botulism and Salmonellosis.
Microorganisms are also used as single cell protein, which is an important source of protein or nutrients to livestock and humans.
8.
Aeromicrobiology: Advances thought in the dissemination of diseases in the air, contamination and spoilage.
9.
Exomicrobiology: Exploration for life in outer space.
2510.
Geochemical Microbiology: Coal, mineral and gas formation; prospecting for deposits of coal, oil and gas and recovery of minerals from low-grade ores.
Activity B 1.
State the importance of microbiology in five different fields of human endeavors.
3.3 The Future of Microbiology There are many promising areas of microbiological research and their potential practical impacts in the future.
These areas include combating new and re-emerging human diseases such as HIV/AIDS, SARS, TUBERCULOSIS, POLIOMYELITIS etc.
there would be need for the production of new drugs and vaccines.
The use of molecular biology and Recombinant DNA technology will be applied to give solutions to these problems.
Microorganisms would be needed for environmental bioremediation of pollutants which is on the increase globally.
Much work will also be needed to be done on microorganisms living in extreme environments such as to advance the development of new antimicrobial agents, industrial processes and bioremediation.
Analyses of genome and its activities will advance the field of bioinformatics and help to investigate biological problems.
4.0 Conclusion Microbiology is one of the most rewarding ofrofessions because it gives its practitioners the opportunity to be able to be in contact with all other natural sciences and thus contribute in many different ways to the betterment of human life.
One indicator of the relevance and importance of microbiology is reflected in the number of Nobel Prize Winners-one third of all awardees are microbiologists or investigators using a microbial model.
5.0 Summary (cid:1) Modern microbiology is a large discipline with many different specialized areas.
Microbiology is subdivided into two main areas of research (basic and applied).
(cid:1) The basic area of research in microbiology deals with the biology of microorganisms and includes fields such as bacteriology, mycology, microbial ecology etc.
(cid:1) The Applied aspect of microbiology deals with the practical application of microorganisms to solve various human problems related to diseases, water and waste treatment, food production and spoilage etc.
(cid:1) The field of microbiology will be faced with many important future challenges such as finding new ways to new and re-emerging diseases, reduced environmental pollution and investigating biological problems.
6.0 Tutored marked assignment 1a.
List the fields of microbiology that deal with the following (a) Metabolism (b) Enzymology (c) Nucleic Acid and Protein Synthesis 26(e) Microorganisms in the Natural Environment (f) Microbial Classification (g) Microbial Cell Structure 1b.
Explain what the field of agricultural microbiology entails .
7.0 References and Further Readings Atlas, R.M.
(1995): Microorganisms in our World.
Mosby Year Book.
Inc. Pp14-23 Medigan, M.T., Martinko, J.M., Dunlap, P.V and Clark, D.P.
(2009).
Brock Biology of Microorganisms; Pearson Education Inc. 12th edition.
Pp20-21 Pelczar, M.J., Chan, E.C.S and Krieg, R.N (2001): Microbiology; Mc Graw-hill, 5th edition.
Pp 3-17 Willey, J.M., Sherwood, L.M and Woolverton, C.J (2008).
Prescott, Harley and Kleins.
Microbiology.
7th ed.
Boston Bur Bridge, IL: Mc Graw Hill Higher Education.
Pp 13-25 27UNIT 4: MICROSCOPY AND SPECIMEN PREPARATION 1.0 Introduction Microbiology is the study of organisms too small to be seen distinctly with the unaided eyes;.
The nature of this discipline makes the microscope of crucial importance because the study of microorganisms is impossible without the microscope.
Microscopes provide magnification which enables us to see microorganisms and study their structures.
The magnification attained by microscopes range from x100 to x400,000 in addition there are different types of microscopy and many techniques have been developed by which specimens of microorganisms can be prepared for examination.
This unit examines the different types of microscopes, how the microscopes work and how specimens are prepared for examination 2.0 Objectives By the end of this unit, you should be able to: (a) define the term microscope; (b) state the two categories of microscope; (c) describe the bright field microscope; (d) explain the resolving power; (e) describe methods of preparing and staining specimens; and (f) describe the scanning electron microscope and the transmission electron microscope.
3.0 The Microscope A microscope is an instrument for producing enlarge images of objects too small to be seen unaided.
Types of Microscopes Microscopes are of two types Light (optical) and electron depending on the principle on which magnification is done.
3.1 The Light Microscope This is a type of microscope in which magnification is obtained by a system of optical lenses using light waves.
It include: 1.
Bright Field Microscope 2.
Dark Field Microscope 3.
Fluorescence Microscope 4.
Phase Contract Microscope Modern microscopes are compound microscopes.
That is, the magnified image formed by the objective lens is further enlarged by one or more additional lenses.
Most undergraduate students of microbiology perform most of their examinations with the bright field microscope which is the most widely used instrument for routine microscopic work.
The other types of microscopy are used for special purposes or research investigation.
3.1.1.
The Bright Field Microscope 28• The ordinary microscope is called a bright field microscope because it forms a dark image against a brighter background.
• The microscope consists of a study metal body or stand made up of a base and an arm to which the remaining parts are attached.
• A light source, either a mirror or an electric illuminator, is located at the base.
• Two focusing knobs, the fine and coarse adjustment knobs are located on the arm and can move either the stage or the nose piece to focus the image.
• The stage is positioned about halfway up the arm and hold microscope slides by slide clips or a mechanical stage clip.
• There is a substage condenser mounted within or beneath the stage which focuses a core of light on the slide.
• The upper part of arm of the microscope holds the body assembly to which a nose piece and one or more eyepieces or ocular lenses are attached.
• Most advanced microscopes have eyepieces for both eyes and are called binocular microscopes.
• The nose piece holds three to five objective lenses of different magnifying power and are easily rotated to position any objective.
• The images you see when viewing a specimen is focused by the objective and ocular lenses working together.
• Light from the specimen which has been illuminated is focused by the objective lens creating an enlarged image within the microscope.
The ocular lens further magnifies this primary image.
• The total magnification is calculated by multiplying the objective and eye piece magnification together.
• e.g.
If a 45 x objective is used with a 10x eyepiece, the overall magnification of the specimen will be 450x.
29Figure: The Bright Field Microscope Source: Microorganisms in our World by Atlas (1995) 3.1.2 The Dark-field Microscope The dark field microscope is used to observe living unstained cells and organisms as a result of change in the way they are illuminated.
A hollow core of light is focused on the specimen in such a way that un reflected and un refracted rays do not enter the objective only light that has been reflected or refracted by the image forms an image.
The field surrounding the specimen appears black while the object itself is brightly illuminated.
The dark field microscope is useful in revealing many internal structures in larger eukaryotic microorganisms.
It is also used in the examination of unstained microorganisms suspended in fluids e.g.
wet mount and hanging drop preparation.
3.1.3 The Phase-Contrast Microscope This type of microscope converts slight differences in refractive index and cell density into easily detected variations in light intensity and is used to view living cells.
The background formed by the un deviated light is bright while the unstained objects appears dark and well defined.
This microscopy is very useful for studying microbial motility, determining the shape of living cells and detecting some bacterial components such as endospores and inclusion bodies it also used in studying eukaryotes.
3.1.4 The Fluorescent Microscope This type of microscope exposes a specimen to ultraviolet, violet or blue light and forms an image of the object with resulting fluorescent light.
The most commonly used fluorescence microscopy light is epifluorescence.
microscopy which is also called incident light or reflected light microscopy.
*Epifluoresence microscope employs an objective lens that also acts as a condenser.
A mercury vapor arc lamp or other source produces an intense beam of light that passes through an exciter futer.
The exaler filler transmits on the desired wavelength of excitation light The excitation light is directed down the microscope by a speed minor called the dichromatic minor.
This minor reflects light of shorter wavelength but allow light of longer wavelength to pass through.
The excitation light continues down passiry through the objective lens to specimen stained with spaced dye molecules called fluorochromes.
3.2 Microscope Resolution Resolution is the ability of a lens to separate or distinguish between small objects that are close together i.e.
the microscope must produce a clear image and not just a magnified one.
It is also known as the resolving power.
30 Resolution is described mathematically by an equation in the 1870s by Ernest Abbe, a German physicist.
The Abbe equation states that the minimal distance (d) between two objects that reveal them as separate entities depends on the wavelength of light (l ) used to illuminate the specimen and on the numerical aperture of the lens (nsinq ) which is the ability of the lens to gather light.
d = 0.5l nsinq as d becomes smaller, the resolution increases and finer details can be discerned in a specimen; d becomes smaller as the wavelength of light used decreases and as the numerical aperture (NA) increases.
Hence the greatest resolution is obtained using a lens with the largest NA and Light with the shortest wavelength.
The relationship between NA and resolution can be expressed as follows: d = l .
2NA where d = resolution and l = wavelength of Light.
Using the values 1.3 for NA and 0.5m m, the wavelength of green light, for > l , resolution can be calculated as d = 0.55 = 0.21m m. 2 x 1.30 From these calculations, we may conclude that the smallest details that can be seen by the light microscope are those having dimensions of approximately 0.2m m. Activity A 1.
Define the resolving power.
2.
List 5 parts of a light microscope and state the function of each.
3.3 Preparation for Light-Microscope Examination There are two general methods used for preparing specimens for light- microscope examination.
(i) The organisms are suspended in a liquid (the wet-mount or the hanging drop technique) and (ii) The organism is dried fixed and stained before observing under the microscope.
3.3.1 The wet mount or hanging drop technique The technique permits examination of organisms in a normal living condition.
A wet mount is made by placing a drop of fluid containing the organisms on a glass slide and covering the drop with a cover slip.
Petroleum jelly may be used to provide a seal between the slide and covers slip after which the slide is viewed under the microscope.
This method is desirable because 31i.
It prevents distortion of the morphology of spiral bacteria when they are stained and dried.
ii.
It reveals whether organisms are motile or not.
iii.
Some cell inclusion bodies are easily observed.
iv.
Spore formation and germination may also be observed in living cells.
3.3.2 Fixed, Stained Smears of Microorganisms.
These are frequently used for the observation of the morphological characteristics of bacteria.
The procedure makes the cell more clearly visible, and differences between cells of different species and within the same species can be demonstrated.
The essential steps in this procedure are preparation of the film or smear, (2) fixation and (3) application of one or more staining solution.
3.3.3 Fixation Fixation is the process by which the internal and external structures of cells and microorganisms are preserved and fixed in position.
It in- activates enzymes that might distrupt cell morphology and toughness cell structures so that they do not change during staining and observation.
A microorganism usually is killed and attached firmly to the microscope slide during fixation.
There are two fundamentally different types of fixation.
1.
Heat Fixation: Is routinely used to observe prokaryotes.
Typically, a film of cells (a smear) is gently heated as a slide is passed through a flame.
Heat fixation preserves overall morphology but not structures within cells.
2.
Chemical Fixation: Is used to protect fine cellular sub- structure and the morphology of larger, more delicate micro organisms.
Chemical fixatives penetrate cells and react with cellular components, usually proteins and lipids, to render them inactive, insoluble, and immobile.
Common fixative mixtures contain such components as ethanol, acetic acid, mercuric chloride, formaldehyde, and glutaradehyde.
3.4 Staining of Specimens Although living microorganisms can be directly examined with the light microscope, they often must be fixed and stained to increase visibility, accentuate specific morphological features, and preserve them for future study.
Types of Staining 1.
Simple staining.
This a kind of staining in which a single stain or dye is used.
Basic dyes such as crystal violet, methylene blue, and carbolfuchsin are used in simple staining to determine the size, shape and arrangement of prokaryotic acids.
2.
Differential staining.
These are staining procedures that make visible the differences between bacterial cells or part of a bacterial cell .It usually involves more than one dye used for staining.
323.
Gram staining.
The Gram stain was developed in 1884 by the Danish physician Christian Gram.
It is the most widely used differential staining procedure.
The steps involved are as follows: (i) The smear is stained with the crystal violet (which is the primary stain).
(ii) This followed by treatment with iodine functioning as a mordant.
(iii) The smear is decolorized by washing with ethanol or acetone.
(iv) The smear is counterstained with a simple dye safranin Bacteria stained by the Gram stain method fell into two groups: Gram positive bacteria which retain the crystal violet and appear deep violet in colour and Gram negative bacteria which, lose the crystal violet and are counterstained with safranin appear red in colour.
4.
Acid fast staining: This is another differential staining procedure commonly used to identify mycobacterium tuberculosis and mycobacterium leprae, the pathogens responsible for tuberculosis and leprosy respectively.
These bacteria have cell walls with high lipid content in particular, mycolic acid which prevents dye from readily binding to the cells.
In the acid fast staining procedure, the red stain and carbol fuchsin is used as primary stain, next acid-alcohol is used as a decolourizer.
The acid-alcohol will remove the red stain form bacteria such as Escherichia coli which the acid fast mycobacteria will remain red.
3.5 Electron Microscopy This type of microscopy uses a beam of electron in place of light waves to produce the image.
There two types: (i) Scanning electron microscope (ii) Transmission electron microscope 3.5.1 The Transmission Electron Microscope Electron microscopes use a beam of electrons to illuminate and create magnified images of specimens.
Electrons replace light as the illuminating beam.
They can be focused, much as light is in a light microscope, but their wavelength is around 0.005mm approximately 1000,000 times shorter than that of visible light.
Therefore, electron microscopes have a practical resolution roughly 1,000 times better than the light microscope, with many electron microscopes point closer than 0.5nm can be distinguished, and the useful magnification is well over 100,000x.
In transmission electron microscope, the electron beam is transmitted through the specimen.
3.5.2 The Scanning Electron Microscope The scanning electron microscope produces an image from electron released from atoms on an object’s surface.
It has been used to 33examine the surfaces of microorganisms in great detail.
Many SEM has a resolution of 7nm or less.
Activity B 1.
Differentiate between the transmission electron microscope and scanning electron microscope.
4.0 Conclusion Scientific observation is an important part of scientific study.
Microbiology as a field of science would not have developed without the necessary instruments such as the microscope and the methods needs for observing the microorganism.
5.0 Summary In light microscopy magnification is obtained by a system of optical lensed using light waves.
Many types of light microscopes have been developed.
They include bright fields, dark field, phase contrast and fluorescence microscope.
• Electron microscope uses a beam of electron in place of light waves to produce the image of an object.
• The ordinary compound microscope is called the bright field microscope because if forms a dark image against a bright background.
• In the bright field microscope which is a compound the primary mage is formed by an objective lens and enlarged by the eye piece or ocular lens to form the final image.
• The dark field microscope uses only refracted light to form an image and objects glow against a black background.
• The dark field microscope is useful in revealing many internal structures in larger eukaryotic microorganism.
• The phase-contrast microscope converts slight differences in refractive index and cell density into easily detected variations in light intensity and is used to view living cells, for studying microbial motility and detecting some bacteria components such as endspores.
• The fluorescent microscope exposes a specimen to ultraviolet, violet or blue light and forms an image of the object with resulting fluorescent light • Two general methods for preparing specimens for light microscope examination are the wet mount or the hanging drop technique and the dried fixed stained technique.
• A wet mount is made by placing a drop of fluid containing the organisms on a glass slide and covering the drop with a cover slip before viewing under the microscope.
• Fixation is a process by which the internal and external structures of cells and microorganisms are preserved and fixed in a position.
It involves preparation of the smear, fixing with heat or chemical and application of one or more staining solutions.
• Electron microscopes use a beam of electrons to illuminate and create magnified images of specimens.
• Simple staining is a kind of staining in which a single stain or dye such as methylene and crystal violet is used.
34• Differential staining involves the use of more than one stain or dye is used to make visible the differences between bacterial cells or part of a bacterial cell examples are the Gram stain.
6.0 Tutored-Marked Assignment 1. a.
What is microscope resolution?
b.
List the stages involved in preparing a specimen for observation under the light microscope 2. a.
Describe the bright field microscope b.
What is the basic difference between a transmission electron microscope and a scanning electron microscope?
7.0 References and Further Readings Atlas, R.M.
(1995): Microorganisms in Our World.
Mosby Year Book.
Inc. Pp64-78 Medigan, M.T., Martinko, J.M., Dunlap, P.V and Clark, D.P.
(2009).
Brock Biology of Microorganisms; Pearson Education Inc. 12th edition.
Pp 26-31 Pelczar, M.J., Chan, E.C.S and Krieg, R.N (2001): Microbiology; Mc Graw-hill, 5th edition.
Pp 50-60 Willey, J.M., Sherwood, L.M and Woolverton, C.J (2008).
Prescott, Harley and Kleins.
Microbiology.
7th ed.
Boston Bur Bridge, IL: Mc Graw Hill Higher Education.
Pp 17-31 35UNIT 5: A BRIEF SURVEY OF MICROBES AS FRIENDS AND FOES 1.0 Introduction Microorganisms occur in large numbers of most natural environments and bring about many changes.
Some desirable and others undesirable.
Microorganisms affect the well being of people in a many ways.
Many are beneficial to man and can be called friends while some are harmful and can be regarded as foes to man.
The beneficial impart of microorganisms range from the production of good and pharmaceutical products, to enhancement of soil fertility, environmental cleanup while their harmful effect can be seen n their ability to cause disease in man, animals ad plants as well as their usage in biological warfare.
However there are more species of microorganisms that perform friendly and beneficial functions than those that harm other living organisms.
This unit gives a brief survey of microorganisms as friends and foes.
2.0 Objectives By the end of this unit, you should be able to: (a) explain the different ways in which microorganisms can act as friends to man.
(b) explain ways in which microorganisms can act as foes to man.
3.0 Microorganisms as Friends Microorganisms have found application in various aspects of life.
They are useful in food industries to produce many food substances, in medicine to produce vaccines and antibiotics, in environmental protection, and in agriculture, to optimize yield.
3.0.1 Microorganisms and Food Production • Many microorganisms are used to produce many of the foods and beverages we consume.
Microbialy produced food products have properties that are very different from those of the starting materials.
Most of these food products are produced by fermentation.
• Fermentation is the chemical transformation of organic compounds carried out by microorganisms and their enzymes.
In industrial fermentation, raw materials (substrate) are converted by microorganisms in a controlled favourable environment (created in a fermentor) to form a desired end product substance.
• The accumulation of fermentation products such as ethanol and lactic acid, produces characteristic flavours and other desirable properties in food substances.
• Many dairy products depend on microbial transformation, such as fermentation that yield products such as cheese, yoghurt and butter milk.
• Pickles and some sausages are also produced by fermentation processes.
• Microorganisms are used to produce fermented dairy products such as cheese, yoghurt and acidophilus milk.
• They are also used to produce alcoholic beverages such as beer by conversion of sugar to alcohol and carbon dioxide.
• Wine fermented from fruits using yeast stains Saccharomyces cerevisiae and bread is also produced by using yeasts.
36• Microorganisms can also be used as direct source of food known as single cell protein.
Various species of yeasts, algae are grown as single cell protein and use as animal feeds thus helping to meet the world food needs.
3.0.2 Production of Pharmaceuticals Microorganisms are used to produce different pharmaceuticals such as antibiotics, steroids vitamins, hormones etc.
Antibiotics are microbially produced substances or substances synthetically derived from natural sources that inhibit or kill microorganisms, Steroids regulate various aspects of human metabolisms and are produced by organisms such Rhizopus, nigricans.
Vaccines are produced using microorganisms with the antigenic properties to elicit a primary immune response, they are used to prevent many once deadly diseases such as polio, small pox, tuberculosis etc.
measles, diphtheria and whooping cough.
3.0.3 Vitamins Vitamins are essential animal nutritional factors, some vitamins are produced by microbial fermentation e.g.
vitamnin B12 by Streptomyces, B12 by Pseudomonas denitrificans and Propionibacterium shermanni.
Riboflavin produced by various species of Clostridium and Ashbya gossypii.
Human insulin and human growth hormone are produced by genetically engineered bacteria.
3.0.4 Production of Organic Acids Various organic acids are produced by microorganisms examples are: 1.
Gluconic acid: used as a pharmaceutical to supply calcium to the body by several fugi including Penicillium and Aspergillus species.
Citric acid produced by Aspergillus niger and used as a food additive especially in the production of soft drinks.
2.
Gibberellic acid: a plant hormone is formed by the fungus.
Gibberella fujikuroi.
It is used as growth promoting substances to stimulate plant growth flowering and seed germination.
3.
Lactic acid by different lactic acid bacteria for example, lactobacillus delbrueckii, lactic and is used in foods as preservatives, in leather production for deliming hides and in the textile industry for fabric treatment, plastics making in baking powders.
3.0.5 Hygiene (i) Hygiene is the avoidance of infection and food spoilage by eliminating microorganisms from the surrounding.
(ii) Our knowledge of how diseases causing microorganisms spread has permitted us to reduce the incidence of many diseases.
Also improved sanitation practices have helped to reduce the incidence of diseases.
(iii) Microorganisms from the surroundings can be totally removed by methods such as sterilization or reduced to acceptable levels using 37methods such as disinfection and antisepsis.
In food preparation, microbes are reduced to acceptable levels using methods such as pasteurization, addition of vinegar.
While complete sterility is achieved by autoclaving or irritation.
3.0.6 Energy Production Microorganisms play major roles in energy production.
Microbes are used in fermentation to produce ethanol and in biogas reactions to produce methane using various forms of agricultural and urban wastes.
Microbial production of synthetic fuels act as an alternative fuel resources to petroleum.
The microbial production of ethanol from sugarcane or cornstarch has become an important source of a valuable fuel, particularly in areas of the world that have abundant supplies of plant residuces such as Brazil and is becoming popular in the United States.
The bacteria Zymomonas mobilis and thermoanaerobacter ethanolicus and different yeast strains are used for product of ethanol.
Methane (natural gas) is produced by methanogenic bacteria is another important natural renewable energy sources.
Methane can be used for the generation of mechanical, electrical and heat energy.
3.0.7 Useful in the Study of Science Microbes are essential tools in biotechnology, biochemistry genetics molecular biology and genomics.
Examples are the yeasts (Saccharomyces cerevisiae) and fission yeast (Shizosaccharomyces pombe) which are model organisms in science.
They can easily be grown rapidly in large quantities and are easily manipulated.
Biotechnology uses genetic engineering which is the artificial manipulation of genes and genes products.
Genes from any sources can be manipulated and modified using microorganisms and their enzymes as molecular tools e.g.
human insulin, a hormone which is very small in people with diabetes is produced by genetically engineered bacteria into which human genes have been inserted.
3.0.8 Recovery of Metals from their Ores Microorganisms are used to recover metals from their ores by the process of bioleaching.
Bioleaching uses microorganisms to alter the physical or chemical properties a metallic ore so that the metal can be extracted.
The bacteria Thiobacillus feroxidans recover copper and uranium from their ores.
3.0.9 Microorganisms and Agriculture Agriculture depends in many ways on the activities of microorganisms.
Microorganisms help in nitrogen fixation used by plants for growth.
In terrestrial habitats, the microbial fixation of atmospheric nitrogen is carried out by free living.
Living and bacteria such as Rhizobium and Bradychizebium living in symbiotic association with plants.
Legumes live in close association with bacteria that form structures called nodules on their roots.
These bacteria in the root nodules of the legumes convert atmospheric N 2 fixed into Nitrogen (NH ) that plants use for growth and eradicates the need 3 for chemical fertilizers.
38Microorganisms in the rumen of ruminant animals such as cattle and sheep also help in the digestion of cellulose present in grasses on which they feed on.
Microorganisms help in the cycling of nutrients such as carbon, nitrogen and sulphur which are needed to maintain ecological balance.
Microorganisms are also used as biological control agents.
Fungi, bacteria and viruses can be used as bioinsecticides or biospesticides e.g.
Bacillus thuringensis.
Microbial activities in soil and water convert these elements to forms that are readily assimilated by plants.
3.0.10 Microorganisms and the Environment Microorganisms can be used to clean up pollution created by human activities in a process called bioremediation.
Pollutants such as pesticides, spilled oil solvents which could poses human health hazard are degraded to nontoxic substances by microorganisms.
Microorganisms are used to degrade wastes and pollutants so as to maintains and restores environmental quality.
3.0.11 Sewage Treatment Microorganism are also used in sewage treatment, specially cultured microbes are used in the biological treatment of sewage and industrial waste effluent in a process known as bioaugmentation.
Thus help to get rid of waste materials when could have accumulated in the environment.
Activity A State the beneficial role of microorganisms in (i) Agriculture (ii) Environmental Protein (iii) Food Production.
3.1 Microorganisms as Foes Microorganism can act as foes to man and other living organisms by causing diseases and by their usage as biological weapons.
3.1.1 Microorganisms as Diseases Agents Microbial diseases are still the major cause of death in many developing countries.
Microorganisms cause different diseases in man such : • AIDS (Acquired Immune Deficiency Syndrome) caused by the Human Immuno Deficiency Virus (HIV).
• Tuberculosis caused by a bacteria.
Mycobacterium tuberculosis • Cholera caused by a bacteria Vibrio cholera.
• Malaria caused by four species of the Protozoa celled.
• Plasmodium transmitted by the female anopheles mosquito.
Other emerging diseases include, Bird flu, swine flu.
Microorganisms are also agents of diseases of plants and animals of agricultural importance.
These microbial diseases of plants and animals cause major economic losses in the agriculture industry and to the world.
393.1.2 Microorganisms As Agents of Warfare and Terrorism.
Use in Biological Warfare Biological warfare is also known as germ warfare.
It is the use of pathogens such as viruses, bacteria, or the toxins produced by them as biological weapons or agents of warfare.
A biological weapon may be used to kill, incapacitate or seriously impar a person, group of people or even an entire population.
It can be used as a military technique by nations during wars.
There are four kinds of biological warfare agents, bacteria, viruses, fungi and rickettsiaes.
They are living organisms that reproduce with their host victims who then become contagious with a deadly if weaking multiple effects.
Toxins on the other hand do not reproduce in the victims but within a short incubation period (usually with a few hours) kill the victims.
Activity B 1.
Explain ways in which microorganism can act as foes to man.
4.0 Conclusion Through the activities of microorganism we have received many benefits such as production of foods with improved qualities, improved agricultural crop yields, maintained environmental quality and decrease the incidence of diseases however some microorganism are still life threatening and harmful to man.
5.0 Summary • Microorganisms can act as friends or foes to man.
• Microorganisms are friends, and useful to man in several ways.
• Microorganisms are used in the production of foods such as breed, beer, wine, dairy products such as cheese yoghurt and in single cell protein.
• Microorganisms are used in the production of pharmaceuticals such as antibiotics, vaccines and steroids.
• Microorganisms are used in production of fuels like ethanol and methane used for energy.
• Microorganisms are used in environmental clean-up.
• Microorganisms are important in agriculture.
• Microorganisms useful in the study of science.
• Microorganisms are used to produce different organic acids such as hectic acid, and Gluconic acid.
• Microorganisms are used to maintain Hygiene.
• Microorganisms act as foes by causing diseases such as AIDS, Tuberculosis in man.
• Microorganisms also cause diseases of animal and plants.
• Microorganisms are used as agents of warfare or terrorism.
6.0 Tutor Marked Assignment 1 (a) List two fuels produced by microorganisms.
(b) Give the name of one bacteria used to recover copper from its ore. (c) Explain two ways in microorganisms are harmful to man.
407.0 Further Reading and Other Resources Pimental, David (2007): Food, Energy and Society, CRC Press.
P.289.
ISBN1-420- 04467-5 Gray, N. F. (2004): Biological of Waste Water Treatment.
Imperial College Press, p. 1164.
ISBN1-860-94332-2.
Atlas, R.M.
(1995): Microorganisms in our World.
Mosby Year Book.
Inc. Pp5-13.
Medigan, M.T., Martinko, J.M., Dunlap, P.V and Clark, D.P.
(2009).
Brock Biology of Microorganisms; Pearson Education Inc. 12th edition.
Pp.
Pelczar, M.J., Chan, E.C.S and Krieg, R.N (2001): Microbiology; Mc Graw-hill, 5th edition.
Pp Willey, J.M., Sherwood, L.M and Woolverton, C.J (2008).
Prescott, Harley and Kleins.
Microbiology.
7th ed.
Boston Bur Bridge, IL: Mc Graw Hill Higher Education.
Pp 1-3 Atlas, R.M.
(1995): Microorganisms in our World.
Mosby Year Book.
Inc. Pp5-13 Medigan, M.T., Martinko, J.M., Dunlap, P.V and Clark, D.P.
(2009).
Brock Biology of Microorganisms; Pearson Education Inc. 12th edition.
Pp Pelczar, M.J., Chan, E.C.S and Krieg, R.N (2001): Microbiology; Mc Graw-hill, 5th edition.
Pp Willey, J.M., Sherwood, L.M and Woolverton, C.J (2008).
Prescott, Harley and Kleins.
Microbiology.
7th ed.
Boston Bur Bridge, IL: Mc Graw Hill Higher Education.
Pp 1-3 41MODULE 2: GENERAL CHARACTERISTICS OF MICROORGANISMS UNIT 1: BACTERIA 1.0 Introduction Bacteria are characterized based on the cell shape, size and structure cell arrangement, occurrence of special structures and developmental forms, staining reactions and motility and flagella arrangement.
Cell wall component, Gram stain reaction, cellular respiration and mode of nutrition.
This unit examines the general characteristics of bacteria, shapes and forms of bacteria, structures external and internal in bacteria among other things.
2.0 Objectives By the end of this unit, you must be able to: 1.
Describe the general characteristics of basic bacteria.
2.
Recognize and name the general shapes and forms of bacteria.
3.
Describe the external and internal structures of bacteria.
4.
Explain the significance of the cell wall structure and composition.
5.
Explain the modes of nutrition and energy source in bacteria.
6.
Explain the modes of cellular respiration in bacteria.
7.
Explain the modes of reproduction in bacteria.
3.0 General Characteristics of Microorganism General characteristics of bacteria: 1.
They are prokaryotic 2.
Simplest of all microbial cells 3.
Single celled organisms.
4.
Distinctive cell wall which contain peptidoglycan.
5.
Measured in unit called micrometer.
6.
Lack a true nucleus but have a region called the nucleroid region i.e.
DNA DNA is free floating 7 May have additional DNA called a plasmid.
8 Reproduction is by binary fission.
9 Extremely diverse and numerous in soils and waters.
3.1 Size, Shape and Arrangement of Bacterial Cell 3.1.1 Size Bacteria are very small, 0.5 to 1.0 NM in diameter.
Because of their small size, they have high surface area/volume ratio which results in a high growth and metabolism rate.
No circulatory mechanism is needed for nutrients taken in because the mass of cell substance to be nourished is very close to the surface.
Examinations of a microbial cell require the use of a high power microscope usually of about 1,000 diameters.
42 Figure 1: A Basic Bacterium Cell Source: Microorganisms in our World by Atlas (1995) 3.1.2 Shape and Arrangement The shape of a bacterium is governed by its rigid cell wall which gives it a definite shape.
Typical shapes of bacteria are: * Cocci (Singular: Coccus) e.g.
Staphylococcus * Bacilli (rods) (Singular: rod, bacillus) e.g.
Bacillus subtilis * Vibrios (Singular: viibro) * Spirilla (Singular: Spirillun) * Spirochaetes (Singular: Spirochaete) e.g.
Treponema pallidum Some species of bacteria are Pleomorphic i.e.
they are able to change their forms especially when grown on artificial media.
1.
Cocci: They are round, oval or spherical in diameter characteristics arrangement when multiplying is based on arrangement of cells, they are called: * Diplococci: cocci in pairs e.g.
meniingo cocci and gonococci * Streptococci cocci in chains.
* Staphylococci: cocci in irregular clusters.
* Tetracocci: cocci in a group of four cells * Sarcinae: cocci in regular clusters 2.
Bacilli (Rod): These are stick like bacteria with rounded, square, tapered or swollen ends.
They measure 1-10µm in length by 0.3-1.0µm in width.
Bacilli are not arranged in patterns as complex as cocci.
Most occur singly.
Other arrangements are: * Diplobacilli: Rods in pairs * Streptobacilli: Rods in chains * Trichomes: Similar to chains but have larger area of contact between adjacent cells.
* Mass together * Mycobacterium leprae 43* Palisade arrangement cells are lined side by side like matchsticks and at angles to each other like Chinese lecters e.g.
Corynebacterium diptheriae.
3.
Vibrios: These are small slightly curved rods,or comma shaped 3-4µm in length by 0.5µm in width.
Most are motile with a single flagellum at one end e.g.
vibrio cholera.
4.
Spirilla: These are helical bacteria, small, regularly coiled, rigid, organisms measuring 3-4µm in length.
Each coil measures about 1µm e.g.
Spirillum minus.
5.
Spirochaetes: They are helical, (complete twist), flexible, coiled organisms, can twist and contort their shapes.
Spirochaeters are divided into three main groups.
- Treponemes: Tiny and delicate with regular tight coils, measuring 6-15µm by 0.2µm in width e.g.
Treponema pallidum and Treponema pertenue.
- Borreliae: Large spirochaetes with irregular open coils 10-20µm in length by 0.5µm in width e.g.
Borella., duttoni and Borrelia vinceti.
- Leptospires: Tiny spirochaetes with many tightly packed coils that are difficult to distinguish; 6-20µm in length by 0.1µM in width and have hooked ends e.g.
Leptospira interrigans.
In addition to the common bacterial shapes many others also occur, which include: 44(i) Pear shaped cells e.g.
Pasteuria (ii) Lobed spheres e.g.
sulfolobus.
(iii) Rods with squared ends e.g.
Bacillus anthracis (iv) Disk arranged Stacks of coins e.g.
Caryophanon.
(v) Rods with helically sculptured surfaces e.g.
Seliberia and many others.
The shape of a cell affects its survival and activity in the environment.
Activity A Describe the different shapes of bacteria.
3.2 Bacterial Structures Examination of a bacterial cell will reveal several components and structures.
Some are external to the cell wall while others are internal to the cell wall.
3.2.1 Structure external to the cell wall 1.
Flagella (Singular: Flagellum): These are hair like, helical appendages that protrude through the cell wall.
0.01 – 0.02µm in diameter and simple in structure.
Based on their location on the cell, flagella may be polar or lateral.
(i) Polar: At one or both ends of bacterium.
(ii) Lateral: Along the sides of the bacterium.
A flagellum is composed of three parts: (i) A based body associated with the cytoplasme, membrane and cell wall.
(ii) A short hook and a helical filament which is usually several times as long as the cell.
(iii) A flagellum grows a the tip rather than at the base.
Types of Flagella * Monotrichous: A single polar flagellum.
Many that appears and function as monopolar or bipolar flagella consists of bundles of 2 to 50 single units (polytrichous).
* Lophotrichous: A cluster of polar flagella.
* Amphitrichous: Flagella, either single or clusters at both cell poles.
* Peritrichous: Cell surrounded by lateral flagella.
45 Figure 3: Types of Flagella Source: Microbiology by Pelczar, et al., (1993) Function of Flagella Bacterial propel themselves by rotating their helical flagella.
2.
Pilli (Singular: Pilus): They are also called fimbriae.
They are hollow, non-helical filamentous appendages that are thinner, shorter and more numerous than flagella; long, thin, straight threads 3-25µm in diameter and 12µm in length.
They do not function in motility since they are found on non-motile and motile species.
Several functions are associated with different types of pill.
F pilus (Sex pilus) serves as the part of entry of genetic material during bacterial mating.
Some play major role in human infection by allowing pathogenic bacteria to attach to the epithehal cells lining the respiratory intestinal or genitourinary tracts, this prevent the bacteria from being washed away by the flow of mucous or body fluids and permits infections to be established.
3.
Capsules: This is a viscous substance forming a covering layer or envelope around the cell wall of some bacteria.
Capsules can be categorized into three based on their visualization by light microscopy using special staining methods.
- If the covering layer can be visualized by light microscopy using special staining methods.
It is termed capsule.
- Microcapsule: If the layer is too thin to be seen by light microscopy.
46- Slime: If it is so abundant that many cells are embedded in a common matrix.
Most bacterial capsules consist of polysaccharides which can be homopolysaccharides or heteropolysaccharides.
Homopolysaccharides: Capsule made up of / composed of a single kind of sugar usually synthesized outside the cell by exocellular enzymes e.g.
glucan (a polymer of glucose) from sucrose by S.mutans.
Heteropolysaccharides: Composed of several kinds of sugars.
A few capsules are polypeptide e.g.
Bacillus anthracis has a capsule made up of a polymer of glutamic acid.
Functions: - They may provide protection against temporary drying by binding water molecules.
- They may block attachment of bacteriophages.
- They may be antiphagocytuc i.e.
they may inhibit the engulfment of pathogenic bacteria by white blood cells.
Hence contribute to invasive or infective ability (vinilence).
- Promote attachment of bacteria to surfaces.
4.
Sheaths: Some bacterial species forms chains or trichomes enclosed by a hollow tube called shealths.
These sheaths consist of a heteropolysaccharides containing glucose, glucoronic acid, galactose and fucose.
Functions: - In a few bacteria, facilitate moderate change of position.
- It enables individual cells to stay associated in cell colonies.
5.
Prosthecae and Stalks Pristhecae: They are semi rigid extensions of the cell wall and cytoplasmic membrane and have a diameter less than that of the cell.
Found in some aerobic bacteria from fresh water and marine environment.
Functions: - Increase surface area of the cell for nutrient absorption.
- Some have adhesive substances that aid attachment to surfaces.
Stalks: They are non-living ribbon like or tubular appendages excreted by some bacterial cells e.g.
found in Gallionella or Planctomyces.
47Functions: They aid in attachment of the cells to surfaces.
Activity B List four different structures external to the cell wall of bacteria and state one function of each.
3.2.2 The Cell Wall It is a very rigid structure that gives shape to the cells.
It also prevents the cell from expanding and eventually bursting of uptake of water since most bacteria live in hypotonic environment (i.e.
environments having a lower osmotic pressure than exists within the bacterial cells).
Cell walls are essential for bacterial growth and division.
Structure and Chemical Composition of the Cell Wall The cell wall of bacteria is made up of peptidoglycan (sometimes called Murein).
Peptidoglycan is found only in prokaryotes.
It is an insoluble, porous, cross-linked polymer peptidoglycan differs composition and structure from species to another but it is basically a polymer of N-acetyglucosamine, N-acetylmuramie acid,L-alanine, D- alanine, D-glutamate and adiamino acid.
Bacteria are classified based on differences in the composition of cell wall.
This is determined by the Gram Stain technique.
Gram stain identifies bacteria as Gram positive or Gram negative.
The Gram stain is named after Christian Gram, a Danish Physician who invented it in 1884.
Gram positive bacteria stained purple whereas Gram negative bacteria stain pink or red by the Gram stain technique.
The difference is the reaction to the Gram staining technique is due presence of a single 20 to 80µm thick homogenous layer of peptidoglycan (Murein) which is present in the all wall of Gram positive bacteria on the other hand, the Gram negative cell is more complex, it has a 2 to 7µm peptidoglycan layer covered by 1 7 to 8µm thick outer layer of lipopolysaccharides (LPS).
These LPS are toxic substances which make Gram negative organisms more harmful than Gram positive organisms.
3.2.3.
Structures Internal to the Cell 1.
Cytoplasmic Membrane • This lies immediately beneath the cell wall.
• It is approximately 7.5µm (0.0075µm) thick and composed primarily of phospholipids (20 to 30 percent) and protein (60 to 70 percent).
• It serves as a barrier to most water soluble molecules.
• It contains various enzymes involved in respiration, and metabolism and in synthesis of capsular and cell wall component.
48• Proteins are also synthesized in the cytoplasm.
2.
Protoplast A protoplast is the portion of a bacterial, all made up of the cytplasmic membrane and the cell material bounded by it.
3.
The cytoplasm This is the cell material bounded by the cytoplasmic membrane and it may be divided into: (i) The cytoplasmic area, granular in appearance and rich in the macromolecular RNA-protein bodies called Ribosomes on which proteins are synthesized.
(ii) The chromatin area rich in DNA and (iii) The fluid portion with dissolved substances.
4.
Nuclear Material Unlike eucaryotic cells bacterial cells do not have a distinct membrane enclosed nucleus but they have an area near the centre of the cell that is regarded as the nuclear structure, the DNA of the cell is confined to this area.
The DNA is circular and bears the genes of the cell.
5.
Spores and Cysts Certain bacterial produce spores either within the cells (endospores) or external to the cell (exospores).
The spore is metabolically dormant form which under appropriate condition can germinate to form a vegetative cell.
Endospores are extremely resistance to desiccation, staining, disinfecting chemicals radiation and heat.
Cysts are also dormant, thick walled desiccation resistant forms that can germinate also under favourable conditioning.
3.3 Nutrition The nutrition requirements of bacteria vary widely.
Based on their source of energy, they are classified as: (i) Phototrophs: These are bacteria that use light energy as their energy sources.
(ii) Chemotrophs: They obtain their energy by oxidizing inorganic or organic – chemical compounds.
Based on the source of carbon which is the major source of nutrient for all cells bacteria can be classified as: (i) Heterotrophs: These are bacteria that derive carbon from preformed organic nutrients such as sugar or carbohydrate.
(ii) Autotrophs: They derive carbon from inorganic sources such as carbon dioxide 3.4 Cellular Respiration Based on whether they need oxygen to survive or not.
Bacteria may be: (i) Aerobic or strict aerobes: these require oxygen e.g.
Bacillus cereus.
49(ii) Anaerobic bacteria or strict anaerobes: they cannot tolerate oxygen e.g.
clostridium spp.
(iii) Facultative anaerobes: These are generally aerobes but have the capacity to grow in the aerobes but have the capacity to grow in the absence of oxygen e.g.
staphylococcus spp.
3.5 Reproduction Bacteria reproduce mainly by asexual method which most of the time is transverse Binary fission.
A process in which a bacterial csell divides to give two daughter cells after developing a transverse septum (crosswall).
Activity C Differentiate between Gram Positive bacteria and Gram Negative bacteria.
4.0 Conclusion Difference types of bacteria differ from one another not only in their shapes and forms but also in their chemical characteristics, modes of cellular respiration, nutrition and reproduction.
5.0 Summary • Bacteria are prokaryotic single celled organisms that lack membrane bund organelles.
Bacteria are very small ranging size from 0.5 to 1.0nm in diameter.
• The typical shapes of bacteria are Cocci, Bacilli (Rod) Vibrio, Spirila and Spirochaetes.
Some bacteria are leomorphic.
• Structures external to bacterial cell wall include flagella, pilli capsules, sheeths, prosthecae and stalks.
• Flagella are hairlike, helical appendages that protrude through the cell water used for locomotion may be polar or lateral based on location on the cell.
• Types of flagella are Monotrichous, Lophotrichous, Amphitrichous, Peritrichous.
• A capsule is a viscous substance forming a covers layer or envelope around the cell wall of some bacteria.
Capsule act as protection against drying, bacteriophages and engulfment of pathogenic bacteria by white blood cells.
• The cell wall is rigid structure made up of peptidoglycan that gives shape to bacterial cells.
Bacteria are classified based on differences in the composition of cell wall as determined by the Gram stain techniques.
• Gram-positive bacteria stained purple while Gram-negative bacteria stain pink of red by Gram stain technique.
• Structures internal to the bacterium cell include cytoplasmic membrane, protoplast, the cytoplasm, the nuclear material, spores and c ysts.
• Based on source of energy bacteria can be classified as phototrophos and chemotrophs.
• Based on source of carbon for nutrition, bacteria can be classified as heterotrophs and chemotrophs.
• Based on oxygen requirement, bacteria are classified as Aerobic, Anaerobic and Facultatie anaerobe.
• Bacteria reproduce asexually by Transverse binary fission.
50• Bacteria are very small, simple prokaryotic cells that have defined shapes and organelles which perform definite functions They are capable of independent living and existence.
6.0 Tutor Marked Assignment 1.
(a) Describe the structure and functions of a flagellum.
(b) State the difference types of bacteria based on their mode of cellular respiration.
(c) Differentiate between Gram Positive and Gram Negative Bacteria Cell Walls 7.0 References Atlas, R.M.
(1995): Microorganisms in our World.
Mosby Year Book.
Inc. Pp5-13 Medigan, M.T., Martinko, J.M., Dunlap, P.V and Clark, D.P.
(2009).
Brock Biology of Microorganisms; Pearson Education Inc. 12th edition.
Pp 67- 94 Pelczar, M.J., Chan, E.C.S and Krieg, R.N (1993): Microbiology; Mc Graw-hill, 5th edition.
Pp 73- 93 The Prokaryotes: A review of Classification .www.faculty.collegeofthedesert.edu/admin-/B115 lecture 9-05STUD-4ppt Willey, J.M., Sherwood, L.M and Woolverton, C.J (2008).
Prescott, Harley and Kleins.
Microbiology.
7th ed.
Boston Bur Bridge, IL: Mc Graw Hill Higher Education.
Pp 30-73.
51UNIT 2: FUNGI 1.0 Introduction Fungi are eukaryotic spore bearing organisms that lack chlorophyll and generally reproduce both sexually and asexually.
They are of great practical and scientific importance.
One of the reasons for this is that many fungi are of microscopic cellular dimensions.
Fungi have a diversity of morphological appearances depending on the species.
Fungi comprise the molds, mushrooms and yeasts.
Molds are filamentous and multicellular while yeasts are unicellular.
They are widely distributed and found wherever moisture is present.
They are of great importance to man in both beneficial and harmful ways.
This unit examines the general characteristics of fungi, the distribution, morphology, nutrition and reproduction of fungi.
2.0 Objectives At the end of the unit, you should be able to (i) define a fungus; (ii) state the general characteristics of fungi; (iii) describe the structure of a yeast; (iv) describe the structure of a mold; (v) explain the mode of nutrition in fungi; (vi) explain the methods of Asexual reproduction and Sexual reproduction in fungi.
3.0 Definition of Fungi Fungi are eukaryotic spore bearing organisms that lack chlorophyll and generally reproduce both sexually and asexually.
3.1 Distinguishing Characteristics of Fungi They are large, diverse and widespread group of organisms, the moulds, mushrooms and yeasts.
1.
Fungi are Eucaryotic.
Members of the domain Eucarya.
2.
They contain a membrane enclosed nucleus and several other organelles.
3.
They have no chlorophyll.
4.
They are chemo organotrophic organisms.
5.
The body of the fungi is called Thallus.
6.
The thallus may consist of a single cell as found in yeasts.
7.
The thallus may consist of filaments, 5 to 10µm across which are commonly branched.as found in molds 8.
The yeast cell or mold filament is surrounded by a true cell wall (exception is the slime mould which have a thallus consisting of a naked amoeboid mass of protoplasm.
9.
Some fungi are dimorphic, that is they exist in two forms.
Some pathogenic fungi of humans and other animals have a unicellular and yeast like form in their host but when growing saprophytically in soil or on a laboratory medium they have a filamentous mold form.
10.
Habitat distribution of fungi are diverse.
Some are aquatic, living primarily in fresh water and a few marine fungi are terrestrial.
They inhabit soil and dead plant.
Some are parasitic, inhabiting and 52infecting.
In living hosts enter plants or animals some form beneficial relationship with other organisms as mycorrhiazae.
11.
The study of fungi is known as mycology.
3.2 Structure and Forms of Fungi The body or vegetative structure of a fungus is called a thallus (plural thalli).
It varies in complexity and size ranging from the single cell microscopic yeasts to multicellular moulds and mushroom.
The fungus cell is usually enclosed in a cell wall of chitin.
3.2.1 Yeasts • They are unicellular fungi that have a single nucleus.
• They are commonly egg-shaped but some are elongated and some spherical.
Yeasts have no flagella or other organelles of locomotion.
• They possess most of the other eukaryotic organelles.
• Yeast cells are larger than most bacteria.
Yeasts vary considerably in size ranging from 1 to 5µm in width and from 5 to 30µm or more in length.
• They reproduce asexually by budding and traverse division or sexually through spore formation.
Figure 1: A Diagram of a Yeast Cell Source: Wikimedia Commons by Frankie Robertson using Inkscape (2009) 3.2.2 Molds The thallus of a mold consists of long branched threadlike filaments of cells called hyphae.
These hyphae form a mycelium which is a tangled mass or tissue like aggregation of hyphae.
Hyphae 531.
Each hypha is about 5 to 10µm wide.
Hyphae are composed of an outer tube like wall surrounding a cavity the Lumen which is filled or lined by protoplasm.
Between the protoplasm and the wall is the plasmalemma, a double layer membrane which surrounds the protoplasm.
2.
The hyphal wall consists of microfibrils composed of hemicelluloses or chitin.
True cellulose occurs only in the walls of lower fungi.
3.
Wall matrix material in which the micro fibrils are embedded consists of proteins, lipids and other substances.
Growth of a hypha is distal near the tip.
The Mycelium 1.
The mycelium is a complex of several filaments called hyphae (singular, hypha).
New hyphae generally arise from a germinated spore.
The germinated spore puts out a germ tube or tubes which elongate to form hyphae.
These hyphae form a tangled mass or tissue like aggregation.
Figure 2: Rhizopus stolonifer Source: Retrieved from The Backyard Nature Website at file://G:\Bread mold fungus, Rhizopus stolonifer.htm .
In some fungi, protoplasm streams through hyphae uninterrupted by cross walls, these hyphae are called coenocytic or aseptate.
The hyphae of others have cross walls called speta (s. septum) with either single pore or multiple pores that enables cytoplasmic streaming.
These hyphae are termed septate.
Summarily hyphae can be said to occur in three forms: 54(i) Nonseptate or coenocytic; such hyphae have no septa.
(ii) Septate with uninucleate cells (iii) Septate with multinucleate cells.
Each cell has more than one nucleus in each compartment.
Activity A (i) What are the major differences between a mold and a yeast?
(ii) State five general characteristics of fungi.
3.3 Nutrition and Metabolism Most fungi are saprophytes, securing their nutrients from dead organic matters.
They release hydrolytic exo enzymes that digest external substrates and absorb the soluble products.
They are also chemoorganoheterotrophs,i.e they use organic compounds as a source of carbon, electrons and energy.
Fungi are usually aerobic, however some yeasts are facultatively anaerobic and can obtain their energy by fermentation.
Obligately anaerobic fungi are found in the rumen of cattle.
3.4 Reproduction Reproduction in fungi can either be asexual or sexual.
methods 3.4.1 Asexual reproduction Asexual reproduction is a type of reproduction involving only one parent that produces genetically identical offspring by budding or by the division of a single cell or the entire organism into two or more parts.
Asexual reproduction also called somatic or vegetative reproduction is accomplished in several ways and does not involve the fusion/union of nuclei, sex cells or sex organs.
It may be accomplished by: (i) fission of somatic cells yielding two similar daughter cells; (ii) budding each bud a small outgrowth of the parent cell develops into a new individual; (iii) fragmentation or disjointing of the hyphal cells each fragment becoming a new organism; (iv) spore formation There are several types of asexual spores each with its own name.
1.
Sporangiospores: These are single-celled spores formed within sacs called sporangia (singular, sporangium) at the end of special hyphae called sporangio phores).
There are two types of sporangiospores; Aplanospores which are non motile and zoospores which are motile.
Molality is due to the presence of flagella.
2.
Condiospores or conidia (singular, conidium).
These are formed at the tip or side of a hypha single celled conidia are called microconidia while large mutlicelled conidia are called macroconidia.
553.
Oidia (singular oidium) or arthrosopores: These are single celled spores formed by disjointing of hyphal cells.
4.
Chlamydospores: These are thick walled single celled spores which are highly resistant to adverse conditions.
They are found from cells of the vegetative hypha.
5.
Blastosopres: These are spores formed by budding Figure 3: Different types of asexual spores Source: Brock Biology of Microorganisms by Medigan et al., (2009) 3.4.2 Sexual Reproduction ¤ Sexual reproduction is a type of reproduction in which two parents give rise to offspring that have unique combinations of genes inheritd from the gametes of the two parents.
¤ It is carried out by fusion of the compatible nuclei of two parent cells.
¤ The process of sexual reproduction begins with the joining of two cells and fusion of their protoplast (plasmogamy) thus enabling the two haploid nuclei of two mating types to fuse together (karologamy) to form a diploid nucleus.
This is followed by meiosis, which again reduces the number of chromosomes t the haploid number.
¤ The sex organelles of fungi if present are called gametangia.
They may form differentiated sex cells called gametes or may contain instead one or more gamete nuclei.
If the male and 56female gametangia are morphologically different, the male gametangiumis called the antheridium (plural antheriodia) and the female gamentagium is called the Oogonium (Oogonia).
Methods of sexual reproduction include: (i) Gametic copulation: This is the fusion of naked gametes, one or both of which are motile.
(ii) Gamete-gametangial copulation.
Two gametangia came into contact but do not fuse; the male nucleus migrate through a pore or fertilization to be into the female gamentangiun.
(iii) Gametangial copulation: Two gamentagia or their protoplast fuse and give rise to a zygote that develops into a resting spore.
(iv) Somatic copulation: Fusion of somatic or vegetative cells.
(v) Spermatization: Union of a special male structure called a spermatium (plural spermatia) with a female receptive structure.
The spermatum empties its content into the female during plasmogamy Sexual spores are produced by the fusion of two nuclei.
Examples are: (i) Ascospores: These are single-celled spores produced in a sac called an ascus.
There are usually eight ascospores in each ascus.
(ii) Basidiospore: These are single celled spores borne on a club- shaped structure called a basidium.
(iii) Zygospores: These are large thick walled spores formed when the tips of two sexually compatible hyphae or gametagia fuse together.
(iv) Oospores: These are formed with a special female structure, the oogonium.
Fertilization of the eggs or oospheres by the male gametes formed in an antheridium give rise to oospores.
Activity B Describe sexual reproduction as it occurs in fungi 3.5 Physiology (cid:1) Fungi are better able to withstand certain extreme environments than other microorganisms.
They can tolerate more acidic conditions than other microbes.
Some yeasts are facultative; they can grow under both aerobic and anaerobic conditions.
Molds and many yeasts are usually aerobic microorganisms.
(cid:1) Fungi grow over a wide a range of temperature optimum for most saprophlytic species is 22 to 300C while pathogenic fungi have a higher temperature orptimum of 30 to 370C.
(cid:1) Some fungi will grow at or near 00C and thus can cause spoilage of meat or and vegetables in cold storage.
3.6 Importance of fungi • About 90,000 fugal species have been described according to literature.
However, some estimates suggest 1.5 million species may 57exist.
Fungi are important to humans in both beneficial and harmful ways.
• Beneficially, fungi act as decomposers.
They degrade complex organic materials in the environment and tireleese simple organic and inorganic molecules like carbon, Nitrogen, Phosphorus needed by other living organisms.
• Moulds and yeasts are used in many industrial processes involving fermentation to produce beer, wine and bread, cheese soy sauce, organic acids and many antibiotics.
• They are important research tools in the study of fundamental processes such as cytology, genetics, biochemistry and microbiology.
• On the other hand, fungi cause many diseases of plants, animals and humans.
About 20 new human fungal pathogens are documented each year.
4.0 Conclusion Fungi are eukaryotic, spore bearing organisms that lack chlorophyll.
They are diverse in distribution, reproduce sexually and asexually.
Fungi are of high importance to man in both beneficially and harmful ways.
5.0 Summary ¤ Fungi are eukaryotic spore bearing organisms that lack chlorophyll and reproduce both asexually and sexually.
¤ Fungi are widespread in environment and found wherever water suitable organic nutrients and an appropriate temperature occur.
¤ Habitats of fungi are diverse.
Many are terrestrial some are aquatic and are parasite in living hosts.
¤ The body or vegetative structure of a fungus is called Thallus.
¤ Fungi may be grouped into molds or yeasts based on the development of the thallus.
¤ Yeasts are unicellular fungi that have a single nucleus and reproduce either asexually by budding or asexually by spore formation.
¤ A mold is made up of long branched thread like filament called hyphae that form a tangled mass called mycelium.
¤ Some fungi are saprophytes and grow best in moist dark habitats.
¤ They are usually aerobic but some yeasts are facultative.
¤ Asexual reproduction occurs in fungi by the production of specific types of spores which are easily dispersed.
¤ Sexual reproduction occurs by the fusion of hyphae or cells of different mating types.
6.0 Tutor Marked Assignment 1.
Describe the structure of a mold 2.
Describe each of the following types of asexual fungal spores: (i) Sporangiospore (ii) Conidiospore and (iii) Blasto spore.
587.0 Further Reading and Other Resources Atlas, R.M.
(1995): Microorganisms in our World.
Mosby Year Book.
Inc. Pp5-13 Medigan, M.T., Martinko, J.M., Dunlap, P.V and Clark, D.P.
(2009).
Brock Biology of Microorganisms; Pearson Education Inc. 12th edition.
Pp 516 -547 Pelczar, M.J., Chan, E.C.S and Krieg, R.N (2001): Microbiology; Mc Graw-hill, 5th edition.
Pp 333 -364 Willey, J.M., Sherwood, L.M and Woolverton, C.J (2008).
Prescott, Harley and Kleins.
Microbiology.
7th ed.
Boston Bur Bridge, IL: Mc Graw Hill Higher Education.
Pp 632- 667 Website: The Backyard Nature.
Bread mold fungus, Rhizopus stolonifer.htm .
59UNIT 5: VIRUSES 1.0 Introduction Viruses are acellular entities.
They are genetic elements that cannot replicate independently of a living cell called the host cell.
Viruses have extracellular forms which enable them to exist outside the host for long periods and to multiply they have to enter a cell in which they can replicate causing infection.
Viruses are the most numerous microorganisms on earth and infected all types of cellular organisms.
The study of viruses is known as virology.
This unit examines the general characteristics of viruses, their structures, genomes, symmetry, replication in hosts and purification.
2.0 Objectives At the end of the unit, you should be able to (i) define the term virus; (ii) state the general characteristics of virus; (iii) describe the structure of a typical virus particle; (iv) explain the symmetry of capids (v) explain the process of viral replication in susceptible host; (vi) state various methods of cutting viruses; (vii) state the various methods of virus purification.
3.0 Definition Viruses are simple acellular entities that can only reproduce within living cells.
3.1 General Characteristics of Viruses (i) They are the smallest microorganisms.
They range in size from 10 to 400m m in diameter and can only be viewed under an electron.microscope (ii) They are acellular i.e.
not cellular and non living.
(iii) They only reproduce when present microscope within living cells.
(iv) They are infectious agents.
(v) A complex virus particle or virion consist of one or more molecules of DNA or RNA enclosed in a coat of protein.
(vi) Viruses can exist in two phases; extracellular and intra cellular.
(vii) The extracellular phase known as virion possesses few if any enzymes and cannot reproduce independent of living cells.
It is metabolically inert and does not carry out respiration.
(viii) In the intracellular phase, viruses exist primarily as replicating nucleic acids in the host cells that induce host metabolism to synthesize virion components which are later released.
Viruses differ from living cells in three ways: (i) They have simple acellular organization.
(ii) The presence of either DNA or RNA both not both in almost all virions (iii) They do not have the ability to reproduce independent of cells and carry out cell division as procaryoutes and eukaryotes do.
3.2 Virion size Virions range in size from about 10 to 400µm in diameter.
The smallest viruses are a little larger than ribosomes where as the pox viruses which 60include vaccinia are about the same size as the smallest bacteria and can be seen in the light microscope.
Most viruses however are too small to be visible in the light microscope and must be viewed with scanning and transmission electron microscope.
3.3 The Structure of Viruses A virus is made up of a central genetic nucleic acid molecule surrounded by a protein coat called a capsid.
The combination of both is called the nucleocapsid.
The capsid surrounds and protects the viral nucleic acid.
The capsid also gives the virus a characteristic shape and help to establish the specificity of the virus for a particular host cells.
Capsids are large macromo lecular structures that self assemble from many copies of one or a few types of proteins.
The protein used to build the capsids is called protomers.
The simplest virus is a naked virus (nucleocapsid) consisting of a geometric capsid assembled around a nucleic acid.
On the other hand we can have a virus made up of a nucleocapsid surrounded by a flexible membrane called an envelope.
This type of virus is called an envelope virus.
The various morphology types of viruses results from the combination of a particular type of capsid symmetry with the presence or absence of an envelope which is a lipid layer external to the nucleocapsid.
Figure 1: Generalized Structures of Viruses Source: Prescott, Harley and Kleins.
Microbiology by Willey et al., (2008) 3.4 Viral Genomes All cells contain double stranded DNA genomes.
By contrast viruses have either DNA or RNA genomes (one group of viruses does use both DNA and RNA as their genetic material but at different stages of the replication cycle).
Hence we have RNA viruses or DNA viruses.
Virus genomes can be classified based on whether the nucleic acid in the virion is DNA or RNA and further subdivided to whether the nucleic acid is single or double stranded.
Linear or circular, some viral genomes are circular but most are linear.
61We can have single strand DNA double stranded DNA, single stranded RNA and double stranded RNA.
All four types are found in animal viruses.
Most plant viruses have single stranded RNA genomes and most bacteria viruses contain double stranded RNA.
3.5 Capsids Symmetry There are three types of capsid symmetry: helical, icosahedral and complex.
1.
Helical Capsids.
They are shaped like hollow tubes with protein walls.
The tobacco mosaic virus is an example of this virus.
In this virus, the self assembly of protomer in a helical or spiral arrangement produces a long rigid tube, 15 to 18 nm in diameter by 300nm long.
The capsid encloses an RNA genome, which is wound in a spiral and lies within a groove formed by the protein molecule.
The size of a helical capsid is influenced by both its protomers and nucleic acid enclosed within the capsid.
2.
Icosahedral Capsid.
The icosahedral is a regular polyhedron with 20 equilateral triangular faces and 12 vertices and is roughly spherical in shape.
It is one of the nature’s favourite shapes.
A few genes sometimes only one can code for protein that self-assemble to form the capsid.
These capsids are constructed from ringo-krob-shaped into caller capsomers each usually made up of five or six protomers.
Pentamers (pentons) have five subunits hexamers (hexons) have six 3.
Viruses with Capsids of Complex Symmetry (Complex viruses) Some virons are more complex than the helical and ico sahedral capsid being composed of several parts, each with seprate shapes and symmetries.
The most complex viruses in terms of structures are some of the bacterial viruses which posses icosahedral heads plus helical tails.
In some bacterial viruses such as bacteriophage T4 of Escherichia coli the tail itself has a complex structure.
The complete T4 tail has 20 different proteins and the T4 head has several more protein.
Activity A (i) How does a virus differ from a cell?
(ii) What is the difference between a naked virus and an enveloped virus?
3.6 Virus Reproduction Viruses need a host cell in which to reproduce hence the first step in the life cycle of a virus is attached to a host.
This is followed by entry of either the nucleocapsid or the viral nucleic acid into the host.
If the nucleocapsid enters uncoating of the genome usually occurs before further steps can occur.
62Once free in the cytoplasm, genes encoded by the viral genome are expressed i.e.
the viral genes are transcribed and translated.
This allows the virus to control the host cell’s biosynthetic machinery so that new virons can be made.
The viral genome is then replicated and viral proteins are synthesized.
New virions are constructed by self assembly of coat proteins with the nucleic acids and finally the matured virons are released from the host.
Summarily the steps involves in viral replication or reproduction are • Attachment of the viron to a susceptible host.
• Penetration or entry of the viron or its nuclei acid into the host • Synthesis of virus nucleic acid and protein by cell metabolism as directed by the virus.
• Assembly of capsids and packaging of viral genomes into new virons • Release of mature virons from the cell.
However there is great variation in the details of virus reproduction for individual virus species.
Figure 1: Generalized Illustration of Virus Reproduction Source: Prescott, Harley and Kleins.
Microbiology by Willey et al., (2008) 3.7 The Cultivation of Viruses Viruses, because they are unable to reproduce independent of living cells can not be cultured in the same way as procaryotic and eukaryotic 63microorganisms.
Animal viruses are cultivated by inoculating suitable host animals or embryonated egg – fertilized chicken eggs incubated about 6 to 8 days after laying.
More recently, animal viruses have been grown in tissue (cell) culture on monolayers of animal cells.
Bacterial and archea viruses are cultivated in either broth or agar cultures of young, actively growing cells.
Plant viruses are cultivated in a variety of ways which include plant tissue cultures, cultures of separated cells, or cultures of protoplasts (cells lacking cell wall) and growing of the viruses in whole plants.
3.8 Virus Purification and Assay Viral purification and Assays are necessary so as to accurately study virus structure, reproduction and other aspects of their biology.
3.8.1 Virus Purification This involves getting or isolating the viral particle in its pure state, purification makes use of several virus properties.
Four of the most widely used methods to isolate and purify viruses are 1. differential and density gradient centrifugation.
This is often used in the initial purification steps to separate virus particles from host cells.
2. precipitation of viruses particles 3. denaturation of contaminants 4. enzymatic digestion of host cells constituents 3.8.2 Virus Assays The quantity of viruses in a sample can be determined either directly by counting particle numbers using the electron microscope or indirectly by measurement of an observable effect of the virus using techniques such as the hemaglutination assay.
Activity B (i) Explain how viruses are cultivated in different hosts.
(ii) Give the four major approaches by which viruses may be purified.
4.0 Conclusion It can be seen clearly that viruses are a complex, diverse and fascinating group of microorganisms, uniquely different from other groups of microorganisms which are cellular.
5.0 Summary • Viruses are simple acellular entities that can only reproduce within living cells.
• A virus is made up of a central genetic nucleari acid molecule which could be DNA or RNA surrounded by a protein called capsid • Capsids are large macromolecular structures that self assemble from many copies of one or a few types of proteins.
• There are three types of capsids symmetry helical, icosahedral and complex.
• Viruses range in size from 10 to 400 NM in diameter and can only be viewed with scanning and transmission electron microscope.
64• Viral nucleic acid can either be single stranded or double stranded DNA or RNA.
• Some viral geromes are circular while some are linear.
• Virus reproduction can be divided into five steps (i) Attachment (ii) Entry into host (iii) Synthesis of viral nucleic acid and proteins (iv) Self assembly of virions and (v) Release from host • Viruses are cultivated using tissue cultures, embryonated eggs, bacterial culture and other living hosts.
• Viral purification involve getting the viral particle in its pure state and involve techniques such differential and gradient centrifugation, precipitation, denaturation or digestion of contaminants.
• Virus particles can be counted directly with the transmission electron microscope or indirectly by the hemagglutination assay.
6.0 Tutored-Marked Assignment: 1.
(a) Explain the processes involved in viral replication or virus reproduction.
(b) Write briefly on viral genomes.
2.
Define the following terms: (i) Virus (ii) Nucelocapsid (iii) Helical symmentry (iv) Viral purification.
7.0 References/Further Readings Atlas, R.M.
(1995): Microorganisms in Our World.
Mosby Year Book.
Inc. Pp5-13 Medigan, M.T., Martinko, J.M., Dunlap, P.V and Clark, D.P.
(2009).
Brock Biology of Microorganisms; Pearson Education Inc. 12th edition.
Pp.
251-257.
Pelczar, M.J., Chan, E.C.S and Krieg, R.N (2001): Microbiology; Mc Graw-hill, 5th edition.
Pp.
415-434.
Willey, J.M., Sherwood, L.M and Woolverton, C.J (2008).
Prescott, Harley and Kleins.
Microbiology.
7th ed.
Boston Bur Bridge, IL: Mc Graw Hill Higher Education.
Pp.
407-423.
65UNIT 4: ALGAE 1.0 Introduction Algae (singular, Alga) are unicellular microorganisms that have chlorophyll and are photosynthetic.
Algae are heterogeneous and range from microscopic unicellular forms to macroscopic seaweeds.
They are different from green plants due to their simple reproductive structure for sexual reproduction.
Many live in aquatic environments but many also thrive as subterranean algae.
Algae are of great importance to biologist because single algal cells are complete organisms capable of photosynthesis and the synthesis of other compounds which constitute the cell.
The study of Algae is known as phycology.
This unit examines the general characteristics, the distribution, the morphology and importance of Algae.
2.0 Objectives At the end of this unit, you should be able to: (i) Define the term Algae.
(ii) State the general characteristics of Algae.
(iii) Describe the general structure of algae with a typical example (iv) Draw a well labeled diagram of Algae.
(v) State the different habitats of Algae.
(vi) Explain the methods of reproduction in Algae.
(vii) State the economic importance of Algae.
3.0 General Characteristics of Algae • Algae are eukaryotic microorganisms.
• They are photosynthetic microorganisms.
• Chlorophyll and other pigments are found in membrane bound organelles known as chloroplasts.
Algae contain a discrete nucleus.
Other inclusions are starch grains, oil droplets and vacuoles.
They contain chlorophyll and utilize light energy to generate their chemical energy.
• They have a wide range of sizes and shapes.
Many species occur as single cells that may be spherical, rod shaped, club-shaped or spindle-shaped.
Others are multicellular and appear in every conceivable form, shape and degree of complexity.
• In most species the cell wall is thin and rigid cell walls of diatoms are impregnated with silica making them thick and very rigid.
• The motile Algae such as Euglena have flexible cell membrane called periplasts.
• They are also able to produce oxygen from water.
3.1 Occurrence and Distribution Algae are found in many places on earth.
They occur in great abundance in the ocean, seas, salt lakes, fresh water lakes ponds and streams.
Many are found in damp soil, on rocks, stones and tree barks.
Some are found on plants and animals.
Small aquatic forms make up a large part of the free-floating microscopic life in water called plankton which is the principal food for aquatic animals including such large ones as whales.
Plankton is generally considered to be composed of both Algae and 66microscopic animal forms.
Phytoplankton is made up of plants i.e.
algal forms and zooplankton is composed of animal organisms.
Algae are found where there are sufficient light, moisture and simple nutrients to sustain them.
Some species of Algae grow on the snow and ice of polar region and mountain peaks, sometimes occurring in such abundance that the landscape becomes coloured by the red pigments in their cells.
At the other extreme, some Algae grow in the hot springs at temperatures as high as 550C.
Some freshwater Algae have adapted their metabolism to the high salt concentration found in the brine lakes of the arid South-Western United State.
Some Algae are adapted to moist soil, the bark of trees and the surface of rocks, which the Algae degrade.
The decomposition products are made available for soil building and enrichment.
Algae are often a problem in water supplies because they produce undesirable and taste and odors.
Heavy Algae growth may form blankets or mats which interfere with the use of some natural waters for recreational purposes.
These Algae mats may act as barriers to the penetration of oxygen into the water; they prevent photosynthesis by including light from deeper water and this may cause fish and other marine animal to suffocate.
On the other hand, when dispersal in natural waters Algae increase the oxygen concentration through photosynthesis.
Heavy growth of some Algae reduces hardness of water and removes slats which are the cause of blackishness.
Some Algae are endophytic; that is they are not free-living but live in other organisms.
Such Algae are widespread in protozoa, molluses, sponges and corals.
3.2 Morphology Algae have a wide range of sizes and shapes.
Many are unicellular and may be spherical, rod shaped, club shaped or spindle shaped.
Others are multicellular and appear in every conceivable forms, shape and degree of complexity including membraneous colonies, filaments grouped, singly or in clusters with individual strands which may be branched or unbranched and tubes.
Algal cells are eukaryotic.
Most are thin and rigid cell walls, however the cell wall of diatoms are impregnated with silica thread which make them thick and very rigid.
Algae have a discrete nucleus, starch grains on droplets and vacuoles: chlorophyll and other pigments are found in membrane bound organelles known as chloroplasts.
67The chloroplast ultra-structure and type of pigment presents in algae are used for their classification e.g.
green algae, red algae, yellow green algae, the golden algae etc.
A very common green alga is spyirogyra, a filamentous algae found on the scum that cover ponds are slow moving water.
3.3 Motility The motile Algae also called the swimming Algae have flagella occurring singly or in clusters at the anterior or posterior ends of the cells.
Some Algae have no means of locomotion and are carried by tides, waves and currents.
Some attach themselves to the substrate in the body of water where they live and are occasionally broken loose by currents which move them to new locations.
In some forms, only the zoospores, the asexual reproductive cells are motile.
Figure 1: Structure of Spirogyra Source: Microbiology by Pelczar et.
al., (2001) 3.4 Reproduction Algae may reproduce either asexually or sexually.
Some species are limited to one of these processes.
However, they have complicated life cycles involving both asexual and sexual means of reproduction.
3.4.1 Asexual Reproduction Asexual reproduction processes in Algae include: i. Purely vegetative binary fission.
ii.
Production of unicellular spores, many of which, especially in the aquatic forms have flagella and are motile, these are called zoospores.
In terrestrial types of Algae, non motile spores or aplanospores are formed however some aplanospores can develop into zoospores.
3.4.2 Sexual Reproduction 68All forms of sexual reproduction are found among the algae.
In this processes there is a fusion (conjugation) of sex cells called gametes to form a zygote.
If the gametes are identical, i.e., there is no visible sex differentiation.
The fusion process is called isogamous.
However, if two gametes are different, the process is called heterogamous.
In higher algae, the sex cells are differentiated into male and female.
The female egg cell (ovum) is large and non motile while the male gametes (sperm cell) is small and are actively motile.
This type of sexual reproduction is called Oogamy.
3.5 Biological and Economic Importance of Algae 1.
Algae as Primary Producers Algae form the base or beginning of most aquatic food chains because of their photosynthetic activities and are therefore called primary producers of organic matter.
2.
Commercial Product from Algae Many product of economic value are derived from algal cell walls.
Three of these, agar, alginic acid and carrageenan, are extracted from the walls of Algae.
Another, diatomaceous earth, is composed of millions upon millions of diatom glass walls deposited over time on either fresh water or the ocean.
All three compounds are used either make gels or to make solution viscous.
Carrageenan has been used as a stabilizer or emulsifier in foods such as ice cream and other milk products.
It is also used as a binder in toothpaste or in pharmaceutical products, as well as an agent in ulcer therapy.
Carrageenan is also useful as a finishing compound in the textile and paper industries, as a thickening agent in sharing creams and lotions and in the soap industry.
Algar is well known as solidifying agent in the preparation of microbiological media.
It is obtained from red Algae.
Species of Gelidium and Gracelaria are used extensively.
It is also important in the food industry when it is valuable in the manufacture of processed cheese, mayonnaise, pudding, jellies, baking products and canned goods.
In the pharmaceutical industry agar can be used as a carrier for a drug.
Lotions and ointments can contain some agar.
About 50 percent of the ice cream in the U.S. contains alginates which provide a smooth consistency and eliminate ice crystal formation.
Alginate is also incorporated into cheeses and bakery products, especially frostings.
Other industrial application includes paper manufacturing, the printing of fabrics and paint thickening.
Diatomaceous earth is used primarily for filters or filter aids.
It is especially suitable because it is not chemically reactive, is not readily compacted or compressed during use and is available in many grades.
69 3.
Algae as Food Many species of algae (mostly red and brown algae) are used as food in the far East.
Of the red algae are of the most important in porphyria; it is used as a food in Japan where it is called “mori” and is usually processed into dried sheets.
4.0 Conclusion Algae are of greet and general interest to all biologists because single algal cells are complete organisms capable of photosynthesis and the synthesis of a multitude of other compounds which constitute the cell.
5.0 Summary ¤ The Algae are photosynthetic eukaryotic microorganisms.
¤ Algae are found in many places on earth including ocean, lakes, ponds, streams, moist soils, rocks, tree barks, ice and hot springs.
¤ Algae may be unicellular or multicellular, have cell wall, a discrete nucleus starch grains, oil droplets, vacuoles chlorophyll and other pigments.
¤ Algae reproduce asexually by binary fission and sexually by fusion of gametes to form a zygote.
¤ Algae are primary producers in most aquatic food chains.
¤ Commercial products such as agar alginic acid and carrageenan are derived from algae.
6.0 Tutor Marked Assignment 1.
State five characteristics of Algae 2.
Discuss the various uses of Algae that make the commercially important.
7.0 References Atlas, R.M.
(1995): Microorganisms in our World.
Mosby Year Book.
Inc. Pp5-13 Medigan, M.T., Martinko, J.M., Dunlap, P.V and Clark, D.P.
(2009).
Brock Biology of Microorganisms; Pearson Education Inc. 12th edition.
Pp543 544.
Pelczar, M.J., Chan, E.C.S and Krieg, R.N (2001): Microbiology; Mc Graw-hill, 5th edition.
Pp365-372 Willey, J.M., Sherwood, L.M and Woolverton, C.J (2008).
Prescott, Harley and Kleins.
Microbiology.
7th ed.
Boston Bur Bridge, IL: Mc Graw Hill Higher Education.
Pp 605 608 Website: http://www.albany.edu/sph/coned/lesson3.pdf.
70UNIT 5: PROTOZOA 1.0 Introduction Protozoa are unicellular, non photosynthetic eukaryotic organisms.
They are distinguished from other eukaryotic protists by their ability to move at some stage of their life cycle and by their lack of cell walls.
Some protozoa are free living while some are parasitic.
Some protozoa form colonies, in a colony, the individual cells are joined by cytoplasmic thread or embedded in a common matrix, hence colonies of protozoa are essentially a cluster of independent cells.
The study of protozoa is called Protozoology.
This unit examines the general characteristics of protozoa, the morphology, occurrence, reproduction and economic importance of protozoa.
2.0 Objectives By the end of this study, you should be able to: (i) Define the term, protozoa (ii) State the general characteristics of protozoa (iii) State the places where protozoa are found.
(iv) Describe some intracellular structures of protozoa.
3.0 General characteristics of Protozoa (cid:1) They are unicellular, non photosynthetic microorganisms.
(cid:1) They are predominantly microscopic in size.
(cid:1) They occur generally as single cells.
(cid:1) They lack cell walls.
(cid:1) They have ability to move at some stages of their life cycle.
Many are motile.
(cid:1) The majority of protozoa are between 5 and 250µm in diameter.
(cid:1) They occur in colonies with each colony having independent individual cells.
(cid:1) Protozoa may be divided into free living forms and those living on or in other organisms.
3.1 Occurrence/Distribution Protozoa are found in all moist habitats.
They are common in the sea, in soil and freshwater.
Free living has even been found in the Polar Regions and at very high altitudes.
Parasitic protozoa may be found in association with most animal groups.
Most protozoa survive dry conditions by the formation of a resistant cyst or dormant stage.
3.2 Ecology of Protozoa From the ecological standpoint, protozoa may be divided into free-living forms and those living on or in other organisms.
The latter group is referred to as the symbiotic protozoa.
Some of the symbiotic ones are parasitic and may cause disease.
Others such as those found in the gut of the termite are beneficial to the host (live in a mutualistic association).
3.2.1 Free-Living Protozoa Free-living protozoa are found in a variety of habitats.
The factors which influence the distribution and number of free-living protozoa in 71a habitat are moisture, temperature, light, available nutrients, and other physical and chemical conditions.
3.2.2 Symbiotic Protozoa This is a type of co-existence between protozoa and other organisms which differ in many ways and include: 1.
Commensalism: In which the host is neither injured nor benefitted but the commensal (protozoa) is benefitted e.g.
the protozoa living in the lumen of the alimentary tract.
2.
Mutualism in which some flagellates are present in the gut of termites and help to digest the woody materials eater by termite to a form which can be used by the lost cells.
If deprived of these flagellates, the termite dies, if the flagellates are removed from the termite gut, they also die.
3.
Some protozoa are parasites, they live at the expense of other organisms, and an example is Plasmodium which is a parasite of man and causes malaria in man.
3.3 Morphology of Protozoa The size and shape of these organisms show considerable variable.
Like all eukaryotic cells, the protozoan cell also consists of cytoplasm, separated from the surrounding medium by a special cell envelope, and the nucleus or nuclei.
3.3.1 The cytoplasm The cytoplasm is a more or less homogeneous substance consisting of globular protein molecules loosely liked together to form a three- dimensional molecular framework.
Embedded within it is the various structures that give protozoan cells their characteristics appearance.
Submicroscopic protein fibrils (fibrillar bundles, myonemes, and microtubles) are groups of parallel fibrils in the cytoplasm.
Protozoan contractility is probably due to these fibrils.
In several forms of protozoa, pigments are diffused throughout the cytoplasm.
These are numerous.
E.g.
they can be green, brown, blue, purple or rose.
In the majority of protozoa, the cytoplasm is differentiated into the ectoplasm and the endoplasm.
The ectoplasm is more gel-like and the endoplasm is more voluminous and fluids, but the change from one layer to another is gradual.
Structures are predominantly found in the endoplasm.
Like other eukaryotic cells, protozoa have membrane systems in the cytoplasm.
They form a more or less continuous network of canals and lacunae giving rise to the endoplasmic recticulum of the cell.
Other structures in the cytoplasm include ribosomes, Golgi complexes or dictyosomes (piles of membranous sacs) mitochondria, kinetosomes or 72blepharoplasts (intracytoplasmic basul bodies of cilia or flagella), food vacuoles, contractile vacuoles, and nuclei.
3.3.2 Nucleus The protozoan cell has at least one eukaryotic nucleus.
Many protozoa, however, have multiple nuclei (e.g.
almost all ciliates throughout the greater part of the life cycle).
The protozoan nuclei are of various forms, sizes, and structures.
In several species, each individual organism has two similar nuclei.
In the ciliates two dissimilar nuclei, one large (marconucleus and one small (micronucleus) are present.
The macronucleus controls the metabolic activities and regeneration processes; the micronucleus is concerned with reproductive activity.
3.3.3 Cysts Many protozoa form resistant cysts at certain times of their life cycle.
As indicated before, these cysts are able to survive adverse environment conditions such as desiccation, low nutrient supply, and even anaerobiosis.
In parasitic protozoa, the developmental stages are often transmitted from host to host within a cyst.
Other kinds of cysts (e.g.
reproductive) are also known.
Cysts have four basic functions 1.
Protect against unfavourable conditions.
2.
Serve as site of multiplication 3.
Assist in attachment to surfaces such as hosts.
4.
Transmission stage from host to host.
Asexual reproduction in some ciliates and flagellates is associated with cyst formation.
Sexual reproduction of sporozoa invariably results in a cyst.
3.3.4 Locomotory Organelles: Protozoa may move by three types of specialized organelles: pseudopodia, flagella and cilia.
In addition, a few protozoa without such organelles can carry out a gliding movement by body flexion.
1.
Pseudopodia: A pseudopodium is a temporary projection of part of the cytoplasm of those protozoa which do not have a rigid pellicle.
Pseudopodia are therefore characteristic of the amoebas (sarcodina).
These organelles are also used for capturing food substances.
2.
Flagella The flagellum is an extremely fine filamentous extension of the cell.
As a rule, the number of flagella present in an individual protozoan varies from one to eight; one or two is the most frequent number.
A flagellum is composed of two parts; an elastic filament called an axoneme and the contractile cytoplasmic sheath that surrounds the axoneme.
73 3.
Cilia: 1.
They are fine and short threadlike extensions from the cell.
2.
In addition to their locomotory function, also aid in the ingestion of food and serve often as a tactile organelle.
They may be uniform in length, or may be of different lengths depending on their location.
Generally, cilia are arranged in longitudinal, oblique, or spiral rows, inserted either on the ridges or in the furrows.
3.3.5 Feeding Structure Food-gathering structures in the protozoa are diverse and range from the pseudopodia of amoebas through the tentacular feeding tubes of suctorians to the well-developed “mouths” of many ciliates.
Amoebas gather 100d by means of pseudopodial engulfment.
In ciliates the cytostome is the actual opening through which food is ingested.
An oral groove is an indentation in the pellicle of certain ciliates.
It guides food toward the cytostome and acts as a concentrating device.
The addition of membranelles to the oral groove makes it a peristome.
Nutrition 1.
Nutrition in protozoa is heterotrophic.
2.
They obtain cellular energy from organic substances such as proteins.
3.
Protozoa engulf and ingest their food sources.
3.4 Two examples of Protozoan 3.4.1 Amoeba Figure 1(a): An Amoeba 74 3.4.2 Paramecium Figure 1(b): A Paramecium Source: Microbiology by Pelczar et.
al.
(1993) 3.5 Reproduction of Protozoa Protozoa general multiply by asexual reproduction.
Many protozoa are able to carry out both asexual and sexual processes.
Some parasitic forms may have an asexual phase in one host and a sexual phase in another host.
3.5.1 Asexual Reproduction Asexual reproduction occurs by simple cell division, which can be equal or unequal – the daughter cells are of equal or unequal sizes, respectively.
If two daughter cells, are formed, then the processes is 75called binary fission.
If many daughter cells are formed, it is multiple fission.
Budding is a variation of unequal cell division.
1.
Binary Fission The simplest form of binary fission is found in the amoebas.
The pseudopodia are withdrawn before the nucleus divides.
After the nucleus divides, the organism elongates and constricts in the centre in order to form two daughter cells 2.
Multiple Fission In multiple fission, a single mother (parental) cell divides to form many daughter (filial) cells.
Division is usually preceded by formation of multiple nuclei within the mother cell, which then cleaves rapidly to form a corresponding number of daughter cells.
Multiple fission is not as widespread as binary fission but it often takes place in addition to the latter process.
In ciliates and flagellates, this type of fission is found in relatively few species.
3.
Budding In protozoology it is often used to describe the varied processes by which sessile protozoa produce motile offspring.
That is, the mother cell remains sessile and releases one or more swarming daughter cells.
The swarmer differs from the parent cell not only in a lower degree of differentiation but also in the possession of special locomotor organelles.
Some form of budding is found in all sessile ciliates and is used to disseminate the species while the mother cell remains in situ.
3.5.2 Sexual Reproduction Various types of sexual reproduction have been observed among protozoa.
Sexual fusion of two gametes (syngamy or gametogamy) occurs in various groups of protozoa.
They include: 1.
Conjugation, which is generally a temporary union of two individuals for the purpose of exchanging nuclear material, is a sexual process found exclusively in the ciliates.
After exchange of nuclei, the conjugants separate and each of them gives rise to its respective progency by fission or budding.
When the gametes (which develop from trophozoites) are morphologically alike, they are called isogametes.
When they are unlike in morphology (as well as physiology), they are anisogametes and can be either microgametes or macrogametes 3.6 Economic Importance of Protozoa • Protozoa are important links in the food chain of communities in aquatic environment where they act as primary consumers.
• They are used in biological treatment of sewage or industrial effluents.
• Some protozoa cause disease in mammals including man.
• They are important research organisms for biologists and chemists.
76 4.0 Conclusion Protozoa are eukaryotic heterototrophic microorganisms that are classified on the basis of morphological characteristics.
5.0 Summary • Protozoa are unicellular non photosynthetic microorganisms that lack cell wall and have ability to move at some stages of their life.
• Protozoa are normally found in moist habitats.
• Protozoa may be free living found in various habitats or symbiotic found in co-existing with other organisms.
• The size and shape of protozoa vary considerable and the cell consists of the cytoplasm (separated from the surrounding medium by an envelope) and the nucleus or nuclei.
• Locomotory organelles in protozoa include Pseudopodia, Cilia and flagella.
• Reproduction in protozoa is mainly asexual, however many are able to carry out both asexual and sexual reproduction.
• Methods of asexual reproduction in protozoa include Binary fission, multiple fission and Budding.
• Sexual reproduction in protozoa involves the fusion of two gametes.
• Protozoa are primary consumer in food chain, in aquatic environment.
They are used to degrade biological and industrial effluents.
They also cause disease of man and other animals.
6.0 Tutor Marked Assignment 1 (a) State five general characteristics of protozoa.
(b) Draw a well labeled diagram of amoeba 2.
Write on three locomotory organelles in protozoa 7.0 References Pelczar, M.J., Chan, E.C.S and Krieg, R.N (1993): Microbiology; Mc Graw-hill, 5th edition.
Pp 389 Atlas, R.M.
(1995): Microorganisms in our World.
Mosby Year Book.
Inc. Pp5-13 Medigan, M.T., Martinko, J.M., Dunlap, P.V and Clark, D.P.
(2009).
Brock Biology of Microorganisms; Pearson Education Inc. 12th edition.
Pp Willey, J.M., Sherwood, L.M and Woolverton, C.J (2008).
Prescott, Harley and Kleins.
Microbiology.
7th ed.
Boston Bur Bridge, IL: Mc Graw Hill Higher Education.
Pp 1-3 77MODULE 3 MICROBIAL REPRODUCTION, GROWTH AND CONTROL UNIT 1: MICROBIAL REPRODUCTION AND GROWTH 1.0 Introduction Microbial growth is defined as an increase in the number of cells.
A microbial cell has a lifespan and a species is maintained only as a result of continued growth of its population.
Growth is the ultimate process in the life of a cell – one cell becoming two and subsequently leading to an increase in the number in a population of microorganisms.
In microbiology, growth is synonymous to reproduction.
This unit examines the term growth, binary fission, the mode of cell division in prokaryotic cells, stages in the growth curve and the mathematics of growth.
2.0 Objectives By the end of this unit, you should be able to: (i) Define the term growth (ii) Explain the process of a Binary Fission in a prokaryotic Cell.
(iii) Draw and explain the Microbial Growth Curve of Microorganisms in a Batch Culture.
(iv) Explain the Mathematics of Growth.
(v) Describe a Continuous Culture.
3.0 Definition of Growth Growth is defined as an increase in the number of cells in a population of microorganisms.
It is an increase in cellular constituents leading to a rise in cell number when microorganisms reproduce by processes like binary fission or budding.
3.1 The Prokaryotic Cell Cycle A prokaryotic cell cycle is the complete sequence of events from the formation of a new cell through the next division.
Most procaryotes reproduce by binary fission, budding or fragmentation.
3.2 Binary Fission • Binary fission is a form of asexual reproduction process.
In which a single cell divides into two cells after developing a transverse septum (crosswall).
• Binary fission is a simple type of cell division and the processes involved are: the cell elongates, replicates its chromosomes and separates the newly formed DNA molecules so that there is a chromosome in each half of the cell.
A septum is formed at mid cell; divide the parent cell into two progeny cells and each having its own chromosome and a copy or complement of other cellular constituents.
78 Figure 1: Stages of Binary Fission in a Prokaryotic Cell.
Source: Prescott, Harley and Kleins, Microbiology by Willey et al., (2008) 3.2.0 Stages in Binary Fission 3.2.1 Chromosome Replication and Partitioning Most prokaryotic chromosomes are circular.
Each circular chromosome has a single site at which replication starts called the origin of replication, or simply the origin.
Replication is completed at the terminus which is located directly opposite the origin.
Early in the cell cycle, the origin and terminus move to mid-cell and a group of proteins needed for DNA replication proceeds in both directions from the origin and the parent DNA synthesis assemble to form the replisome at the origin.
DNA replication proceeds in both directions from the origin and the parent DNA is thought to spool through the replisome, which remains relatively stationary.
As progeny chromosomes are synthesized, the two newly formed origins move toward opposite ends of the cell, and the rest of the chromosome follows in an orderly fashion.
3.2.2 Cytokinesis Septation is the process of forming a crosswall between two daughter cells.
Cytokinesis, a term that has traditionally been used to describe the formation of two eukaryotic daughter cells, is used to describe the process in procaryotes as well.
Septation is divided into several steps: 79- Selection of site where the septum will be formed.
- Assembly of a specialized structure called the Z ray, which divides the cell in two by construction.
- Linkages of the Z ring to the plasma membrane and perhaps components of the cell walls.
- Assembly of the cell wall-synthesizing machinery - Construction of the Z ring and septum formation.
The Z protein, a tubulin homologue found in most bacterial and many archaea forms the Z ray.
Fts Z, like tubulin, polymerizes to form filaments.
Once the Z-rings form, the rest of the division machinery is constructed.
First one or more anchoring protein links the Z ring to the cell membrane.
Then the cell wall – synthesizing machinery is assembled.
The final steps in division involve construction of the Z ring, accompanied by invagination of the cell membrane and synthesis of the septal wall.
Activity A 1.
Define the term growth.
2.
(a) What is binary fission?
(b) Outline the stages in binary fission.
3.3 The Growth Curve This is a curve that describe the entire growth cycle of a microorganisms.
It is the growth of microorganism reproducing by binary fission, plotted as the logarithm of the number of viable cells versus the incubation time.
When microorganisms are cultivated in liquid medium they are usually grown in a batch culture or closed system.
That is, they are incubated in a closed culture vessel with a single batch of medium.
The Growth curve has four phases; the lag phase, the exponential phase, the stationary phase and the death phase.
Stationery phase (cid:2)(cid:2)(cid:2)(cid:2) s Exponential (log) cell phase Death e bl phase a Vi of r e b m Lag u N g phase o L Time (cid:2)(cid:2)(cid:2)(cid:2) 80 Figure 2: Microbial Growth Curve in a Close System Source: Prescott, Harley and Kleins, Microbiology by Willey et al., (2008) 3.3.1 Lag Phase This is a phase in which there is no increase in the cell number of a microbial population freshly introduced into a fresh culture medium.
In this phase, there is no cell division and growth.
However, the cell is metabolically active synthesizing new components.
Lag phase before cell division begins may be necessary for these reasons: (i) The cell may be old and depleted of ATP, essential cofactors and ribosome which the cell synthesizes at this phase or stage.
(ii) The new medium may be different from the one the microorganism was growing in previously; the cells synthesize new enzymes to be used in the new medium.
(iii) The cells may be injured and require time to recover.
The period of the lag phase varies depending on the condition of the microorganisms and the nature of the medium.
The phase may be long, if (i) The inoculum is from an old culture or one that has been refrigerated.
(ii) If the new medium is chemically different from the old one from which the microorganism was taken.
However if a young, actively growing culture is transfer to afresh medium of the science composition, the lag phase will be short or absent.
3.3.2 Exponential Phase This is also known as the log phase.
It is a period in which the microorganisms are growing and dividing at the maximal rate possible given their genetic potential, the nature of the medium and the conditions under which they are growing.
The rate of growth is constant during this phase because the microorganisms are dividing and doubling in number at regular interval.
It is during this period that the generation time of the organism is determined.
The log of the number of cells plotted against time results in a straight line.
In this phase, the population is most nearly uniform in terms of chemical composition of cells, metabolic activity and other physiological characteristics exponential phase vary among different bacterial The exponential growth is balanced growth this is because cellular constituents are manufactured at constant rates relative to each other.
If 81nutrient level and other environmental conditions change unbalanced growth results.
Unbalanced growth is growth during which the rate of synthesis of cell components vary relative to each other until a new balanced state is reached.
This is observed in two types of experiments (1) Shift up and (2) Shift down.
The Shift Up occurs when a culture of microorganism is transferred from a nutritionally poor medium to a richer one while the Shift Down occurs when a culture of microorganism is transferred from a rich medium to a poor one.
3.3.3 The Stationary Phase This is a phase in which population growth ceases and the growth curve becomes horizontal.
In this phase, the total number of viable microorganisms remains constant.
This may result from a balance between cell division and cell death or the population may simply cease to divide but remain metabolically active.
Factors responsible for stationary phase when a required nutrient is exhausted are: (i) Nutrient Limitation: If an essential nutrient has been used up e.g.
O or carbon source and becomes unavailable to the 2 microorganisms, population growth will cease.
(ii) Accumulation of toxic waste products e.g.
Streptococci can produce too much lactic acid and other organic acids from sugar fermentation that their medium becomes acidic and growth is inhibited.
(iii) When a critical population level has been reached: This will prevent further dividing and doubling of the cells / when physical conditions do not permit a further increase in population size.
Once the stationery growth phase is reached, there is no further net increase in bacterial cell numbers.
3.3.4 Death Phase This is a phase in which the number of viable cells begins to decline.
During this phase, the number of living cells decreases because the rate of cell death exceeds the rate of new cell formation.
The depletion of essential nutrients and the accumulation of laboratory products such as acids contribute to the death rate.
3.4 The Mathematics of Growth During the exponential phase each microorganism is dividing at constant interval which means the population will double in number during a specific length of time called the generation time.
One cell divides to produce two 82cells.
Thus, if we start with a single bacterium, the increase in population is by geometric progression: 1 2 22 23 24 25 …2n Where n= the number of generations.
Each succeeding generation, assuming no cell death, doubles the population.
The total population N at the end of a given time period would expected: N=1 X 2n ………….Eq.
(1) However, under practical conditions, the number of bacteria no inoculated at time zero is not 1 but more likely several thousand, so the formula now becomes N = N X 2n ………….Eq.
(2) 0 Where N = total population at the end of given time period Solving Equation (2) for n, we have log N=log N + nlog 2 10 10 0 10 n=log N-log N 10 10 0 log 2 ………….Eq.
(3) 10 N = Initial population at a given time 0 n= the number of generation.
If we now substitute the value of Log 2, which is 0.301, in the above 10 equation, n = log N-log N 10 10 0 0.301 n = 3.3 (log N-log N ) ………….Eq.
(4) 10 10 0 Thus, using Equation (4), we can calculate the number of generations that have taken place, provided we know the initial population and the population after the growth has occurred.
The generation time g (the time required for the population to double) can be determined from the number of generations n that occur in a particular time interval t. Using equation 4 for n, the generation time can be calculated by the formula.
t t g= _ __________________ n 3.3 (log N – log N ) ..………….Eq.
(5) 10 10 0 83The growth rate R is the number of generations per hours) and it is the reciprocal of the generation time (g).
It also the slope of straight n the obtained when the log number of cells is plotted against the time.
Hence we have: R = 3.3 log N – log No 10 10 t Activity B 1.
In what phase of the growth curve are cells dividing in a regular and orderly process.
2.
Why do cells enter the stationery phase.
3.5 The Continuous Culture of Microorganism A continuous culture is an open culture.
The continuous culture vessel maintains a constant volume to which fresh medium is added at a constant rate and an equal volume of spent culture medium is removed at the same rate.
Once such a system is in equilibrium the chemostat volume, cell number and nutrient status remain constant and the system is said to be in a steady state.
Two major types of continuous culture system commonly used are: (i) Chemostats and (ii) Turbidostats The Chemostat: A chemostat is a device in which a liquid medium is continuously fed into the bacteria culture.
A chemostat is constructed so that sterile medium is fed into the culture vessel at the same rate as the spent media containing microorganisms is removed.
The culture medium for a chemostat possesses an essential nutrient in limiting quantities.
Hence, the growth rate is determined by the rate at which new medium is fed into the growth chamber and the final cell density depends on the concentration of the limiting nutrients.
The rate of nutrient exchange is expressed as the dilution rate (D), the rate at which medium flows through the culture vessel relative to the vessel volume, where f is the flow rate (ml/hr) and V is the vessel volume (ml) D= f v Both the microbial population and generation time are related to the dilution rate.
The generation time decreases as the dilution rate increase, while the microbial population density remains unchanged over a wide range of dilution rates at very low dilution rates, an increase in D causes a rise in both cell density and the growth rate and as the dilution rate increases, the amount of nutrients and resulting cell density rise because energy is available for both maintenance and reproduction.
84 Figure 3: A Continuous Culture Systems.
The Chemostat Source: Prescott, Harley and Kleins, Microbiology by Willey et al., (2008) Continuous Culture Systems are very useful because they provide a constant supply of cells in exponential phase and growing at known rate.
They also make possible the study of microbial growth at very low nutrients levels concentration close to those present in natural environments.
These are useful for research in many areas.
Continuous systems are also used in food and industrial microbiology.
4.0 Conclusion Growth is the ultimate process in the life of a cell.
Microbial cells have a finite lifespan.
And a species is maintained only as a result of continued growth of its population.
5.0 Summary * Growth is an increase in the number of cell in a population.
* Most procaryotes reproduce by binary fission, a process in which the cell elongates and the chromosome is replicated and segregates to opposite poles of the cell prior to the formation of a septrum, which divides the cell into two progeny cells 85* Two overlapping pathways function during the procaryotic cell cycle: the pathway for chromosome replication and segregation and the pathway for septrum formation.
Both are complex and poorly understood.
The partitioning of the progeny chromosomes may involve homologues of eucaryotic cytoskeletal proteins.
* When microorganisms are grown in a closed system or batch culture, the resulting growth curve usually has four phases; the lag, exponential or log, stationery, and death phases.
* In the exponential phase, the population number of cells undergoing binary fission doubles at a constant interval called the doubling or generation time.
The mean growth rate constant (k) is the reciprocal of the generation time.
* Exponential growth is balance growth, cell components are synthesized at constant rates relative to one another.
Changes in culture conditions (e.g.
in shift-up and shift-down experiments) lead to unbalanced growth.
A portion of the available nutrients is used to supply maintenance energy.
* Microorganisms can be grown in an open system in which nutrients are constantly provided and wastes removed.
* A continuous culture system is an open system that can maintain an microbial population in the log phase.
There are two types of these systems: chemostats and turbidostats.
* The chemostat is a continuous device in which a liquid medium is continuously fed into the bacteria culture.
6.0 Tutor Marked Assignment 1.
Describe the four phases of the growth curve in a closed system.
2.
(a) Define the terms (i) generation time and (ii) mean growth rate.
(b) During log-phase growth of a bacterial culture, a sample is taken at 8.00 a.m. and found to contain 1,000 cells per milliliter.
A second sample is taken at 5.54 p.m. and is found to contain 1,000,000 cells per milliliters.
What is the generation time in hour?
7.0 Further Reading and Other Resources Medigan, M.T., Martinko, J.M., Dunlap, P.V and Clark, D.P.
(2009).
Brock Biology of Microorganisms; Pearson Education Inc. 12th edition.
Pp 142-153 Pelczar, M.J., Chan, E.C.S and Krieg, R.N (1993): Microbiology; Mc Graw-hill, 5th edition.
Pp115-125 Willey, J.M., Sherwood, L.M and Woolverton, C.J (2008).
Prescott, Harley and Kleins.
Microbiology.
7th ed.
Boston Bur Bridge, IL: Mc Graw Hill Higher Education.
Pp 119-132.
86MODULE 3: MICROBIAL REPRODUCTION, GROWTH AND CONTROL UNIT 2: MEASUREMENT OF GROWTH AND FACTORS AFFECTING MICOBIAL GROWTH 1.0 Introduction Measurement of microbial growth helps to determine growth rate and generation time.
Population growth is measured by following changes in cell number and cell mass, this is because growth leads to increase in both.
Also, there are different factors that affect the growth rate of microorganisms.
This unit examines different methods of measurement growth and factors affecting microbial growth.
2.0 Objectives By the end of this unit, you should be able to: (i) Describe methods of measuring total sum number of microorganisms.
(ii) Describe methods of counting viable cells of microorganisms.
(iii) Describe methods of measuring cells mass of microorganisms.
(iv) State the advantage and disadvantages of the difference methods of measuring microbial growth.
(v) Explain how different environmental factors affect microbial growth.
3.0 Measurement of Microbial Growth Population growth is measured by following changes in the number of cells or changes in the level of some cellular components.
This could be done by measuring the total cell number or by measuring the cell mass.
3.1 Measurement of Total Cell Number A total number of microbial number can be achieved by using direct count methods.
3.1.1 Direct Count Methods Bacteria, microorganisms can be enumerated by direct counting procedure using: (i) Special counting chambers such as hemocytometer and petroff- itausser chamber can be employed to determine the number of bacteria.
These chamber are ruled with squares of a know area and are constructed in such a way that a film f liquid of known depth can be introduced between the slide and the cover slips, and view under the microscope consequently the volume of the sample overtyping each square is known.
These specially designed slides have chambers of known depth with an etched grid on the chamber bottom.
The number of microorganism in a sample can be calculated by taking into account the chambers volume and any sample dilution required.
Advantages 87(i) Using a counting chamber is easy, inexpensive, and quick.
(ii) It gives information about the size and morphology of microorganism.
Disadvantage The microbial population must be fairly large for accuracy because it involves sampling a small volume.
Prokaryotes are more easily counted in these chambers if they are stained or when a phase contrast or fluorescence microscope is used.
(ii) Large microorganisms such as Protists and Yeast can be directly counted using electronic chambers such as the coulter counter and the flow cytometer.
The microbial suspension is forced through a small hole or orifice in the coulter chamber.
An electrical current flow through the hole and electrodes placed on both sides of the orifice measure its electrical resistance.
Each time a microbial cell passes through the orifice, electrical resistance increases or the conductivity drops and the cell is counted.
The Coulter counter gives accurate results with larger cells and is extensively used in hospital laboratories to count red and white blood cells.
(iii) The Membrane Filter Technique The number of bacterial in aquatic sample can be determined from direct counts after the bacteria have been trapped on special membrane filters such as a nitrocellulose 0.2 µM pone size filter or a black polycarbonate membrane filter.
The sample is first filtered through the membrane after which the bacterial are stained with a fluorescent dye such as acridine orange or the DNA stain DAPI and observed under the microscope.
The stained cells are easily observed against the black background of the membrane filter and can be counted when viewed under the microscope.
The disadvantage of this method is that it does not distinguish between dead cells and live cells.
3.1.2 Viable Counting Methods These methods involve plating serial dilutions of a suspension of microorganisms unto a suitable solid growth medium and after a period of incubation (in which single cells multiply to form visible colonies) the number of colonies are counted or enumerated.
These methods are 88referred to as viable counting methods because they count only those cells that are alive and able to reproduce.
Two commonly used methods are the spread plate technique and the pour plate technique.
(i) In the spread plate technique, the suspension sample is spread over the surface of an agar plate containing growth nutrients while in the pour plate technique; the suspension is mixed with the agar while it is still in the liquid state and poured into the plate.
The plates are incubated to allow the organisms to grow and form colonies.
It is assume that each colony arises from an individual bacterial cell.
By counting the number of colonies formed the colony forming units (CFUs) and taking account of the dilution factors, the concentration of bacteria in the original can be calculated.
Two or three plates of the same sample are counted to determine the viable number of bacteria.
Countable plates are those having between 30 to 300 colonies.
Less than 30 colonies is not acceptable for statistical reasons and more than 300 colonies are likely to produce colonies too close to distinguish as individual CFUs such samples are noted as TNTC (too numerous to count).
(ii) The membrane filter technique is another method that can be used for viable counts of bacteria.
The sample is poured through the filter which traps bacteria.
The filter is then placed on an agar medium or a pad soaked with liquid media and incubated until each cell forms a separate colony.
A colony count gives the number of microorganisms in the filtered sampled and special media can be used selectively for specific microorganisms.
Advantages of Viable Counts Methods or Plating Techniques - They are simple technique sensitive - Widely used for viable counts of bacteria and other microorganisms in samples of food, water and soil.
Disadvantages or Limitation - It is selective.
- The nature of the growth medium and the incubation condition determine which bacteria can be grow and counted.
- Sometimes cells are viable but not culturable.
The viable plate count technique is selective because no one combination of and media allows the growth oil types of bacteria to grow.
893.1.3 Most Probable Number (MPN) Technique Most Probable number is a statistical method based on probability theory.
In this method, multiple serial dilutions are performed to reach a point of extinction.
The point of extinction is the dilution level at which no single cell is deposited into one or more multiple tubes.
A criterion such as development of cloudiness or turbidity or gas production is established for indicating whether a particular dilution contains bacteria.
The pattern of positive and negative test results are then used to estimate the concentration of bacteria in the original sample by comparing the observed pattern of result with a table of statistical probabilities for obtaining those results.
Activity A 1.
Briefly describe methods by which total number of microbial cells can be measured.
3.2 Measurement of Cell Mass Techniques for measuring changes in cell mass can be used to measure growth of microorganisms.
They include: 3.2.1 Determination of microbial dry weight.
Cells growing in liquid medium are collected by centrifugation, washed, dried in an oven and weighed.
This is a useful technique for measuring growth of filamentous fungi however it is time consuming and not very sensitive.
3.2.2 Spectrophotometry These methods depends on the fact that microbial cells scatter light that strikes them because microbial cells in a population are of roughly constant size, the amount of scattering is directly proportioned to the biomass of cell present and indirectly related to cell number.
When the concentration reaches about 10 million cells (107) per ml, the medium appears slightly cloudily or turbid.
Further increase in concentration result in greater-turbidity and less light is transmitted through the medium.
The extent of light scattering can be measured by a spectrophotometer and is almost linearly related to cell concentration at low absorbance level.
If the amount of a substance in each cell is constant, the total quantity of the cell constituted is directly related to the total microbial cell mass.
3.4 Factors Influencing Microbial Growth * The rate of microbial growth and death are greatly influenced by environmental factors or parameter.
* Some environmental conditions favour rapid microbial growth while others do not permit bacterial reproduction.
90* Understanding the influence of environmental factors on microorganisms help in the control of microbial growth and the study of ecological distribution of microorganis * These factors include, temperature, solute, and water activity, pH, Oxygen level, pressure, radiation.
The growth and activities of microorganisms are greatly affected by physical and chemical state f the environment.
The four key factors are temperature, pH, water and availability.
Activity A Briefly describe methods by which the total number of microbial cells can be measured.
3.4.1 Temperature Temperature is the most important factor affecting the growth and survival of microorganism.
At either too cold or too hot temperature, microorganisms will not be able to grow and may even die.
For every microorganism, there is a minimum temperature bellow which growth is not possible, an optimum temperature at which growth is most rapid and a maximum temperature above which growth is not possible..
These three temperatures are called the cardinal temperature and are characteristics for any given microorganism.
The Temperature Classes of Microorganism Microorganisms can be placed in five classes based on their temperature for growth: (i) Psychrophiles: These are organisms that grow well at 0ºc and have an optimum growth temperature of 150c or lower.
The maximum is around 100c.
They are readily isolated from arctic and antartic habitat , many psychrophiles are found in the ocean.
(ii) Psychrotrophs or facultative psychophiles: These organisms can grow at 0ºc to 7ºc even though they have optima between 20ºc and 30ºc.and maxima at about 35ºc These organisms are the major causes of spoilage of refrigerated food.
(iii) Mesophile: These are microorganism with growth optima around 20ºc to 45ºc.
They often have temperature minimum of 15ºc to 20ºc.
Their maximum is about 45ºc or lower.
Examples of this group of microorganisms are the human pathogens because of their environment the body is fairly constant 37ºc (iv) Thermophile: These microorganisms can grow at temperature of 55ºc or higher.
Their growth minimum is usually around 45ºc and they often have optima between 55ºc and 60ºc.
Majority of thermophiles are prokaryotes although a few photosynthetic protists and fungi are thermophile.
These organisms flourish in many habitats including compost, heating hay stacks, hot water line and hot spring.
(v) Hyperthermophiles: these are prokaryotes that have growth optima between 80ºc and 113ºc.
They do not grow well below 9155ºc.
pyrococcus abyss, and pyrodictum are example of marine hyperthermphile found in hot areas of the seafloor 3.4.2 Oxygen Concentration The importance of oxygen to the growth of an organism correlate with its metabolism especially with the processes it uses to conserve the energy supplied by its source.
Based on the ability to grow in the presence or absent of oxygen.
Microorganisms are classified as: (i) Aerobes:These are organism that able to grow in the presence of atmospheric oxygen.
(ii) Anerobic : they grow in the absence of atmospheric oxygen (iii) Facultative: these are organism that do not require oxygen for growth but grow better in its presence.
(iv) Aerotolrant anaerobe: are not dependent on oxygen.
They grow equal whether oxygen is present or absent e.g.
enterococus faccalis.
(v) Strick or obligate anaerobe: They do not tolerate oxygen at all and due to its presence e.g.
clostridium pasteurianum.
(vi) Microaerophile: These organism are damaged by normal atmospheric level of oxygen (20%) and require o2 level below the range of 2 to 10% for growth e.g.
campytobacter.
A microbial group may show more than one type of relationship to oxygen (O ).
A type is found among the prokaryotes and protozoa.
2 Fungi are normally aerobic but a few species particularly among the yeasts are facultative anaerobes.
Photosynthetic protists are almost always obligate aerobes.
3.4.3 pH or Acidity pH is a measure of the hydrogen ion activity of a solution and is define as the negative logarithms of the hydrogen concentration (expressed in terms of molarity).
Ph = -log(H+) = log(1/(H+)) The PH scale extend from ph 0.0 to ph 14 and each pH unit represent a tenfold change in hydrogen ion concentration.
Based on pH growth range and pH growth optimum we have the following group of organisms.
(i) Acidophiles: they have their growth optimum between ph 0 and 5.5 (ii) Neutrophiles: growth optimum between 5.5 and 8.0 (iii) Alkalophiles: growth optimum between 8.0 and 11.5 Extreme alkalophile have growth optima at pH 10 or higher.
In general, different microbe groups have characteristics pH preference.
Most bacteria and protists are neurophiles.
Most fungi are acidophile(ph between 4 to 6).
Photosynthetic protist also favor slight acidity.
Many archaea are acidophile.
923.4.4 Solute and Water Activity This is the ability of a microorganism to grow over a wide range of water activity or osmotic concentration.
Selectively permeable plasma membrane separates microorganisms from their environment hence they are affected by changes in the osmotic concentration of their surroundings.
If a microorganism is placed in a hypotonic solution (one with a lower osmotic concentration) water will enter the cell and cause it to burst If nothing is done to prevent it on the other hand.
If a microorganism is placed in a hypertonic solution(one with a higher osmotic concentration) water will flow out of the cell.
In microbes that have cellwalls (ie most prokaryotes, fungi and algae), the membrane shrinks away from the cellwall- a process called plasmolysis.
The amount of water activity actually available to microorganism is expressed in terms of water activity (a ).
Some w microbes are adapted to extreme hypertonic environment In microbes that have cell wall (ie most prokaryotes, fungi and algae) the membrane shrinks away from the cell wall by a process called plasmolysis.
Some organisms are adapted to extreme hypertonic environment.
Microorganisms usually have a specific requirement for NaCl in addition to growing optimally at the water activity of seawater such organism are called halophiles.
Halophiles grow optimally in the presence of NaCl or other salt at a concentration above 0.2M.
Most microorganisms are unable to cope with environment of very low water activity and either die or become dehydrated and dormant under such condition.
Halotolerant organisms can tolerate some reduction in the a of their environment but grow best in the absent of the added w solute.
By contrast, some organism thrives and indeed requires low water activity for growth.
Organisms able to live in environments high in sugar as a solute are called Osmophiles and those able to grow in a very dry environments (made dry by lack of water rather than by dissolved solute) are called xerophiles.
Radiation Sunlight is the major source of radiation on the earth.
It include visible light, ultraviolet radiation(UV), infrared ray, and radio wave.
Visible light is a most conspicuous and important aspect of our environment: most life is dependent on the ability of photosynthetic organisms to trap the light energy of the sun.
most form of electromagnetic radiation are very harmful to microorganism.
This is particularly true of ionizing radiation, radiation of very short wavelength and high energy, which can cause atom to lose electron (ionize).
Two major form of ionizing radiation are (i) X -rays, which are artificially produced, and (ii) Gamma rays which are emitted during radioisotope decay.
93Low level of ionizing will produce mutation and may indirectly result in death, whereas higher level are directly lethal.
Ultraviolet (VU) radiation can kill all kind of microorganism due to its short wavelength (approximately from 10-400nm) and high energy the most effectively absorbed by DNA.
Activity B Briefly describe the five classes of microorganisms based on temperature.
4.0 Conclusion The growth of microorganisms is greatly affected by the chemical and physical nature of their environment.
An understanding of the factors that influence microbial growth aid ecological distribution of microorganisms.
5.0 Summary • Microbial population can be counted directly with counting chambers, electronic counters, or fluorescence microscopy.
Viable counting techniques such as the spared plate, the pour plate, or the membrane filter can be employed.
• Most bacterial, photosynthetic protists, and fungi have rigid cell walls and are hypertonic to the habitat because of solutes such as amino acids, polyols, and potassium ions.
The amount of water actually available to microorganism is expressed in terms of the water activity (a ).
w • Each species of microorganism has an optimum pH for growth and can be classified as an acidophile, neutrophile, or alkalophile.
• Microorganisms can alter the pH of their surroundings, and mos culture media must be buffered to stabilize the pH.
• Microorganisms have distinct temperature ranges for growth with minima, maxima, and optima – the cardinal temperatures.
These ranges are determined by the effects of temperature on the rates of catalysis, protein denaturation, and membrane disruption.
• There are five major classes of microorganisms with respect to temperature preferences: (1) psychrophiles (2) facultative psychrophiles or psychrotrophs, (3) mesophiles, (4) thermophiles, and (5) hyperthermophiles.
• Microorganisms can be placed into at least five different categories based on their response to the presence of O2: obligate aerobes, facultative anaerobes, aerotolerant anaerobes, strict or obligate anaerobes, and microaerophiles.
• Most deep-sea microorganisms are barotolerant, but some are barophilic and require high pressure for optimal growth.
• High-energy or short-wavelength radiation harms organisms in several ways ionizing radiation.
X-rays and gamma rays – ionizes molecules and destroys DNA and other cell components.
Ultraviolent (UV) radiation induces the formation of thymine dimmers and strand breaks in DNA.
• Visible light can provide energy for the formation of reactive singlet oxygen, which will destroy cells.
6.0 Tutor Marked Assignment 1.
What are the advantages and disadvantages of the viable plate count method?
942.
What are cardinal temperatures?
3.
Describe the types of oxygen relationship seen in microorganism.
7.0 Further Reading and Other Resources Atlas, R.M.
(1995): Microorganisms in our World.
Mosby Year Book.
Inc. Pp5-13 Medigan, M.T., Martinko, J.M., Dunlap, P.V and Clark, D.P.
(2009).
Brock Biology of Microorganisms; Pearson Education Inc. 12th edition.
Pp Pelczar, M.J., Chan, E.C.S and Krieg, R.N (2001): Microbiology; Mc Graw-hill, 5th edition.
Pp Willey, J.M., Sherwood, L.M and Woolverton, C.J (2008).
Prescott, Harley and Kleins.
Microbiology.
7th ed.
Boston Bur Bridge, IL: Mc Graw Hill Higher Education.
Pp 1-3 95MODULE 3: MICROBIAL REPRODUCTION, GROWTH AND CONTROL UNIT 3: PHYSICAL METHODS OF ANTIMICROBIAL CONTROL (STERILIZATION) 1.0 Introduction Most microorganisms are beneficial to human beings however many have undesirable consequences.
They cause food spoilage and many diseases to plants, animal and human.
To control and inhibit the growth and activities of harmful microorganisms which are capable of causing diseases and contaminating water, food and substances used.
This unit examines the various frequently employed physical methods of sterilization which are: heat, filtration and radiation.
Different sterilization techniques such as heat, radiation are used which totally remove microorganisms from an object or habitat.
2.0 Objectives At the end of this lesson, you should be able to: (i) Define and explain the term sterilization.
(ii) Explain the use of heat sterilization to control microbial growth.
(iii) Describe the use of various filters to sterilize liquid substances.
(iv) Explain the use of radiation for sterilization.
3.0 Definition of Sterilization Sterilization is the process by which all living cells, spores and acellular entities (e.g.)
viruses, viroids and prions) are either destroyed or removed from an object or habitat.
It can also be defined as the killing or remover of all viable organisms within a growth medium.
A sterile object is totally free of viable microorganisms, spores and other infectious agents.
3.1 The Pattern of Microbial Death Microbial population death is exponential or logarithmic, meaning the population will be reduced by the same fraction at constant interval.
If the logarithm of the population remaining is plotted against the time of exposure to the agent, a straight-line plot will result.
A bacterium is often defined as dead if it is not viable and does not grow and reproduce when inoculated into a culture medium that normally supports its growth.
3.2 Heat Sterilization * The most common sterilization method used for controlling and destroying microbial growth is the use of heat.
* Heat can kill microorganisms by denaturing the enzymes which prevent them from multiplying.
* At temperature exceeding the maximal growth temperature, the death rate exceeds the growth rate.
96* Factors that determines the effectiveness of heat sterilization include the temperature and duration of the heat treatment, and whether the heat is moist or dry 3.2.1 Measuring Heat Sterilization All microorganisms have a maximum growth temperature beyond which viability decreases.
Viability is lost because at very high temperatures most macromolecules lose structure and function, a process called denaturation.
The effectiveness of heat as a sterilant is measured by the time required for a tenfold reduction in the viability of a microbial population at a given temperature.
This is the decimal reduction time or D. The time and temperature, therefore, must be adjusted to achieve sterilization for each specific set of condition.
In addition, the type of heat is also important.
Moist heat has been observed to possess better penetrating power than dry heat and, at a given temperature, produces a faster reduction in the number of living organisms.
The determination of a decimal reduction time requires a large number of viable count measurements.
An easier way to characterize the heat sensitivity of an organism is to measure the thermal death point i.e.
the time it takes to kill al cells at a given temperature.
Thermal death point (TDP) is the lowest temperature required to kill all the microorganisms in a liquid suspension in 10minutes.
Heat is the most widely applicable and effective agent for killing microorganisms and also the most economical and easily controlled.
To determine the thermal death time, samples of a cell suspension are heated for different times, mixed with a culture medium and incubated.
If all the cells have been killed, no growth is observed in the incubated samples.
The thermal death time depends on the size of the population tested; a longer time is required to kill all cells in a large population than in a small one.
3.2.2 Moist Heat Sterilization Moist heat readily kills viruses, bacteria and fungi.
It kills by degrading nucleus acids and by denaturing enzymes and other essential proteins.
Exposure of microorganisms to boiling water will destroy vegetable cells and eukaryotic spores.
However this temperature will not kill bacterial endospores.
In order to destroy bacterial endospores moist heat sterilization above 1000C using saturated steam under pressure is done.
Steam sterilization is carried out with an autoclave.
The Autoclave The autoclave is a sealed heating device that allows the entrance of steam under pressure.
The killing of heat-resistant endospores requires heating at temperatures above 1000C (the boiling point of water at normal atmospheric pressure).
This is accomplished by applying steam under pressure at a temperature of 1210C.
97 The materials to be sterilized are placed in a chamber and the chamber is sealed.
Steam is transferred from a jacket into the chamber forcing out all the air.
The steam is held in the chamber for 15mins necessary at 1210C and then vented from the chamber.
If an object being sterilized is bulky, heat transfer to the interior is retarded and the total heating time must be extended to ensure that the entire object is at 1210C for 10-15 minutes.
Extended times are also required when large volumes of liquid are being autoclaved because large volumes take longer time to reach sterilization temperatures.
It must be noted that it is not the pressure inside the autoclave that kills the microorganisms but the high temperature that can be achieve when steam is applied under pressure.
Figure 1: The Autoclave Source: Prescott, Harley and Kleins, Microbiology by Willey et al., (2008) 3.2.3 Dry Heat Sterilization This is a method of heat sterilization in which the objects or materials are sterilized in the absence of water.
Some items are sterilized by incineration for example; inoculating loops used in the laboratory during the culturing of bacteria can be sterilized in a small bench top incinerator.
98The use of an oven at a temperature of 10 to 170o for 2 to 3 hours can also be used to sterilize glasswares such as pipettes, and testubes in laboratories.
Dry heat kills the microorganisms by the oxidation of the cell constituents and denaturation of proteins.
This method of sterilization has some definite advantages, it does not corrode glassware and mental instruments as moist heat does and it can be used to sterilize powders, oils and other similar items however it is very slow and less effective than moist heat.
For example, the spores of Clostridium botulinum the organism that causes botulism are killed in 5 minutes at 1210C by moist heat but only after two hours at 1600C with dry heat.
Activity A 1.
Define the term sterilization 2.
Explain the use of moist heat for sterilization Filtration 1.
Filtration is a method that accomplishes decontamination and even sterilization.
2.
Heat-sensitive liquids and gasses are sterilized by the use of filtration method.
3.
The liquid or gas is passed through a filter, a device with pores too small for the passage of microorganisms, but large enough to allow the passage of the liquid or gas.
The selection of filters for sterilization must account for the size range of the contaminants to be excluded.
4.
Some microbial cells are greater than 10 µm in diameter, and the smallest bacteria are less than 0.3 µm in diameter rather than directly destroyed the contaminating microorganism the filters simply removes them.
5.
There are two types of filters (a) Depth Filters (b) Membrane Filters Depth Filters * This is made up of fibrous or granular materials that have been bonded into a thick layer filled with twisting channels of small diameters.
* They can also be made of diatomaceous earth, unglazed porcelain, asbestos, bromosilicates and other similar materials.
* The solution containing microorganisms is sucked through the thick layer of the fibrous material under vacuum and microbial cells are removed by physical screening or entrapment and by adsorption to the surface of the filter material.
They are used for the filter sterilization of air in industrial processes.
In the home, the filter is used in forced air heating and cooling systems 99is a simple depth filter, designed to trap particulate matter such as dust, spores, and allergens.
Depth filters are important for bio-safety applications.
For example, manipulation of cell cultures, microbial cultures, and growth media require that contamination of both the operator and the experimental materials are minimal.
These operations can be efficiently performed in a biological safety cabinet with airflow, both in and out of the cabinet, directed through a depth filter called a HEPA filter or high- efficiency particulate air filter.
A typical HEPA-Filter is a single sheet of borosilicate (glass) fibers that has been treated with a water- repellant binder.
It removes 0.3 µM test particles with an efficiency of at least 99.97%; they thus effectively remove both small and large particles, including most microorganisms, from the airstreams.
Membrane Filters * Membrane filters are the most common type of filters used for liquid sterilization in the microbiology laboratory.
* They are porous membrane, a little over 0.1mm thick, made of cellulose acetate, cellulose nitrate polycarbonate, polyvinylidene fluoride and other synthetic materials.
* Membranes with pores about 0.2µM in diameter are used to remove most vegetable cells but not viruses from solutions ranging in volume from 1m to many litres.
* The membrane are held in special holding and are often proceeded by depth filter to remove larger particles that may clog the membrane filter.
* It differs from the depth filter because it functions more like a sieve and trapping particles on the filter surface.
About 80- 85% of the membrane surface area consists of open pores.
The porosity provides for a relatively high fluid flow rate.
* The solution to be sterilized is forced through the filter with a vacuum or with pressure from a syringe, peristaltic pump and collected in previously sterilized container.
* They are used to sterilize pharmaceutical ophthalmic solutions, culture media, oils ,antibiotics and other heat sensitive solutions.
* Air can also be sterilized by filtration.
Examples are surgical masks and cotton plugs on culture vessels that let air in but keep microorganism out.
Activity B 1.
Explain the use of membrane filter for sterilization 3.3 Radiation Many forms of electromagnetic radiation are very harmful to microorganisms.
Microwares, ultraviolet (UV) radiation, X-rays, gamma rays (Y-rays) and electrons can effectively reduce microbial growth if applied in the proper close.
1003.3.1 Ionizing Radiation Ionizing radiation is a form of radiation which has very short wave length and high energy, which can cause atoms to lose electrons (ionize).
Two major forms of ionizing radiation are: (i) X-rays (short waves length of 10-3 to 102 nanometer) which are artificially produced.
(ii) Gamma rays (short wave length of 10-3 to 10-1 nanometer) which are emitted during radioisotope decay.
Low Levels or Doses of Radiation will produce mutation in the microorganisms which may indirectly lead to the death of microorganisms.
In cases where large doses or high levels of these radiation are used the microorganisms are directly and instantly killed.
Ionizing radiation can be used to sterilize items.
Gamma and X-radiation have high penetrating power and are able to kill microorganisms by inducing or forming toxic free radicals (ions) viruses and other microorganism are inactivated by exposure to ionizing radiation.
Ionizing radiations are used to pasteurize or sterilize products e.g.
most commercially produced disposables and plastic petro dishes are sterilized by exposure to gamma rays.
3.3.2 Ultraviolet (UV) Radiation * These are radiation of short ware length (from 10 to 400µM) and high energy.
* The most lethal UV radiation has a wavelength of 260µM, the wavelength mostly absorbed by DNA.
* The primary mechanism of UV damage is the formation of thymine dimmers in DNA.
* Two adjacent thymines in a DNA strand are covalently joined to inhibit DNA replication and function.
* Ultraviolet (UV) radiation can kill all kinds of microorganisms especially microorganisms on or near the surface of clear solution exposure to ultraviolet rays can be used to maintain sterility of surfaces such as bench tops in laboratories and hospitals.
Radiation is currently used for sterilization and decontamination in the medical supplies and food industries.
In the U.S. for example, the Food and Drug Administration has approved the use of radiation for sterilization of such diverse items as surgical supplies, disposable labware, drugs, and even tissue grafts.
However, because of the costs and hazards associated with radiation equipment, this type of sterilization is limited to large industrial applications or specialized facilities.
The use of radiation sterilization practice has not been readily accepted in some countries because of fears of possible radioactive contamination, alteration in nutritional value, production of toxic or carcinogenic products, and perceived “off” tastes in irradiated food.
101Activity C 1.
Why is ionizing radiation more effect than ultraviolet radiation for sterilization of food products?
4.0 Conclusion Different methods of sterilization are used to sterilize different types of objects and to make them free of viable microorganism spores and other infectious objects.
5.0 Summary * Sterilization is the process by which all living cells, spores and cellular entities (viruses) are either completely destroyed or removed from an object or habitat.
* Physical methods frequently used to sterilize are heat, low temperature, filtration and radiation.
* Heat sterilization is used to kill all microorganisms in a sample.
It may be moist or dry.
Moist heat sterilization involves; the use of autoclave.
* Autoclaving involves using steam under pressure at a temperature of 1210C for 15 minutes.
* Dry heat involves sterilizing objects at a higher temperature, in the absence of water and for a longer exposure time.
* The use of oven at a temperature of 1600C to 1700C for 2 to 3 hours to sterilize glasswares and the use of incinerator are examples of dry heat sterilization.
* Microorganisms can be effectively removed by filtration with either depth filters or membrane filters.
* Radiation of short wavelength or high energy ionizing and ultraviolet radiation can be used to sterilize objects.
6.0 Tutor Marked Assignment 1.
In a tabular form, give physical or chemical agents that should be best used for the sterilization of the following items: (i) Glass pipettes (ii) Nutrient ager (iii) Antibiotic solution (iv) Interior of a biological safety cabinet (v) Package of plastic Petri dishes (vi) Water 2.
Explain the difference types of radiation that are destructive to microorganisms.
7.0 Further Reading and Other Resources Atlas, R.M.
(1995): Microorganisms in our World.
Mosby Year Book.
Inc. Pp.
311- 333.
Medigan, M.T., Martinko, J.M., Dunlap, P.V and Clark, D.P.
(2009).
Brock Biology of Microorganisms; Pearson Education Inc. 12th edition.
Pp 779-788.
Willey, J.M., Sherwood, L.M and Woolverton, C.J (2008).
Prescott, Harley and Kleins.
Microbiology.
7th ed.
Boston Bur Bridge, IL: Mc Graw Hill Higher Education.
Pp 149-164.
102UNIT 4: THE USE OF CHEMICAL AGENTS FOR MICROBIAL CONTROL AND DISINFECTION 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objectives 3.0 Definition of Disinfection 3.1 Antimicrobial Agents 3.2 Characteristics of an Ideal Antimicrobial Agent 3.3 Factors for the Selection of a Chemical Agent 3.4 Major Groups of Chemical Antimicrobial Agents 3.4.1 Phenolics 3.4.2 Alcohols 3.4.3 Halogens 3.4.4 Heavy Metals and their Compounds 3.4.5 Detergents 3.4.6 Quaternary Ammonium Compounds 3.4.7 Aldehyde 3.5 Sterilizing Gases 3.5.1 Ethylene oxide (EtO) 3.5.2 Betapropiolactore (BPL) 3.5.3 Vaporized hydrogen peroxide 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutor Marked Assignment 7.0 Further Reading and Other Resources 1031.0 Introduction A large number of chemical compounds have the ability to inhibit the growth and metabolism of microorganisms or to kill them.
They are called antimicrobial agents.
These different chemicals are available for use as disinfectants and each has its own characteristics and mode of action, advantages and disadvantages.
This unit examines the term disinfection, the characteristics of an ideal disinfectant and different chemical groups used as disinfectants.
2.0 Objectives By the end of this unit, you should be able to: (i) Define the term disinfection.
(ii) State the characteristics of an ideal disinfectant.
(iii) List difference chemicals that can be used as disinfectants.
(iv) Explain the use of different chemical as disinfection agents.
3.0 Definition of Disinfection Disinfection is the killing, inhibition or removal of organisms that may capable cause diseases.
1.
It is the process of destroying infectious agents.
2.
Disinfectants are antimicrobial agents, usually chemicals used to carry out disinfection; they are normally used on an inanimate object e.g.
disinfection may not lead to the total removal of microorganism or sterilization because viable spores and a few microorganisms may remain.
3.
Antimicrobial bleach (sodium hypochorite) solution, for example, is a disinfectant used to clean and disinfects food preparation areas.
3.1 Antimicrobial Agents An antimicrobial agent is a natural or synthetic chemical that kills or inhibits the growth of microorganisms.
Agents that kill organisms are called -cidal agents, with a prefix indicating the type of microorganisms killed.
Thus, they are called bactericidal, fungicidal and viricidal agents because they kill bacteria, fungi and viruses, respectively.
Agents that do not kill but only inhibit growth are called -static agents.
These include bacteriostatic, fungistatic and viristatic compounds.
3.2 Characteristics of an Ideal Antimicrobial Agent or disinfectant (i) It should have a broad spectrum of antimicrobial activity i.e.
it must be effective against a wide range of infectious agents such as gram positive and gram negative bacteria, acid fast bacteria, bacterial endospores, fungi and viruses.
(ii) It must be active even at low concentration.
(iii) It must be active in the presence of organic matter.
(iv) Non toxicity to human and other animals.
It should be toxic to the infectious agent.
(v) It must be non-corroding and non-staining.
(vi) It must be stable upon storage.
(vii) Odourless or with pleasant smell.
(viii) Solubility: It must be soluble in water and lipids for proper penetration microorganisms.
104(ix) Homogeneity: It must be uniform in composition so that active ingredients are present in each application.
(x) Capacity to penetrate: It must have a low surface tension so as to penetrate cracks in surfaces.
(xi) Availability: It must be readily available.
(xii) It must be relatively in expensive.
Factors for the Selection of a Chemical Agent The major factors that need to be considered in the process of selecting the most appropriate chemical agent for a specific practical application are: 1.
The nature of the material to be treated: e.g.
a chemical agent used to disinfect contaminated utensils might be quite unsatisfactory for application to the skin.
2.
Types of microorganisms: Chemical agents are not all equally effective against bacteria, fungi, viruses, and other microorganisms.
Spores are more resistant than vegetative cells.
Differences exist between Gram- positive and Gram-negative bacteria.
3.
Environmental condition: Such as temperature, pH, time, concentration, and presence of extraneous organic materials, may all have a bearing on th rate and efficiency of antimicrobial action.
Activity A 1.
What is a disinfectant?
3.3 Major Groups of Chemical Antimicrobial Agents • Pherol and Phenolic Compound • Alcohols • Halogens • Heavy metals and their compounds • Dyes • Detergents • Quaternary ammonium compounds • Aldehydes • Gaseous Agents 3.3.1 Phenolics 1.
Phenol is also known as carbolic acid and is the oldest recognized disinfectant.
2.
Phenol (Carbolic acid) was the first widely used antiseptic and disinfectant.in 1867, Joseph Lister employed it to reduce risk of infection during surgery.
3.
The mode of the Action of phenol is by disrupting plasma membranes, inactivate enzymes and denaturing proteins of microorganism.
4.
They are stable when heated or dried and retain their activity in the presence of organic material.
It used for disinfection of hospital floors and walls.
1055.
Examples of phenol and phenolics (phenol derivatives) are cresols, xylenols and orthophel/phenols which are used as disinfectants in laboratories and hospitals.
Advantage They are effective against microbial agents of tuberculosis, effective in the presence of organic material and remain on surface long after application.
Disadvantage They are a disagreeable odour and can cause skin irritation.
3.3.2 Alcohols Alcohols are widely used as disinfectants and antiseptic.
They are bactericidal and fungicidal but not sporicidal.
Some viruses are also destroyed by alcohols.
Two most popular alcohols germicides are ethanol and isopropanol usually used 70 to 80% concentration.
Isopropanol has the highest bactericidal activity and is the most widely used.
They act by denaturing proteins and by dissolving membrane lipids and acting as a dehydrating agent.
10-15 minutes socking of thermometer in alcohol is sufficient to disinfect the thermometer 3.3.3 Halogens A halogen is any of the five elements in group VIIA of the periodic table.
They are fluorine, chlorine, bromine, iodine and astatine and are effective microbial elements widely used as disinfectants.
The halogen iodine and chlorine are impotent antimicrobial agents.
Chlorine * Chlorine is the usual disinfectant for municipal water supplies and swimming pools.
It is also used in diary and food industries.
Various forms of chlorine are used for disinfection.
It may be applied as chlorine gas,, sodium hypochlorite (bleach) or calcium hypochlorite.
All yield hypochlorous acid (HCLO) followed by atomic oxygen.
It causes oxidation of cellular materials, destruction of vegetable bacteria and fungi by disrupting membranes and inactivating enzymes but does not destroy spores.
The germicidal action of chlorine is based on the formation of hypochlorines and when it is added to water.
HA releases an active form of death of almost all microorganisms occur within 30minutes of use.
* Chlorine is also an excellent disinfectant for individual use.
Small quantities of drinking water can be disinfected with halozone tablets.
This tablet (parasulfoen dichloramido benzoic acid) slowly releases chloride when added to water and disinfects it in about a half hour.
It is frequently used by campers lacking access to uncontaminated drinking water.
* Chlorine is an effective disinfectant because it inexpensive, effective and easy to employ.
106 It is commonly use in disinfecting and deodorizing in most houses.
* Food processing plants and restaurants also use calcium and sodium hypochlorite solution to disinfect utensils.
* Hypochlorite is used in hospital to disinfect rooms, surfaces and non-surgical instruments.
It used on a consumable product such as drinking water, their concentration must be reduced before product is consumed.
The germicidal action of chlorine is based on the formation of hypochlorous acid when it is added to water.
Hypochlorous acid releases an active form of oxygen that reacts with cellular biochemical.
* Chlorine form considered into liquids is widely used for disinfection and is the stand treatment for disinfecting drinking water in many communities.
* It is also used to disinfect effluents from sewage treatment plants to minimize the spread of pathogenic microorganisms also used to disinfect swimming pools.
A residual chlorine level of 0.5mg/l will achieve control of microbial population and prevent the multiplication of pathogens in swimming pools such levels are harmless to human tissues.
3.3.4 Heavy Metals and their Compounds * Heavy metals such mercury, silver, zinc, copper and arsenic are used as germicides.
For example, copper sulphate is an effective algicide in lakes and swimming pools.
* They act by combining with proteins and inactivating them.
They may also precipitate cell proteins.
* 1% of Silver nitrate is solution added to the eyes of infants to prevent ophthalmic gonorrhea.
3.3.5 Quaternary Ammonium Compounds (Detergents) • These are detergents that have antimicrobial activity.
• Detergents are organic cleaning agents that are amphipathic, having both polar hydrophilic and non-polar hydrophobic components.
• They act by disrupting microbial membrane and by denaturing proteins.
• If the detergents are electrically charged, they are termed ionc.
• Anionic (negatively charged) detergents are only mildly bactericidal and are used as laundry detergents to remove soil and debris.
They also reduce number of microorganisms associated with the item being washed.
• Cationic (positively charged) detergents are highly bactericidal i.e.
they kill bacterial.
They are effective against staphylococcus and various viruses.
Advantages They are stable, non-toxic not inactivated by hard water and soap.
Cationic detergents are used as disinfectant for food utensils and small instruments.
107 3.3.6 Aldehyde • Formaldehyde and glutaraldehyde are useful for disinfection.
They are highly reactive molecules that combine with nucleic acid and proteins and inactive them.
They are sporicidal and can be used as chemical sterilants.
• Formaldehyde is usually dissolved in water or alcohol before use formal.
A 2% buffered solution of glutaraldehyde is an effective disinfectant.
It is less irritating than formaldehyde and is used to disinfect hospitals and laboratory equipment.
Glutaraldehyde usually disinfects objects within about but may require as long as 12 hours to destroy all spores.
Activity B 1.
List five groups of chemical antimicrobial agents and explain their uses.
3.4 Sterilizing Gases Gases such as ethylene oxide gas are used to sterilize heat sensitive items such as disposable plastic petridishes, syringes, heart lung machines components, sutures and catheters.
3.4.1 Ethylene oxide (EtO) This is both microbicidal and sporicidal and kills by combining with cell proteins.
Sterilization is carried out in a special ethylene oxide sterilizer, very much resembling an autoclave in appearance, that control the EtO concentration, temperature, and humidity.
Because pure EtO is explosive, it is usually mixed with either CO2 or dichlorodifluoromethane.
The ethylene oxide concentration, humidity and temperature influence the rate of sterilization.
A clean object can be sterilized if treated for 5 to 8 hours at 40 to 50% and the EtO concentration at 700mg/litre.
Extensive aeration of the sterilized material is necessary to remove residual EtO because it is so toxic.
3.4.2 Betapropiolactore (BPL) This is occasionally employed as a sterilizing gas.
In the liquid form it has been used to sterilize vaccines and sera.
BPL decomposes to an inactive form after several hours and us therefore not as difficult to eliminate as EtO.
It also destroys microorganisms more readily than ethylene oxides but does not penetrate materials well and may be carcinogenic.
For these reason, BPL has not been used as extensively as EtO.
3.4.3 Vaporized hydrogen peroxide This can be used to decontaminate biological safety cabinets, operating rooms and other large facilities.
These systems introduce vaporized hydrogen peroxide (H2O2) into the enclosure for sometime, depending on the size of the enclosure and material within.
Hydrogen peroxide is toxic and kill a wide variety of microorganisms.
However, during to course of the decontamination process, it breaks down to H2O and 108oxygen, both of which are harmless.
Other advantages of these systems are that they can be used at a wide range to temperature (4 to 80oC) and they do not damage most materials.
4.0 Conclusion Many different chemicals are available for use as disinfectants and each has its own advantages and disadvantages.
In selecting an agent, it is important to keep in mind the characteristic of a desirable disinfectant.
5.0 Summary * Chemical agents are usually used as disinfectants.
* Characteristics of an ideal disinfectant include broad spectrum antimicrobial activity, stability, non-toxicity to humans, non-conoding and non-staining, easy penetration no odour or pleasant odour among others.
* Phenolics are used as disinfectants in hospitals and laboratories.
They act by denaturing proteins,disrupting cell membranes and inactivating enzymes of microorganisms.
* Halogens (Chlorine and iodine) kill microorganising by oxidizing cellular constituents.
* Chlorine is used to disinfect municipal water supply and swimming pool.
* The germicidal action of chlorine is based on the formation of hypochlorous when it is added to water.
* Alcohol are the most effect and most used agents for sterilization and disinfectant.
* Aldehyde such as formaldehyde and glutaraldehyde can sterilize as well as disinfect because they kill spores.
* Cationic detergents are used as disinfectants antiseptic, they disrupt the membrane and denature proteins of microorganisms.
* Ethylene oxide gas is use to sterilize heat sensitive materials like disposable plastic petridishes.
6.0 Tutor Marked Assignment 1.
List five characteristics of an ideal antimicrobial agents.
2.
Explain the use of chlorine as a disinfectant 7.0 References Atlas, R.M.
(1995): Microorganisms in our World.
Mosby Year Book.
Inc. Pp5-13 Medigan, M.T., Martinko, J.M., Dunlap, P.V and Clark, D.P.
(2009).
Brock Biology of Microorganisms; Pearson Education Inc. 12th edition.
Pp Pelczar, M.J., Chan, E.C.S and Krieg, R.N (2001): Microbiology; Mc Graw-hill, 5th edition.
Willey, J.M., Sherwood, L.M and Woolverton, C.J (2008).
Prescott, Harley and Kleins.
Microbiology.
7th ed.
Boston Bur Bridge, IL: Mc Graw Hill Higher Education.
Pp 1-3 109Answers to TMAs Module 3 Unit 1: 1.
(i) Lag Phase This is a phase in which there is no increase in the cell number of a microbial population freshly introduced into a fresh culture medium.
In this phase, there is no cell division and growth.
However, the cell is metabolically active synthesizing new components.
Lag phase before cell division begins may be necessary for these reasons: (i) The cell may be old and depleted of ATP, essential cofactors and ribosome which the cell synthesizes at this phase or stage.
(ii) The new medium may be different from the one the microorganism was growing in previously; the cells synthesize new enzymes to be used in the new medium.
(iii) The cells may be injured and require time to recover.
The period of the lag phase varies depending on the condition of the microorganisms and the nature of the medium.
The phase may be long, if (iii) The inoculum is from an old culture or one that has been refrigerated.
(iv) If the new medium is chemically different from the old one from which the microorganism was taken.
However if a young, actively growing culture is transfer to afresh medium of the science composition, the lag phase will be short or absent.
(ii) Exponential Phase This is also known as the log phase.
It is a period in which the microorganisms are growing and dividing at the maximal rate possible given their genetic potential, the nature of the medium and the conditions under which they are growing.
The rate of growth is constant during this phase because the microorganisms are dividing and doubling in number at regular interval.
It is during this period that the generation time of the organism is determined.
The log of the number of cells plotted against time results in a straight line.
In this phase, the population is most nearly uniform in terms of chemical composition of cells, metabolic activity and other physiological characteristics exponential phase vary among different bacterial The exponential growth is balanced growth this is because cellular constituents are manufactured at constant rates relative to each other.
If nutrient level and other environmental conditions change unbalanced growth results.
Unbalanced growth is growth during which the rate of synthesis of cell components vary relative to each other until a new balanced state is reached.
This is observed in two types of experiments (1) Shift up and (2) Shift down.
110 The Shift Up occurs when a culture of microorganism is transferred from a nutritionally poor medium to a richer one while the Shift Down occurs when a culture of microorganism is transferred from a rich medium to a poor one.
(iii) The Stationary Phase This is a phase in which population growth ceases and the growth curve becomes horizontal.
In this phase, the total number of viable microorganisms remains constant.
This may result from a balance between cell division and cell death or the population may simply cease to divide but remain metabolically active.
Factors responsible for stationary phase when a required nutrient is exhausted are: (i) Nutrient Limitation: If an essential nutrient has been used up e.g.
O 2 or carbon source and becomes unavailable to the microorganisms, population growth will cease.
(ii) Accumulation of toxic waste products e.g.
Streptococci can produce too much lactic acid and other organic acids from sugar fermentation that their medium becomes acidic and growth is inhibited.
(iii) When a critical population level has been reached: This will prevent further dividing and doubling of the cells / when physical conditions do not permit a further increase in population size.
Once the stationery growth phase is reached, there is no further net increase in bacterial cell numbers.
(iv) Death Phase This is a phase in which the number of viable cells begins to decline.
During this phase, the number of living cells decreases because the rate of cell death exceeds the rate of new cell formation.
The depletion of essential nutrients and the accumulation of laboratory products such as acids contribute to the death rate.
Stationery phase (cid:2)(cid:2)(cid:2)(cid:2) Exponential (log) s ell phase Death c e phase bl a Vi f o r e b m Lag u N phase g o L Time (cid:2)(cid:2)(cid:2)(cid:2) 1112.
(a) (i) Generation Time: This is the time required for the population of a microorganisms to double.
(ii) Mean Growth Rate: This is the number of generation of microorganism per hour (b) g = t = t .
n 3.3(log N – Nlog N ) 10 10 o g = 9.54 3.3 (log 1,000,000 – log 1,000) 10 10 = (9 x 60) + 54 = 594 min 3.3 (6-3) 9.9 = 60 mm/gen Unit 2 1.
(a) Advantages of Viable Counts Methods or Plating Techniques (i) They are simple technique sensitive (ii) Widely used for viable counts of bacteria and other microorganisms in samples of food, water and soil.
(b) Disadvantages or Limitation (i) It is selective.
(ii) The nature of the growth medium and the incubation condition determine which bacteria can be grow and counted.
(iii) Sometimes cells are viable but not culturable.
The viable plate count technique is selective because no one combination of and media allows the growth oil types of bacteria to grow.
2.
The three temperatures that are called the cardinal temperature are.
(i) a minimum temperature bellow which growth is not possible (ii) an optimum temperature at which growth is most rapid.
(iii) a maximum temperature above which growth is not possible 3.
Oxygen Relationship Based on the ability to grow in the presence or absent of oxygen.
Microorganisms are classified as: (i) Aerobes:These are organism that able to grow in the presence of atmospheric oxygen.
(ii) Anerobic : they grow in the absence of atmospheric oxygen (iii) Facultative: these are organism that do not require oxygen for growth but grow better in its presence.
(iv) Aerotolrant anaerobe: are not dependent on oxygen.
They grow equal whether oxygen is present or absent e.g.
enterococus faccalis.
(v) Strick or obligate anaerobe: They do not tolerate oxygen at all and due to its presence e.g.
clostridium pasteurianum.
112(vi) Microaerophile: These organism are damaged by normal atmospheric level of oxygen (20%) and require o2 level below the range of 2 to 10% for growth e.g.
campytobacter.
(vii) A microbial group may show more than one type of relationship to oxygen (O ).
A type is found among the prokaryotes and protozoa.
Fungi are normally 2 aerobic but a few species particularly among the yeasts are facultative anaerobes.
Photosynthetic protists are almost always obligate aerobes.
Unit 3 1.
(i) Oven (ii) The autoclave (iii) Membrane filters (vi) Radiation (v) Radiation (vi) The autoclave 2.
Radiation Many forms of electromagnetic radiation are very harmful to microorganisms.
Microwares, ultraviolet (UV) radiation, X-rays, gamma rays (Y-rays) and electrons can effectively reduce microbial growth if applied in the proper close.
(a) Ionizing Radiation Ionizing radiation is a form of radiation which has very short wave length and high energy, which can cause atoms to lose electrons (ionize).
Two major forms of ionizing radiation are: (i) X-rays (short waves length of 10-3 to 102 nanometer) which are artificially produced.
(ii) Gamma rays (short wave length of 10-3 to 10-1 nanometer) which are emitted during radioisotope decay.
Low Levels or Doses of Radiation will produce mutation in the microorganisms which may indirectly lead to the death of microorganisms.
In cases where large doses or high levels of these radiation are used the microorganisms are directly and instantly killed.
Ionizing radiation can be used to sterilize items.
Gamma and X-radiation have high penetrating power and are able to kill microorganisms by inducing or forming toxic free radicals (ions) viruses and other microorganism are inactivated by exposure to ionizing radiation.
Ionizing radiations are used to pasteurize or sterilize products e.g.
most commercially produced disposables and plastic petro dishes are sterilized by exposure to gamma rays.
(b) Ultraviolet (UV) Radiation * These are radiation of short ware length (from 10 to 400µM) and high energy.
* The most lethal UV radiation has a wavelength of 260µM, the wavelength mostly absorbed by DNA.
113* The primary mechanism of UV damage is the formation of thymine dimmers in DNA.
* Two adjacent thymines in a DNA strand are covalently joined to inhibit DNA replication and function.
* Ultraviolet (UV) radiation can kill all kinds of microorganisms especially microorganisms on or near the surface of clear solution exposure to ultraviolet rays can be used to maintain sterility of surfaces such as bench tops in laboratories and hospitals.
Unit 4 1.
Characteristics of an Ideal Antimicrobial Agent or disinfectant (i) It should have a broad spectrum of antimicrobial activity i.e.
it must be effective against a wide range of infectious agents such as gram positive and gram negative bacteria, acid fast bacteria, bacterial endospores, fungi and viruses.
(ii) It must be active even at low concentration.
(iii) It must be active in the presence of organic matter.
(iv) Non toxicity to human and other animals.
It should be toxic to the infectious agent.
(v) It must be non-corroding and non-staining.
(vi) It must be stable upon storage.
(vii) Odourless or with pleasant smell.
(viii) Solubility: It must be soluble in water and lipids for proper penetration microorganisms.
(ix) Homogeneity: It must be uniform in composition so that active ingredients are present in each application.
(x) Capacity to penetrate: It must have a low surface tension so as to penetrate cracks in surfaces.
(xi) Availability: It must be readily available.
(xii) It must be relatively in expensive.
2.
The Use of Chlorine as a Disinfectant (i) Chlorine is the usual disinfectant for municipal water supplies and swimming pools.
It is also used in diary and food industries.
Various forms of chlorine are used for disinfection.
It may be applied as chlorine gas,, sodium hypochlorite (bleach) or calcium hypochlorite.
All yield hypochlorous acid (HCLO) followed by atomic oxygen.
It causes oxidation of cellular materials, destruction of vegetable bacteria and fungi by disrupting membranes and inactivating enzymes but does not destroy spores.
The germicidal action of chlorine is based on the formation of hypochlorines and when it is added to water.
HA releases an active form of death of almost all microorganisms occur within 30minutes of use.
(ii) Chlorine is also an excellent disinfectant for individual use.
Small quantities of drinking water can be disinfected with halozone tablets.
This tablet (parasulfoen dichloramido benzoic acid) slowly releases chloride when added to water and disinfects it in about a half hour.
It is frequently used by campers lacking access to uncontaminated drinking water.
(iii) Chlorine is an effective disinfectant because it inexpensive, effective and easy to employ.
114It is commonly use in disinfecting and deodorizing in most houses.
(i) Food processing plants and restaurants also use calcium and sodium hypochlorite solution to disinfect utensils.
(ii) Hypochlorite is used in hospital to disinfect rooms, surfaces and non-surgical instruments.
It used on a consumable product such as drinking water, their concentration must be reduced before product is consumed.
The germicidal action of chlorine is based on the formation of hypochlorous acid when it is added to water.
Hypochlorous acid releases an active form of oxygen that reacts with cellular biochemical.
(iii) Chlorine form considered into liquids is widely used for disinfection and is the stand treatment for disinfecting drinking water in many communities.
(iv) It is also used to disinfect effluents from sewage treatment plants to minimize the spread of pathogenic microorganisms also used to disinfect swimming pools.
A residual chlorine level of 0.5mg/l will achieve control of microbial population and prevent the multiplication of pathogens in swimming pools such levels are harmless to human tissues.
115MODULE 4: SYSTEMIC CLASSIFICATION OF BACTERIA, FUNGI & VIRUSES UNIT 1: INTRODUCTION TO SYSTEMIC CLASSIFICATION OF MICROORGANISMS 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objectives 3.0 Definition of terms 3.1 The polyphase taxonomy 3.2 Methods classification 3.3 Taxonomic rank 3.4 Technique for determining microbial taxonomy and phylogeny 3.4.1 Classical characteristics 3.4.2 Molecular characteristics 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutored-Marked Assignment 7.0 References/Further Readings 1161.0 Introduction In order to make sense of the diversity of organisms, it is necessary to group similar organisms together and organize these groups in a non overlapping hierarchical arrangement.
One of the tools needed to perform this grouping is a reliable classification method.
The Swedish botanist Carl von Linne or Carolus Linnaeus as he is often called developed the first natural classification, based largely on anatomical characteristics in the middle of the eighteenth century.
The term systemic is often used for taxonomy.
However, many taxonomists define systemics in more general terms as “the scientific study of organisms with the ultimate objects of characterizing and arranging them in an orderly manner.” Any study of the nature of organisms, when the knowledge gained is used in taxonomy, is a part of systematics.
Thus, systematics encompasses discipline such as morphology, ecology, epidemiology, biochemistry, molecular biology and physiology.
This unit examines the definition of terms in systemic classification of microorganisms, methods used to classify microorganisms.
Taxonomic ranks and different characteristics used in classifying microorganisms.
2.0 Objectives By the end of this unit, you should be able to: (i) Define the following terms: Taxonomy, Nomenclature, classification, identification and systemics; (ii) Explain the different methods that have been used in classification; (iii) Explain the different taxonomy ranks (iv) Explain the different characteristics used in classification and identification of microorganisms.
3.0 Definition of terms i. Taxonomy is defined as the science of biological classification.
In a broader sense, it consists of three separate but interrelated parts: classification, nomenclature, and identification.
ii.
Classification – is the organization of organisms into progressively more inclusive groups on the basis of either phenotypic similarity or evolutionary relationship.
It is the arrangement of organisms into groups called taxa based on mutual similarity.
iii.
Nomenclature –is the branch of taxonomy concerned with the assignment of giving names to taxonomic groups in agreement with published rules.
iv.
Identification - is the practical side of taxonomy, the process of determining if a particular isolate belongs to a recognized taxon.
v. Systemic - The term systemic is often used for taxonomy.
It is the scientific study of organisms with the ultimate objective of characterizing and arranging them in an orderly manner.
Once a classification scheme is selected, it is used to In practice, determination of the genes and species of a newly discovered prokaryote is based on polyphasic taxonomy.
This approach includes phylogenetic phenotypic and genotypic features.
3.1 The polyphase taxonomy The polyphasic approach to taxonomy uses three kinds of methods, phenotypic, genotypic and phylogenetic for the identification and description of bacteria.
Phenotypic analysis examines the morphological, metabolic, 117physiological and chemical characteristics of the organisms.
Genotypic analyses consider comparative aspects of cells at the level of the genome.
These two kinds of analyses group organisms on the basis of similarities.
They are complemented by phylogenetic analysis which place organisms in a frame work of evolutionary relationships.
The habitat and ecology of the organisms is also used polyphasic taxonomy.
3.2 Methods of Classification i. Phenotypic classification: This is the grouping of microorganisms together based on the mutual similarity of the phenotypic characteristics.
This classification system succeeded in bringing order to biological diversity and classified the function of morphological structures.
Organisms sharing many characteristics make up a single group or taxon.
ii.
Phylogenetic classification: Compare organisms on the basis of evolutionary relationships.
The term phylogeny refers to the evolutionary development of species.
This method is restricted because of lack of good fossil records.
iii.
Genotypic classification: Compare the genetic similarity between organisms’ individual genes or whole genomes can be compared.
Since the 1970s, it has been widely accepted that prokaryotes whose genomes are at least % homologous belong to the same genus.
iv.
Numeric taxonomy: This is grouping of taxonomic units into taxa on the basis of their character state by numerical methods.
Information about the properties of organisms is converted into a form suitable for numerical analysis and they are compared by means of a computer.
The resulting classification is based on general similarity as judged by comparison of many characteristics each given equal weight.
The result of numerical taxonomic analysis is often summarized with a treadlike diagram called a dendogram.
3.3 Taxonomic Ranks The classification of microbes involves placing them within hierarchical taxonomic levels.
Microbes in each level or rank share a common set of specific features.
The highest rank is the domain, and all procaryotes belong to either the Bacteria or the Arcahaea.
Within each domain, each microbe is assigned (in descending order) to a phylum class, order, family, genus and species.
The basic taxonomic group in microbial taxonomy is the species.
A prokaryotic species is a collection of strains that share many stable properties and differ significantly from other groups of strains.
A strain consists of the descendents of a single, pure microbial culture.
Each species is assigned to a genus, the next rank in the taxonomic hierarchy.
A genus is a well-defined group of one or more species that is clearly separate from other genera.
118Taxonomy groups of higher rank than genus are listed below: Family: A group of similar genera Order: A group of similar families Class A group of similar orders Phylum: A group of similar class Domain: A group of similar division Microbiologists name microorganisms by using the binomial system of Linneaeus.
The Latinized, italicized name consists of two parts.
The first part, which is capitalized, is the generic name, and the second is the un capitalized species name (e.g.
Escherichia coli).
Often, the name will be shortened by abbreviating the genus name with a single capital letter, for example E.
coli., S. aures etc.
The species name is stable however a generic name can change if the organism is assigned to another genus because of new information.
For example, some members of the genus Streptrococcus were placed into two new genera.
Enterococcus and Lactococcus based on rRNA analysis and other characteristics.
Bergey’s manual of systematic Bacteriology contains the currently accepted system of prokaryotic taxonomy.
Domain Bacteria Phylum Proterobacteria Class α-proterobacteria β-proterobacteria g-proterobacteria d-proterobacteria e-proterobacteria Order Chromatiales Thiotricales Legionalles Pseudomonades Vibrrionales Enterobacteriales Pasteurellales Family Enterobacteriacae Genus Enterobacter Escherishia Klebsiella Proteus Salmonella Seratta Shipella Yersinia Species Siboytii S, dyenteriae S. flexneri S. Sonnei Figure 1: Hierarchical Arrangement in Taxanomy Source: Prescott, Harley and Kleins, Microbiology by Willey et al., (2008) 3.4 Techniques for Determining Microbial Taxonomy and Phylogeny Many different approaches are used in classifying and identifying microorganisms.
For clarity, these have been divided into two groups: classical and molecular.
Activity A Define the following terms: (i) Taxonomy (ii) Classification (iii) Nomenclature (iv) Identification and Systematics 1193.4.1 Classical Characteristics Classical approaches to taxonomy make use of morphological, physiological, biochemical, ecological and genetic characteristics.
They are quite useful in routine identification and may provide phylogenetic information as well.
1.
Morphological characteristics Morphological features are important in microbial taxonomy for many reasons.
One, morphology is easy to study and analyze, particularly in eukaryotic microorganisms and the more complex prokaryotes.
In addition, morphological comparisons are valuable because structural features depend on the expression of many genes, are usually genetically stable.
Thus, morphological similarity is often a good indication of phylogenetic relatedness.
The transmission and scanning electron microscopes, with their greater resolution, have immensely aided the study of all microbial groups.
Table 2: Some Morphological features used in classification and identification Feature Microbial Groups Cell shape All major groups Cell size All major groups Colonial morphology All major groups Ultrastructural characteristics All major groups Staining behaviour Bacteria, some fungi Celia and flagella All major groups Mechanism of motility Gliding bacteria, spirochetes Endospore shape & location Endospore-forming bacteria Spore morphology & location Bacteria, protests, fungi Cellular inclusions All major groups Color All major groups * Used in classifying and identifying at least some bacteria, fungi and protests.
2.
Physiological and metabolic characteristics Physiological and metabolic characteristics are very useful because they are directly related to the nature and activity of microbial enzymes and transport proteins.
Since proteins are gene products, analysis of these characteristics provides an indirect comparison of microbial genomes.
Some physiological and metabolic characteristics used in classification and identification are : i.
Carbon and nitrogen sources 120ii.
Cell wall constituents iii.
Energy sources iv.
Fermentation products v. General nutritional stype vi.
Growth temperature optimum range vii.
Lumniscence viii.
Mechanisms of energy conversion ix.
Motility x. Osmotic tolerance xi.
Oxygen relationships xii.
pH Optimum growth range Photosynthetic pigments xiii.
Salt requirements and tolerance xiv.
Secondary metabolites formed xv.
Sensitivity to metabolic inhibitors & antibiotics xvi.
Storage inclusions.
3.
Ecological characteristics The ability of micro-organisms to colonize a specific environment is of taxonomic value.
Some microbes may be very similar in many other respects but inhabit different ecological niches, suggesting that they may not be as closely related as first suspected.
Some examples of taxonomically important ecological properties are life cycle patterns, the nature of symbiotic relationships; the ability to cause disease in a particular host; and habitat preferences, such as requirements for temperature, pH, oxygen, and osmotic concentration.
Many growth requirements are considered physiological characteristics as well.
4.
Genetic Analysis Although prokaryotes do not reproduce sexually, the study of chromosomal gene exchange through transformation, conjugation and transduction is sometimes useful in their classification.
Transformation can occur between different prokaryotic species but only rarely between genera.
The demonstration of transformation between two strains provides evidence of a close relationship since transformation cannot occur unless the genomes are fairly similar.
Transformation studies have been carried out with several genera: Bacillus, Micrococcus, Haemophilus, Rhizobium and others.
Despite transformation’s usefulness, its results are sometimes hard to interpret because an absence of transformation may result from factors other than major differences in DNA sequence.
Plasmids are important taxonomically because they can confound the analysis of phenotype traits.
Most microbial genera carry plasmids and some plasmids are passed from one microbe to another with relative ease.
When such plasmids encode a phenotypic trait (or traits) that is 121being used to develop a taxonomic scheme the investigator may assume that the trait is encoded by chromosomal genes.
3.4.2 Molecular characteristics Microorganisms have left no fossil record unlike evolutionary biologist studying plants and animals that have drawn from a rich fossil record to assemble a history of morphological changes.
In this case, molecular approaches serve to supplement this data, so molecular analysis is the only feasible means of collecting a large and accurate data set from a number of microbes.
1.
Nucleic Acid Base Composition or G.C ratios G+C ratio data are valuable in at least two ways.
First, they can confirm a taxonomic scheme developed using other data.
Second, G+C content appears to be useful in characterizing prokaryotic genera because the variation within a genus is usually less than 10% even though the content may vary greatly between genera.
The GC ratio is the percentage of guanine plus cytosine in an organism’s genomic DNA.
GC ratios vary over a wide range, with values as low as 20% and as high as nearly 80% among Bacteria and Archaea, a range that is some-what broader than for eukaryotes.
It is generally considered that if two organisms GC ratios differ by more than 5%, they will share two DNA sequences in common and are therefore unlikely to be closely related.
2.
Nucleic Acid Hybridization The similarity between genomes can be compared more directly by use of nucleic acid hybridization studies.
3.
Nucleic Acid Sequencing The method uses rRNA from small ribosomal submits (165 and 185 rRNAs from prokaryotes and eukaryotes, respectively) have become the molecules of choice for inferring microbial phylogenetic and making taxonomic assignments at the genus level.
The small subunit rRNAs (SSU rRNAs) are almost ideal for studies of microbial evolution and relatedness because they play the same roles in all microorganisms.
In addition, because the ribosome is absolutely necessary for survival and the SSU rRNA are part of the complex ribosomal structure.
4.
Genomic Fingerprinting A group of techniques called genomic fingerprinting can also be used to classify microbial and help determine phylogenetic relationships.
Unlike the molecular analysis so far discussed, genomic fingerprinting does not involve nucleotide sequencing.
Instead, it employs the capacity of restriction endonucleases to recognize specific nucleotide sequences.
1225.
Amino Acid Sequencing The amino acid sequences of proteins directly reflect mRNA sequences and therefore represent the genes coding for their synthesis.
6.
The Major Division of Life The division of all living organisms into three domains – Archaea, Bacteria and Eucarya – has become widely accepted among micro biologists.
7.
DNA-DNA Hybridization When two organisms share many highly similar (or identical gene,) their DNAs would be expected to hybridize to one another in approximate proportion to the similarities in their gene sequences.
To this way, measurement of DNA-DNa hybridization between the genomes of two organisms provides a rough index of their similarity to each other.
DNA-DNA hybridization therefore is useful for differentiating between organisms as a complement to SSU, RNA gene sequencing.
Activity B Explain the use of morphological, ecological and molecular characteristics in the classification of microorganisms.
4.0 Conclusion Systemic classification is the scientific study of organisms, their organization and arrangement in orderly manner into groups based on their classical and molecular characteristics.
This classification is important for the study of the diversity of microorganisms in nature.
5.0 Summary • Taxonomy is the science of biological classification, is composed of three parts: classification, nomenclature and identification.
• A Polyphasic approach is used to classify microorganisms.
It makes use of genetic phenotypic and phylogenetic analysis.
• Methods of classification of microorganisms include phenetic, phylogenetic.
Genotypic and numerical taxonomy.
• Taxonomy ranks are arranged in a non overlapping hierarchy.
• The taxonomic ranks are species, genus, family, order, class, phylum and Domain.
• Microorganisms are named according to the binomial system.
• The classical approach to determining microbial taxonomy and phylogeny include morphological, physiological, metabolic ecological and genetic characteristics.
• Molecular techniques used in classification include nucleic acid Base composition, nucleic acid hybridization, nucleic acid, sequencing genomic finger printing and amino acid sequencing.
6.0 Tutored-Marked Assignment 1.
(a) Define the following terms: (i) Species (ii) genus (iii) Order (iv) class (v) family 123(vi) domain, (vii) phylum (b) Arrange the listed terms in their hierarchical taxonomic levels.
(c) Differentiate between phonetic classification and phylogenetic classification.
7.0 Further Reading and Other Resources Medigan, M.T., Martinko, J.M., Dunlap, P.V and Clark, D.P.
(2009).
Brock Biology of Microorganisms; Pearson Education Inc. 12th edition.
Pp 142-153 Pelczar, M.J., Chan, E.C.S and Krieg, R.N (2001): Microbiology; Mc Graw-hill, 5th edition.
Pp115-125 Willey, J.M., Sherwood, L.M and Woolverton, C.J (2008).
Prescott, Harley and Kleins.
Microbiology.
7th ed.
Boston Bur Bridge, IL: Mc Graw Hill Higher Education.
Pp 119-132.
124MODULE 4: SYSTEMIC CLASSIFICATION OF MICROORGANISMS UNIT 2: SYSTEMIC CLASSIFICATION OF BACTERIA 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objectives 3.0 Bergey’s Manual of Systematic Bacteriology - Volume 1 3.0.1 Spirochetes 3.0.2 Aerobic/motile, helical/Vibroioid bacteria 3.0.3 Non motile gram negative curved bacteria.
3.0.4 Gram negative, aerobic rods and cocci 3.0.5 Facultatively anaerobic, Gram-negative rods 3.0.6 Aerobic, Gram-negative rods.
3.0.7 Dissimilatory sulfate-reducing or suffer reducing bacteria 3.1 Bergey’sManual of Systematic Bacteriology - Volume 2 3.1.1.
Gram-positive cocci.
3.1.2 Aerotolerant fermentative cocci 3.1.3 Anaerobic Gram-positive cocci.
3.1.4 Endospore forming Gram-positive bacteria 3.1.5 Anaerobic spore forming Rods 3.1.6 Non spore forming Gram positive Rods of Regular Shape.
3.1.7 Non Spore forming Gram-positive of irregular shape 3.1.8 Mycobacterium 3.1.9 Nocardioforms 3.2 Bergey’s Manual of Systematic Bacteriology - Volume 3 3.2.1 Anoxygenic Phototropic Bacteria 3.2.2 Oxygenic Phototrophic Bacteria 3.2.3 Gliding, Fruiting Bacteria 3.2.4 Gliding, Non fruiting Bacteria 3.2.5 Sheathed Bacteria 3.2.6 Budding and / or Appendaged Bacteria 3.2.7 Chemolithotrophic Bacteria 3.4.8 Archaeobacteria 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutored-Marked Assignment 7.0 Further Reading and Other Resources 1251.0 Introduction The most widely used reference for bacteria classification is Bergey’s manual of Systematic Bacteriology, which is divided into four volumes.
Division within Bergey’s manual are based on characteristics such as; Gram, reaction, cell, shape, cell arrangement, oxygen requirements, motility, metabolic properties.
Bacteria are also classified according to the international agreed rules by the international committee on systematic bacteriology.
This unit examines the systematic classification of bacteria.the major groups of bacteria and main characteristics of each group 2.0 Objectives By the end of this unit, you should be able to; (i) Identify the major groups of bacteria (ii) State the major characteristics which set each group apart from others (iii) Identify important genera within the appropriate group.
3.0 Bergey’s Manual of Systematic Bacteriology - Volume 1 Ordinary Gram Negative Bacteria Bergey’s manual of systematic bacteriology, Volume 1 is made up of the ordinary gram negative chemoheterotrophic bacteria.
Many of which have clinical, industrial or agricultural importance.
They include: 3.0.1 The Spirochetes These bacteria have helical shapes .
They have the ability to twist and contract their shape (they are flexible).
There is presence of a special kind of flagella termed periplasmic flagella or axial fibrils which may be more than one.
They are so thin they cannot be easily seen in light microscope.
When gram stained, dark field microscope is used to visualize these organisms.
They are gram negative bacteria .many spirochetes are human pathogens.
Important genera.
Treponema : causes syphilis and yaws Borrelia : causes lymes diseases Leptospira ;causes fever, liver and kidney damages 3.0.2 Aerobic/motile, helical/Vibriod bacteria The are gram negative bacteria.
The cells are rigid and range from vibriod (having less than one tumor twist) to helical.
They swim by means of polar flagella.
They are aerobic or microaerophilic.
Most are harmless saprophyte and occur in soil ,fresh water or marine environment but a few are parasite and pathogen for human animals and other bacteria.
Important genera: Spirillum - adapted to low concentration of organic matter Azospirillum - associated with plant roots, nitrogen fixer important to agriculture.
Campylobater - a food poisoning bacteria 126Bdellovibrio - Predator on bacteria.
3.0.3 Non motile gram negative curved bacteria.
These bacteria have rigid cell that are curved to various degree forming coil, helical spirals and sometime ring, they are not motile.
They occur mainly in soil, fresh water and marine environment.
3.0.4 Gram negative, aerobic rods and cocci These group of bacteria form one of the largest and most diverse group of bacteria.
They are straight or slightly curved rod, some are cocci.
They are a strictly respiratory type of metabolism: Many industrially, medical, and environmentally important bacteria.
Habitats include soil, water, animal parasites.
Important genera: Pseudomonas - Opportunistic infections in burns.
Aerobic motile with rods with polar flagella.
Many may synthesize a yellow green-pigment that fluoresces under uv unt resistant to many chemicals and antibiotics.
Legionella - Legionnaire’s Disease, fastidiuos organisms found in many environments.
Neisseria - STD mostly of humans and animals Brucella - obligate intracellulare parasites Burdetella - Whooping & kernel coughs Francisella - tularemia in rabbits, require cysteme.
Rhizobium - A nitrogen fisxing soil bacterium Agrobacterium- use to introduce DNA into plants.
3.0.5 Facultatively anaerobic, Gram-negative rods Many important pathogens oxidase and a requirement for organic Habitats include soil, -plants, animal respiratory and intestinal tracts Many in this group known as ‘enterics’ found in human intestine) Important genera: (inhabit intestine of animals) bulky desentry Escherichia, Salmonella, Shigella, Klebsiella, Yersina, Vibrio, Haemophilus, Gardnerella, Pasteurella, Proteus, Seratia 3.0.6 Aerobic, Gram-negative rods.
Straights, curved and helical rods.
They are rigid.
They are obligate anaerobic (cannot live in pressure of O ) 2 Habitats: Mostly in intestinal traits, some in mouth and genital trait and some of the most common organism in the intestine.
Important genera: Bacteriodes Fusobacterium Leptotrichia 127 3.0.7 Dissimilatory sulfate-reducing or sulfur reducing bacteria They live a Gramm-negative cell wall.
They are found in anaerobic sediments, reduce oxidized forms of sulphur to H S dissimilation = nutrition no assimilated but rather 2 excreted.
Occur in mud fresh water marine or brackish environments.
Important genera: Desulfovibrio – vibroid or helical cells.
Desulfococcus Activity A: In what way does spirochete differ from other bacteria 3.1 Bergey’s Manual of Systematic Bacteriology - Volume 2 Ordinary Gram Positive Bacteria Bergey’s manual of systematic bacteriology, Volume 2 is made up of the ordinary gram positive chemoheterotrophic bacteria.
Many of which have clinical or industrial or agricultural importance.
They are 3.1.1.
Gram-positive cocci.
Aerobic/facultatively Anaerobic cocci They possess cytochrome They are able to respire with oxygen Some can also obtain energy under anaerobic conditions by fermentation Members are placed in two families Deinococcaceae and micrococcae.
Important genera 1.
Micrococcus (cid:1) aerobes or facultative anaerobes that form irregular clusters by dividing in two or more planes 2.
Streptococcus (cid:1) aerotolerant anaerobes that obtain energy from fermenting sugars to lactic acid (cid:1) form chains by dividing in one or two planes (cid:1) lack catalase (cid:1) can cause extensive tissue destruction by the release of enzymes that degrade fibrin 3.
Staphylococcus (cid:1) common human pathogen (cid:1) responsible for skin abscesses or boils (cid:1) will tolerate and grow in high salt concentrations (cid:1) will rapidly develop antibiotic resistance 4.
Peptococcus (a) obligate anaerobes lack both catalase and enzymes to ferment lactic acid (b) form pairs or irregular clusters (c) can cause many infections 5.
Peptostreptococcus 128 2.
Aerotolerant fermentative cocci They do not have cytochromes.
They have only a fermentative type of metabolism and do not respire yet they can grow anaerobically or aerobically.
The cells are arranged in pairs, chains or tetrads.
Some representatives genera include Streptococcus.
Leuconostoc and Pediococcus 3.
Anaerobic Gram-positive cocci.
These cocci have a fermentative type of metabolism clusters, tetrads, short or long chains.
3.1.2 Endospore forming Gram-positive bacteria Most are rod shaped but some are cocci.
Majority are gram-positive but a few species stain gram-negative.
Motility if present is by means of peritrichous flagella.
Some genera included in the group are: i. Aerobic/facultatively Anaerobic spore forming Rods and Cocci.
These groups are rod and cocci in shape.
Two genera found in the group are Bacillus and Sporosarcina.
ii.
Bacillus.
They are rod shaped bacteria.
May form exocellular enxymes that hydrolyse proteins and complex polysaccharides.
They form endospores which are heat resistance.
They are harmless saprophytes found in soil, fresh water or sea water.
Examples include B. subtilis, B. cereus and B. thuringiensis.
iii.
Sporosarcina: They are cocci in shape and arranged in tetrads or cubical packets of eight cells.
They are widely distributed in fertile soil.
3.1.3 Anaerobic spore forming Rods They have a fermentative type of metabolic.
They are widely distributed in soil, in marine and fresh water naerobic sediments.
They include Clostridium and Desulfotomaculum.
3.1.4 Non spore forming Gram positive Rods of Regular Shape.
They are short or long rods in shape.
The group is made of harmless saprophytes Some are parasitic organisms .
Important genera 1.
Lactobacillus (a) foods and cheeses (2.
Listeria (a) infection of brain and its membranes, will damage fetus 3.
Erysipelothrix (a) red sores in human 1293.1.5 Non Spore forming Gram-positive of irregular shape This group contain a heterogenous variety of bacteria.
The few common features are Straight to slightly curved rods.
1.
May be aerobic or facultatively anaerobic Some examples of the genera in the group include Corynebacterium, Arthrobacter, Brevibacterium, Micrococcus and Cellulomonas Corynebacterium: This genus contains rod shaped cells which are pleomorphic and frequently exhibit club-shaped swellings and a palisade arrangement.
They may be saprophytes, pathogens of human and or animals as well as plant pathogens.
An example is C.diptheriae which causes diphtheria in humans.
2.
Aerobic/Facultatively Anaerobic Branched Filamentous Rods.
The bacteria of this group form colonies which at first are microscopic in size (microcolonies) and contain branched filamentous cells.
As the colonies develop to macroscopic size many of the cells become diphteroid (like caryobacteria) or aocci in shape.
Examples include Agromyces and Arachnia 3.
Anaerobic Non-filamentous or Filamentous The organisms are either anerobes or if facultatively abaerobic are preferentially anaerobic.
Two of the genera in this group are propionbacterium and actinomyces.
They are differentiated by their morphology and by their fermentation end products as determined by gas chromatography.
Important genera 1.
Corynebacterium (a) can cause diphtheria 2.
Propionibacterium: anaerobic causes acne 3.
Eubacterium 4.
Actinomyces: (a) branching filamentous soil microbes 3.1.6 Mycobacterium They are aerobic bacteria.
Their cell walls contain large amounts of lipids.
They are made up of a single genus Mycobacterium which are slightly curved or straight rods that may show branching.
They are acid fast.
Some are saprophytes e.g.
M. phlei While some are pathogens e.g.
M.tuberculosis 3.1.7 Nocardioforms They are aerobic bacteria that produce a substrate mycelium i.e.
a mat of branching hyphae formed under the surface of the agar medium 130 Important genera (1) Nocardia: pulmonary nocardiosis (2) some pathogens Activity B: 1. a List the group of bacteria placed in Bergey’s Manual of Systematic Bacteriology Volume II.
b. Differentiate between staphylococcus and streptococcus.
3.2 Bacteria with unusual properties The organisms in this volume have unusual properties which are quite different from those in volume one and two.
The anoxygenic phototrophs can be divided into two major groups based on their pigmentation purple bacteria and green bacteria.
They occur in anaerobic fresh water or marine environment.
They may also occur beneath the surface of shallow aquatic environments rich in organic matter such as stagnant ponds and dishes.
3.2.1 Anoxygenic Phototropic Bacteria They belong to the order Rhodospinllales.
They are Gram-negative and capable of carrying out photolitrothrophic or photoorganotrophic type of metabolism.
They contain bacteriolchlorophyll.
Also present in their cells are various water-insoluble carotenoid pigments which can also trap or absorb light energy and transmit it to the bacteriochlorophyl.
The anoxygenic bacteria grow phototrophically only under anaerobic conditions and are incapable of forming O because they possess only 2 photosystems.
3.2.2 Oxygenic Phototrophic Bacteria They are bacteria that contain chlorophyll.
They can use light as an energy source and evolve O in a manner similar to that of green 2 plants.
The group include: the Cyanobacteria (blue-green algae).
3.2.3 Gliding, Fruiting Bacteria Gram-negative non phototrophic bacteria.
They lack flagella; yet can glide across solid surfaces.
They have a complex life cycle in which the cells swarm together in masses and form fruiting bodies.
The fruiting bodies contain myxo spores which are shorter and thicker than the vegetative cells.
They are found in surface layers of soil, compost, manure, rotting wood and animal dung, genera include Stigmatella Chondromyes.
They are aerobic or microaerophilic organisms.
They are that live in soil or water.
1313.2.4 Gliding, Non fruiting Bacteria Gram negative non phototrophic rods, filaments or multicellular trichomes that glide across solid surfaces: fruiting bodies are not produced.
Examples of organisms include Cytophaga, Flexibacter or Vitreoscilla Beggiotoa, Simonsiella,Saprospira and Thiothrix.
3.2.5 Sheathed Bacteria Gram-negative non phototrophic bacteria that form an external sheat that covers the chain or trichomes.
They inhabit fresh water of marine environments.
Among the genera included in this group are Sphaerotilus, Leptothrix etc.
3.2.6 Budding and / or Appendaged Bacteria They are Gram-negative non phototrophic bacteria that reproduce asymmetrically by budding and or form prosthecea or stalks.
(Non living ribbon-like or tubular appendages that are excreted by the cell.
The organisms range from aerobic to microaerophilic to facultatively anaerobic.
Examples include Hyphomicrobium Ancalomicrobium, Caulobacter.
3.2.7 Chemolithotrophic Bacteria Gram-negative non phototrophic bacteria that obtain energy for carbon dioxide fixation from the oxidation of ammonia, nitrite, reduced sulfur compounds or ferrous iron.
Examples of families in this group are the nitrifying bacteria, the sulfur metabolizing bacteria and the siderocapsaceae.
Many of these organisms are found in the soil, fresh water and marine environments.
3.2.8 Archaeobacteria Gram-positive or Gram-negative that are phylogenetically distinct from eubacteria; some produce methane gas; some require unusually high level of NaCl for growth: others are distinguished by their ability to grow at a low pH and a high temperature.
Three main categories of archaeobacteria recognized are the methanogens the red extreme halophiles, and the thermo acidophiles.
Activity C List the major group of organism in volume 3 and state the characteristics of each 3.3 Bergey Manual of Systematic Bacteriology - Volume 4 Gram-positive filamentous bacteria of complex morphology The organisms in volume IV are aerobic gram positive bacteria which from structures such as phycellium of filamentons hyhac and asexual spores as found in Microscopic eukenyitc fungi and have different cell types of cellwalls based on amino acid and sugar composition.
132 3.3.1 Filamentous bacterial that divide in more than one plane The hyphae divide not only transversely but also longitudinally to produce cluster or packet of cells or spore; cell-wall type iii; soil organism, animal pathogen, and symbiotic nitrogen-fixer are represented.
The three genera present in this group are Geodermatophilus, Dermatophilus and Franka.
3.3.2 Filamentous bacteria that form true sporangia Harmless soil and water organism whose hyphea divide in a single plane; the spore are formed within special sacs; cell-wall type ii or iii A good example of a genius in this division is Actinoplanes.
3.3.3 Streptomyces and related genera The hyphea divide in a single plane; long chain of conidiospore are formed at the tips of sporagenic hyphae; the organism are mainly harmless soil organism that are noted for production of antibiotics; a few are human or plant pathogen; cell-wall type.
Several genera in this group include streptroverticullium, Actinopycnidium,Actinosporangium but the most popular of these genera is Streptomyces.
3.3.4 Additional filamentous bacteria having uncertain taxonomic placement The taxonome placement of the bacteria of this heterogeneous group is not yet agreed upon because many of the organisms have unusual and striking morphological or physiological characteristics such as: i) The extreme halophilism exhibited by actinopolyspora ii) Formation of heat resistant spores by thermoactinomyces and other unusual properties.
A heterogenic collection of organism whose relationship to the major groups of gram-positive filamentous bacteria is not yet agreed upon; some have remarkable morphological or physiological properties; a few organisms are pathogenic for humans; the cell-wall type vary.
4.0 Conclusion Division within bergey’s of manual of systemic bacteriology volume i-iv is based on characteristics such as gram reaction, cell shape, cell arrangement, oxygen requirement motility and metabolic properties.
5.0 Summary • The Bergey’s Manual of Systematic Bacteriology Volume 1-IV is as reference for the classification of bacteria.
• Division is based on characteristics such as Gram Stain reaction, call shape, oxygen requirement and other properties.
• Bergey’s Manual Volume 1 is made up of ordinary gram negative bacteria.
They include: the spirochetes which have helical shapes, flexible with 133periplasmic flagella.
Important general include Treponema and Leptospira Aerobic, motile helical or vibriod bacteria with rigid cells and vibriod or helical in shape with polar flagella.
Important general are Spirillum and Azospirillum.
• Non motile gram negative curved bacteria have rigid cell that are curved, they occur in soil, fresh water and marine environment.
• Gram negative aerobic rods and cocci are straight or slightly curved rods, they include Pseudomonas, Nesseria and other genera.
• Other gram-negative organisms in this group include facultatively anaerobic Gram-negative rods, Aerobic Gram-negative rods, and dissimilatory sulfate- reducing bacteria • Bergey’s Manual of Systematic bacteriology Volume 2 is made of ordinary Gram positive bacteria among which are Aerobic/facultatively anaerobic cocci.
• Aerotolerant fermentative cocci, Anaerobic Gram positive, cocci.
• Endospore forming gram positive bacteria of regular and irregular shapes and mycobacterium.
• Bergey’s Manual of Systematic bacteriology – Volume 3 is made up bacteria of unusual properties among which are Anoxygenic Phototropic Bacteria, Oxygenic Phototropic Bacteria, Gliding fruiting Bacteria, Gliding Non fruiting Bacteria Sheathed Bacteria and Building and on appendaged Bacteria.
• Volume IV of Bergey’s Manual of Systematic Bacteriology is made up of gram positive bacteria of complex morphology which include filamentous bacteria that divide in more than one plane, filamentous bacteria that form true sporangia, Streptomyces and related genera and filamentous bacteria having uncertain taxonomic placement.
6.0 Tutored-Marked Assignment 1.
What genera of gram-negative bacteria are associated with plants as nitrogen fixer?
2.
Write on systemic classification of Gram-positive cocci.
7.0 Further Reading and Other Resources Medigan, M.T., Martinko, J.M., Dunlap, P.V and Clark, D.P.
(2009).
Brock Biology of Microorganisms; Pearson Education Inc. 12th edition.
Pp 142-153 Pelczar, M.J., Chan, E.C.S and Krieg, R.N (2001): Microbiology; Mc Graw-hill, 5th edition.
Pp115-125 Willey, J.M., Sherwood, L.M and Woolverton, C.J (2008).
Prescott, Harley and Kleins.
Microbiology.
7th ed.
Boston Bur Bridge, IL: Mc Graw Hill Higher Education.
Pp 119-132.
134UNIT 3: FUNGI 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objectives 3.0 Chytridiomycetes or chytrids 3.1 Zygomycota 3.2 Ascomycota 3.3 Basidiomycetes 3.4 Glomeromycota 3.5 Microsporidea 3.6 Uredinomycetes and ustiloginomycetes 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutored-Marked Assignment 7.0 References/Further Readings 135 1.0 Introduction The classification of fungi like that of bacteria is described mainly for practical application but it also bear some relation to phylogenic consideration.
The nomenclature is binomial, with a generic and specific name(e.g aspergillus niger).
Species are collected in genera, families(suffice-acae), families in order(suffice ale), and order in class (suffice mycete).
Sequence analysis of 185-RNA and certain protein – coding gene has shown that the fungi comprises a monophyletic group with eitht subdivisions.
Four of this subdivisions, the chytridiomycetes, zygomycota, ascomycota and besidomycota have been recognized as separate group for sometime.
The other four – unrediniomycetes, ustilaginomycetes, glomeromycota and microsporidia have just been proposed recently as separate group.
This unit examines the systemic classification of fungi.
2.0 Objectives By the end if this unit, you should be able to: (i) identify the different of divisions of fungi; (ii) state the characteristics of each division of fungi; and (iii) state the mode of reproduction of each division of fungi.
3.0 Chytridiomycetes or Chytrids Chytridiomycetes or chytrids are the earliest and the simplest group of fungi.
They are unique among fungi because they produce motile zoospore with a single posterior whiplash flagellum.
The cell wall is made of chitin.
Some exist as single cell while other form colonies with hypae.
Some are free living and found living on plant or animal matter in fresh water, mud or soil.
Others are parasitic and infect aquatic plant and animal including insects.
They display a variety of life cycles involving both asexual and sexual reproduction.
Sexual reproduction usually involves production of sporangiospores from sporagia.
Based on zoospore morphology, the subdivisions with the chytridiomycetes include the blastocladiales, monoblepharidales, neocallimastigaceae, spzellomycetales and the chytridiales.
3.1 Zygomycota The zygomycota are made of fungi called zygomycetes.
They are commonly found in soil and on decaying plant materials.
All are multinucleate (coenocytic).
Asexual spore develop in sporangia at the tip of aerial hypae and are usually dispersed by wind.
Sexual reproduction produces tough, thick walled zygotes called zygospores that can remain dormant which the environment is too harsh for growth of the fungus.
The breed mould rhizopus stolonifer is very common member of this division, the fungi grows on moist, carbohydrate-rich foods such as bread and vegetables.
Activity A 1.
What feature of zygomycetes give this group its name.
3.2 Ascomycota Member of this group are called ascomycetes, commonly known as sac fungi.
This ascomycetes are a large and highly diverse group of fungi ranging from 136single-celled species such as yeast (Saccharomyces) to species that are filamentous like neurospora.
The ascomycetes derived their names from the production of asci (singular, ascus) cells in which two haploid nuclei from different mating types come together and fuse, forming a diploid nucleus that undergoes meiosis to form haploidascopores.
Asexual reproduction in ascomycetes is by the production of conidia formed at the tip of specialized hypae called conidiospore, an example of fungi in this group is yeast.
Cell division is Saccharomyces cerevisiae (yeast) occur by budding.
During the budding process, a new cell forms as a small outgrowth of the old cell, the bud gradually enlarges and separate from the parent cell.
Sexual reproduction also involve ascus formation with each ascus usually bearing eight haploid ascospores.
3.3 Basidiomycetes The basidomycota include the basidiomycetes, commonly known as club fungi.
Example include jellyfungi, puffballs, toadstools and mushrooms.
They are named for their characteristis structure cell, the basidium, which is involved.
A basidium is produced at the tip of hypae and is normally club shaped.
Two or more basiodospores are produced by the basidium and besidia may be held within fruiting bodies called basidiocarps.
The basidiomycetes affect human in many ways.
Most are saprophytes that decompose plant debris e.g cellulose and lignin e.g polyporus squamosus.
Some are used as food e.g the mushroom.
Agaricus Campetris while some like Crytococcus, Neoformans and important human and animal pathogen.
3.4 Glomeromycota The glomeromycetes are a relatively small group of fungi with major ecological importance.
Only about 160 species of glomeromycetes are currently known.
All known species of glomeromycetes form endomycorrhizae, also called arbucular mycorrhizas with the roots of herbaceous plants.
They aids the plant acquisition of materials from the soil.
They prouduce only asexually and are mostly coenocytic in their morphology.
There is mutualitic relationship between the fungus, the fungus help protect the plant from stress and deliver soil nutrient to the plant which in turn provides carbohydrates to the fungi.
3.5 Microsporidea These are tiny (2-5µm), unicellular parasite of animals and protests.
They have been considered protest and are sometime cited as such.
Molecular analysis of ribosomal RNA and specific protein such as α- and β- tubulin shows that they are most closely related to fungi.
However unlike fungi, they lack mitochondria, peroxisomes and centriols.
They are obligate parasites that infect insects, fish and human, in particular they infect immunosuppressed individuals such as those with HIV/AIDS, an example is Enterocystozoa spp which causes diarrhea and pneumonia.
It reproduces asexually by spore formation.
1373.6 Uredinomycetes and Ustiloginomycetes Both the uredinomycetes and the ustilaginomycetes include plant pathogens causing rust and musts.some uredinomycetes include human pathogens.
They are often considered basidomycota.
Both unlike the basidomycota, they do not form large basidocarp instead small basidia arises from hypaeat the surface of the most plant.
The hypae grow either intracellular or extracellularly in the plant tissue.
A good example is Ustilago maydis, a common corn pathogen that causes smuts.
Activity B 1.
State the role of arbuscular mycorrhizae to plants.
4.0 Conclusion Systematic classification of fungi is based on sequence analyses of 185r RNA and some protein coding genes and on the characteristics of the sexual spores and fruiting bodies present during sexual reproduction.
5.0 Summary Sequence analyses of 185r RNA and some protein-coding genes shows that the fungi comprises a monophyletic group with eight subdivisions.
• Chytridiomycetes are the earliest and simplest group fungi.
They produce motile spore, some are saprophytic while some are parasites.
• Zygomycetes are coenocytic(multinucleate) saprophytic.
They reproduce asexually by spore formation and sexually by fusion of two gametagia to form a zygospore, an example is the bread mould Rhizopus stolonifer.
• Ascomycota are known as sac shaped reproductive structure called an ascus.
Asexual reproduction occur by conidus production while sexual reproduction occurs by fusion of gametes.
• Basidiomycota are the club fungi.
They are named after their basidium which produces basidiospores.
Some are saprophytes, while some are pathogens of human and animals.
• Glomeronmycota form endomycorrhizae with plants roots.
They help to increase nutrient intake in the plants.
• Microsporidia are still sometimes considered as protests but molecular analysis has shown they are most closely related to fungi.
They lack mitochondria, centrioles and peroxisomes.
They usually pathogens to insect and those with immunocompressed immunity.
• Uredinomycetes and ustilagimycetes are often considered basidiomycetes but they do not form basidiomycetes but they do not form basidiocarp.
6.0 Tutored-Marked Assignment (i) What are chytridiomycetes?
How do they differ form other fungi.
(ii) In what structure are the basidiospores formed.
138 7.0 References/Further Readings Atlas, R.M.
(1995): Microorganisms in Our World.
Mosby Year Book.
Inc. Pp51-53 Medigan, M.T., Martinko, J.M., Dunlap, P.V and Clark, D.P.
(2009).
Brock Biology of Microorganisms; Pearson Education Inc. 12th edition.
Pp 535-542 Pelczar, M.J., Chan, E.C.S and Krieg, R.N (2001): Microbiology; Mc Graw-hill, 5th edition.
Pp 345-364 Willey, J.M., Sherwood, L.M and Woolverton, C.J (2008).
Prescott, Harley and Kleins.
Microbiology.
7th ed.
Boston Bur Bridge, IL: Mc Graw Hill Higher Education.
Pp 635-642.
139UNIT 4: ALGAE 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objectives 3.0 Major groups of algae 3.1 Rhodophycophyta 3.2 Xanthophycophyta 3.3 Chrysophycophyta 3.4 Phaeoophycophyta 3.5 Bacillariophycophyta 3.6 Euglenophycophyta 3.7 Chlorophycophyta 3.8 Cryptophycophyta 3.9 Pyrrophycophyta 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutor Marked Assignment 7.0 Further Reading and Other Resources 1.0 Introduction Algae are generally classified on the basis of the following characteristics which include: • Nature and properties of pigment.
• Chemistry of reserve food products or assimilatory products of photosynthesis.
• Type and number, insertion (point of attachment), and morphology of flagella.
• Chemistry and physiological features of cell walls.
• Morphological characteristics of cells and thalli.
• Life history, reproductive structures and method of reproduction.
This unit examines the systemic classification of algae and the characteristics of the major groups of algae 2.0 Objectives By the end of this unit, you should be able to: 140(i) identify the major groups of algae (iii) state the types of pigment present in each group of algae (iii) state the major characteristics of each group of algae (iv) state the mode of reproduction of each group of algae 3.0 Major Groups of Algae 3.1 Rhodophycophyta - The Red Algae The Rhodophycophyta, or red algae, are marine forms found in the warmer seas and oceans, but some grow in colder water as well as in fresh water.
Most red algae grow in the subtidal (submerged) zone, only a few being able to survive desiccation or exposure.
Some species deposit upon their surfaces lime from seawater; ultimately this results in deposition of lime in the ocean and plays a part in the formation of algal reefs.
They range from unicellular to multicellular.
They are photosynthetic and contain chlorophyll A. their chloroplast lack chlorophyll B and contain phycobiliproteins.
The major light- harvesting pigments of the cyanobacteria, the reddish color of red algae results from phycoerythrin, an accessory pigment that masks the green color of chlorophyll.
And example is gelidium from which agar is made, polysiphonia and chondrus crispus.
3.2 Xanthophycophyta - The Yellow-Green Algae These yellow-green algae were once classified with the green algae.
However, their pale green or yellow-green coloration indicates that they have a unique group of pigments.
They are found more frequently in temperate regions in freshwater and marine habitats, as well as on and in soil.
Xantophytes exists as single cells colonies, and as both branched and unbranched filaments.
Motile genera are not common, although, some reproduce asexually by motile reproductive cells (zoospores).
Flagella are of unequal lengths.
The xanthophyte wall are typically of cellulose and pectin.
The cellular storage product is an oil or (a branched glucan) chrysolaminarin.
Vaucheria, the water felt, is a well-known member of this division and is widely distributed on moist soil and in both quiet and rapidly flowing water.
Both freshwater and marine species are known.
Zoospores are formed singly in terminal sporangia in asexual reproduction.
3.3 Chrysophycophyta – The Golden Algae Species of chrysophycophyta are predominantly flagellates; some are amoeboid, with pseudopodia extensions of the protoplasm.
The naked amoeboid forms can ingest particulate food with the pseudopodia.
Non motile coccoid and filamentous forms are also included in the division.
The chrysophycophyta differ from the green algae in the nature of their pigments, in storing reserved food as oil or chrysolaminarin rather than as starch, and in their frequent incorporation of silica.
Most forms are unicellular, but some form colonies.
Their characteristic color is due to the marking of their cholorophyll by brown pigments.
Reproduction is commonly asexual (binary fission) but occasionally isogamous.
An example is ochromonus 141 Activity A: What are the major characteristics of the crysophycophyta?
3.4 Phaeoophycophyta – The Brown Algae These algae are multicellular and contain a brown pigment which gives them their characteristic color and common name of brown algae, or brown seaweeds.
Nearly all are marine and most frequently found in the cool ocean waters.
They are structurally quite complex, and some – the kelps – are large, the individual plants reaching a length of several hundred feets.
Many have have holdfasts; and some have air bladders, which give them buoyancy.
They reproduce asexually by zoospores and sexually by isogamous and heterogamous.
This group includes algae used in commerce, such as the many varieties of kelp.
They are used as food for humans, other animals and fish.
3.5 Bacillariophycophyta – The Diatoms Members of this group are the diatoms, they are found in both fresh and salt water and in moist soil.
Abundant in cold waters, diatoms are the most plentiful form of plankton in the Arctic.
The thousands of species diatoms provide an ever present and abundant food supply for aquatic animals.
Diatoms are either unicellular, colonial, or filamentous and occur in a wide variety of shapes.
Each cell has a single prominent nucleus and massive ribbon-like, or smaller lens-like, plastids.
They produce shells (cell walls) containing silica, some of which are very beautiful.
Shells of diatoms are called frustules.
Deposits of these shells resulting from centuries of growth are called diatomites or diatomaceous earth 3.6 Euglenophycophyta – The Euglenoids They are unicellular organisms and they are actively motile by means of flagella.
They reproduce by cell division.
Of particular interest is the genus Euglena, which is representative of a group designated as animals by some zoologists but as plants by many botanists.
Euglena is widely distributed and occurs in soil as well as in water, where it often forms a variety film or bloom.
The Euglena is not rigid; it is pliable.
There is no cell wall containing cellulose.
The outer membrane is an organized periplast.
An anterior “gullete” is present even though, no food is ingested through it.
Certain species develop a prominent stigma or red eyespot.
Contractile vacuoles and fibrils are also present in the cell.
All these are animal attributes.
On the other hand, the organism carries out photosynthesis.
A few types can even ingest particulate food through transient openings adjacent to the gullet.
Reproduction is by longitudinal binary fission.
Dormant cysts are formed by all types 3.7 Chlorophycophyta – The Green Algae Members of this large and diverse group of organisms, called green algae, are principally freshwater species.
They are also found in seawater, and many of them are terrestrial.
The cells of the chlorophycotphytaa have a well-defined 142nucleus and usually, a cell wall, and the chlorophyll pigments are in chloroplasts, as in higher plants.
The majority of green algae contain one chloroplast per cell.
It may be laminate, cup-shaped, or reticulate.
The chloroplasts also often contain dense regions called pyrenoids, on which surface starch granules are formed.
Food reserves are stored as starch, a product of photosynthesis.
They bear chloroplasts containing chlorophyll A and B giving them their characteristical green color.
There are many single-celled forms and many colonial types of green algae.
Many unicellular green algae are motile by flagella action.
Colonial types occur as spheres, filaments, or plates.
Some species have special structures called holdfasts, which anchor them to submerged objects or aquatic plants.
An example is Chlamydomonas.
Chlamydomonas is considered a typical green algae.
It is s typical unicellular, motile, green algae and is widely distributed in soils and freshwater.
It varies from 3 to 29m m in common forms and is motile except during cell division.
Motility is by means of two flagella.
Each cell has one nucleus and a single large chloroplast that in most species is cup-shaped, although in some, it may be star-shaped or layered.
The cell wall contains cellulose; in many species, an external gelatinous layer is also present.
There is some evidence that the red eyespot or stigma in the chloroplast is the site of light perception.
In addition to motile unicellular algae like chlamydomonas, others, non-motile unicellular green algae are widely distributed.
One of the most important of these is chlorella, which has served useful tool in many investigations on photosynthesis and supplemental food supply.
Volvox is a colonial green algae which may form water blooms.
Its colonies are visible to the naked eye.
Each colony contains from 500 to thousands of cells arranged at the surface of a watery colloidal matrix.
The individual cells are biflagellate and are morphologically similar to that of chlamydomonas.
Desmidsis one of the most interesting green algae found in a wide variety of attractive shapes and designs.
Each cell is made up of two symmetrical halves with one or more chloroplasts Ulethrix is a filamentous form found in flowing streams, attached to wings or stones by holdfasts at the base of the filament.
A very common green algae is spirogyra, a filaementous form seen in the scums that cover ponds and slow-moving water.
It is of interst because of its common occurrence and its possession of unusual chloroplasts, which are arranged spirally.
3.8 Cryptophycophyta – The Cryptomonads The cryptomonads are a small group of biflagellate organisms.
They have two unequal flagella, which arises form the base of a groove; both are of the tinsel type, with stiff hairs.
The cells are slipper-shaped, are flattened into a dorsal- ventral plane, and occur singly.
Some forms have a cellulose wall while others are naked, being surrounded only by a plasmalemma with a thin 143granular material on the outside.
There are one or two plastids, with or without pyremids, per cell.
Food reserved is stored as a true starch as well as oil.
Asexual reproduction is either by means of longitudinal cell division or the formation of zoospores or cysts.
An example is the genus Cryptomonas.
3.9 Pyrrophycophyta – The Dinoflagellates This division include the dinoflagellates, a diverse group of biflagellated unicellular organisms.
The dinoflagellates are so named because of their twirling motion rather than their morphology.
These organisms constitutes an important component of marine, brackish, and fresh bodies of water.
This is another group of that has both plant like and animal like characteristics.
The cells are typically flattened and have a tranversed constriction, the girdle, usually around the cell equator.
Distinguish feature of dinoflagellates are that the flagella are inserted in the girdle and that the flagella are arranged with one encircling the cell and one trailing.
Hairs project from the flagellar surface.
Many dinoflagellates are covered only by a plasmolemma.
In some forms, there is a wall mode of cellulose.
Still, others have a serious of cellulose plates within the plasmalemma.
These are termed thecal plates and dinoflagellates with them are said to be armored.
Dinoflagellates are an important constituent of planktons.
They are best known as the organisms that produce “red tides”, or blooms in which concentration of cells may be so great as to color large areas of the ocean red, brown, or yellow.
Such an organism is Gonyaulax.
Other marine dinoflagellates such as Noctiluca are luminescent.
Asexual reproduction takes place by division of the cell.
Activity B: What are the characteristics of the chlorophycophyta?
4.0 Conclusion It can be seen clearly from the different major classes or groups of algae that classification of algae were based on their characteristic colored pigments and cell morphologies.
5.0 Summary The Rhodoplycophyta – The red Algae are found in aquatic habitats.
They reproduce a sexually by non motile spores and sexually by the union of well differentiated non motile male and female germ cells Examples are Gelidium and Polysiphomia.
The Xanthophycophyta.
: The yellow green algae are single cells, colonies or filamentous algae that have pale green or yellow green pigmentation and are found in temperate region fresh water, marine habitat and asexually by cell division and production of motile spores The phaeophycophyta.
: The brown algae are multicellular with brown pigments found most times in marines and reproduce a sexually by zoospores and sexually both isogamosly and heterogamously.
144 Bacillariophycophyta.
: The diatoms are found in both fresh and sact water and in moist soils.
They occur in a wide variety of shapes and serve as found for aquatic animals.
Euglenophycophyta: are unicellular organisms that move by means of flagella and reproduce b binarycell division a good example is Euglena with animal like and plant like characteristics.
Chlorophycophyta: The green algae may be unicellular, colonies or filament are found in fresh water, see water and terestial habitas.
They have chlorophyll and other pigments in chloroplasts and have food reserve stored as starch and reproduce by zoospores, fission and other asexual methods.
Crytophycophyta: The cryptomonads are biflagellate organisms with two unequal flagella food reserved is stored as a true starch as well as oil.
Reproduction is either by means of longitudinal cell divisionor the formation of zoospores or cysts.
Sexual reproduction has been confirmed in the genus Cryptomonus.
Phyrrophycohyta: The dinoflagellates are a diverse group of biflagellated unicellular organisms with animal like and plant like, China found in aquatic habitats where they produce “red tides” or blooms which color large areas of the ocean red, brown or yellow.
A sexual reproduction is by division of the cell.
Examples are Gonyaulax and Noctiluca.
6.0 Tutor Marked Assignment 1.
(a) What are the characteristics Euglena shares with; (i) Animals (ii) with plants (b) Write on the Chlorophycophyta 7.0 References Medigan, M.T., Martinko, J.M., Dunlap, P.V and Clark, D.P.
(2009).
Brock Biology of Microorganisms; Pearson Education Inc. 12th edition.
Pp543-544 Pelczar, M.J., Chan, E.C.S and Krieg, R.N (2001): Microbiology; Mc Graw-hill, 5th edition.
Pp 366-388 Willey, J.M., Sherwood, L.M and Woolverton, C.J (2008).
Prescott, Harley and Kleins.
Microbiology.
7th ed.
Boston Bur Bridge, IL: Mc Graw Hill Higher Education.
Pp 624-625.
145UNIT 5: PROTOZOA 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objective 3.0 Classification of the Major Groups of Protozoa 3.1 The Flagellates (subphylum Mastigophorea) 3.2 The Zooflagellates (Class Zoomastigophorea) 3.3 The Amoebas (Subphylum Sarcodina) 3.4 The Sporozoa (Phylum Apicomplexa) 3.5 The Ciliates (Phylum Ciliophora) 3.6 Other Ciliated Protozoa 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutor Marked Assignment 7.0 Further Reading and Other Resources 1.0 Introduction Traditionally, the protozoa are grouped together based on general similarities: they lack cell walls, they are colorless and motile, they exhibit a wide range of morphologies and inhabit many different kinds of habitat, they play major roles in human society and health.
The different forms of protozoa have been grouped together not because they are all related in an evolutionary way, but simply for convenience.
.
The old classification schemes of protozoa were based primarily on organelles of locomotion.
The major groups are called Phyla (singular, phylum).This unit determines the systematic classification of protozoa and different phyla in which they were placed.
2.0 Objectives At the end of the unit, you should be able to: (i) Identify the major phyla of protozoa; (ii) State the characteristics of each phylum; (iii) Differentiate between different phyla; and (iv) List some species found in each group or phyla.
3.0 Classification of the Major Groups of Protozoa 3.1 The FLAGELLATES (Sub phylum Mastigophora) These protozoa are conventionally divided into two groups: The plant like forms (class Phytomastigophorea, the phytoflagellates) and the animal like forms (class zoomastigophores, the zooflagellates).
Plant-like protozoa usually contain green or yellow chloroplasts as well as flagella and are photosynthetic.
The zooflagellates have no chlorophyll and are heterotrophic.
All members have one or more flagella.
Some have pseudopodia.
Asexual reproduction occurs by longitudinal binary fission.
A form of multiple fission takes place in some organisms.
Encystmant is common but sexual reproduction is not common.
146These organisms are considered as algae by some biologists.
The zooflagellates have no chlorophyll and must obtain nutrition heterotrophically.
All members of this group have one or more flagella; some members are capable of forming pseudopodia.
3.1.1 The Zooflagellates (Class Zoomastigophorea) The Choanoflagellates (order choanoflagellida) are distinctive in that they are either stalked or embedded in jelly, and each cell has a thin transparent collar that encircles a single flagellum.
The collar functions as a food catching device.
Organisms in the order kinetoplastida are grouped together because of the presence of a kinetoplast (an extra nuclear region of DNA associated with the mitochondrion).
The single mitochondrion itself is extensive, traversing the length of the body as single tube, hoop or network of branching tubes.
One or two flagella may be present; if there are two, one is either trailing free or attached to the body, with undulating membranes occurring in some cases.
3.3 The Amoebas (Subphylum Sarcodina) Structure • Amoebas get their name from the Greek word amoibe, meaning “change” because their shapes are constantly changing.
A typical example is Amoeba proteus • Amoebas are composed of protoplasm differentiated into a cell membrane, cytoplasm and a nucleus.
The cytoplasm shows granules as well as vacuoles containing food, wastes, water, and possibly gases.
The outer membrane is selective and permits the passage of certain soluble nutrients into the cell and waste materials out of the cell.
Solid food is ingested with the help of pseudopodia.
The nucleus functions in reproduction.
Metabolism and the transmission of hereditary characteristics.
• Amoeba react to various physical and chemical stimuli in their surroundings.
This is an irritability responses which is at least superficially analogous to responses of higher organisms to their environment.
Nutrition of Amoeba • Uses pseudopodia to capture its food.
• Reproduction – amoeba is asexually binary fission.
3.4 The Sporozoa (Phylum Apicomplexa) They are in constant motion.
They move by sending out portions of their bodies in one direction which the whole body follows.
They use pseudopodia to capture food.
Reproduction is asexually by binary fission, some have the ability of encysting in unfavorable condition.
Most are free living, some saprophytic however, one species Entamoeba histolytica causes amoebic dysentery in man.
All sporozoa are parasitic for one or more animal species.
Adult forms have no organs of motility but all are probably motile by gliding 147at one stage of their life cycle.
They cannot engulf solid particles, but feed on the host’s cells or body fluids.
Many have complicated life cycles, certain stages of which may occur in one host and other stages in a different host.
They all produce spores at some time in their life history.
They life cycles exhibit an alternation of generations of sexual and asexual forms , such that the intermediate host usually harbors the asexual forms and the final host, the sexual forms.
Sometimes humans serve as hosts to both forms.
Toxoplasmosis and malaria are the major human diseases cause by sporozoa.
Malaria is caused by plasmodium asporozoa which infect the liver and red blood cells.
3.5 The Ciliates (Phylum Ciliophora): The ciliates are protozoa with cilia for locomotion.
Common examples of the ciliated protozoa are included in the genus.
Paramecium, found in freshwater ponds and lakes where adequate food supplies exist.
Structure / Morphology Paramecium Paramecium move rapidly by rythmatic beating of the cilis.
• Nutrition paramecium takes in food through a fixed cytostoma at the base of the gullet.
• Excretion is through the contractile.
• Reproduction – reproduce asexually by binary conjugation may also occur Paramecia are microscopic, some, however, are just barely visible to the unaided eye.
The outer layer of the cell is less flexible than the outer membrane of the amoeba, and the interior is composed of semifluid, granular protoplasm containing nuclei and vacuoles of several kinds.
Paramecia are easily distinguished by their characteristic shape, which has been likened to that of a slipper.
The anterior (front) end of the cell is rounded, and the posterior (rear) end is slightly pointed.
The entire cell is covered with hundreds of short hair-like projections called cilia, which are the organs of locomotion and also serve to direct food into the cytosome.
3.6 Other Ciliated Protozoa The ciliated protozoa are represented by many forms other the paramecia.
Colpoda is a common freshwater genus.
The genus Didinium lives on a diet of paramecia, which are captured by a special structure and swallowed whole.
The genus Stentor comprises large cone-shaped protozoa that more about freely but attach to some object by a tapered lower end while feeding.
4.0 Conclusion Classification in protozoa is by use of general characteristics and not as a result of evoluation.
5.0 Summary 148• Phytomastigophora are divided into two groups.
The plant like forms class phytoflagellates which have chlorophyll and flagella forms class zoomastigophora which have no chlorophyll and are heterotrophic.
• The amoeba (subphylum sarcodina) are constantly changing their shapes and composed of protoplasm differentiated into a cell membrane cytoplasm and a nucleaus and feed with the help of the pseudopodia.
• The sporozoa (phylum Apicomplexes) are parasitic for one or more animal species feed by the use of pseudopia and reproduce asexually by binary fission.
• The ciliates (phylum ciliophora): The ciliates are protozoa with cilia for locomotion.
• Other ciliates include colpodia and the genes Didinium and the genus stentor.
6.0 Tutor Marked Assignment 1.
(a) State the two groups of flagellates.
(b) Describe the structure of paramecium.
7.0 References Atlas, R.M.
(1995): Microorganisms in our World.
Mosby Year Book.
Inc. Pp5-13 Medigan, M.T., Martinko, J.M., Dunlap, P.V and Clark, D.P.
(2009).
Brock Biology of Microorganisms; Pearson Education Inc. 12th edition.
Pp Pelczar, M.J., Chan, E.C.S and Krieg, R.N (2001): Microbiology; Mc Graw-hill, 5th edition.
Pp 403- Willey, J.M., Sherwood, L.M and Woolverton, C.J (2008).
Prescott, Harley and Kleins.
Microbiology.
7th ed.
Boston Bur Bridge, IL: Mc Graw Hill Higher Education.
Pp 1-3 149MODULE 5: MICROBIAL GENETICS AND BIOGEOCHEMICAL CYCLING OF ELEMENTS UNIT 1: MECHANISMS OF GENETIC VARIATION AND HEREDITARY 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objectives 3.0 Genetic Variation 3.1 Mutation 3.1.1 Spontaneous mutation 3.1.2 Induced mutation 3.2 Types of mutation 3.3 Genetic recombination 3.4 Mechanism of recombination 3.4.1 Conjugation 3.4.2 Transformation 3.4.3 Transduction 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutor Marked Assignment 7.0 Further Reading and Other Resources 1501.0 Introduction Each living organism resembles its ancestors in most of its characters.
The maintenance of specific properties, that is, the constancy of characters over generation, is called hereditary.
Genetics is the study of inheritance (hereditary) and the variablility of the characteristics of an organism.
Inheritance exact transmission of genetic information from parents to their progeny (offsprings).
Deoxyribonucelic acid (DNA) is the chemical substance responsible for hereditary in all cells because it beams the genetic information.
Each genetic character can be assigned to a gene which carries the information.
Microorganisms are capable of transmitting genetic information from generation to generation with great accuracy.
(This unit examines the causes of variation in microorganisms).
Variability or variation of the inherited characteristics occurs or alters as a result of change in the genetic make of a cell or in environmental conditions.
Variation in microorganisms takes place by mutation.
Recombination and gene transfer.
2.0 Objectives At the end of this unit, you should be able to: (i) Define the term genetic variation.
(ii) Define mutation 3.0 Genetic Variation This is changes in or of a gene which leads to a loss of the enzymes or to production of an altered enzymes hence to a recognizable changes in the hereditary character.
Genetic variation in bacteria can take place by: (i) Mutation (ii) Gene Transfer or recombination.
3.1 Mutation Mutation can be defined as a change in the nucleotide sequence of DNA.
Mutation can involve the addition, deleting or substitution of nucleotides.
These changes in the nucleotides are stable and heritable and are passed down from one generation to the next.
Mutation introduces genetic variation among organisms.
A Mutant is a strain of any cell or virus carrying a change in the nucleotide sequence.
A mutant different from its parent strain in (i) Genotype: The nucleotide sequence of the genome (ii) The Phenotype: The observable properties of the mutant the altered phenotype is called a mutant phenotype.
The strain isolated originally from nature is called the wild type strain Mutation can occur spontaneously or induced under the influence of external agents (mutagens) 1513.1.1 Spontaneous Mutation This is mutation that occurs without exposure to external agents or any known mutagenic treatment.
It occurs at a fairly constant frequency in a particular organism, one per 106 to 1010 in a population derived from a single bacterium.
It may result from errors in DNA replication or from the action of mobile genetic molecules called transposons Mutation arising from error in DNA replication can be (i) Transition Mutation: This is the substitution of a purine for another purine (A or G) or one pyrimidine for another pyrimidine (C or T) that lead to a stable alteration of the nucleotide sequence.
This type of mutation is relatively common.
(ii) Transversion Mutation: This is a mutation in which a purine is substited for a pyrimidine or pyrimidine for a purine.
This is rarer due to the steric problems of pairing purines with purines and pyrimidine with pyrimidine.
Both Transition and Transversion mutations are types of base substitution in point mutation.
(iii) Mutations as result of lesions on DNA which result in apurine sites, apyrimidinic sites, oxidation of DNA.
(iv) Mutation as a result of the insertion of DNA segments into genes.
Insertion usually inactivates genes.
They are caused by movement of insertion sequences and transpons.
3.1.2 Induced Mutation This is mutation caused by external agent (mutagens), which may be physical or chemical agents.
1.
Physical Agents: Physical agents include ultraviolet (UV) light, raising radiation, visible light and heat.
Ionizing radiation (e.g.
X-rays) can break both single and double strand DNA.
The frequency of mutation is greatly increased at a temperature of 37oC and above.
2.
Chemical Agent: There are three main types of mutagenic chemicals.
(i) Base analogs: These are chemicals structurally similar to normal DNA bases and can be substituted for them during DNA replication.
These compounds exhibit based pairing properties different from the bases they replace and eventually cause a stable mutation.
An example 5-bromouracil (5-BU) an analog of thymine.
(ii) DNA Modifying Agents: These chemicals react chemically with DNA.
They change a bases structure and alter its base pairing characteristics.
Examples are Methyl-nitrosoguanidine and Hydroxylamine.
(iii) Intercalating Agents: These are chemicals with flat molecules that can intercalate (slip in) between bases pairs n the central stack of the DNA helix.
They 152include single nucleotide pair insertion and deletions.
Examples are acridine such as proflavin and acridine orange.
3.2 Types of Mutation Two common types of mutation are point mutation and frame shift mutation.
1.
Point Mutations Point mutations occur as a result of the substitution of one nucleotide for another in the specific nucleotide sequence of a gene or define as change only one base pair.
Point mutations in protein – coding genes on affect protein structure and are named according to if and how they change the encoded protein.
The most common type of point mutations are: (i) Silent mutation: Change the nucleotide sequence of a codon but do not change the amino acid encoded by that codon.
(ii) Missence Mutations: This involves a single base substitution that changes a codon for one amino acid into a codon for another.
(iii) Nonsense Mutation: This cause the early termination of translation and therefore result in a shortened polypeptide.
They are called nonsense mutation because they convert a sense codon to a non sense or stop code.
2.
Frame Shift Mutations These mutations result form an addition or loss of one or more nucleotides in a gene and are termed insertion or deletion mutations respectively.
This results in a shift or the reading frame.
Frame shift mutations usually are very harmful and yield mutant phenotypes resulting from the synthesis of non-functional protein.
The Effect of Mutation can be described at the protein level and in terms of traits or other easily observed phenotypes.
A mutation from wild type to a mutant form is called a forward mutation however a reversion mutation occurs when second mutual at the same site as the original mutation which restore the wild type phenotype.
If the second mutation is at a different site than the original mutation is called suppressor mutation.
153Activity A: 1.
What are point mutations?
2.
What are frame shift mutations?
3.3 Genetic Recombination This is the formation of a new genotype by reassortment of gene following an exchange of genetic material between two defferent chromosomes which have similar gene at corresponding sites and are from defferent individuals.
Progeny or offspring from recombination have combination of gene different from those that are present in the parents.
In bacteria, genetic recombinations result from three types of gene transfer, they are; 1.
Conjugation: this is the transfer of gene between cell that are in physical contact with one another.
2.
Transduction: this is the transfer of gene from one cell to another by a bacteriophage.
3.
Transformation: this is the transfer of cell free or naked DNA from one cell to another.
3.4 Mechanism of recombination Inside the recipient cell, the donor DNA fragment is positioned alongside the recipient DNA in such a way that homologous gene are adjacent.
Enzyme act on the recipient DNA, causing nic and excision of a fragment.
The donor is the integrated into the recipient chromosome in place of the excised DNA.
The recipient become the combination cell because its chromosome contain DNA of both the donor and the recipient cell.
3.4.1 Conjugation This is a mechanism of genetic transfer that involves cell to cell contact.
It is plasmid encoded mechanism ie it is controlled by gene carried by certain plasmid(such as F plasmid).the process of conjugation involves a donor cell which contains conjugative plasmid and a recipient cell which does not.
F Plasmid: The F plasmid (F stands for fertility) is a circular DNA molecule of 99159 bp.
It is an extra chromosome DNA that encodes the necessary information necessary for conjugation.
The F plasmid has a large region of DNA, the extra region containing genes thet encode transfer functions.
Many genes in the extra region are involved in meeting pair formation and most of these have to do with the synthesis of a surface structure the sex pilus (plural, pilli).
Only donor cells produce these pilli.
Pilli allow specific pairing to take place between the donor and recipient cells.
The pilus makes specific contact with a receptor on the recipient cell and is retracted by disassembling its subunit.
This pulls the two cells together, making the donor and recipient cells rmain in contact by binding proteins located in the outer membrane of each cell DNA is the transfer from donor to recipient cells through this conjugation junction.
154Mechanisms of DNA Transfer During conjugation DNA transfer is triggered by cell to cell contact by which one strand of the circular plasmid is mixed and is transferred to the recipient.
The nicking enzyme required to initiate the process that is encoded by the of the F plasmid DNA synthesis by the rolling circle mechanisms replaces the transferred strand in the donor while a complementary DNA strand is being made in the recipient.
At the end of the process, both donor and recipient cells possess complete plasmid.
For transfer of the F plasmid, if an F-containing donor cell (designated as F+) mates with a recipient cell lacking the plasmid (designated as F-) the result is two F+ cells.
Figure 1: The diagrammatic illustration of conjugation source Source: Prescott, Harley and Kleins, Microbiology by Willey et al., (2008) 3.4.2 Transformation This is a genetic transfer process by which free DNA is incorporated into a recipient cell and brings about genetic change.
Several prokaryotes are naturally transformed including certain species of gram 155negative and gram positive bacteria and some species of archaea because the DNA of prokaryotes is present in the cell as a large single molecule, when the cell is gently lysed, the DNA pours out and breaks easily into fragments containing genes which are released into the surrounding environment.
If a fragment contacts a competent cell, a cell that is able to take up DNA and be transformed, the DNA can be bound to the cell and taken inside.
Figure 2: The diagrammatic illustration of transformation Source: Prescott, Harley and Kleins, Microbiology by Willey et al., (2008) Competency for transformation is a complex phenomenon and is dependent on several condition such as stage of growth.
Natural transformation has been discovered so far in certain genera including streptococcus bacillus, acinectobacter, azobacter, helicobacter and pseudomonas.
Gene transfer by this in process occurs in soil and aquatic environment.
3.4.3 Transduction This is a mechanism of genetic transfer in which a bacterial virus (bacteriophage) transfers DNA from one cell to another.
Virus can transfer the host genes in two ways (i) Generalized transduction and (ii) Specialized transduction 1) Generalized transduction DNA derived from virtually any portion of the host genome is packaged inside the mature union in place of the virus gonome.
Any gene on the donor chromosome can be transferred to the recipient since they carry any of the host chromosome, they are called generalized transduction.
When a bacteria cell is infected with a phege, the lythe cycle is initiated.
During the lytic infection, the enzymes responsible for packaging viral DNA into the bacteriophage sometimes package host DNA accidentally.
The resulting union is called a 156transducing particle, on lysis of the host cells, the transducing particle are release along with normal union(that is those containing the virus genome) hence the lysate is used to infect o population of recipients cells most of the the cell becomes infected with normal virus, however a small portion of the population receives transducing particles that inject the DNA they packaged from the previous host bacterium.
This transducing particle undergo genetic recombination with the DNA of the new host.
Generalized transduction allow the transfer of any gene from one bacteria to another at a low frequency Figure3: The diagrammatic illustration of generalized transduction Source: Brock’s Biology of Microorganisms by Medigan et al., (2009) 2) Specialized Transduction In specialized transduction, DNA from specific region of the host chromosome is integrated directly into virus genome usually replacing some of the virus genes.
This occur only in acertain temperate viruses specialiased transduction allows extremely efficient transfer but is selective and transfer only a smell region of the bacteria chromosome.
In the first case of specialized transduction to be discovered, gelatose genes were translated by phege lambda of E. Cola.
When lambda lysogenizes a host cell, phege genomes is integrated into the host DNA at a specific site.
The region in which lambda integrates in the E. Coli chromosome is next to the cluster of the gene that encode the enzyme for galactose utilization.
After insertion, viral DNA replication is under control of bacterial host chromosome.
Upon induction, the viral DNA separate from the host DNA by a process that is reverse of integration.
157 Figure 4: The diagrammatic illustration of specialized transduction Source: Brock’s Biology of Microorganisms by Medigan et al., (2009) The phenotype of microorganisms can be affected in various ways: (i) Morphological Mutations: Changes in the microorganism colonial or cellular morphology of the microorganisms.
(ii) Lethal Mutation: Resulting in the death of the microorganism.
(iii) Biochemical Mutation: Causing a change in the biochemistry of the cell.
3.4.4 Mutation detection involves: (i) Visual Observation (ii) Replace Plating Technique 4.0 Conclusion Microbial variation can arise as a result of mutations which can occur spontaneous or induced by physical and chemical changes.
Mutation leads to changes in protein structure and function which in turn alter the phenotype of an organism.
This results in the organism (mutant) being different from the one found originally in nature (the wild type).
5.0 Summary • Mutation is a stable heritable change in the nucleotide sequence of a DNA molecule.
• Mutation can be spontaneous or induced.
158• Spontaneous mutation can arise from replication errors (transition, transversion, addition and deletion of nucleotide).
From DNA lesions and from insertion of DNA segments and Transpons.
• Induced mutation can be from physical and chemical agents called Mutagens.
• Physical agents, of mutation include ultraviolet rays, ionizing rays, radiation, light, heat etc.
• Chemical agents of mutation are base analogs, intercalating agents and DNA modifying agents.
• Main types of mutation are point mutation and frame shift mutation.
• Mutations are recognized when they cause a change from the normal wild type phenotype.
A mutant phenotype can be restored to wild type by either reversion or suppressor mutations.
• Some major types of mutations categorized based on the effect on phenotypes are morphological, lethal and biochemical.
• Replace planting can be used for detection and isolating mutants.
• Amen test is used to screen for mutagens and potential carcinogens.
6.0 Tutor Marked Assignment 1a.
what is mutation?
b.
List four ways in which spontaneous mutation might arise c List three methods of recombination in a prokaryotic cell d Explain the mechanism of conjugation in bacteria 7.0 References Atlas, R.M.
(1995): Microorganisms in our World.
Mosby Year Book.
Inc. Pp5-13 Medigan, M.T., Martinko, J.M., Dunlap, P.V and Clark, D.P.
(2009).
Brock Biology of Microorganisms; Pearson Education Inc. 12th edition.
Pp 285-309 Pelczar, M.J., Chan, E.C.S and Krieg, R.N (2001): Microbiology; Mc Graw-hill, 5th edition.
Pp 217-253 Willey, J.M., Sherwood, L.M and Woolverton, C.J (2008).
Prescott, Harley and Kleins.
Microbiology.
7th ed.
Boston Bur Bridge, IL: Mc Graw Hill Higher Education.
Pp 317-350 159UNIT 2: BIOGEOCHEMICAL CYCLING OF ELEMENTS 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objectives 3.0 Biogeochemical Cycling 3.1 Peculiar Features of Biogeochemical cycles 3.2 Carbon Cycle 3.3 Nitrogen Cycle 3.3.1 Nitrogen Fixation 3.3.2 Nitrification 3.3.3 Denitrification 3.3.4 Ammonification 3.4 Sulphur Cycle 3.5 The Phosphorus Cycle 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutor Marked Assignment 7.0 References 160Introduction Life on earth would not be possible without microbes.
Soil microorganisms serve as biogeochemical agents for the conversion of complex organic compounds into simple inorganic compounds or into their constituents elements.
The overall process is called Mineralization.
Biogeochemical cycling refers to the biological and chemical processes that elements such as carbon, nitrogen, sulfur, iron and magnesium undergo during microbial metabolism.
This conversion of complex organic compounds into inorganic compounds or elements provides for the continuity of elements (or their compounds) as nutrients for plants and animals including man.
This unit examines the biogeochemical cycles of elements such as carbon, sulfur, nitrogen and phosphorous.
2.0 Objectives At the end of the unit, you should be able to: (i) define biogeochemical cycling (ii) state the features of biogeochemical cycles (iii) describe the carbon cycle (iv) describe the sulphur cycle (v) describe the phosphorus cycle 3.0 Biogeochemical cycling is the movement of materials via biochemical reactions through biospheres The biosphere is that portion of the Earth and its atmosphere in which living organisms occur.
The activities of microorganisms within the biosphere have a direct impact on the quality of human life.
Microorganisms are especially important in recycling materials.
The metabolism carried out by microorganisms often transfers materials from one place to another.
Changes in the chemical forms of various elements can lead to the physical movement of materials.
Something causing transfer between the atmosphere (air) hydrosphere (water) and lithosphere (land).
It also refers to the biological and chemical processes that elements such as carbon, nitrogen, sulfur, iron and magnesium undergo during microbial metabolism.
They can also be defined as cyclical path that elements take as they flow through living (biotic) and non-living (abiotic) components of the ecosystem.
These cycles are important because a fixed and limited amount of the elements that make up living cell exists on the earth and in the atmosphere thus in order for an ecosystem to maintain and sustain its characteristics life forms elements must continuously be recycled for example, if the organic carbon that animals use as an energy source and exhale as carbon dioxide (CO ) were not eventually converted back to an organic form we 2 would run out of organic carbon to build cells.
Elements involved in the biogeochemical cycles are used for three general purposes.
i. Biomass production In biomass production, the element transferred (e.g.
N, C, etc) is incorporated into cell materials for example, all organisms require nitrogen to produce amino acids hence plants and many prokaryotes assimilates nitrogen by incorporating ammonia (NH ) to synthesize the amino acid glutamate.
3 Animals cannot incorporate ammonia instead require amino acids in their 161diets.
Some prokaryotes can reduce atmosphere nitrogen to form ammonia, which can then be incorporated into cellular material.
ii.
Energy Source A reduced form of the element is used to generate energy in form of ATP.
For example reduced carbon compounds such as Lipids and amino acids are used as energy source by heterotrophs.
Chemolitrophs can use reduced inorganic molecules such as hydrogen sulfide (H S) ammonia (NH ) and Hydrogen gas.
2 3 iii.
Terminal Electron Acceptor i.e.
Carbohydrate oxidised to CO 2 Electrons from the energy source are transferred to an oxidized form of the element during respiration, this reduces the terminal electron acceptor in aerobic conditions, O is used as a terminal electron acceptor.
In anaerobic 2 conditions, some prokaryotes can use nitrate N) , Nitrate sulfate (SO ) and 3 4 carbon dioxide (CO ) as terminal electron acceptors.
2 Global climate change, temperature precipitation and stability of acosystem are all dependent on biogeochemical cycles.
3.1 Peculiar Features of Biogeochemical cycles 1.
Element required are in five forms and mostly from non-living reservoir in the atmosphere.
They can also be gotten from sedimentary rock or water.
2.
The element go in cycle and are always free in inorganic state in abiotic environment and when needed in biotic environment, they are turned to organic state.
They can be combined with other element.
3.
The recycling of these elements maintain a necessary balance of nutrient and they are maintained throughout.
4.
The cycles (biogeoxcal) are complex and they involve the activity of producers, consumers and decomposers.
5.
All organisms participate directly in recycling by removing addition or altering nutrients.
Mlorgs are voted for metabolic conversion especially in charging some element from one nutritional farm to another.
6.
The total turnover rate of element is most rapid in atmosphere and lowest in sedimentary rocks.
Activity A 1.
What is biogeochemical cycle of elements?
2.
State three features of biogeochemical cycles.
3.2 Carbon Cycle Carbon is a very important element as it makes up organic matter which is a part of all life.
Carbon follows a certain route on earth called the CARBON CYCLE.
The carbon cycle primarily involves the transfer of carbon dioxide and organic carbon between the atmosphere where carbon occurs principally as inorganic CO and the hydrosphere and lithosphere which contain varying 2 concentrations of organic and inorganic compounds.
162 The carbon cycle begins with carbon fixation, which is the conversion of CO 2 to organic matter.
Plants are thought of as the principal CO fixing organisms 2 but at least half of the carbon on earth is fixed by microbes particularly marine photosynthetic prokaryotes and protests.
Cyanobacteria such as Prochlorococcus and Synechococcus are involved in carbon fixation using energy from sunlight.
Chemolithoauto trophic microorganisms such as Thiobacillus and Beggiatoa also fix CO into organic 2 matter while metabolissing compounds such as H S for energy.
2 Once carbon is fixed into organic compounds, the next stage in the cycle involves its transfer from population to population within the biological community, supporting the growth of a variety of heterotrophic organisms i.e.
heterotrophs such as animals and protozoas eat autotrophs and may in turn be eaten by other animals.
Hence, they acquire organic carbon to build biomass and to oxidize to gain energy.
Decomposers use the remains of primary producers and consumers for the same purposes.
The respiratory and fermentative metabolism of heterotrophic organisms returns inorganic carbon dioxide to the atmosphere completing the carbon cycle.
When plants and animals die, these organic compounds are decomposed by bacteria and fungi and during decomposition the organic compounds are ocidised and CO is returned to the cycle.
2 Carbon is stored in rocks such as limestones (CaCO ) and is dissolved as 3 carbonate ions (CO ) in oceans.
Vast deposits of fossil organic matter exist in 3 the form of fossil fuel such as coal and petroleum.
Burning these fuel releases CO resulting in an increased amount of CO in the atmosphere.
2 2 Alternatively, inorganic CO and organic carbon can be reduced anaerobically 2 to methane ((CH ).
Methane is produced by archaea in anoxic habitats.
4 Archaea such as methanobrevibacter in the gut of termites also contribute to methane production.
The carbon cycle has come under intense scrutiny in the last decade or so.
This is because CO levels in the atmosphere have risen from their 2 preindustrial concentration of about 280m mol per mol to 376m mol per mole in 2003.
This represents an increase of about one-third and CO levels continue 2 to rise.
Like CO , methane is also a greenhouse gas and its atmospheric 2 concentration is likewise increasing about 1% per year, from 0.7 to 1.7ppm (volume) since the early 1700s.
These changes are clearly the results of the combustion of fossil fuels and altered land use.
The term greenhouse gas describes the ability of these gases to trap heat within earth’s atmosphere, leading to a documented increase in the planet’s mean temperature.
Indeed, over the past 100 years, earth’s average temperature has increased by 0.6% and continues to rise at a rapid rate i.e.
global warming of the earth.
163 Figure 1: Carbon cycle 3.3 Nitrogen Cycle Nitrogen is an essential component of DNA, RNA and proteins, which are the building blocks of life hence all organisms require Nitrogen to live and grow.
Nitrogen, the most abundant substance in the atmosphere or air (almost 80%) is not directly useable by most organisms.
This is because the strong triple bond between the Nitrogen atoms in the molecule makes it relatively inert.
Only a few bacteria are able to utilize Nitrogen directly.
For plants and animals to be able to use N , N gas must first be converted to more 2 2 chemically available forms such as ammonium (NH +), Nitrate (NO -1), (NO - 4 3 2 1) and organic nitrogen containing compounds such as amino acids and proteins.
Microorganisms also are able to utilize these other forms of nitrogen mentioned above.
The conversion of Nitrogen compounds primarily by microorganisms changes the oxidation states of Nitrogenous compounds and establishes a Nitrogen cycle.
Three processes carried out by microorganisms are critical in the Nitrogen cycle.
They are: (1) Nitrogen fixation (2) Nitrification and (3) denitrification.
3.3.1 Nitrogen Fixation This is strictly a bacterial process in which molecular Nitrogen is converted to ammonium ion and it is the only naturally occurring process that makes Nitrogen available to living organisms.
It is carried out by a few bacteria that have a nitrogenase enzymes system.
This process brings Nitrogen from the atmosphere to the hydrosphere and lithosphere.
Because plants depend on the availability of Nitrogen for growth, microbial metabolism of Nitrogen containing compounds has a dramatic impact on agricultural productivity.
Plants and animal rely entirely on the fixed forms of Nitrogen (such as ammonium and nitrate ions) provided by bacterial nitrogen fixation.
Nitrogen fixation involves two types of bacteria or microorganisms).
1.
Free Living Nitrogen Fixing Bacteria These bacteria are found in high number or concentration in the rhizosphere (the region where the soil and roots make contacts).
In aquatic environment, blue green algae is an important free- living Nitrogen fixer microbes such as Azobacter and the cyanobacterium.
Trichodesmium fix Nitrogen aerobically while 164free-living anaerobes such as members of the genus clostridium fix Nitrogen anaerobically.
2.
Symbiotic Nitrogen Fixing Bacteria Members of the genera Rhizobia, brady rhizobium and others are important Nitrogen fixing bacteria.
They play an important role in plant growth for crop production.
These bacteria live in association with leguminous plants.
The bacteria invade the root cells to form nodules, recaves carbohydrate and a favourable environment from their host plants in exchange for the Nitrogen they fix.
However, other bacterial symbiotics fix Nitrogen, for example the action mycete frankia fixes Nitrogen while colonizing amny types of woody shrub and the heterocystous cyanobacterium Anabaenea fixes Nitrogen when in association with the water fern Azolla.
The product of Nitrogen fixation is ammonia (NH ).
It is 3 immediately incorporated into amino N-atoms are eventually as amino.
These Nitrogenase enzymes are very sensitive to oxygen and must be protected from oxidizing effects.
Introduced into proteins nucleic acids and other biomolecules.
The Nitrogen cycle continues with the degradation of these molecules into ammonium (NH +) within mixed assemblages 4 of microbes.
Rhizobium and Biadyrhizobium species generally exhibits rates of Nitrogen fixation that are two or three times higher than these accompanied by free Nitrogen fixing bacteria.
3.3.2 Nitrification This is a process carried out by chemolithotrophic bacteria which convert ammonium ions to nitrite (NO -) ions.
It is a two step process 3 whereby ammonium ion is first oxidized to nitrate (NO -) which is then 2 oxidized to nitrate.
First step NH + NO - 4 2 Ammonium ion Nitrate ion Second step NO - NO - 2 3 Nitrite ion Nitrate ion Bacteria of the genera Nitrosomonas and Nitrosococcus play important role.
In the first step and Nitrobacter and related chemolithotrophic bacteria carry out the second step.
In addition Nitrosomonas eutropha has been found to oxidize ammonium ion anaerobically to nitrite oxide (N.O) using Nitrogen dioxide (NO ) as an acceptor in a denitrification 2 related reaction.
Genera of Nitrification Bacteria 165Genus Converts Habitat Nitrosomonas Ammonia to nitrite Soil, freshwater marine Nitrosospira Ammonia to nitrite Soils Nitrosococcus Ammonia to nitrite Soils, freshwater marine Nitrosotobus Ammonia to nitrite Soils Nitrobacter Nitrite to nitrate Soils, freshwater marine Nitrospira Nitrite to nitrate Marine Nitrococcus Nitrite to nitrate Marine The production of nitrate is important because it can be reduced and incorporated into organic nitrogen.
This process is known as assimilatory nitrate reduction.
(i.e.
the use of nitrate as a source of organic nitrogen is an example of assimilatory reduction) because assimilatory reduction of nitrate sometimes accumulates a transcient intermediate.
Alternatively, some microorganisms use nitrate as a terminal electron acceptor during anaerobic respiration this is a form of dissimilatory reduction.
3.3.3 Denitrification This is a process in which nitrate is removed from the ecosystem and returned to the atmosphere as dinitrogen gas (N ) through a series of 2 reactions.
i.e.
Denitrification leads to the return or loss of Nitrogen to the atnmosphere as nitrogen gas.
Though this process, oxidixed forms of Nitrogen such as nitrate and nitrite are converted to dinitrogen (N ) 2 and to a lesser extent, nitrous oxide gas.
Denitrification is an anerobic process carried out by denitrifying bacteria which convert nitrate to dinitrogen in the following sequence: NO - NO - NO N O N 3 2 2 2 Nitrate Nitrite Nitric Nitrous Nitrogen Ion ion oxide oxide gas Nitric oxide and nitrous oxide are both environmentally important gases.
N O is an important Greenhouse gas.
Contributing to global 2 climate change while Nitric oxide contributes to smog.
One converted to dinitrogen nitrogen is unlikely to be reconverted to a biologically available form because it is a gas and is rapidly lost to the atmosphere.
Denitrification is the only nitrogen transformation that removes nitrogen from ecosystem (essentially irreversibly).
Denitrification is a form of dissimilatory reduction.
Finally nitrate can be transformed to ammonia in dissimilatory reduction by a variety of bacteria, including geobacter metallireducens, Desulfovibro spp and clostridium spp.
Other sp capable of transforming NO to N are Achomobacter, Agro 3 2 bacterium, Akaligenes, Bacillus, chromobacterium flarobacterium, Hypnomicrobium, pseudomonas Thiobacillus and vibrio from agricultural standpoint it is an undesirable process because loss of nitrogen from the soil hence a decline in nutrients for plant growth.
3.3.4 Ammonification 166Ammonification is the decomposition process that converts organic nitrogen into ammonia (NH ).
A wide variety of organisms, including 3 aerobic and anaerobic bacteria as well as fungi can degrade protein, thus they do through the action of extracellular poteolytic enzymes that break down protein into short peptides or amino acids.
After transport of the breakdown products into the cell, releasing ammonium.
The decomposer will assimilate much of this compound to create biomass.
Figure 2: Nitrogen Cycle 3.4 Sulphur Cycle Sulphur can exist in several oxidation states within organic and inorganic compounds.
Oxidation-Reduction reactions medicated by microorganisms change the oxidation state of sulphur within various compounds establishing the sulphur cycle.
Microorganisms are capable of removing sulphur from organic compounds under aerobic conditions, the removal of sulphur (desulfurization) of organic compounds results in the formation of sulphate, whereas under anaerobic conditions hydrogen sulphide is normally produced from the mineralization of organic sulphur compounds.
Hydrogen sulphide may also be formed by sulphate-reducing bacteria that utilize sulfate as the terminal electron acceptor during anaerobic respiration.
Hydrogen sulphide react with metals to is negatively charged, so it complexes or react easily with cations in the environment such as iron, aluminium and calcium.
These compounds are relatively insoluble and most available to plants and microbes between pH 6 and 7 under these conditions.
These organisms readily and rapidly convert phosphate to its organic form so that it becomes available to animals.
The microbial transformation of phosphorus features the transformation of simple orthophosphate (PO -) which bears phosphorus in the +5 valence state to more 4 complex forms.
These include the polyphosphates seen in metachromatic granules as well as more familiar macromolecules.
167 Figure 3: Sulfur Cycle 3.5 The Phosphorus Cycle Biogeochemical cycling of phosphorus is important because allliving cells require phosphorus for nucleic acids, lipids and some polysaccharides.
However, most environmental phosphorus is present in low concentration, locked within the earth’s crust,hence it is the nutrient that livinds growth.
Unlike the Carbon and Nitrogen cycles, the phosphorus cycle has no gaseous component.
Phosphorus is derived solely from the weathering of phosphate – containing rocks,hence in soil, phosphorus exists in both inorganic and organic forms.
Organic phosphorus is found in biomass, humus and other organic form.
The phosphorus in these organic materials is recycled by microbial activity.
Inorganic phosphorus, on the other hand is negatively charged, so it complexes or react easily with cations in the environment such as iron, aluminium and calcium.
These compounds are relatively insoluble and most available to plants and microbes between pH 6 and 7.Under these conditions these organisms readily and rapidly convert phosphate to its organic form so that it becomes available to animals.
The microbial transformation of phosphorus features the transformation of simple orthophosphate (PO -) which 4 bears phosphorus in the +5 valence state to more complex forms.
These include the polyphosphates seen in metachromatic granules as well as more familiar macromolecules.
168 Figure 4: Phosphorus Cycle Activity B 1.
Define the following terms: (a) Nitrogen Fixation (b) Nitrification (c) Denitrification (d) Ammonification 4.0 Conclusion Microorganisms in the course of their growth and metabolism interact with each other to cycle nutrients such as carbon, sulphur and phosphorus.
The nutrient cycling called biogeochemical cycling of elements involves both biological and chemical processes and is of global importance.
6.0 Summary • Biogeochemical cycling of elements is the movement of materials via biochemical reactions through biospheres.
• It also refers to the biological and chemical processes that elements such as carbon nitrogen and sulfur undergo during….. • Element involved in biogeochemical cycles are used for three general purposes which are: (i) Biomass Production (ii) Energy Source and (iii) Terminal Electron Acceptor • The carbon cycle primarily involves the transfer of carbondioxide and organic carbon between the atmosphere where it occurs as principally as inorganic CO and the hydrosphere and tithosphere which contain varying concentration 2 of organic and inorganic compounds.
• The first step in carbon cycle is carbon fixation which is the conversion of CO to organic matter by organisms such as cyanobacteria.
2 169• The second stage is the transfer of the fixed carbon from population to population within the biological community.
• The respiratory and fermentative metabolism of heterotrophic organisms returns inorganic carbon dioxide to the atmosphere.
• Decomposition of organic compounds such as plants and animals return CO2 to the cycle.
• Carbon is stored in rocks such as limestones (CaCO ) and is dissolved as 3 carbonate ions (CO ) in oceans.
3 • Burning of fuels such as coal and petroleum releases carbon dioxide to the atmosphere.
• Nitrogen is an essential compound of DNA, RNA and proteins which are the building blocks of life.
• Atmospheric Nitrogen is not directly useable by most organisms but has to be converted to stable organic forms such as ammonium and nitrates.
• Three processes carried out by microorganisms in the nitrogen cycle are nitrogen fixation, nitrification and denitrification.
• Nitrogen fixation is strictly a bacterial process in which molecule nitrogen is converted to ammonium ion by a few bacteria that have a nitrogenese enzyme system.
• Nitrogen fixation is carried out by free living nitrogen fixing bacteria such as a zobacter, cyanobacteria and clostridium found in the rhizosphere of plant.
• Symbiotic nitrogen fixing bacteria such as Rhizobia and bradyrhizobium which in symbiotic association with leguminous plants elp fixes nitrogen in soilwhile cyanobacterium Anabaenea fixes nitrogen when in association with the water fern.
• Nitrification is carried out by chemolithotropic bacteria which convert ammonium ions to nitrate (NO ) ions in two steps.
3 • Nitrosomonas and Nitrosospira convert ammonia to nitrite while Nitrococcus and Nitrobacter convert nitrite to nitrate.
• Denitrification converts nitrate to dinitrogen.
• Ammonification is the decomposition process that converts organic nitrogen to ammonia (NH ).
3 • Oxidation – Reduction reactions mediated by microorganisms change the oxidation states of sulphur with in various compounds establishing the sulphur cycle.
• Biogeochemical cycling of phosphorus is important because all living cells require phosphorus for nucleic acids, Lipids and some polysaccharides.
• The phosphorus cycle has no gaseous state and phosphorus is derived solely from weathering phosphate containing rocks and organic phosphorus in biomass humus and other organic forms.
6.0 Tutor Marked Assignment 1.a State three uses of biogeochemical cycles.
Stating specific examples of microorganisms.
.b Explain the role of symbiotic nitrogen fixing bacteria in biological nitrogen fixation in agricultural soils.
c. Outline the steps involved in nitrification.
1707.0 References Atlas, R.M.
(1995): Microorganisms in our World.
Mosby Year Book.
Inc. Pp5-13 Medigan, M.T., Martinko, J.M., Dunlap, P.V and Clark, D.P.
(2009).
Brock Biology of Microorganisms; Pearson Education Inc. 12th edition.
Pp Pelczar, M.J., Chan, E.C.S and Krieg, R.N (2001): Microbiology; Mc Graw-hill, 5th edition.
Pp Willey, J.M., Sherwood, L.M and Woolverton, C.J (2008).
Prescott, Harley and Kleins.
Microbiology.
7th ed.
Boston Bur Bridge, IL: Mc Graw Hill Higher Education.
Pp 1-3 171Answer to TMAs Module 5 Unit 1 1.
(a) Mutation Mutation can be defined as a change in the nucleotide sequence of DNA.
Mutation can involve the addition, deleting or substitution of nucleotides.
These changes in the nucleotides are stable and heritable and are passed down from one generation to the next.
Mutation introduces genetic variation among organisms.
(b) Mutation arising from error in DNA replication can be (v) Transition Mutation: This is the substitution of a purine for another purine (A or G) or one pyrimidine for another pyrimidine (C or T) that lead to a stable alteration of the nucleotide sequence.
This type of mutation is relatively common.
(vi) Transversion Mutation: This is a mutation in which a purine is substited for a pyrimidine or pyrimidine for a purine.
This is rarer due to the steric problems of pairing purines with purines and pyrimidine with pyrimidine.
Both Transition and Transversion mutations are types of base substitution in point mutation.
(vii) Mutations as result of lesions on DNA which result in apurine sites, apyrimidinic sites, oxidation of DNA.
(viii) Mutation as a result of the insertion of DNA segments into genes.
Insertion usually inactivates genes.
They are caused by movement of insertion sequences and transpons.
(c) The combination can occur by 1 conjugation 2.
Transformation 3.
Transduction (d) Conjugation This is a mechanism of genetic transfer that involves cell to cell contact.
It is plasmid encoded mechanism ie it is controlled by gene carried by certain plasmid(such as F plasmid).the process of conjugation involves a donor cell which contains conjugative plasmid and a recipient cell which does not.
F Plasmid: The F plasmid (F stands for fertility) is a circular DNA molecule of 99159 bp.
It is an extra chromosome DNA that encodes the necessary information necessary for conjugation.
The F plasmid has a large region of DNA, the extra region containing genes thet encode transfer functions.
Many genes in the extra region are involved in meeting pair formation and most of these have to do with the synthesis of a surface structure the sex pilus (plural, pilli).
Only donor cells produce these pilli.
Pilli allow specific pairing to take place between the donor and recipient cells.
The pilus makes specific contact with a receptor on the recipient cell and is retracted by disassembling its subunit.
This pulls the two cells together, making the donor and recipient cells rmain in 172contact by binding proteins located in the outer membrane of each cell DNA is the transfer from donor to recipient cells through this conjugation junction.
Mechanisms of DNA Transfer During conjugation DNA transfer is triggered by cell to cell contact by which one strand of the circular plasmid is mixed and is transferred to the recipient.
The nicking enzyme required to initiate the process that is encoded by the of the F plasmid DNA synthesis by the rolling circle mechanisms replaces the transferred strand in the donor while a complementary DNA strand is being made in the recipient.
At the end of the process, both donor and recipient cells possess complete plasmid.
For transfer of the F plasmid, if an F-containing donor cell (designated as F+) mates with a recipient cell lacking the plasmid (designated as F-) the result is two F+ cells.
The diagrammatic illustration of conjugation source Source: Prescott, Harley and Kleins, Microbiology by Willey et al., (2008) 173Unit 2 1.
(a) i. Biomass production ii.
Energy Source iii.
Terminal Electron Acceptor i.e.
Carbohydrate oxidised to CO 2 (b) Symbiotic Nitrogen Fixing Bacteria Members of the genera Rhizobia, brady rhizobium and others are important Nitrogen fixing bacteria.
They play an important role in plant growth for crop production.
These bacteria live in association with leguminous plants.
The bacteria invade the root cells to form nodules, recaves carbohydrate and a favourable environment from their host plants in exchange for the Nitrogen they fix.
However, other bacterial symbiotics fix Nitrogen, for example the action mycete frankia fixes Nitrogen while colonizing amny types of woody shrub and the heterocystous cyanobacterium Anabaenea fixes Nitrogen when in association with the water fern Azolla.
The product of Nitrogen fixation is ammonia (NH ).
It is immediately 3 incorporated into amino N-atoms are eventually as amino.
These Nitrogenase enzymes are very sensitive to oxygen and must be protected from oxidizing effects.
Introduced into proteins nucleic acids and other biomolecules.
The Nitrogen cycle continues with the degradation of these molecules into ammonium (NH +) within mixed assemblages of microbes.
4 Rhizobium and Biadyrhizobium species generally exhibits rates of Nitrogen fixation that are two or three times higher than these accompanied by free Nitrogen fixing bacteria.
(c) Nitrification The two steps involved in nitrification are (i) Aammonium ion is first oxidized is to nitrite (NO -) 2 (ii) Nitrite is then oxidized to nitrate.
First Step NH + NO - 4 2 Ammonium ion Nitrate ion Second Step NO - NO - 2 3 Nitrite ion Nitrate ion 174
