BIO 208 SEEDLESS PLANTS NATIONAL OPEN UNIVERSITY OF NIGERIA SCHOOL OF SCIENCE AND TECHNOLOGY COURSE CODE: BIO208 COURSE TITLE: SEEDLESS PLANTS 1 BIO 208 SEEDLESS PLANTS MODULE 1.
UNIT 1: MORPHOLOGY OF ALGAE CONTENTS 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objectives 3.0 Main Content 3.1 Morphology of algae 3.1.1 Anacystis 3.1.2 Chlamydomonas 3.2 Colonial Forms 3.2.1 Microcystis 3.2.2 Volvox 3.3 Filamentous Forms 3.3.1 Nostoc 3.3.2 Ulothrix 3.4 Heterotrichous Forms 3.4.1 Draparnaldiopsis 3.4.2 Ectocarpus 3.5 Thalloid Forms 3.5.1 Ulva 3.5.2 Fucus 3.6 Polysiphonoid Forms 3.6.1 Polysiphonia 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutor Marked Assignment 7.o References/Further Reading 2 BIO 208 SEEDLESS PLANTS 1.0 INTRODUCTION Algae are placed in Kingdom Protista along with protozoa.
Earlier they were classified with plants as they are photosynthetic autotrophs-possess chlorophyll and chloroplasts and superficially appear like plants.
Since their gametes do not have protective cells around them they are no longer classified with plants.
In this unit on algae, you will study the morphology of algae.
Although simple in structure, lacking differentiation, algae exhibit great diversity in size and appearance.
Their size ranges from simple microsocple to giant thallus extending several metres in length as in kelps.
Algal morphology varies from simple unicellular form to complex thallus as found in seaweed.
Algae are widely distributed in nature whenever there is plenty of water and sunshine.
They also occur abundantly on wet rocks, wet ground and a pool of water.
They also inhabit harsh habitats.
2.0 OBJECTIVES After studying this unit you will be able to: • know where algae can be found • describe the basic types of thallus in algae • compare the morphology of unicellular, colonial, filamentous, heterotrichous, thalloid and polysiplionoid forms of algae.
• draw the morphology of.
Anacystis, Chlamydomonas, Microystis, Volvox, Ulva, and Fucus and describe their special features.
3.2 ALGAL MORPHOLOGY The science or study of algae is called ‘Phycology’.
One who speciallises in the study of algae is called ‘Phycologist’ or ‘Algologist’.
3 BIO 208 SEEDLESS PLANTS The body of an alga is called thallus.
In unicellular algae it is simple consisting of a single cell.
All multicellular organisms start their life as single cells.
When a cell divides and the daughter cells form a packet enclosed in a mucilaginous mass, a colony is formed.
While the division of a cell continuously in the same plane, with the daughter cells sticking together, results in a row of cells forming a filament.
Some of the cells of a filament divide only once by a vertical plane followed by transverse divisions repeatedly and thus produce filamentous branched thallus.
Further, when all the cells of a filament undergo divisions in cross and vertical planes it results in a sheet of one or more cells in thickness.
Such multicellular thallus may show complicated differentiation as in seaweed.
All multicellular algae show the above stages during their development.
In the following account you will study the specific examples of the above basic types of thallus in algae.
It is to he noted that all the above forms may not be found in all algal divisions but some are predominently multicellular, some filamentous and some include only unicellular forms.
A gradual complexity in form also indicates how the evolution of thallus has taken place, in algae.
Morphologically algae can be distinguished as unicellular, colonial, filamentous, heterotrichous, thalloid and polysiphonoid forms.
Each of these type is described below.
Unicellular Forms 3.1.1 Anacystis Single cells, cylindrical, short or long; sometimes very long snake forms (Fig.1.1a) Cells divide by constriction, the two daughter cell get separated, rarely they remain together to form a 2-celled filament.
4 BIO 208 SEEDLESS PLANTS Individual single cells may have their own mucilagenous cover around them.
Several such cells may be enclosed in common colourless mucilage giving the impression of a colony.
3.1.2 Chlamydomonas This single celled alga contains a nucleus, a cup-shaped chloroplast in which one pyrenoid is commonly present (Fig.
1.1b) The chloroplast on the anterior side shows 2 to 3 rows of fatty redcoloured granules.
This is known as eyespot or stigma which is helpful for the alga to respond to light.
The cell wall is firm and distinct.
A small contractile vacuole is found at the base of each flagellum.
Chlamydomonas cells under partially dry conditions divide and the daughter cells without flagella remain enclosed by a common mass of mucilage.
Such a colony is known as palmella stage of Chlamydomonas (Fig.1.1c).
This is only a temporary stage and on flooding with water individual cells develop flagella and escape swimming away from the colony.
Thus the beginning of the colony construction found in Volvox can be seen in Chlamydomonas.
a c Fig.
1.1: Unicellular algae: a) Anacystis nidulans, b) Chlamydomonas 5 BIO 208 SEEDLESS PLANTS 3.2 Colonial Algae When a cell divides and the daughter cells formed remain together within a common mucilage mass, it is known as a colony.
A colony may contain large number of cells.
Sometimes it may be so big that one can see it with unaided eyes.
3.2.1 Microcystis This is a colonial alga, most common in polluted ponds and lakes (Fig.1.2e) Sometimes the colonies are big and can be seen by unaided eyes.
They accumulate on the surface of water forming quite a thick layer in some seasons (water blooms).
Single cells are spherical and colony is formed because of loose aggregates of several thousand cells held by mucilage (Fig.
1.2e).
The colonies float on the surface of water because of the presence of elongated cylindrical gas vesicles inside the individual cells.
3.2.2 Volvox The colonies of Volvox are spherical, ball-like and big enough to be seen with unaided eye (Fig.1.2g) Each colony contains l000-5000 cells arranged on the outside of a mucilagenous ball called coenobiuim.
Coenobium is a colony in which the number of cells is fixed at the time of formation.
No further addition of cells occurs.
Generally the cells are also in a special arrangement.
Two types of cells can be seen generally, vegetative or somatic and gonidia.
In younger colonies cytoplasmic connections - plasmodesmata between individual cells can be seen under the microscope.
Vegetative cells are more or less like ChIamydomonas with two flagella, cell wall, single cup-shaped chloroplast, eyespot, pyrenoid, contractile vacuole and 6 BIO 208 SEEDLESS PLANTS a nucleus (Fig.
1.2h).
The cells on the posterior side of the colony may be larger than in the front.
In Volvox all the cells of a colony are derived from a single parental cell.
They are arranged on the surface of mucilaginous ball, connected with other cells by cytoplasmic connections.
Some cells behave as sex cells meant for reproduction whereas others remain vegetative and ultimately grow old and die.
This differentiation into vegetative and reproductive cells is a very important feature in the development of multicellular organisms.
e f g h Fig.
1.2 Colonial algae; e) Microcystis aeruginosa, f) Portion of e magnified g) Volvox aureus h) Cells of in the interior polar view.
7 BIO 208 SEEDLESS PLANTS Filamentous Forms When a cell divides always cross-wise and the daughter cells do not separate from each other, it results in a linear row of cells as in Nostoc, Ulothrix and Oedogonium.
However, the three algae show different levels of differentiation.
3.3.1 Nostoc This is a simple, filamentous form, a single row of cells, uniseriate (Fig.1.3a).
Several filaments of Nostoc are generally enclosed within a common mucilage envelop to form a colony (Fig.
1.3b).
Some cells in between the vegetative cells are modified into heterocysts.
Heterocyst are a highly differentiated cell in some filamentaous blue-green algae that is a site of nitrogen fixation.
All the vegetative cells are capable of developing into spores called akinetes.
Akinete are a thick-walled, nonmotile reproductive cell found in algae.
a b C d Fig.
1.3: Filamentous algae; (a) filaments of Nostoc showing akinetes and (b) heterocysts and aggregate of Nostoc filaments forming a ball, (c) germilings of Ulothrix and (d) cell structure of UIothrix showing gridle shaped chloroplasts.
8 BIO 208 SEEDLESS PLANTS 3.4 Heterotrichous Forms When some cells of a filament divide vertically it results in a branch.
Many filamentous forms show extensive branching of the main filament giving it a bushy appearance.
In some algae the branches at the base remain horizontal, attached to the substratum known as prostrate system from which erect system of vertical branched filaments arise.
This type of body is known as heterotrichous habit.
Heterotrichous habit is the most highly developed filamentous construction in algae.
3.4.1 Draparnaldiopsis It is a heterotrichous alga which shows greater differentiation in plant body.
The prostate system is very much reduce The main axis contains long internodal cells alternating with short nodal cells (Fig.
1.4).
The short nodal cells bear a bunch of short branches.
Some of the side branches may develop into long colourless hairs or setae.
The main axis produces at the base long multicellular colourless rhizoids in large number to form a kind of cortex.
Their main function is to attach the alga to the substratum.
Fig.
1.4: Draparnaldiopsis indica (photograph by late Prof. Y.B.K Chowdarv).
9 BIO 208 SEEDLESS PLANTS a b Fig.
1.5: Heterotrichous algae; a, Ectocarpus showing habit and b) thalli with unilocular sporangia or gametangia.
3.4.2 Ectocarpus It is another heterotrichous alga (Fig.
1.5).The prostrate system which attaches the alga to the substratum is made of branched filaments.
The erect system is in the form of uniseriate (single row of cells) branched filaments forming loose tufts of 1mm to 10 mm or more.
The branches arise just below the cross walls of the cells of the main filament.
Most of these branches terminate in elongated hairs.
3.5 Thalloid Forms When the cells of a filament divide in more than one plane, that is not only cross-wise but also lengthwise it results in a sheet of cells.
The thallus may be one cell or many cells in thickness.
3.5.1 Ulva Ulva is a very common alga found on rocky coasts of sea (Fig.
1.6a).
The thallus is attached to the substrate such as rocks by rhizoids at the base.
10 BIO 208 SEEDLESS PLANTS Fig.
1.6: Ulva lactuca; a) habit of growth b) Fucus vesiculosus- morphology of the thallus.
Fucus Fucus is a brown algal seaweed common on the rocky coasts of sea in temperate countries (Fig.
1.6b).
The body of Fucus is large about half a metre or so in length.
It has a basal discoid holdfast, a short stipe and long flat and dichotomously branched fronds or blades.
Dichotomous branching pattern is one in which the two arms of the branch are more or less equal in length.
At the tip of the blade are found air bladders which make the plant float in water.
3.6 Polysiphonoid Forms This form of algae is more complex than the earlier described forms.
It is found in the red alga Polysiphonia (Fig.
1.7) which is marine in habitat.
3.6.1 Polysiphonia The algae shows in general heterotrichous habit.
The prostrate system is in the form of an elongated rhizoid which attaches the algae to the substratum.
The erect system is highly branched.
The branches are of two kinds, some are long and some short and hair-like.
The main filament grows by the division of a single apical cell.
The mature plant body is made up of central row of cells - central siphon, surrounded by vertical rows of cells, 4 to 24 - pericentral siphons.
11 BIO 208 SEEDLESS PLANTS All the pericentral cells are connected with the cells of central siphon and are also connected with each other.
When the cytoplasm of one cell is connected to the cytoplasm of the neighbouring cell through a pit in their wall, it is known as pit connection.
In Polysiphonia although all the cells are separate, their cytoplasm is connected by means of pit connections.
Fig.1.7:Polysiphonia; habit showing multicellular construction of several interconnected rows of siphons New branches may develop from the cells of central siphon or from the pericentral cells.
The trichoblasts which are simple or branched hair-like lateral branches arise from the pericentral cells.
4.0 CONCLUSION Algae are diverse in the group and forms.
They can be distinguished as unicellular, colonial, filamentous, heterotrichous, thalloid and pohysiphonoid forms.
The unicellular algae are simplest in form while the thalloid are sheet- like.
12 BIO 208 SEEDLESS PLANTS 5.0 SUMMARY • Algae are diverse group of organisms ranging from microscopic unicellular to giant thalloid forms anchored to rocks in the sea.
Morphologically they can be distinguished as unicellular, colonial, filamentous, hetertrichous, thalloid and polysiphonoid forms.
• The unicellular algae are simplest in morphology.
Some advancement is observed in colonial forms.
The cells of a colony may communicate through plasmodesmata.
There is division of labour between cells, some remain vegetative while others take part in reproduction.
• Some algae have a prostrate system attached to the substratum and an erect system of vertical branches.
This is called heterotrichous habit.
• Thalloid forms are sheet like polysiphonoid forms are more complex.
They possess rhizoids and branched erect system.
Mature thallus consists of central row of cell-central siphon surrounded by pericentral siphon.
6.0 TUTOR MARKED ASSIGNMENT 1.
Describe the structure of two simplest forms of algae.
7.0 REFERENCES/FURTHER READINGS Dutta, A.C. (1981).
Botany for degree students.
Oxford University Press.
909p.
IGNOU (1991 )Indira Gaahdi National Open University.
Plant Diversity-Algae.
13 BIO 208 SEEDLESS PLANTS UNIT 2: CLASSIFICATION OF ALGAE CONTENTS 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objectives 3.0 Main Content 3.1 Criteria for Classification of Algae 3.1.1 Prokaryotic Algae 3.1.2 Division Cyanophyta (BIue-green algae) 3.2 Eukaryotic Algae 3.2.1 Division Chlorophyta (Green algae) 3.2.2 Division Phacophyta (Brown algae) 3.2.3 Division Rhodophyta (Red algae) 3.2.4 Division Xanthophyta (Yellow-green algae) 3.2.5 Division Chrysophyta (Golden-brown algae) 3.2.6 Division Euglenophyta (Euglenoids) 3.2.7 Division Dinophyta (Dinoflagellales) 3.2.8 Division Cryptopliyta (Cryptomonad) 3.2.9 Division Bacillariophyta (Diatoms) 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutor Marked Assignment 7.0 References/Further Reading 1.0 INTRODUCTION From the previous two units it is evident that algae show a great diversity in structure and reproduction.
In this unit you will learn classification of this diverse group.
Classification means grouping of organisms according to the similarity in their characters.
It is not far fetched but true that organisms showing similar morphology, life cycle, physiology and biochemistry are 14 BIO 208 SEEDLESS PLANTS genetically related from the evolutionary point of view (phylogenetically related) and one is justified in grouping them together.
Algae could be classified according to their common characters into 8 divisions of’ Kingdom Protista.
In this unit you are introduced to the characteristics of different divisions of algae.
2.0 Objectives After studying this unit you should be able to: • list the various criteria used for the classification of algae, • explain why algae are classified as protists instead of plants, • list the various divisions of algae and describe the characteristics of each, • classify the genera of algae into division, order and family and • give common examples of algae from each division.
3.0 MAIN CONTENT 3.1 CRITERIA FOR CLASSIFICATION OF ALGAE The criteria used by phycologists are quite varied.
Generally a number of characters are used together ranging from external morphology, ultrastructure, chromosome number and their morphology, pigment composition, nature of cellular storage products, enzymes, isoenzymes, DNA homology, and DNA banding etc.
As new techniques are developed they are used to decide more precisely the relatedness (or absence of it) of organisms which seem otherwise’ related to each other.
Given below are the salient characters of each of the divisions of the algae.
It is to be noted that each division is again divided into orders, families, genera and species.
Because of the restriction of time representatives of other divisions are 15 BIO 208 SEEDLESS PLANTS not included in your course, not because they are any less important in the biological world.
3.1.1 PROKARYOTIC ALGAE 3.l.2 Division CYANOPHYTA (Cyanobacteria or Blue-green algae) Prokaryotic algae are placed in Division Cyanophyta.
Algae of this division may be unicellular, colonial, and filamentous, with or without branches, branching may be ‘true’ or ‘false’ type.
Most forms are embedded in mucilaginous or gelatinous sheaths.
The composition of cell wall is similar to bacterial cell wall.
It is, made up of distinctive mucopeptides and muramic acid.
The ultrastructure of the cell shows no organised nucleus, mitochondria or chloroplasts.
Photosynthetic lamellae and ribosomes of 70s type are present in the cytoplasm of the cells.
Some filamentous forms possess specialised cells termed as ‘heterocysts’ which are involved in nitrogen fixation.
The main photosynthetic pigments are chlorophyll a and phycobilins - (phycocyan and phycoerythrin).
A number of carotenoids including β carotene are also present some of which are specific to the division.
Carbon is reserved in the cells as glycogen granules and nitrogen as cyanophycear granules.
16 BIO 208 SEEDLESS PLANTS Other granules like polyphosphate granules, some enzyme aggregates Iike carboxysomes may also be present.
Reproduction occurs by simple cell division.
No motile cells are found in cyanobacteria and they do not have sexual method of reproduction.
Thick walled cells called ‘akinetes’ or spores are present in some forms for perennation and asexual reproduction.
Cynobacteria are distributed all over the earth in diverse habitats, fresh water lake ponds, rivers, arctic, antarctic areas, hot water springs, brine salt pans, desert soils, subaerial surfaces like tree trunks, building terraces and rock surfaces.
Examples: Anacystis, Microcystis, Nostoc, Anabaena, Oscillatoria, Spirulina, Calothrix, Gleotrichia, and Scytonema (Fig.
2.1).
Anacystis Microcystis Anabaena Nostoc Calothrix Spirulina Fig.
2.1: Some examples of blue-green algae 17 BIO 208 SEEDLESS PLANTS 3.2 EUKARYOTIC ALGAE As you have learnt earlier, that Kingdom Protista includes eight divisions of some phycologists make nine divisions treating Bacillariophyta separate from Chrysophyta.
You may note that we have also taken it as a separate division following account they are described in detail below.
3.2.1 Division CHLOROPHYTA (Green algae) This includes unicellular to multicellular forms of green algae.
The multicell forms may be in the form of filamentous, branched or unbranched, thalloid, or sheet like arrangement of cells.
Some of the green algae are colonial in form, cell structure is eukaryotic type as in higher plants with membrane bound organised nucleus, plastids, mitochondria, and cytoplasmic ribosomes of 80s type.
The cell wall is generally made up of cellulose.
Sometimes the cells are also with chitin.
The principal photosynthetic pigments are chlorophyll a and b, carotenes an xanthophyIls located in the thylakoids.
Chlorella Chlamydomonas Spirogyra Trentephohlia Coleochaete Cladophora Fig.
2.2: Some members of Division Chlorophyta.
18 BIO 208 SEEDLESS PLANTS The storage products of the cell are mostly starch, but in some algae lipids.
Reproduction occurs by asexual and sexual methods.
Asexual reproduction is biflagellate or quadri-flagellate zoospores whereas gametes (sexual reproductive biflagellate).
The flagella are anterior and of whiplash type.
Sexual reproduction includes isogamy, anisogamy, and oogamy.
Green algae are distributed in fresh water and marine habitats; some may be subaerial on wet soil or bark of trees.
ExampIes: Chlorella, Chlamydomonas, Pediastrum, Spirogyra, Cladophora, Acelabularia, Trentephohlia, Micrasterias and Caulerpas (Fig.
2.2).
3.2.2 Division PHAEOPHYTA (Brown algae) Structurally, they are most complex in morphology.
They range from simple branched filaments to massive bodies.Cell wall composition is complex.
Besides cellulose, it may contain algin, fucoidin Principal photosynthetic pigments are chlorophyll a and c and carotenoids.
Fucoxanthin (brown in colour) is present in large amount that gives alga brown colour by masking the green colour of chlorophyll.
Photosynthetic storage product is mannitol, some times laminarin.
Rarely, lipid droplets may be found in the cells.
Sexual reproduction ranges from isogamy to oogamy.
The motile swarmers have two unequal laterally inserted flagella, one of the flagella is larger and anterior and the other is smaller and posterior.
Most of the brown algae are seaweed.
very large in size, commonly known as kelps.
They are the main source of iodine, agar and related products.
Examples: Ectocarpus, Fucus, Laminaria, Sargassum, Dictyota, Alaria, Macrocystis, Nereocystis and Padina (Fig.
2.3) 19 BIO 208 SEEDLESS PLANTS Fig.
2.3: Some common brown-algae.
3.2.3 Division RHODOPHYTA (Red algae) Most forms are multicellular and highly branched, a few are ihalloid and one algae Porphyridium is unicellular.
The body may be covered with calcium carbonate incrustations.
Besides cellulose their cell wall contains pectin, polysulphate, esters and large amount of polysaccharides on the outside of their surface.
These polysaccharides are the source of agar and carageenans.
Certain red algae for example coralline algae secrete calcium carbonate around their cells and form stiff thalli.
Caralline algae are a group of red algae that secrete calcium carbonate around their cells and form still thalli.
Caralline algae are important builders of coral reefs in tropical water, contrary to the believe that coral animals alone make up oral reefs.
20 BIO 208 SEEDLESS PLANTS Fig.
2.4: Some common Red algae.
The main photosynthetic pigments are chlorophyll a, d and phycoerythrin.
Some red algae contain phycocyanin also.
The algae appear red or pink in colour because of large amounts of phycoerythrin.
The food reserve in the cells is floridian starch.
No motile cells are found at any stage of reproduction.
Sexual reproduction is advanced oogamous type.
Male gametes spermatia are passively transported by water movements to the tip of trichogyne of the female carpogonium.
After fertilisation, special developmental changes occur, that are not found in any other division of the algae.
Most of the red algae are marine in habitat.
A few are found in fresh water lakes, rivers, streams and ponds.
Some are epiphytic or parasitic in nature.
Example: Porphyridium (unicellular), Porphyra, Polysiplonia, Gracilaria, Gelidium and Corallina (Fig.
2.4).` 3.2.4 Division XANTHOPHYTA (Yellow-green algae) Some forms are unicellular and motile while others are filamentous, with multinucleate cells.
Photosynthetic pigments are chlorophyll a, c, β carotene 21 BIO 208 SEEDLESS PLANTS which is present in large amount, and xanthophylls giving the cells greenish- yellow colour.
Food reserves include lipid and chrysolaminarin (β-1,3 - linked polymer of glucose, also known as leucosin).
Cell wall frequently consists of two overlapping halves, containing pectin, silica and small amount of cellulose.
Sexual reproduction is rare.
The motile cells have two.unequal flagella present on the anterior end; one is tinsel and the other whiplash type (Fig.
2.5) Yellow-green algae are widely distributed in aquatic, fresh water habitats.
Some are sub-aerial and a few are marine in distribution.
Examples: Vaucheria, Botrydium (Fig.2.5) Fig.
2.5: Two members of yellow-green algae 3.2.5 Division CHRYSOPHYTA (Golden brown algae) Mostly unicellular or colonial, filamentous forms are rare.
Motile cells have two equal or unequal flagella present on the anterior end.
The longer one has stiff hairs and the shorter is smooth.
The cell wall is made of pentin and silica or scales of carbonate.
The chloroplasts are deeply lobed.
22 BIO 208 SEEDLESS PLANTS Fig.
2.6 Some members of Chrysophyta.
Principal pigments are chlorophyll a, c, and carotenoids like β-carotene, fucoxanthin, diatoxanthin and neofucoxanthin.
Storage products are mostly oil droplets, and true starch is absent but glucan granules or leucosin are present.
Sexual reproduction is rare.
Most common features are the formation of resting cysts, resting spore (statospores), with silica walls.
The cysts are formed as a result of asexual or sexual reproduction.
Golden-brown algae are distributed in marine and fresh water habitats, and in fast flowing mountain streams.
Marine coccolithophorides are responsible for the formation of chalk beds on the bottom of the sea.
Examples: Synura, Chromulina, Ochromonus, Mallomonas, and Dinobryon (Fig.
2.6).
23 BIO 208 SEEDLESS PLANTS 3.2.6 Division EUGLENOPHYTA (Euglenoids) Most of the euglenoids are simple unicellular motile flagellates.
They have no firm cell wall, and possess characteristics like protozoans.
They have a contractile vacuole.
Cell surface is pellicle (thin membrane) and has helical; knob like projections.
Cell shape changes constantly (euglenoid-movements).
Chloroplasts show variety of shapes such as discoid, ribbon like or stellate.
Cells are biflagellate but only one flagellum emerges anteriorly (Fig.
2.7) Members of some algal divisions such as the englenoids, cryplophytes dinolligellates, chrysophytes are predominantly unicellular.
Some biologists consider these organisms to be more related to the animal kingdom and classify them under protozoa.
The photosynthetic pigments located in the plastids include chlorophyll a, b and carotenoids including β-carotene.
Some euglenoids are also colourless.
A form of starch-paramylon is present as distinct granules.
Oil droplets and polyphosphate granules are also common in the cells.
Cells divide by binary fission.
Many species produce cysts under adverse conditions.
Sexual reproduction is absent.
Fig.
2.7: Euglena 24 BIO 208 SEEDLESS PLANTS Euglenoids occur in fresh water and brackish water and very commonly polluted ponds and temporary rain water pools.
Examples: Euglena, Trachelomonas, Phacus.
3.2.7 Division DINOPHYTA (Dinollagellates) Cell wall consists of cellulose plates which are inside the plasma membrane and a number of plates or body scales may be present on the cell wall.
Cell structure is complex.
Majority of forms are unicellular and motile.
Many dinoflagellates e.g Noctiluca, are luminescent.
They glow in the dark when they are disturbed (Fig.
2.8).
Most of these algae contain chlorophyll, a and c and distinctive carotenoid specific to dinoflagellates.
Reserve foods are mostly in the form of starch and oil.
Asexual method of reproduction is by cell division.
Parent cell divides into a number of aplanospores or zoospores or non-motile cells.
Sexual reproduction has been recently reported, gametes are smaller than the vegetative cells and the fusion is isogamous.
Formation of cysts with or without gametic fusion it found.
Dinoflagellates are mostly found as marine phytoplankton, sometimes as ‘redtide’ blooms.
Many occur as symbionts in marine animals like corals (zooxanthellae).
Examples: Noctiluca, Gonyaulax, Peridinium, Ceratium.
Fig.
2.8: Members of Division Dinophta 25 BIO 208 SEEDLESS PLANTS 3.2.8 Division CRYPTOPHYTA (Crytomonads) Unicellular motile organisms, when alive they are brown in colour.
Several genera are animal like in morphology and mode of nutrition, some are colourless and saprophytic in nature.
Cells are without cell wall ovoid and dorsiventrally flattened.
The two flagella are apical and unequal in length.
The chloroplasts may be single or many in a cell.
In some cryptomonads there are two, large parietal choroplasts, or many disc like ones.
Pigments include chlorophyll a, c, phycocyanin, phycoerythrin,and diverse carotenoids.
Reserve photosynthate is starch.
Reproduction is by longitudinal division of the cell.
Palmelloid forms may produce zoospores.
Sexual reproduction has not been reported so far.
Examples : Crytomonas, Chroomonas.
3.2.9 Division BACILLAR1OPHYTA (Diatom) Mostly unicellular forms, some are colonial and filamentous in structure.
Cell wall is silicified, consisting of two perforated overlapping plates.
It is highly ornamented on the surface.
Chromatophores are brownish in colour due to large amount of carotenoids.
Diatoms (cut in half) each cell is made up of two parts.
The larger part fitting tighty over the slightly smaller part like a petridish (Fig.
2.9) Photosynthetic pigments are chlorophyll a and c, fucoxanthin, diatoxanthin and diadinoxanthin.
Common storage product is oil and chrysolaminarin.
Reproduction occurs by vegetative and sexual methods.
Diatom cells unlike other algae are diploid in nature.
Sexual fusion is homothallic, within the individuals of the same clone.
Two amoehoid gametes fuse to form a zygote which develops into an auxospore.
Fusion may be isogamous, anisogamous or oogamous type.
26 BIO 208 SEEDLESS PLANTS Diatoms are widely distributed in fresh water and sea as planktons, on mud surfaces, moist rocks, and sand.
They may even be epiphytic, epizoid or endozoid.
Large deposits of fossil diatom shells known as diatomaceous earth are mined and used in various industries.
Examples: Navicula, Cymbella, Coscinodiscus, Diatoma and Fragilaria.
At the end it has to be pointed out that classification of algae is tentative and can be improved by using new and advanced techniques like DNA fingerprinting which can clarify the genetic relatedness of organisms.
Fig.
2.9: Members of Divison Bacillariophyta.
Some diatoms as seen under scanning electron microscope (Courtesy of P. D. yanandan) 4.0 CONCLUSION Algae could be classified according to their common characters into 8 divisions of Kingdom Protista.
The relationship among different groups and differences was also discussed.
27 BIO 208 SEEDLESS PLANTS 5.0 SUMMARY In this unit you have learnt: • Algae have been grouped into two major types: prokaryotes and eukaryotes because of the basic differences in the ultrastructure of the cells.
• Cyanobacteria or blue-green algae although related to bacteria, are grouped with oilier algae because of the similarity in pigment composition and presence of oxygenic photosynthesis.
• Eukaryotic algae can be classified into 9 divisions each sharing a large number of common characters.
All photosynthetic algae have chlorophyll a and β-carotene, but other pigments may vary.
• Three divisions Cyanophyta, Rhodophyta and Cryptophyta have similar phycobilin pigments blue phycocyanin, and red phycoerythrin, otherwise they are unrelated in any of the other characters.
• Green algae (Division Chlorophyta) are unicellular, colonial and filamentous in forms, motile and free floating.
The photosynthetic pigments are chlorophyll a, b, β-carotene and xanthophylls.
Food is stored as starch.
Though euglenoids also contain chlorophyll a and b, but they are different from green algae.
• Brown algae (Division Phaeophyta) are mostly marine, large, complex usually multicellular and non-motile.
The chlorophylls are masked by brown pigment fucoxanthin.
Food is stored as oil and complex carbohydrate-laminarin.
The zoospores and gametes are motile.
• Red algae (Division Rhodophyta) are marine, multicellular and filamentous.
The chlorophylls are masked by phycobilins.
Food is stored as floredian starch.
There are no motile cells in the life cycle of the algae.
28 BIO 208 SEEDLESS PLANTS • Members of Xanthophyta, Chrysophyta, Dinophyta and Cryptophyta are mostly unicellular.
They contain chlorophyll a and c and are collectively called chromophytes.
• In Xanthophyta, Chrysophyta, Dinophyta the cell wall is made either of cellulose or is absent.
In Euglenophyta and Cryptophyta cell wall is absent.
6.0 TUTOR MARKED ASSIGNMENT 1) In the following statements fill in the blank spaces with appropriate words.
i) In cyanobacteria carbon in reserved as ………………………………… ii) The colour of red algae is due to ………………………………………… iii) The storage material in the algae of Division Phaeophyta is……….
iv) Sexual reproduction in Xanthophyta is ……………………………….
7.0 Reference/Further Reading Dutta, A.C. (1981).
Botany for degree students Academy Press U.K. IGNOU.
(2002).
Indira Gandhi National Open University.
Plant Diversity-Fungi.
29 BIO 208 SEEDLESS PLANTS Unit 3: REPRODUCTION AND LIFE CYCLE IN ALGAE 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objectives 3.0 Main Content 3.1 Types of Reproduction 3.1.1 Vegetative Reproduction 3.1.2 Asexual Reproduction 3.1.3 Sexual Reproduction 3.2 Reproduction and Life Cycle 3.2.1 Chlamydomonas 3.2.2 Ulothrix 3.2.3 Fucus 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutor Marked Assignment 7.0 References / Further Reading 1.
INTRODUCTION In unit you have learn that algae vary in size from small microscopic unicellular forms like chlamydomonas to large macroscopic multicellular forms like Polysiphonia.
The multicellular forms show great diversity in their organization and include filamentous, heterotrichous, thalloid and polysiphnoid forms.
In this unit we will discuss the types of reproduction and life cycle in algae taking suitable representative examples from various groups.
Algae show all the three types of reproduction vegetative, asexual and sexual.
Vegetative method solely depends on the capacity of bits of algae accidentally 30 BIO 208 SEEDLESS PLANTS broken to produce a new one by simple cell division.
Asexual methods on the other hand involve production of new type of cells, zoospores.
In sexual reproduction gametes are formed.
They fuse in pairs to form zygote.
Zygote may divide and produce a new thallus or it may secrete a thick wall to form a zygospore.
You will see that sexual reproduction in algae has many interesting features.
2.0 OBJECTIVES After studying this unit you should be able to: • describe with suitable examples the three types of reproduction vegetative, asexual and sexual in algae.
• distinguish the three types of union of gametes – isogamy, anisogamy and oogamy in algae.
• illustrate diagrammatically reproduction and life cycle in Chlamydomonas, Ulothrix, and Fucus describe their special features, • describe the four basic types of life cycle found in algae 3.0 MAIN CONTENT 3.1 TYPES OF REPRODUCTION Reproductive processes found in various groups of algae can be broadly divided into three types: vegetative, asexual and sexual methods.
3.1.1 Vegetative Reproduction The most common type of reproduction in algae is by binary fission.
In unicellular prokaryotic algae like Anacystis it is the only method of reproduction found in nature.
In filamentous and multicellular forms, 31 BIO 208 SEEDLESS PLANTS the algae may get broken accidentally into small pieces, -each developing into a new one.
The above methods of propagation are know as vegetative reproduction.
3.1.2 Asexual Reproduction When vegetative reproduction takes place through specialized cells (other than sex cells), it is descried as asexual reproduction.
Anabaena and Nostoc The cells accumulate food materials; develop thick walls to become spores or akinetes (Fig.
3.1).
Akinetes can withstand dryness (lack of water) and high temperature for a long time, but when conditions are suitable they germinate to form new filaments.
Akinete Fig.
3.1 : Anabaena showing akinetes.
Ulothrix Filamentous algae (like Ulothrix) may reproduce by producing motile cells called zoospores (Fig.
3.2).
The protoplast of a single cell divides many times by mitosis to produce several zoospores.
Fig.
3.2: Formation of zoospores in Ulothrix Each zoospore has 2-4 flagella with which it swims for sometime and then settles by its anterior end.
It subsequently divides into a lower 32 BIO 208 SEEDLESS PLANTS cell which becomes the holdfast and the upper cell which by further divisions becomes the vegetative filament.
Zoospores are produced in other algae also.
Asexual reproduction in other algae is described below.
Chlamydomonas Although this is a unicellular motile algae but it produces zoospores.
The parent cell divides inside the cell –envelop and each daughter cell develops two flagella each.
These zoospores look exactly like the parent cell except they are smaller in size.
When the zoospores are fully developed the parent cell wall dissolves, releasing them free into the surrounding water (Fig.3.3) Fig.
3.3 :Formation of zoospores and palmella stage in Chlamydomonas Sometimes when there is less water outside, zoospores may lose flagella and round up.
These non-motile spores are called aplanospores which develop into thick walled hypnospores.
On moist soil when zoospores can not be released due to lack of free water, they get embedded within a gelatinous material formed from parent cell wall.
Such cells do not have flagella but whenever they become flooded with water they develop flagella and swim away in the 33 BIO 208 SEEDLESS PLANTS water.
These gelatinous masses containing thousands of non-motile cells are known as palmella stage of Chlamydomonas.
Oedogonium Zoospores are produced singly in a cell.
Each has one nucleus and a crown of flagella at the apex.
Many zoospores are produced from a single cell, as in Ulothrix.
They have single nucleus and 2-4 flagella.
Ectocarpus Zoospores are produced in sporangia which are of following two types: I Plurilocular Sporangia: The sporangium is made up of many cells and several biflagellate zoospores are produced (Fig.
3.4).
II Unilocular Sporangia: The sporangium is made up of one cell which produces single biflagellate zoospore (Fig.
3.4) Fig.
3.4: Unilocular and Plurilocular sporangia of Ectocarpus 3.1.3 Sexual Reproduction Sexual reproduction in algae like in other organisms involves the fusion of two cells from opposite sex called gametes, resulting in the formation of a zygote.
Some basic features of this method of reproduction are as follows: 34 BIO 208 SEEDLESS PLANTS Gametes are always haploid and may or may not be different in morphology.
If both the sex cells look alike, they could be male called plus (+) or female called minus (-) mating types of strains.
Gametes can fuse only when one is plus and the other is minus.
Both of them + and – may be produced by a single parent.
This is called monoecious or homothallic condition.
When they come from different plus or minus thallus types it is called dioecious or heterothallic condition.
There are three types of gametic fusion (Fig.
3.5).
a. Isogamy: When both the gametes are of the same size and morphology.
b. Anisogamy: The two gametes are distinctly different in size or shape, the larger of the two is minus (female) type.
c. Oogamy: The female gamete, egg or ovum is big in size and has no flagella hence it is non-motile.
Male gametes are flagellated and highly motile.
They are also known as antherozoids, spermatozoids or sperms.
The male gametes are attracted by the female cells because of special hormones called gamones (a violatile hydrocarbon) produced by them.
Fusion of the gametes leads to the formation of a zygote.
If the conditions are unsuitable for growth, the zygote may develop a thick wall and become a resting zygospore.
Gametes being haploid, are produced by mitosis in a haploid thallus.
If the thallus is diploid as in Fucus the reproductive cells undergo meiosis or reduction division to form haploid gametes.
35 BIO 208 SEEDLESS PLANTS Fig.
3.5: Three types of gametic fusion-isogamy, anisogamy and oogamy.
In haploid thallus, after the fusion of gametes, the diploids zygote undergoes meiosis during germination.
However, in diploid algae a zygote may divide mitotically and give rise to a diploid thallus (Fucus).
Both haploid and diploid thallus are found in Ulva.
They look very similar in size and shape.
3.2 REPRODUCTION AND LIFE CYCLE We have given above the basic modes of reproduction in algae.
Now we take up some specific algal types to illustrate their life cycle in nature.
It is to be noted that the life cycle of an alga is very much controlled by environmental factors like temperature, light, seasons, and availability of nutrient, and also salinity, wave action and periodicity of tides in the case of marine forms.
Observations made by people during different times from various geographical locations and sometimes experimentally studied under controlled conditions, give us fairly comprehensive if not a complete picture of the life cycle of an alga.
3.2.1 Chlamydomonas Sexual reproduction in this alga shows all the three different types depending on the species (Fig.
3.6).
Isogamy is found in C. reinhardii, C. gynogama and C. media.
36 BIO 208 SEEDLESS PLANTS Fig.
3.6 :Sexual reproduction in Chlamydomonas: Isogamy, anisogamy and oogamy.
Isogamy is of two types: In clonal population (cells obtained by the repeated divisions of a single parent cell) fusion may take place between gametes which are homothallic or in self compatible strains.
For example, fusion occurs between any two cells of C. gynogama and C. media.
In C. moewusii and C. reinhardii fusion of gametes can take place only when they come from two different unrelated (heterothallic, self incompatible) strains.
In many isogamous species the parent cell may divide to produce 16 to 64 biflagellate gametes while in some the adult cells themselves may directly behave as gametes and fuse.
Anisogamous form of gametic fusion is found in C. braunii.
A female cell divides and produces four large cells.
Each of these cells have two flagella but are less active.
The male cells are about 8 in number but smaller in size.
37 BIO 208 SEEDLESS PLANTS Oogamy is the advanced type of sexual reproduction found in C. coccifera.
A parent cell discards its flagella and directly becomes a non- motile egg or ovum.
While male parent cell by repeated divisions produces sixteen male gametes.
These are biflagellate and highly motile.
The process of gametic attraction, fusion and related phenomena have been studied in some detail in the laboratory.
Under proper light condition and carbon dioxide concentration, production of gametes can be initiated by nitrogen starvation.
The formation of male or female gametes (even in the case of isogamy) is attributed to the varying concentration of gamones produced by them.
The attraction between gametes was found due to the presence of glycosidic mannose at the tips of the flagella of one strain which in a complementary way binds with the substance present in the flagella of the gamete of the opposite stain.
Once this sticking of the flagella of plus and minus gametes takes place, flagella twist about each other bringing the anterior ends of the gametes close.
This is followed by cellular and nuclear fusion.
The zygote secrets a thick wall and accumulates large amount of food materials like starch.
Lipids and orange – red pigments.
It is now known as zygospore which remains dormant till the environmental conditions are favourable for its germination It has been shown that during germination of zygospore meiosis takes place followed by mitosis resulting in haploid Chlamydomonas cells.
Life Cycle Chlamydomonas is unicellular, haploid and reproduces asexually many times by forming zoospores.
Under unfavourable environmental conditions it produces gametes which fuse to form diploid zygospore.
38 BIO 208 SEEDLESS PLANTS During germination reduction division takes place and haploid cells are formed (Fig.
3.7).
Chlamydomonas is of great interest to biologists.
Its study has brought to light several interesting features of biological importance, some of which are listed below.
i Presence of DNA in the chloroplasts of the alga ii Presence of cytoplasmic genes iii Production of genetic mutations – affecting nutrition, photosynthesis and production of mutants without flagella or cell wall.
iv Dicovery of gamones and their role in sexual reproduction.
v Presence of isogamy, anisogamy and oogamy in a single genus.
vi Control of reproduction by environmental conditions.
Fig.
3.7: Life cycle of Chlamydomonas Alternation of Generations The type of life cycle of an organism in which reproduction alternates with each generation between sexual reproduction and 39 BIO 208 SEEDLESS PLANTS asexual reproduction is called alternation of generations.
The two generations are termed as gametophytic and sporophytic generations.
The gametophytic generation is haploid(n) and the sporophytic generation is diploid(2n) The fusion of two gametes(n) results in zygote(2n) which on germination forms the plant / thallus called sporophyte.
The sporophyte in turn produces haploid spores by meiosis.
When a spore germinates it develops into gametophyte which bears male or female gametes or both on the same plant / thallus.
In some bryophytes the gametophytic generation is more conspicuous.
While in ferns the sporophytic generation is more prominent.
In angiosperms main plant body is sporophyte and the gametophytic generation is reduced to a few cells.
You will see that all type of situations prevail in algae.
In some algae gametophyte is prominent while in others sporophyte is prominent.
3.2.2 Ulothrix Sexual reproduction takes place by means of isogamous, biflagellate.
Fusion takes place only between plus and minus mating types.
The gametes are from different filaments (heterothallic).
The zygote develops a thick wall and remains dormant till the conditions are favourable for germination.
When conditions become favourable meiosis takes place and 4 – 16 haploid zoospores are produced which settle down and give rise to vegetative filaments (Fig.
3.8) 40 BIO 208 SEEDLESS PLANTS It has been found that Ulothrix produce gametes when grown under long day conditions while short day conditions initiate the formation of zoospores.
Life Cycle Look at Fig.
3.8 : showing the life cycle of Ulothrix.
Which is the diploid stage of the algae?
The thallus of Ulothrix is haploid and the diploid stage is represented by the zygote only.
We would like to draw your attention to the fact that in some species (U. speciosa, u. flcca and and in U. implexa) the zygote develops into an independent, unicellular, thallus which is diploid in nature.
It produces zoospores asexually by meiosis.
The zoospores develop into haploid filaments.
Thus in Ulothrix two types of life cycles can be distinguished: Haplobiontic: The thallus is haploid and only the zygote is diploid e.g.
U. zonata?
Diplobiontic: In diplobiontic cycle, the alga consists of a haploid thallus that produces gametes and a diploid unicellular stalked thallus which produces zoospores after meiotic division.
The two generations – haploid and diploid, alternate with each other.
(alternation of generations).
Because the two thalli are very different in size and morphology it is known as heteromorphic, diplobiontic life cycle.
41 BIO 208 SEEDLESS PLANTS Fig.
3.8: Life cycle of Ulothrix 3.2.3 Fucus uocus has advanced type of reproductive structure, termed as receptacles, which are swollen at the tips of branches (Fig.
3.9 A) Distributed over the surface of each receptacle are small pores, known as ostioles which lead into the cavities, called conceptacles (Fig.
3.9B).
Each conceptacle may produce only eggs, only sperms or as in some cases both.
A thallus may be unisexual – either having male receptacle or only female ones.
Fig.
3.9 :Fucus : A) Structure of thallus, B) Enlarged receptacle 42 BIO 208 SEEDLESS PLANTS At the base, inside the conceptacle is a fertile layer of cells which develops into oogonia (Fig.
3.10).
Each oogonium has a basal stalk cell and an upper cell which undergoes reduction division and produces eight haploid eggs (Fig.
3.10C and D).
These are liberated in the conceptacle (Fig.
3.10E).
Some of the cells inside the conceptacle produce unbranched multicellular hairs called paraphyses which emerge out of the ostiole as tufts.
Fig.
3.10: Fucus A) T. S. through female conceptacle showing oogonia, B) T. S. through male conceptacles showing antheridia, C) structure of an oogonium, D and E) formation and liberation of eggs.
Fig.
3.11: Formation and developmental stages of a zygote 43 BIO 208 SEEDLESS PLANTS Antheridia are produced on branched paraphyses inside the concptacle ( Fig.
3.10B).
Each antheridium is like a unicellular sporangium which divides meiotically and then by further divisions produced 64 haploid sperms.
The biflagellate sperm has a longer flagellum pointing backwards and a shorter one projecting towards the front.
It has a single chloroplast and a prominent orange eye spot The release of the gametes is connected with the sea tides.
At low tide, Fucus fronds shrink due to loss of water, and when such fronds are exposed to an on coming tide, the eggs and sperms are released into the surrounding sea water.
The egg of Fucus are known to attract sperms (Fig.
3.11 A and B) by secreting a gamone.
Immediately after fertilization a all is secreted around the zygote.
It has been shown that unfertilized eggs can develop into germlings parthenogenetically if treated with dilute acetic acid.
The diploid zygote germinates by producing a rhizoidal outgrowth on one side.
It is later cut by wall formation to form a lower rhizoidal cell and apical cell (Fig.
3.11 C) which by further divisions (Fig.
3.11 D and E) gives rise to the Fucus fronds.
4.0 CONCLUSION Reproduction in algae could be by vegetative method (binary fission), asexual through specialized cells or sexual by fusion of two cells from opposite sex called gametes.
The life cycles of Chlamydomonas, Ulothrix and Ficus were discussed.
There are other genera in this group.
It should be 44 BIO 208 SEEDLESS PLANTS noted that algae also exhibit alternation of generations in their life cycles.
5.0 SUMMARY • Reproduction in algae is by asexual and sexual methods.
• Asexual method involves fission of cells are regeneration of new ones • Sexual method involves fusion of male gamete and female gamete resulting in the formation of a zygote.
• The life cycle in algae demonstrates clearly a marked alternation of generations especially in the higher forms like Ulva, Laminaria and Ficus.
6.0 TUTOR MARKED ASSIGNMENT 1) Which of the following algae reproduce only by binary fission?
a. Volvox b. Chlamydomonas c. Anacystis d. Microcystis 2) In the following statements fill in the blank spaces with appropriate words: i ………………… is an enlarged cell in blue-green algae which accumulates food reserve, develops a thick wall and functions as a resting spore.
ii Under unfavourable conditions the zoospores lose their flagella and round up, they are called ……………… iii When a filamentous alga is accidently broken it develops into a ………………………... 45 BIO 208 SEEDLESS PLANTS iv The stage when thousands of zoospores of Chlamydomonas cluster together in a gelatinious mass is called …………………….. v When both plus (+) and minus (-) strains are produced by the same parent the condition is called ………………….
vi When two gametes (plus and minus) arise from different parent algae the condition is called ………………….. vii Fusion of gametes of same size and morphology is called ………………….. viii In anisogamy the two gametes are of ………………….. 7.0 REFERENCES Dutta A.C. (1981).
Botany for degree students.
Oxford University Press.
909p.
IGNOU.
(1991).
Indra Gandhi Nationl Open University.
Plant Diversity - Algae.
46 BIO 208 SEEDLESS PLANTS MODULE 2 UNIT 1: FUNGI MORPHOLOGY CONTENTS 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objectives 3.0 Main Content 3.1 Fungal Morphology 3.2 Unicellular Forms 3.3 Filamentous Forms 3.4 Pseudoparenchymatous Forms 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutor Marked Assignment 7.o References/Further Readings 1.0 INTRODUCTION You are probably familiar with yeast, bread mould, rust, smut and mushrooms.
They all are members of the fungal Kingdom.
Fungi exhibit a range of structures: unicellular, plasmodium like filamentous and pseudoparenchy -matous.
However, the different forms show common cellular, physiological and biochemical characteristics.
In this unit, you will study these forms in some detail.
2.O OBJECTIVES After studying this unit you should be able to: i. distinguish fungi from other groups of organisms on the basis of morphological features.
ii.
describe the range of morphological forms in fungi.
3.0 MAIN CONTENT 47 BIO 208 SEEDLESS PLANTS 3.1 FUNGAL MORPHOLOGY First have a good look at Fig.
1.1 showing some common but morphologically different fungi, The baker’s yeast is a unicellular fungus.
It is very minute in size and looks like a pinhead under the light microscope.
Most fungi are microscopic but several grow very large.
For example, mushrooms, motels and puffballs can be seen with unaided eyes.
Under the microscope, a slime mould looks like a protozoan with a naked amoeboid mass of protoplasm.
Bread mould (Mucor), pink mould (Neurospora) and green mould (Penicillium) show branched filaments.
Whereas mushrooms, morels and puffballs are the fruiting bodies formed by close packing of several interwoven filaments.
When conditions are suitable the fruiting bodies develop from the mycelium which otherwise grows beneath the surface of the ground.
A mushroom consists of an umbrella-like cap and a stalk or stipe.
Fig.
1.1: Some common fungi.
The reproductive structures in fungi are formed from vegetative structures and exhibit a variety of forms on the basis of which fungi are classified.
A few members of these divisions are listed below.
3.2 Unicellular Forms a) Yeast 48 BIO 208 SEEDLESS PLANTS The fungi are unicellular, often multicellular or acellular epkaryotic organisms.
The most common unicellular fungi are yeasts.
Which are of wide occurrence.
Yeast is found on the sticky sugary surface of ripe fruit and grows in any sugar solution.
The individual cells adhere to one another forming a chain.
Single Cells are hyaline but the colonies appear greenish or brownish in colour.
The fine structure of a yeast cell as shown in Fig.
1.2a, is of the eukaryotic type.
It has a well-defined nucleus, mitochondria, endoplasmic reticulum and other organelIes.
Close to the nucleus, a large area of cytoplasm is occupied by vacuole.
The cell wall of yeast has 2-3 layers made of chitin and polysaccharides - glucan and mannans, Depending upon the stage of development variable amounts of proteins, lipids and other substances are found accumulated in the cell.
Yeasts are distributed well over the surface of earth.
They are abundant on substrates that contain sugars, like the nectar of flowers and surface of fruits.
They are also found in soil, animal excreta, milk and on the vegetative parts of plants and also in some other habitats.
B A Olpidium in algal cell Saccharomyces Fig.1.2 A) The fine structure of yeast Saccharomyces B) Olpidium Yeasts are noted particularly for their ability to utilise carbohydrates, hence the name Saccharomycetes is applied to this group.
49 BIO 208 SEEDLESS PLANTS Another unicellular fungus is Olpidium (Fig.
1.2b), the simplest chytrid, which is a simple globular cell without branches.
b) Slime Moulds Unicellular forms are also seen in slime during a certain stage of their life cycle (Fig.1.3).
You must remember that slime moulds are not considered true fungi.
Their characteristics resemble both protozoa and fungi.
That is why it has been difficult to classify them.
These curious organism show unicellular (multinucleate) protozoan-like or multicellular fungus-like stages during the course of their life cycle.
Slime moulds are further classified as cellular slime moulds and plasmodial slime moulds.
c) Cellular type In the vegetative stage Dictyostelium discoideum, a cellular slime mould is small independent, uninucleate haploid cell called myxamoeba (Fig.1.3).
Like amoeba, it feeds on bacterial by phagocytosis and multiplies by binary fission.
Phagocytosis is the process in which a cell flows around particles in its surroundings and takes them into the cytoplasm.
At a later stage the individual myxamoebae come together and form a single multinucleate slug but the individual myxamoebae retain their intact cell membranes (Fig.
1.3).
This structure is called pseudoplasmodium.
In the reproductive stage, sporangia-bearing spores are formed like in true fungi (Fig.
1.3a to h).
each spore germinates to form an amoeba like structure (Fig.
1.3f).
50 BIO 208 SEEDLESS PLANTS Fig.
1.3: Life Cycle of a cellular slime mould, Dictyostelium discoideum d) Plasmodial Type In plasmodial slime moulds, for example Echinosteliurn minutum, in the vegetative stage, a large mass of multinucleate amoeboid cytoplasm with characteristic diploid nuclei is formed (Fig.
1.4).
But unlike cellular slime moulds, the individual cells are not delimited by cell membrane.
The cell wall is absent.
It feeds on encysted myxamoebae and bacteria and may spread over a large area.
The plasmodium does not have a definite size or shape.
It may be globose, flat and sheet-like spreading over a large area in the form of a very thin network (Fig.
1.4b).
When the plasmodium creeps over the surface of the substratum, it changes its shape accordingly and engulfs particles of food on its way.
Finally, it matures and changes into the fructification typical of the species (Fig.
1.4c and d).
The entire plasmodium takes part in the formation of fructifications, which bear spores resulting from meiosis.
The spores germinate to produce flagellated cells which develop into plasmodium (myxamoeba Fig.
1.4e to i).
51 BIO 208 SEEDLESS PLANTS Slime mould plasmodia are often brilliantly coloured ranging from colourless to shiny grey, black, violet, blue, green, yellow, orange and red.
The yellow and the white plasmodia are probably the most commonly encountered.
Colour changes have been observed to occur within a plasmodium under laboratory conditions.
Most slime moulds live in cool, shady, moist places in the woods, on decaying logs.
Dead leaves or other organic matter which holds abundant moisture.
Zygote (Karyogamy) Fig.1.4: Life cycle of a plasmodial slime mould, Echimosteliumminutum.
3.3 Filamentous Forms Most fungi are filamentous.
You may have noticed on a piece of stale bread a web of very fine and delicate threads.
These are formed when a fugal spore lands on the bread and germinates into a small tube-like outgrowth, which further grows as transparent, tubular filaments in all directions.
Each of these filaments is called hypha, the basic unit of fungal body.
The mass of interwoven hyphae constituting the body of a fungus is called mycelium (Fig.1.5) It may consist of highly dispersed hyphae, or it may be a cottony mass of hyphae.
The aerial hyphae that bear reproductive structures are called 52 BIO 208 SEEDLESS PLANTS reproductive hyphae.
The fugal mycelium has an enormous surface to volume ratio and is close to the food source.
This large surface-to- volume ratio is a marvellous adaptation for absorptive mode of nutrition.
The mycelium of fungi is covered with a cell wall made of chitin, a polysaccharide that is also found in the exoskeleton of insects and crustaceans However, in some fungi the cell wall contains cellulose and lignin- like substances.
The protoplasm of mycelium may be continuous throughout the mycelium so there will he several nuclei scattered throughout the cytoplasm.
This condition is termed as coenocytic (Fig.
1.5b), Such non- septate hyphae are observed in the members of the Division Zygomycetes e. g. Mucor and Rhizopus..
The septa or cross walls in the non-septate mycelia are formed only to cut off reproductive structuies or to seal off a damaged portion.
Such septa are solid plates without any pores.
The members of other classes of fungi like ‘Ascomycetes and Basidiomycetes e.g.
Aspergillus and Penicilliun develop internal cross walls i.e., septa, which divide the hyphae into segments.
The septa appear at regular intervals.
The segments may be uninucleate or multinucleate.
The septa, in these cases have perforations through which cytoplasmic strands including nuclei can migrate from one cell to the other (Fig.
1.5a).
The presence of septa gives mechanical support to the hyphae.
The reproductive structures are also separated from vegetative structures h septa but these are not perforated.
53 BIO 208 SEEDLESS PLANTS Fig.
1.5: Typical septate and non-septate hyphae of fungi.
In some groups of fungi the mycelium formed on germination of spores consists of uninucleate segments (monokaryotic) initially.
This is called primary mycelium.
Later when fusion occurs either between hyphal segments of the same mycelium or different mycelium, the segments contain two nuclei (dikaryotic).
This conversion is called dikaryotisation and the mycelium is called secondary mycelium.
This stage may last for a long period.
When this mycelium gets organised into a specialized structure, it is termed tertiary mycelium.
3.4 Pseudoparenchymatous Forms The fungus mycelium normally, as mentioned above, is a mass of loosely interwoven hyphae which form a network.
In some fungi the entire mycelium or its parts undergo various modifications.
The walls of the hyphae in the mass get fused and they lose their individuality.
As a result the hyphal mass, in cross section appears to he a continuous structure.
It resembles the parenchymatous tissue of higher plants, but it is not a true parenchyna as found in higher plants.
In fungi such a tissue is called plectenchyma.
Plectenchyma can further be differentiated into two types.
The plectenchyma with rounded fungal cells is called pseudoparenchyma and with less compacted elongated cells is called prosenchyma.
54 BIO 208 SEEDLESS PLANTS Often, the hyphae in many fungi aggregate and get organised into various structures that may be vegetative or reproductive in nature.
Some examples of such structures are stroma, sclerotium and rhizomorph (Fig.
1.6).
Stroma is an indefinte body formed in Daldinia.
It commonly develops reproductive structures Selerotia are tough and resting bodies.
These are formed in Clavicepssp.
The interior cells in the sclerotium are hyaline and stored with food and the outer cells are thick walled, black and crust-like.
In some fungi, hyphae lose individuality and form thick, dark brown, hard strands.
These are called rhizomorphs because they appear like roots.
In parasitic fungi the hyphae may enter the cell wall of the host and form haustoria for obtaining nourishment.
Rhizomorph Section through Structural detail of Stroma Stromatic tissues Sclerotium T. S. Of Sclerotium Fig.
1.6: Formation of various structures in fungi by aggregation of hyphae.
55 BIO 208 SEEDLESS PLANTS 4.0 CONCLUSION Fungi exhibit a range of structures from unicellular, plasmodium-like filamentous to pseudoparenchymatous.
Most fungi are multicellular and branched filaments.
The mycelium is the main part of fungal body and it may aggregate to produce stoma, sclerotia and rhizomorphs.
5.0 SUMMARY In this unit you have learnt that: i.
Fungi grow on variety of substrates that contain traces of organic compounds.
Some of the members can grow under extreme conditions of temperature and osmotic concentration of the solute.
ii.
Fungi show a range of morphological forms.
Unicellular fungi like yeast are rare.
Slime moulds are either unicellular or plasmodium like at a certain stage of the life cycle.
iii.
Most fungi are multicellular, branched filaments.
The mycelium is the main part of the fungal body.
The reproductive structures are born on the reproductive hyphae.
iv Various kinds of structures arise when the entire mycelium or its part aggregate and give rise to special structures such as stroma, sclerotia, rhizomorphs arid others.
6.0 Tutor Marked Assignment Indicate which of the following statements are true or false.
Write T for true or F for false; i) Fungi are achlorophyllous organisms.
ii) Fungi prefer acidic medium for growth.
iii) The cell wall of fungi belonging to the division Oomycota is made of chitin.
iv) Fungi can utilise organic substances.
56 BIO 208 SEEDLESS PLANTS v) Yeast cell is prokaryotic type.
vi) Most genera in fungi are multicellular and some are unicellular.
vii) In slime moulds the cell wall is absent 7.0 Reference/Further Reading 1.
Dutta: A. C. (1981).
Botany for degree students.
Oxford University Press 909p.
2.
IGNOU.
(1991).
Indra Gandhi National Open University.
Plant Diversity.
57 BIO 208 SEEDLESS PLANTS UNIT 2: LIFE CYCLES IN FUNGI CONTENTS 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objectives 3.0 Main Content 3.1 Types of Life cycles and alteration of generation s 3.1.2 Phytopthora 3.1.3 Rhizopus 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutor Marked Assignment 7.o References/Further Reading I.0 INTRODUCTION In the last units you learnt about the morphology of fungi.
In this unit we shall discuss a detailed study of reproduction and alternation of generations in Phytophthora and Rhizopus.
2.0 OBJECTIVES After studying the units you should be able to; i. describe reproduction processes in Phytopthora and Rhizopus ii.
illustrate the life cycles of Phytopthora and Rhizopus.
3.0 MAIN CONTENT 3.1 TYPES OF LIFE CYCLES AND ALTERNATION OF GENERATIONS 3.1.2 Phytophthora This fungus belongs to the Division Oomycota.
There are about 75 species in this genus, most of which live as parasites on flowering plants.
The species 58 BIO 208 SEEDLESS PLANTS Phytophthora infestans is of great economic importance.
It causes a serious potato disease called potato blight or late blight of potato.
Morphology The mycelium of Phytophthora is profusely branched and consists of aseptate, hyaline and coenocytic hyphae.
The hyphae ramify in the intercellular spaces of the host tissues.
The mycelium produces haustoria which penetrate the host cell wall and enter the cells to draw nourishment (Fig.
2.1a).
The haustoria may be simple or branched.
Phytophthora reproduces both asexually and sexually.
Asexua1 Reproduction In warm and humid weather it normally reproduces asexually.
During this stage a tuft of slender, branched hyphae usually arise from the internal mycelium.
They come out through the stomata or pierce through the epidermal cell on the lower surface of the leaf (Fig.
2.1b).
In tubers they come out through the injured portions of the skin.
These aerial hyphae are hyaline and branched.
They bear a sporangium at their tip.
You have learnt earlier that the hyphae-bearing sporagia or conidia are called sporangiophores or conidiophores respectively.
The sporangia are thin-walled, hyaline and lemon- shaped and have a beak-like projection or papilla at their tips.
The mature sporangia can easily be separated from the sporangiophore.
The sporangiophore is branched.
It bears nodular swellings which denote the point of detachment of sporangia.
Wind, rain drops or contact with neighbouring leaves detach and scatter the ripe sporangia on neighbouring potato plants.
They may fall on the ground and get spread into the soil.
The sporangia lose their viability if they fail to germinate within a few hours.
59 BIO 208 SEEDLESS PLANTS When the sporangia fall on the leaf of a host plant, they germinate.
Moisture and temperature are the determinants for germination.
In the presence of water and low temperatures (upto 12°C) the sporangiun behaves as a zoosporangium.
The protoplast divides into 5-8 uninucleated daughter protoplasts which transform into zoospores.
Fig.
2.1: Phytophthora infestans; a) Intercellular mycelium forming hapstoria, b) Soranglophores coming out of stoma bearing sporangia c) flagellared zoospores.
The zoospores are uniform and biflagellate (Fig.
2.1c) of the two flagella one is of the whiplash type and the other is of the tinsel type.
The zoospores are set free through the apical papilla into a vesicle in some species.
The vesicle soon bursts open to liberate the zoospores.
The liberated zoospores swim for some time, and later settle on a substratum losing the flagella and germinate.
During germination, the zoospore puts out a short hypha called appressorium.
The appressoria help to fix the fungus on the surface of the host leaf.
From the appresorium, a narrow, peg- like infection hypha develops which forces its way into the host leaf.
60 BIO 208 SEEDLESS PLANTS At temperature up to 24°C, and low relative humidity the sporangium germinates directly behaving like a conidium.
It germinates producing a germ tube or a short hypha, which enters into the host leaf.
The sporangia, which are washed into the soil, germinate and infect the tubers.
As a result the tubers rot by harvest time or during storage.
Under favourable conditions a number of asexual generations may be produced in one growing season.
This results in rapid propagation of the fungus to spread the disease.
Sexual Reproduction Sexual reproduction is of the oogamous type.
The male sex organs are antheridia and the female oogonia.
They arise at the tips of short lateral branches as antheridial and cogonial initials respectively (Fig.
2.2a).
Phytophthora infestans is heterothallic.
The antheridium is a club-shaped structure with one or two nuclei to begin with.
Later the nuclei divide and produce about 12 nuclei (Fig.2.2b).
At the time of the fertilization only one functional nucleus persists and the others degenerate.
The oogonium develops on a neighbouring hypha of the antheridial branch.
It grows across the antheridium and swells to form a pear-shaped or spherical structure (Fig.2.2 c).
It contains dense cytoplasm and many nuclei (about 40).The protoplast of the oogonium becomes differentiated into an outer multinucleate periplasm and a central uninucleate ooplasm.
The central nucleus divides into two and one of them disappears.
The surviving nucleus functions as the egg nucleus.
The nuclei of the periplasm later degenerate.
The oogonial wall bulges out at a certain point to make a receptive spot .
The oogonial wall disintegrates at this spot.
Through this opening the antheridium pushes a short fertiIization tube (Fig 2.2e).
The fertilization tube penetrates the periplasm and reaches the ooplasm.
Here it opens and delivers the male nucleus along with the surrounding cytoplasm.
The male and female nuclei fuse, thus bringing out fertilization (Fig.
2.2f) 61 BIO 208 SEEDLESS PLANTS Antheridial initial Antheridia Oogonia Oogonial initial b c a Periplasm Ooplasm f d e Oospore Fig.
2.2: Stages of sexual reproduction in Phytophthora infestans The fertilized egg secretes a thick wall around itself and becomes the oospore.
When the conditions are favourable the oospore germinates.
It is believed that meiosis takes place during germination.
The germination of oospore takes place after the decay of the host tissue.
A germ tube develops from the oospore and may directly develop into a mycelium or oospore may bear a terminal sporangium.
Inside the sporangium zoospores are produced which after liberation develop into new mycelia.
ln the life cycle of Phytophthora there is an asexual cycle which may repeat during favourable conditions.
The sexual cycle takes place prior to the onset of unfavourable conditions forming a resting spore.
These cycles normally alternate with each other.
3.1.3 Rhizopus Rhizopus isa member of Division Zygomycota.
It is commoly called bread mould since it is frequently found growing on stale bread.
It is a saprophytic fungus.
It also grows on decaying fruits, vegetables and other food materials.
Rhizopus stolonifer sometimes grows as a facultative parasite on strawberries causing a transit disease called ‘leak’ and also causes ‘soft rot’ disease of sweet potatoes, yam and cassava tubers.
62 BIO 208 SEEDLESS PLANTS The mycelium is a white cotton-like fluffy mass with numerous, slender, branched hyphae.
The mycelium has three types of hyphae: i) rhizoidal ii) stolons and iii) sporangiophores (Fig, 2.3).
The rhizoidal hyphae are a cluster of brown, slender and branched rooting hyphae which arise from the lower surface of the stolon at certain points which are the apparent nodal points.
These hyphae help in anchorage and in the absorption of water and nourishment from the substratum.
The aerial hyphae which grow horizontally over the surface of the substratum are called stolons.
These hyphae are comparatively large, and slightly arched.
The stolons grow rapidly in all directions, completely filling the surface of the substratum.
The third kind of hyphae called sporangiophores develop during the reproductive phase.
The sporangiophores arise from the apparent nodal regions, opposite to the rhizoidal hyphae in a cluster.
They grow vertically bearing sporangia at their tips.
Asexual Reproduction Rhizopus reproduces asexually by multinucleate, non-motile spores which are produced in small, round, black sporangia.
The sporangia are borne terminally, and singly on unbranched sporangiophores (Fig 2.3b).
A mature sporangium is differentiated into two regions, a central less dense, vacuolated region with fewer’ nuclei called columella and a peripheral dense region with many nuclei called sporoferous region.
The protoplast in the columella is continuous with that of the sporangiophore.
The sporeferous region undergoes cleavage to form a number of muItinucleate segment.
These segments round off and secrete walls around them to become sporangiospores.
These are unicellular, multinucleate, non-motile aplanospores, globose or oval in shape (Fig.
2.3c).
As the spores mature the 63 BIO 208 SEEDLESS PLANTS sporangium bursts open liberating the spore mass (Fig.
2.3d and e).
A part of the wall remains as a collar-like fringe at the base of the sporangium.
The spores are dispersed away by the wind.
Falling on a suitable substratum, under suitable conditions a spore germinates producing a short germ tube which grows further and branches profusely to produce three types of hypae.
Sporangiosphores Feeding Rhizoidal a mycelium hyphae Sporangia Spores Columella c Spores Columella Sporangiophores d Spores Columella Rhizoids b e Fig.2.3: Rhizopus stolonifer a) three kinds of hyhae of the mycelium, b) sporangiophores developing at the point of rhizoidal hyhae, c) structure of the sporangium in detail, d) invaginated columella, e) dehiscence of the spores.
Under unfavourable conditions Rhizopus produces chlamydospores.
As you learnt they are thick-walled spores with accumulated reserve food.
They are produced intercalarily.
They help to tide over unfavourable conditions during which time the mycelium perishes.
With the return of favourable conditions they germinate and produce normal mycelium.
64 BIO 208 SEEDLESS PLANTS Sexual Reproduction Towards the end of the growing season Rhizopus reproduces sexually.
Sexual reproduction is of the conjugation type.
Here the two gametangia fuse.
You learnt above that such a union of protoplasts is called gametangial copulation.
Some species of Rhizopus are homothallic while others are heterothallic.
In heterothallic species the mycelia belong to two mating types or strains one plus and the other minus.
Promycelium Germinating zygospore Zygophores a g Spores Progametangia Zygosorangium b Columella Formation of cross walls Germinating c zygospore Gametangia Suspensor Suspensor h Aplanogamete Meiosis d Fusion cell e Germinating spore j Zygospores f Fig.
2.4: Stages of sexual reproduction in Rhizopus stolonifer During sexual reproduction the hyphae of the two mating types (+ and—) called zygophores are attracted towards each other (Fig.2.4a).
They produce copulating branches called progametangia which meet at their tips (Fig.
2.4b).
The tips of the progametangia enlarge due to accumulation of cytoplasm and nuclei, and are cut off from the basal portion by cross walls (fig 2.4c).
The 65 BIO 208 SEEDLESS PLANTS terminal portion is call suspensor.
The entire gametangium transforms into an aplanogamete (Fig.
2.4d).
The two gametangia may be of the same size or one of them slightly smaller than the other.
When the gametangia mature the intervening, waIls dissolve and the two gametes and their nuclei fuse producing a zygospore (fig.
2.4e and f).
The zygospore increases in size and secretes a thick two layered wall around it.
The outer layer is dark and warty.
It is called extine or exospore.
The inner layer is thick and is called intine or endospore.
As the zygospore increases in size, the wall of the fusion cell containing the zygospore ruptures and it is set free.
Prior to germination of the zygospore, the diploid nuclei divide meiotically producing numerous haploid nuclei.
During meiosis segregation of strains takes place.
The zygospore during germination absorbs water and swells.
As a result the outer wall extine breaks open.
The inner wall intine with the inner contents grows out as a germ tube or promycelium (Fig 2.4g).
The promyceliurn is of limited growth and produces a terminal sporangium.
It is called zygosporangium or germ sporangium (Fig 2.4h).
Inside the sporangium numerous, non-motile germ spores called meiospores are produced.
They are liberated at maturity which develop into new mycelia (Fig 2.4i and j).
The life cycle of Rhizopus consists of two phases, asexual and sexual.
The asexual phase consists of myelium, sporangiophores, sporangia and the sporangiospores.
This phase in the life cycle serves to propagate the haploid phase of the fungus during favourable conditions.
The sexual phase, consists of mycelia of the plus and minus strains, the progametangia, gametangia, aplanogametes, zygospore, promycelium, germ sporangium and the germ spores.
Among these, the zygospore is the only diploid structure.
All others are hapoid.
Such a sexual cycle is called haplontic characterized by zygotic meiosis and haploid mycelium as the only adult fungi 66 BIO 208 SEEDLESS PLANTS Rhizopus exhibits heterothallism wherein the mycelia of a single species are morphologically similar but physiologically different.
There is no apparent distinction between male and female mycelia except in their sexual behaviour.
Such a distinction is designated by the terms plus and minus.
This was first discovered by Blakeslee in 1904.
This is the first indication of the origin of dioecious condition of sexual phase in an organism.
4.0 CONCLUSION Reproduction in fungi occurs by vegetative asexual and sexual methods.
Vegetative reproduction occurs by budding, fission, framentation, formation of oidia and rhizomorphs.
Asexual reproduction occurs more frequently.
Sexual reproduction involves plasmogamy, karyogamy and meiosis.
Phytophthora infestans and Rhizopus are some of the examples of fungi treated in this unit.
5.0 SUMMARY In this unit you have learnt that; i. Phytophthora infestans causes serious potato disease.
The coenocytic hyphae ramify in the host tissue and draw nutrition through haustoria.
Asexual reproduction takes place by the formation of sporangia.
Depending upon the condition of temperature and humidity the sporangia may produce zoospores or germinate directly.
Sexual reproduction is of oogamous type.
ii.
In Rhizopus the mycelium has rhizoidal hyphae, stolons and the hyphae- bearing sporangiophores.
The sporangiophores bear non-motile aplanospores, the asexual reproductive bodies.
Sexual reproduction occurs by the fusion of gametangia of opposite strains forming zygosporangia which bear numerous non-motile zygospores.
67 BIO 208 SEEDLESS PLANTS 6.0 Tutor Marked Assignment a.
How many types of sexual reproduction are found in fungi?
List them.
b.
What are Sclerotia?
7.0 Reference/Further Reading Dutta, A.C. (1981).
Botany for degree students Academy Press U.K. IGNOU.
(2002).
Indra Gandhi National Open University.
Plant Diversity-Fungi.
68 BIO 208 SEEDLESS PLANTS UNIT 3 :REPRODUCTION IN FUNGI CONTENTS 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objectives 3.0 Main Content 3.1 Types of Reproduction 3.1.1 Vegetable reproduction 3.1.2 Asexual reproduction 3.1.3 Sexual reproduction 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutor Marked Assignment 7.o References/Further Reading I.0 INTRODUCTION In the previous unit you learnt about fungal morphology.
In this unit we will discuss the process of reproduction in fungi.
Like algae, reproduction in fungi occurs by vegetative, asexual and sexual methods.
In the following account we will describe the various types .of production in fungi with suitable examples.
2.0 OBJECTIVES After studying this unit you should be able to: i. describe the types of reproduction in fungi.
ii.
distinguish between vegetative and asexual methods of reproduction, iii.
describe plasmogamy in details.
iv.
describe the phases of sexual reproduction in fungi.
3.0 MAIN CONTENT 3.1 TYPES OF REPRODUCTION In the previous unit you have learnt that a fungus hypha elongates by apical growth, but most parts of a fungus are potentially capable of growth.
When the 69 BIO 208 SEEDLESS PLANTS mycelium of a fungus reaches a certain stage of maturity and accumulates reserve food, it starts reproducing.
As in algae, reproduction in fungi is of three kinds: i) vegetative, ii) asexual and iii) sexual Fission Budding a b Chlamydospore Ooidia c d Fig.3.1:Vegetative reproduction in fungi Vegetative (Fig.
3.1)and asexual methods of reproduction which do not involve the fusion of nuclei or sex cells or sex organs are, however, clubbed by many mycologists into asexual methods of reproduction.
Thus, they recognise only two methods, asexual and sexual.
3.1.2 Asexual Reproduction In fungi, asexual reproduction is a more common method than sexual reproduction.
It is usually repeated several times in a season.
It takes place by the formation of special reproductive cell called spores.
The formation of spores in fungi is called sporulation.
Each spore develops into a new mycelium.
These spores are produced as a result of mitosis in the parent cell and hence they are also called mitospores.
The spores vary in colour, shape and size, number, arrangement on hyphae and in the way in which they are 70 BIO 208 SEEDLESS PLANTS borne.
They may be hyaline, green, yellow, orange, red, brown to black in colour and are minute to large in size.
In shape they vary from globose to oval, oblong, needle-shaped to helical.
Thus an infinite variety of spores can be observed in fungi (Fig.3.2) and you will find them very fascinating under the microscope.
Fig.
3.2 Variety of spores in fungi Usually the spores are unicellular.
They may be uninucleate or multinucleate.
In some fungi like Alternaria and Curvularia they are multicellular.
The mitospores produced in fungi are of two types, sporangiospores and conidia.
The sporangiospores are produced inside a sac-like structure called sporangium.
The hypha bearing a sporangium is called sporangiophore (Fig.3.3a).
They are characteristically branched.
The sporangiospores may be motile or non-motile.
The non-motile sporangiospores are called aplanospores- from Greek a, not + planets wanderer + spores seed, spore (Fig.
3.3a).
These are characteristic of terrestrial species like Mucor and Rhizopus.
In aquatic fungi like Pythium of’ the Division Oomycota motile biflagellate sporangiospores are produced.
These are called zoospores and the sporangium bearing them is called zoosporangium (Fig.3.3b and c).
A zoospore is a motile spore lacking a cell wall.
After a swarming period it secretes a wall and germinates to form a germ tube.
In contrast to zoospores, the aplanospores have a definite spore wall and are dispersed by wind and insects.
71 BIO 208 SEEDLESS PLANTS The conidia are non-motile, deciduous mitospores formed externally as single separate cells.
They develop either directly on the mycelium or on morphologically differentiated hyphae called conidiophores (Fig.3.3d).
The conidiophores may be simple or branched, septate or aseptate.
The conidia are produced singly e.g., Phytophthora or in chains at the tips of the conidiophores e.g.
Aspergillus (Fig.3.3d) or at the tips of their branches e.g., Penicillium (Fig.3.3e).
Often the conidiophores arise singly and are scattered in the mycelium.
Sometimes they arise in specialised structures called fruiting bodies.
According to their appearance they are termed as synnema, sporodochia, acervuli (sucer-shaped), pycnidia (flask-shaped, globular) or pustules.
These are shown in Fig.3.4 Aplanospores Sporangium Zoospores Zoosporangium Sporangiophore Sprangiosphore b a Zoospores Conidia Sterigma Zoosporangium c d Conidia Secondary sterigma Primary sterigma Vesicle Sterigmata Conidiophore e Fig.3.3: Formation of sporangiospores and conidia in fungi: sporangia containing (a) aplanospores, (b) and (c) zoospores (d) conidiophores showing conidia on branches and (e) conidophores bearing conidial chains on branches.
72 BIO 208 SEEDLESS PLANTS Fig.
3.4: Various types of fruiting bodies in fungi.
3.1.3 Sexual Reproduction The sexual stage in fungi is called the perfect state in contrast to the imperfect state which is the asexual stage.
Sexual reproduction involves the fusion of two compatible sex cells or gametes of opposite strains.
Fungal sex organs are called gametangia.
They may be equal in size.
In many higher ascomycetes morphologically different gametangia are formed.
The male garnetangia are called antheridia and the female ones ascogonia.
The fungus may be homothallic, that is, the fusing gametes come from the same mycelium or may be heterothallic, that is, the fusing gametes come from different strains of mycelia.
In fungi, sexuaI reproduction involves the following three phases: i) plasmogamy, ii) karyogamy and iii) meiosis (Fig.3.5).
These three processes occur in a regular sequence and at a specific time, during the sexual stage of each species.
i. Plasmogamy: It is the union of protoplasts of reproductive hyphae or cells, one from the male and the other from the female to bring about the 73 BIO 208 SEEDLESS PLANTS nuclei of the two parents close together as a pair.
However, the two nuclei do not fuse with each other.
Such a cell is called a dikaryon.
The dikaryotic condition is unique to fungi and may continue for several generations as the two nuclei (dikaryon) divide simultaneously during cell division.
These are passed on to the daughter hypha.
ii.
Karyogamy: The fusion of the two nuclei which takes place in the next phase is called karyogamy.
It may immediately follow plasmogamy as in lower fungi, or it may be delayed for a long time as in higher fungi.
iii.
Meiosis: Karyogamy which eventually occurs in all sexually reproducing fungi is sooner or later followed by meiosis producing four genetically different spores.
We will now discuss plasmogamy in detail.
There are different methods of plasmogamy in fungi.
Haploids Haploid spores Fig.3.5: Three phases of sexual cycle in fungi i) Planogametic copulation: It involves fusion of two gametes.
Like in algae sexual union in fungi may be isogamous, anisogamous or oogamous (Fig.3.6a ).
Anisogamy and oogamy are together called heterogamous sexual reproduction.
Isogamy is the simplest type of sexual reproduction, where the fusing gametes are morphologically similar e.g.
Olpidium and Catenaria.
Anisogamy, where the fusing gametes are dissimilar is found in one genus, Allomyces, a chitrid.
In oogamy as you may recall the motile antherozoid enters oogonium and unites with egg or oosphere forming a zygote.
Oogamy is seen in fungi like Pythium and Albugo.
74 BIO 208 SEEDLESS PLANTS Fig.
3.6: Different ways of plasmogamy in fungi ii) Gametangial copulation : The two gametangia make contact and the entire contents of the two fuse together and become one e. g., Mucor and Rhizopus.
In some fungi the entire protoplast of one gametangia flows into the other through a pore (Fig.
3.6b).
Among the two, the recipient is the female and the donor is the male.
75 BIO 208 SEEDLESS PLANTS iii) Gametangial contact The male gamete is not a separate entity but the nucleus in the antheridium represents the gamete.
As you can see in the Fig.
the oogonium and antherididm form a contact through a tube and one or more nuclei inside the antheridium migrate into the oogonium.
You may note that in this case the two gametangia do not fuse.
It is observed in Penicillium (Fig.3.6c).
iv) Spermatization This mode is quite remarkable as the minute conidia like gametes called spermatia are produced externally on special hyphae called spermatiophore (Fig.
3.6d).
Spermatia may develop inside the cavities called spermatogonia.
The female cell may be a gametangium, a specialised receptive hypha or even a vegetative hypha.
v) Somatogamy: In higher fungi like Ascomycetes and Basidiomycetes there is a progressive degeneration of sexuality.
The entire process is very much simplified by the fusion of two mycelia which belong to opposite strains (Fig.
3.6e).
The post-fertlization changes result in the production of a fruiting body which is called ascocarp in Ascomycetes and basidiocarp in Basidiomycetes.
The gametangial fusion followed by the fusion of male and female nuclei results in diploid nuclei.
Subsequently, reduction division occurs and haploid spores are formed.
In fungi, the spores may be formed in specialised structures characteristic of a division.
In Ascornycetes the spores called ascospores are formed within the ascus (plur.
Asci, Fig.3.7).
The asci reside enclosed within the fruiting body- the ascocarp.
According to the characteristics, the ascocarps are distinguished as cleistothecium (indehiscent) apothecium, (cup or saucer shaped), perithecium (flask-shaped) and pseudoperithecium.
76 BIO 208 SEEDLESS PLANTS In basidiomycetes, sexual spores are termed basidiospores which develop on club- shaped structure, called basidium.
Fig.
3.7: a to f) Stages of sexual reproduction in Penicillium; a to c) development of sex organs, antheridia and ascogonia, c and f) stages in plasmogamy, g and h) ascocarp-cleistothecium formed when surrounding hyphae enclose a number of asci, i) apothecium of Ascobolus sp j) perithecium, k) an immature pseudothecium of Leptosphaera.
4.0 CONCLUSION Fungi reproduce when the mycelium reaches a certain stage of maturity.
Phytophthora.
Intestans the crusal organism for potato blight or late blight of potato reproduces sexually and asexually.
Both the asexual and sexual phases alternate with each other depending on how favourable the weather condition is.
Rhizopus, also a parasite, have a similar life cycle like Phytophthora 77 BIO 208 SEEDLESS PLANTS 5.0 SUMMARY In this unit you have learnt that; i.
Fungi reproduce by vegetative, asexual and sexual methods.
ii.
Vegetative reproduction takes place by fission, budding, fragmentation.
iii.
Asexual reproduction occurs more frequently then sexual method.
The sporangiophores or conidiophores formed bear spores and conidia respectively.
iv.
In sexual reproduction, depending upon the species the entire thallus or a portion of it may take part in the formation of reproductive bodies.
6.0 Tutor Marked Assignment a.
List the main types of reproduction in fungi.
b.
List the types of plasmogamy in fungi.
7.0 Reference/Further Reading Dutta, A.C. (1981).
Botany for degree students.
Oxford University Press.
909 p. IGNOU.
(1991).
Indra Gandhi National Open University .
Plant Diversity 1.
78 BIO 208 SEEDLESS PLANTS MODULE 3 UNIT 1: MORPHOLOGY, LIFE CYCLE AND CLASSIFICATION OF BRYOPHYTES CONTENTS 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objectives 3.0 Main Content 3.1 General Characteristics 3.2 Life Cycle / Adaptation to land 3.3 Morphology Classification of Bryophytes 3.2.1 Hepaticopsida Riccia Marchantia 3.3.2 Anthocerotopsida Anthoceros 3.3.3 Bryopsida Sphagnum Funaria 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutor Marked Assignment 7.o References/Further Reading 1.0 INTRODUCTION In the previous units, you have studied about algae in general.
In this unit, you will learn about the Bryophytes.
Bryophytes are considered to be the first land plants among embryophytes.
Exactly how this happened is not clear because the fossil records are not 79 BIO 208 SEEDLESS PLANTS complete.
When there was a shift from aquatic mode of life to land habit the species had to face many challenges.
How could water and minerals be taken from the soil and transported to parts that are not in contact with soil?
How could the soft bodies keep from drying out?
To meet these challenges there was a need to develop certain structural modifications.
The land plants belonging to various groups have continued to exist approximately from the Devonian period.
This demonstrates that they are well adapted to their particular niche on land.
It is the nature of these adaptations that is of interest to us in this unit.
In this unit we will deal with the characteristic features of each group and describe a few genera belonging to these groups.
You will study how these genera differ from each other and also from the majority of flowering plants which are so commonly growing around you.
2.0 OBJECTIVES After studying this unit, you should be able to: • describe the general characteristics of bryophytes, • give reasons why algae are considered to be ancestors of the first land plants, • classify the bryophytes • describe the reproduction and life cycle of bryophytes, • describe the morphology of some members of the group.
3.0 MAIN CONTENT 3.1 GENERAL CHARACTERISTICS AND LIFE CYCLE The Division Bryophyta includes the simplest and the most primitive members of land plants that lack roots, and do not have a vascular system.
There are some mosses that have a primitive system of tubes that conduct-water and 80 BIO 208 SEEDLESS PLANTS food.
The water-conducting tubes are called hydroids.
They have elongated, thick, dead cell.
But they are not lignified like tracheids and vessels.
The food- conducting tubes are called leptoids, and they are connected through plasmodesmata.
A single plant is very small, hardly a few cm in size.
It seldom grows large because of lack of supporting tissues.
Thousands of tiny moss plants often grow together and given thick, green carpet-like appearance.
The morphology of some common bryophytes is given in (Fig.1.1).
Have a good look at them.
Can you recall seeing any in their natural habitats?
Bryophytes show two distinct and well defined phases of life cycle, sexual and asexual, which follow each other.
The gametophyte is haploid and produces gametes.
The sporophyte is diploid and produces spores.
The haploid generation alternates with diploid .generation (recall alternation of generations in algae).
Both the gametophyte and sporophyte may be several centimetres in length but the gametophyte is the long-lived phase of life cycle.
You may note that in other land plants the sporophyte is the dominant generation.
The gametophyte may be thalloid (Fig.
1.1 A, B and D) or has an axis differentiated into stem-like and leaf-like structures (Fig.
1.1C, E and F) which lack xylem and phloem.
You may note that these leaf-like structures are part of gametophyte, whereas in vascular plants the leaves strictly develop on sporophyte.
The gametophyte is green, photosynthetic and nutritionally independent, and anchors to the soil by unicellular or multicellular filaments called rhizoids.
Rhizoids appear like roots but unlike roots they lack vascular tissues and are much simpler in structure.
Now try to list a few points that distinguish bryophytes from algae.
Bryophytes are most abundant in moist tropical areas.
But they also grow in deserts, mountains and are observed in parts of Antarctica.
In dry areas their 81 BIO 208 SEEDLESS PLANTS growth and activity is restricted to wet seasons only.
Some mosses grow in fresh water streams but they are not found in sea flora.
3.2 Life Cycle We are illustrating here the life cycle of bryophytes taking Funaria as an example.
The gametophyte of Funaria (Fig.
1.2 A) bears two types of specialised multicellular reproductive organs (Fig.1.2B and C) called the gametangia (gamete holders) which protect egg and sperm during the development.
The male gametangia, called antheridia (sing, antheridium, Fig.1.2B), produce sperms.
The female gametangia, called archegonia (sing, archegonium, Fig.1.2C), produce eggs.
The gametangiá have outer sterile layer of cells forming protective jacket.
Fig.
:1.1: Morphology of bryophytes : A and B) thalloid liverworts - Riccia and Marchanlia, C) a leafy Liverwort - Porella,, D) a hornwort - Anthoceros, E and F) mosses - Sphagnum and Funaria.
Bryophytes are oogamous i.e.
the egg is larger, nonflagellated and non-motile, and the sperm is smaller and motile.
82 BIO 208 SEEDLESS PLANTS What types of sexual reproduction occurs in algae?
You may recall that besides oogamy some algae show isogamy and anisogamy.
After fertilisation (Fig.1.2D), the sporophyte starts developing inside the archegonium (Fig.1.2E).
It may grow several centimetres in length, become photosynthetically sufficient but it draws minerals and water from gametophyte.
However, in contrast to the sporophyte of all other land plants it never becomes independent of gametophyte.
It remains permanently attached to it, until maturity and senescence.
It is wholly or partially dependent on it for nutrition.
Mature sporophyte is differentiated into a haustorial foot, a stem- like seta and a terminal spore producing capsule (Fig.
1.2F).
In Riccia both foot and seta are absent.
While in others like Sphagnum seta is absent.
Within the capsule spores are produced by reduction division of spore mother cells.
Fig.
1.2: Lifecycle of bryophytes: A) a moss plant, B) enlarged antherdiurn, C) enlarged archegonium D) formation of zygote in the archegonium, E) developing sporophyte, F) sporophyte growing on gametophyte, G) a capsule, H) a spore, I) germinating spore, J) growing protonema.
The bryophytes are homosporous i.e.
spores of any given species are all alike.
Which some pteridophytes are heterosporous (they produce two types of spores - microspores a megaspores).
83 BIO 208 SEEDLESS PLANTS A spore represents the first stage of gametophytic generation (Fig.
1.2H).
It is unicellular haploid and germinates (Fig.1.2H,I) to produce a short-lived green protonema (Fig.1.2j) The adult gametophore develops on this protonema.
Protonema may be thalloid, globular or filamentous.
The protonema and the adult gametophore are strikingly different from each other.
An adult gametophyte bears gametangia which produce haploid male and female gametes.
The gametes represent the last stage of gametophytic generation and the zygote represents the first stage of sporophytic generation, whereas the spore mother cells (diploid) represent the last.
The spore mother cells undergo reduction division to form haploid spores.
So, any stage in the life cycle which is haploid, belongs to gametophytic generation, whereas the diploid stage belong to sporophytic generation.
Now let us sum up the distinguishing features of bryophytes.
1.
They lack vascular system.
In some of the mosses a primitive conducting system is present that transports food and water.
2.
The gametophyte is dominant generation and sporophyte remains attached to it.
In other land plants the sporophyte is dominant and independent There are strong reasons to believe that green algae served as ancestors of bryophytes.
The move from water to land offers an organism some distinct competitive advantages as well as challenges.
What could be the advantages of the terrestrial habitat over the aquatic?
Some of the advantages are as follows: i) greater availability of sunlight for photosynthesis, ii) increased level of carbon dioxide, and 84 BIO 208 SEEDLESS PLANTS iii) decreased vulnerability to predation.
If some more points cross your mind, add to this list.
Can you now think what are the challenges of land environment?
Try to list them below.
Compare your points with the following: 1.
Plants on land are exposed to direct sunlight and air.
Hence there is danger of drying out or desiccation because of evaporation.
Gametes and zygotes are also susceptible to desiccation.
2.
The aquatic plants are supported by the buoyancy of water, but on land, plants need some anchor to fix to the ground and also require support to stand erect.
3.
Absorption of minerals and water, and their transportation to the parts which are not in contact with soil.
In other words, land plants need supply lines for the distribution of water and nutrients.
4.
Effective dispersal of spores at right time and at right place for the survival of progeny, with the help of hygroscopic structures like elaters and peristome teeth.
3.3 MORPHOLOGY OF BRYOPHYTES So far you have studied the general characteristics of bryophytes.
You may recall that the Division Bryophyla is divided into three classes (a) Hepaticopsida (liverworts) (b) Anthocerotopsida (hornworts) and (c) Bryopsida (mosses).
Let us now study the representative genera from each class.
3.3.1 Hepaticopsida The gametophyte of liverworts usually lies close to the ground.
There are two forms of liverworts.
In some, the gametophyte is dorsi-ventral, thalloid in form with obvious upper and lower surfaces.
These are thalloid liverworts.
While in others it is differentiated into leaf-like and stem-like structures like those of 85 BIO 208 SEEDLESS PLANTS mosses.
The latter are known as leafy liverworts.
The leaves of leafy liverworts are without midrib, whereas midrib is present in the leaves of mosses.
Internally, the gametophytes of liverworts may be homogenous or composed of different types of tissues.
Liverworts grow on moist ground or rocks that are always wet.
They can be found in muddy areas near streams.
In greenhouses you may find them growing in flower pots.
In this course you will study two representatives of the order Marchantiales (Riccia and Marchantia) and one of the order Jungermanniales (Pellia).
Take a look at this classification: Division - Bryophyta Class - Hepaticopsida Order - Marchantiales Family - Ricciaccae The gametophytes of Marchantiales are exclusively thalloid.
The order Marchantiales consists of about 35 genera and approximately 420 species.
We will first study in detail the genus Riccia and then Marchantia.
Riccia Riccia belongs to the family Ricciaceae which is the most primitive and the smallest family of the order Marchantiales.
Riccia has more than 130 species and is very widely distributed.
Most of the species are terrestrial and grow mainly on moist soil and rocks.
Riccia fluitans is an aquatic species.
In structure, Riccia represents the simplest of the bryophytes.
Its gametophyte is small green fleshy, thalloid.
It grows prostrate on the ground and branches freely by dichotomy.
Several Riccia plants grow together and take the form of circular patches, which are typically resette-like (Fig.
1.3A).
The thallus bearing female and male sex organs are shown in (Fig.
1.3B and C.) 86 BIO 208 SEEDLESS PLANTS Fig.
1.3: Morphology and internal structure of Riccia A) a rosette of Riccia trichocarpa, B) a female thallus of R. discolor, C) a male thahlus of R. discolor, D)ventral surface of the thallus, E) a smooth walled rhizoid, F) a tuberculate rhizold, ) transverse vertical section of female thallus.
The branches of the thallus are called thallus-lobes.
According to the species, thallus lobes are linear to wedge-shaped.
The dorsal surface of the thallus has a prominent midrib, represented by a shallow groove called the dorsal groove.
At its apex there is a depression termed as apical-notch.
The sporophytes are sunk deeply, in the dorsal groove, each in a separate cavity.
Both male and female sex organs may develop on the same tha]lus (monoecious) or on different thalli (dioecious) (Fig.1.3B and C).
On its ventral surface (Fig.1.3D) There are a number of slender, colourless, unicellular.
unbrandhed processes called rhizoids that help to attach the thallus to the substratum.
The rhizoids are of two types: (a) smooth walled - these have smooth walls (Fig1.3E) and (b) tuberculate - these have peg-like ingrowths of wall projecting into the lumen (Fig.1.3F).
On the ventral surface towards the apex and along the margins of thallus small plate like structures are also present (Fig.1.3D).
These are scales which are arranged in a single row and are single cell in thickness.
These scales project forward and overlap the growing point to protect it from desiccation.
The growing point is located in the notch and consists of a transverse row of 3 to 5 cells.
The growth of the thallus occurs in length as well as in width by the divisions of these cells.
Each thallus branches 87 BIO 208 SEEDLESS PLANTS dichotomously and several dichotomies lie close to one another forming a typical rosette.
Again take a look at this simple classification of the bryophyte Division -Bryophyta CIass -Hepaticopsida Order -Marchantiales Family -Marchantiaceae Marchantia The family Marchantiaceae, to which Marchantia belongs, includes about 23 genera and approximately 200 species.
The special feature of this family is that in all the genera the gametophyte bears archegonia on vertical stalked receptacles called archegoniophore (carpocephala).
In Marchantia anthoridia are also produced in stalked receptacles known as antheridiophores.
The type- genus Marchantia is placed among the most advanced members with about 65 species, of which Marchantia polymorpha is the most widely distributed.
Marchantia usually grows in cool moist places along with mosses and in areas of burnt ground.
It is deep green in colour.
Like Riccia its gametophyte is flat, prostrate, dorsi-ventral and dichotomously branched thallus (Fig.1.4A ).
There is a prominent midrib low ridge covered with rhizoids (Fig.1.4B).
Along the midrib there are a number of cuplike structures with frilled margins.
These are called gemma cups (Fig.
1.4C) which contain numerous vegetative reproductive bodies called gemmae (sing.
gemma).
In mature thalli antheridiophores and archegoniophores, which bear antheridia and archegonia (Fig.1.4D and E) respectively, are also present at the growing apices of certain branches.
Marchantia is dioecious.
Like Riccia the apex of each branch is notched and a growing point is situated in it.
You will note that 88 BIO 208 SEEDLESS PLANTS on dorsal surface the thallus is marked into hexagonal areas which are visible to the naked eye (Fig.
1.4C).
If we examine with a hand lens we can see a pore at the centre of each hexagon.
Like Riccia the thallus of Marchantia is anchored to the surface by rhizoids which are of smooth walled as well as tuberculate type (Fig.
1.4F and G).
Scales are also present on the ventral surface, but in Marchantia they are arranged on both side of the midrib (Fig.1.4B).
Fig.1.4:A) Morphology of Marchantia polymorpha: A) thallus with gema cups, B) ventral surface of the thallus, C) a portion of A enlarged, (note the hexagonal markings wth a pore in the centre of each on the surface of the thallus), D) thallus with antheridiophore, E) thallus with archegoniophores, F) smooth walled rhizoids, G) tuberculate rhizoids.
3.3.2 Anthocerotopsida Classification: Division - Bryophyta Class - Anthocerotopsida Order - Anthocerotales Family - Anthocerotaceae The genus Anthoceros has about 200 species.
The class Anthocerotopsida contains the single order Anthocerotales.
We will study Anthoceros as the representative of this class.
89 BIO 208 SEEDLESS PLANTS Anthoceros It grows principally in moist shady places on the sides of ditches, or in moist cracks of rocks.
The gametophytes of Anthoceros are dorsi-ventral, thallose, somewhat lobed or dissected, and sometimes have a tendency toward dichotomous branching (Fig.1.5A).
The thallus of Anthoceros is dark green, velvety on the upper surface and variously lobed.
The midrib is either indistinct or absent.
It also lacks tuberculate rhizoids and scales.
Only smooth walled rhizoids are present.
Sporophytes Thallus A Fig.1.5:Anthoceros; A) mature thallose gametophyte with attached sporophytes.
Note the sheath at the base of each sporophyte.
3.3.3 Bryopsida Classification: Division - Bryophyta Class - Bryopisida Order - Sphagnales Family - Sphagnaceae This is the largest class of bryophytes and includes about 600 genera and 14,500 species.
Bryopsida is divided into three subclasses: Sphagnidae (peat 90 BIO 208 SEEDLESS PLANTS mosses), Andreaeidae (rock mosses) and Bryidae (true mosses).
Bryidae include about 14,000 species.
You will study the genus Funaria as a representative of this order.
Order Sphgnales is represented by a single genus Sphagnum which includes about 300 species.
Let us first study Sphagnum.
Sphagnum Sphagnum forms peat bogs in northern parts of the world.
In some countries peat is burnt as fuel.
Sphagnum is also used in plant nurseries as packing material.
Mats of this moss hold moisture and help the seeds of other plants to germinate and grow.
Sphagnum is confined to acidic, water-logged habitat.
It is the principal component of peat bogs where it forms a more or less continuous spongy layer.
The adult gametophyte develops as an upright leafy-shoot, called gametophores from a simple thallose, one cell thick protonema.
The gametophore is differentiated into stem and leaves.
The terminal growth of the stem is due to an apical cell.
The axis is attached to the soil by means of multicellular, branched rhizoids with oblique cross walls.
Rhizoids are present only in young gametophores and disappear when it matures.
Afterwards, the gametophore absorbs water directly.
Look at Fig.1.6A, the mature gametophores consists of an upright stem bearing leaves.
Every fourth leaf of the stem bears a group of three to eight lateral branches in its axis.
These branches are of two types: (i) divergent and (ii) lying next to the stem (Fig.1.6B).
Sometimes, one of the branches in a tuft continues upward growth to the same height as the main axis and resembles it in structure.
These strongly developed branches are called innovations and they ultimately get detached and become independent plants.
The branches near the apex of a stem are short and densely crowded in a compact head called coma.
91 BIO 208 SEEDLESS PLANTS The leaves lack midrib (Fig.1.6C and D).
They are small and arranged in three vertical rows on the stem.
In the surface view of a leaf one can observe two types of cells: (i) narrow, living, chlorophyll containing cells and (ii) large dead, empty, rhomboidal, hyaline (glass-like, transparent) cells with pores and s spiral as well as annular wall thickenings (Fig.1.6E).
In transverse section, leaf shows beaded appearance, with large, dead hyaline cells regularly alternating with the small, green, chlorophyllous cells (Fig.1.6F).
The spiral thickenings provide mechanical support and keep the hyaline cells from collapsing when they are empty.
Stem Divergent branches Pendent branches B D C A Hyaline cell Chlorophyll containing cell E F Fig.
1.6:Structure and morphology of Sphagnum: A) a mature gametophyte with attached sporophyte at the apex, B) portion of a shoot showing divergent and drooping (pendent) branches, C) leaf of a divergent branch enlarged.
Note the apex.
The midrib is absent, D) leaf of the main stem without midrib, E) leaf cells in surface.
Note the network of chlorophyllous cells, surrounding porous hyaline cells; also the fibrillar thickenings of walls of hyaline cells.
F) T. S. of a leaf.
The pores help in rapid intake of water and also in exchange of cations for H+ions which are the metabolic products of Sphagnum.
Hence, they create acidic environment in their immediate surrounding.
The hyaline cells take up 92 BIO 208 SEEDLESS PLANTS and hold large quantities of water, sometimes as much as twenty times the weight of the plant.
The narrow chloroplast containing cells carry on photosynthesis.
In a mature leaf these two types of cells are arranged in a reticulate manner.
This peculiar leaf structure accounts for the ability of the Sphagnum plant to absorb and retain large quantities of water and consequently for its outstanding bog-building properties.
Because of their water absorbing quality they are used in gardening.
Funaria Classification: Division - Bryophyta Class - Bryopsida Sub-class - Bryidae Order - Funariales Family - Funariacea Funaria is a very common moss.
It is very widely distributed throughout the world.
One species, Funaria hygrometrica is cosmopolitan and it the best known of all the mosses.
Like other bryophytes that you have studied, the most conspicuous form of the moss plant is the adult gametophyte.
This consists of a main erect axis bearing leaves which are arranged spirally (Fig.
1.7A).
This adult gametophyte is called gametophores.
It is small, about 1-3 cm high.
The leaves do not have a stalk but show a distinct midrib.
The gametophore is attached to the substratum by means of rhizoids which are multicellular, brached and have oblique septae.
The gametophyte bears sporophyte which has foot, seta and capsule (Fig.1.7A).
93 BIO 208 SEEDLESS PLANTS The gametophores develops from a filamentous, green short-lived protonema.
The protonema produces buds at certain stage of development, which initiate the development of upright leafy green axis the gametophore.
Epidermis Cortex Sporogonium Central strand B +Obranch Midrib C A Fig.
1.7: Funaria: A) mature gametophores with male and female branches and also a mature sporophyte (sporogonium), B) T. S. of stem C) T. S. of leaf.
4.0 CONCLUSION The Bryophyta includes the simplest and the most primitive member of land plants.
They lack roots based on morphological and anatomical features, they can be grouped into three major classes-Hepaticopsida, Anthocerotopsida and Bryopsida.
There is alternation of generations between the gametophyte and the sporophyte.
Members include Riccia, Marchantia, Anthoceros, Sphgnum, and Funaria.
5.0 SUMMARY In this unit you have learnt that • Bryophytes are the simplest, primitive non-vascular land plants among embryophytes.
Because of several common characteristics, it is believed that they evolved from green algae.
94 BIO 208 SEEDLESS PLANTS • There is alternation of generations between green independent gametophyte and sporophyte which is wholly or partially dependent on it.
Sporophyte is generally a small capsule with or without foot and seta.
The gametophyte develops from protonema and bears sex organs - archegonia and antheridia.
Bryophytes are homosporous.
• The challenges of land environment for a plant are fixation to the ground, desiccation, conduction of water and dispersal of sperms and spores.
These are taken care of by developing land adaptations such as epidermis, cuticle, stomata, airpores, rhizoids, multicellular jacket of cells for the protection of developing gametes, and retention of zygote in the archegonium.
In some bryophytes the primitive conducting tissues - hydroids and leptoids have also developed.
• The gametophyte of liverworts - Riccia and Marchantia is dorsi-ventral, thalloid structure and is internally differentiated.
The pores on the dorsal surface allow exchange of gases and are much advanced in Marchantia.
The leafy liverworts have leaf-like and stem-like appendages.
The gametophyte of Anthoceros, is also dorsiventral, but not differentiated internally.
Blue green algae Nostoc live in mucilage cavities of the thallus.
• Bryophytes are classified into liverworts (Hepaticopsida) hornworts (Anthocerotopsida) and Mosses (Bryopsida).
• Mosses – Sphagnum and Funaria have erect axis and bear leaf-like structures.
6.0 TUTOR MARKED ASSIGNMENTS a) In the following statement choose the alternative correct word given in the parentheses.
In bryophytes.
i. the dominant phase of life cycle is (gametophyte/sporophyte) ii.
(roots/rhizoids) anchor the plant to the soil.
iii.
the protonema is (haploid/diploid) 95 BIO 208 SEEDLESS PLANTS iv.
the sporophyte is (dependent/not dependent) on gametophyte.
b) Which of the following statements are true and which are false about bryophytes?
Write T for true and F for false against each statement.
i.
Some mosses have hydroids and leptoids for the conduction of water and food, respectively.
ii.
The gametophyte is an independent plant.
iii.
They produce two types of spores iv.
Protonema is the transitional stage between spore and adult gametophyte.
7.0 REFERENCES/FURTHER READING Dutta A.C. (1981).
Botany for degree students.
Oxford University Press.
909p.
IGNOU.
(1991).
Indra Gandhi National Open University.
Plant Diversity-Algae.
96 BIO 208 SEEDLESS PLANTS UNIT 2: CHARACTERISTICS, LIFE CYCLE CLASSIFICATION AND MORPHOLOGY OF SOME PTERIDOPHYTES.
1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objectives 3.0 Main Content 3.1 Pteridophytic Life Cycle 3.2 General Characteristics and Relationship with Other Groups 3.3 Formation of Fossils and Their Types 3.4 Morphology Lycopodium Selaginella Pteris 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutor Marked Assignment 7.0 Reference / Further Reading 1.0 INTRODUCTION Now we come to the last group of non-flowering plants, the pteridophytes, included in this course.
The most familiar plants of this group are ferns which we commonly see as houseplants, in parks and also in house landscapes along with other ornamental plants.
Ferns are rather small plants with graceful, often delicate compound leaves.
Because of their beauty and difficulty in propagation, they are considered very precious plants.
97 BIO 208 SEEDLESS PLANTS In this unit you will study the general characteristics and life cycle of pteridophytes and the structure and morphology of some represent - tative genera.
Scientists got the idea about the early vascular land plants from fossils – the extinct members.
Rhynia and Cooksonia were the simple and most primitive pteridophytes.
One of the simplest living members of this group is Psilotum.
You know, pteridophytes are vascular plants and they possess root, stem and leaves.
All vascular plants posses water- and food- conducting pipelines made up of xylem and phloem tissues, respectively.
In different groups of plants, a great variation is found in the relative position and arrangement of xylem and phloem, other associated tissues and in the presence or absence of pit.
In pteridophytes a natural gradation in vascular tissues from simple (primitive) to complex forms is observed.
2.0 OBJECTIVES After studying this unit you will be able to: • list characteristics of pteridophytes • outline the life cycle of a typical pteridophytes • compare the general features and life cycle of pteridophytes with bryophytes • differentiate between different types of fossils • give examples of fossil pteridophytes • describe morphology of the genera included in this unit • distinguish among groups of pteridophytes on the basis of morphological character.
98 BIO 208 SEEDLESS PLANTS 3.0 MAIN CONTENT 3.1 PTERIDOPHYTIC LIFE CYCLE Have a good look at the pictures of a pteridophyte.
What you see are sporophytes of these plants.
Their gametophytes are very small only a few millimeters in size, and are short-lived.
Let us first learn about the life cycle of pteridophytes because then it would be easier for us to list their characteristics.
Like bryophytes, pteridophytes also have two distinct phases in the life cycle: gametophyte and sporophte (Fig.
2.1) that follow each other in regular succession.
Since the two generations look different, they are termed heteromorphic.
Under normal circumstances, gametophyte produces motile male gametes (sperms) and non-motile female gametes (eggs).
Fusion between an egg cell and male gamete results in the formation of a zygote which is diploid.
The zygote divides by mitotic divisions and forms the sporophyte.
On sporophyte a number of haploid, non-motile spores are produced by meiosis.
The life cycle is then completed when a spore germinates and produces a haploid gametophytes by mitotic divisions, (Fig.2.1).
You have studied that in bryophytes, the dominant phase in the life cycle is the gametophyte, and the sporophyte is either partially or completely dependent on it for nutrition.
But in pteridophytes the sporophyte very soon becomes independent of the gametophyte and is the dominant generation.
The sporophyte shows greater degree of complexity in structural organization.
It is organized into stem, root and leaves, except in the most ancient fossil pteridophytes and in the most primitive living member.
The vascular tissues (xylem and phloem) are developed only in the sporophytes.
99 BIO 208 SEEDLESS PLANTS Fig.
2.1: Potential typical life cycle of pteridophytes.
Furthermore, the aerial parts are covered with a layer of cuticle.
On the epidermis there are stomata for the exchange of gases.
These anatomical complexities of the sporophyte helped in inhabiting a much wider range of environmental conditions than the gametophyte could.
The life cycle of a typical fern e.g.
Dryopteris felixma is as shown in(Fig.
2.2).
It is annotated and self explanatory.
100 BIO 208 SEEDLESS PLANTS 2 The fern spore develops into a 3 Each gametophyte has both male & 1 Most ferns are small, heat-shaped gametophyte female sex organs, but the archegonia homosporous, meaning that sustains itself by photo- antheridia usually mature at different times, that they produce a synthesis.
ensuring cross-fetiliation between gametophytes.
single type of spore 7 Sporangia release spores, which give rise to gametophytes Spore MEIOSIS Young gametophyte Sporangium Archegonium Mature sporophyte Egg Sperm New sporophyte Zygote FERTILIZATION Haploid Diploid Meiosis 6 The spots on the underside of Gametophyte 4 Fern sperm, like those of all seedless reproductive leaves vascular plants, use flagella to swim (sporophylls) are through moisture from antheridia to called Sori.
5 A fertilized egg develops into a eggs in the archegonia and then fetilize Each sorus is a cluster new sporophyte, and the young plant the eggs.
of sporangia.
grows out from an archegonium of its parent, the gametophyte.
Fig.
2.2: The life cycle of a fern.
After Campbell and Reece (1991).
3.2 GENERAL CHARACTERISTICS AND RELATIONSHIP WITH OTHER GROUPS In the previous section, you have learnt that in pteridophyte is the dominant phase.
It possesses a vascular system and is differentiated into true root, stem and leaves.
Pteridophytes exhibit a great variation in form, size and structure.
Most of the pteridophtes are herbaceous except a few woody tree ferns.
They may be dorsi-ventral or radial in symmetry and have dichotomously or laterally branched stems that bear microphyllous or megaphyllous leaves 101 BIO 208 SEEDLESS PLANTS The organization of vascular cylinder (also called stele, see box item) in the sporophyte varies from simple primitive type to more complex forms.
Besides, vessels are also present in some members.
The roots are generally adventitious, the primary embryonic root being short-lived.
The spores are produced in special structures called the sporangia that are invariably subtended by leaf-like appendages known as sporophylls (Fig.2.3C).
Fig.
2.3 C: Lycopidium showing a sporophyll The sporangia may be scattered throughout the vegetative axis or may be restricted to a particular area.
They are in many cases compacted to form distinct spore producing regions called the cones or the strobill (sing, strobulus).
The sporangia in some cases, may be produced within specialized structures called the sporocarp.
Distinct segregation of vegetative and reproductive shoots and leaves has also been observed in some other species.
Have you ever noticed brown-black dots on the underside of a fern leaf?
Each dot is a reproductive structure called sorus (plura, sori, Fig.2.5C).
It is a cluster of sponrangia that contain spores.
102 BIO 208 SEEDLESS PLANTS Sori C Fig.
2.5: Plant of Cyathea.
C) A portion of leaf showing sori Pteridophytes, in general, are homosporous i.e.
they produce only one type of spores.
However, a few species are heterosporous i.e.
they produce two types of spores, microspores and megaspores (Fig.2.4D,B).
A spore on germination produces gametophyte.
Heterosporous species produce microgametophyte as well as megagametophyte.
Megasporophyll Microsporophyll Microsporangium Megasporangium Microspore Megaspore C A B D Microsporangium Megasporangium Fig.
2.4: Selaginella: A) A megasporophyll.
B) V.S.
of A.
C) Microsporophyll.
D) V. S of microsporophyll.
103 BIO 208 SEEDLESS PLANTS In general, pteridophytes form green, dorsiventrally differentiated, thallose gametophytes with sex organs restricted to the ventral surface.
The sex organs may be embedded or projecting.
They resemble those of bryophytes in general plan.
The female reproductive structure is archegonium and the male reproductive structure is an antheridium.
The archegonium has invariably four longitudinal rows of neck cells whose height varies in different genera.
The antheridium consists of a single layer of sterile jacket of cells enclosing a mass of androcytes or antherozoid mother cells.
Each androcyte gives rise to a single ciliated, motile antherozoid.
The opening of the mature sex organs and the subsequent fertilization is still conditioned by the presence of water.
Hence like bryophytes, they could also be called amphibians of plant kingdom.
Now that you have studied the life cycle and the general characteristics of pteridophytes, can you compare them with bryophytes?
Bryophytes resemble pteridophytes in the following features: 1.
Thallose liverworts and pteridophyte show similarity in vegetative structure of gametophytes.
2.
Their female and male reproductive structures are archegonium and antheridium, respectively.
3.
The opening of the mature sexual reproductive organs and the subsequent fertilization are conditioned by the presence of water in liquid state, i.e., both require water for fertilization.
4.
They usually show a distinct and clearly defined heteromorphic alternation of generations and the two generations follow each other in regular succession.
104 BIO 208 SEEDLESS PLANTS 5.
The spores arise in the same manner in both the groups.
The spore mother cells are produced by the last division of the sporogenous tissues.
Each of the spore mother cells undergoes meiotic division resulting in a tetrads of spores.
6.
Development of embryo occurs in the archegonium 7.
The young sporophyte or embryo is partially parasitic upon the gametophyte.
Now try to list the characteristics which distinguish pteridophyte from bryophytes 1.
………………………………………............. 2.
……………………………………………….. 3.
………………………………………………… Compare your points with the following: 1.
Unlike bryophytes, in which sporophyte is dependent upon gametophyte physically and physiologically, the sporophyte is independent at maturity in pteridophytes, and is the dominant phase of life cycle instead of gametophyte.
2.
In pteridophytes the sporophyte has true roots, stem and leaves and well developed conducting tissues – xylem and phloem, which are absent in bryophytes.
3.
Some of the pteridophytes are heterosporous but all the bryophytes are homosporous.
As mentioned earlier,pteridophytes form an important link between bryophytes and seed plants.
This suggests that they also resemble in some respects with spermatophytes.
105 BIO 208 SEEDLESS PLANTS Pteridophytes resemble seed plants in the following respects: 1.
The sporophytes is dominant, typically photosynthentic phase of life cycle.
2.
It is organized into stem, root and leaves.
3.
The roots and the leafy shoots are provided with a conducting system made of specialized cells.
4.
Some pteridophytes do approach seed-habit and some fossil pteridophytes had seed-like structure.
Due to their affinities with bryophytes as well as with higher vascular, plants, pteridophytes are also known as “Vascular Cryptogams” (non-seed producing plants).
In the above account you have learnt about the characteristics of pteridophytes and their relation to other plant groups.
Now we will describe the formation of various types of fossils and how they reveal life forms that occurred millions of year ago.
3.3 FORMATION OF FOSSILS AND THEIR TYPES You may raise a question as to how can one know “Where, when and from what ancestral group did the first vascular land plant and seed- like structure evolve?” To find the answer to these questions we have to depend on fossils.
Let us first try to define a fossil and the ways in which fossils came to be formed.
We will also try to know the extent to which they may be expected to provide information useful to the morphologist.
What are Fossils?
Fossils are the remains and / or impressions of organisms that lived in the past.
In its correct sense fossils include the remains of organisms or their parts and also anything connected with an organism proving 106 BIO 208 SEEDLESS PLANTS its existence, i.e., anything which gives evidence that an organism once lived.
How are fossils formed?
The actual nature of fossilization depends on the environmental conditions in which it takes place.
Dead plant remains are liable to get disintegrated and it is only rarely that they get fossilized.
Chances of fossilization are better for organisms having stiff tissues / skeletons.
The details of fossilization process are discussed below.
Fossilization Process The process of formation of fossils is going on ever since the sedimentary rocks began to deposit and it is going on in nature even now.
In some cases plants may be deposited on the site where they grow (in situ), such as swamps and small inland lakes.
Due to low oxygen content and presence of toxic substance in the water, microbial growth is inhibited, so the plants do not decay.
This results in the preservation of the plant remains until they were covered by layers of sediments.
European and Enugun coal forests are the example of this type of fossilization.
In other cases plant parts are carried down by flowing water and finally sink to the bottom of a lake or estuarine water where they are less susceptible to decay by microbes.
During fossilizations the protoplasmic contents and softer parenchymatous cells disappear first, while the harder wood and other sclerenchymatous or cutinized tissues resist to the last.
The growing pressure of the heavy sedimentary rocks above, fist reduces the vacant 107 BIO 208 SEEDLESS PLANTS spaces inside the cells and forces the liquids substances out.
Some organic substances may also escape as marsh gas.
Naturally, all fossils get highly compressed and the final result depends on how far the conditions were favourable for good fossilization.
In spite of all hazards sometimes fossils are formed, which retain their cellular structure beautifully and sometimes even some of the cell contents.
Types of fossils According to the nature of fossilization, fossils may be of the following types: 1.
Petrifaction It is the best type of fossilization.
In this type buried plant material gets decayed with the passage of time and gets replaced, molecule for molecule by mineral solutions.
The impregnation of silica, calcium carbonate, magnesium carbonate, iron sulphide takes place within the tissues.
Most of the plant material may get decayed but at least some original cell wall components remain.
After fossilization the whole structure becomes stone-like and it can be cut into fine section.
The structure of the tissues may be observed by examining the section under the microscope.
Anatomical structures of ancient plants are beautifully obtained from such petrifactions.
Silicified and calcified pieces of wood are quite common.
II.
Cast or incrustation This type of fossilization is also quite common.
The plant parts get covered up by sand or mud.
After sometime the plant material inside degenerates leaving a cavity known as mold.
This cavity, again gets filled up by some rock-forming material which in course of time solidifies into an exact cast of the plant material, showing all its 108 BIO 208 SEEDLESS PLANTS surface features.
A cast fossil does not actually contain any part of the original plant but it is of great use as the cast correctly shows the original features of plant part.
III.
Impression These are found when a leaf or any other part of the plant falls on and leave an impression on the surface of semisolid clay.
In course of time this impression becomes permanent when the clay turns into stone.
Such impressions often very clearly show details of external features and structures like stomata are clearly seen in good preparation.
IV.
IV.
Compression In a compression the organic remains of the plant part actually remain in the fossils but in a highly compressed state.
During fossilization the great pressure of sediments above causes flattening of plant parts.
In the fossil usually a carbonaceous film remains which represents the surface features.
However, in good compressions it has been possible to swell out the organ by some chemical treatments so that plant some details become visible.
A good type of compressed fossil is the “clay nodule”.
In this the plant material gets encased in a ball of clay, gets compressed and the clay ball turns into stone.
Nomenclature of fossils Mostly, fossils consist of fragments of plants.
Sometimes it may take many years to find the fossil of a stem to which a particular kind of leaf belonged.
Therefore, in the meantime each fragment of fossil plant is described under a separate generic name and such genera are known as “Form genera”.
In naming such form genera we usually add suffixes, signifying which part of the plant it came from.
Following are a few examples: 109 BIO 208 SEEDLESS PLANTS Plant Part Suffix Used a) Leaf -phyllum b) Fern-like or frond -pteris c) Tree trunk -dendron d) Woody part -xylon e) Seed-like structure -spermum, -carpon, -carpus, -storms f) Microsporangium -theca g) Cone -strobilus, - strobes It is the work of palaeobotanists to collect bits of such fossils, i.e, form general, and to reconstruct the form, structure and mode of life of the plant from which they came.
Success has been achieved in reconstructing a few fossil plants.
3.4 MORPHOLOGY As you have noticed in the earlier units on Algae, Fungi and Bryophytes, each of these major plant groups are classified into smaller groups on the basis of distinguishable characteristics.
You may recall the following major divisions of extant and extinct pteridophytes.
Extinct Pteridophytes (known only from fossil records): Rhyniophta Zosterophyllophyta Tremerophyta Living Pteridophytes Psilotophyta Lycopodiophyta Equisetophyta 110 BIO 208 SEEDLESS PLANTS Pterophyta (= polypodiophyta, Filicopsida) In the following text we will learn in detail about representative types of some of these classes.
As you know that during evolution, advanced, complex forms evolved from primitive simpler forms.
So we will first study simple, primitive forms and subsequently the advanced, complex forms.
Lycopodium Classification: Division - Lycopodiophyta Class - Lycopsida Order - Lycopodiales Lycopodium, popularly known as club moss, is a large genus with about 180 species of which approximately 33 species are found in India.
They are distributed world –wide in tropical, sub-tropical forests and in temperate regions.
Some species are abundant in hills at comparatively high altitude.
They grow in cool climate on moist humus-rich soil.
The adult sporophyte is herbaceous and with a wide range of habits.
Generally in tropics they are pendulous epiphytes, whereas in temperate regions they are prostrate or erect (Fig.2.6A, B, C).
They usually grow about 30 to 60 cm in length.
The stem may be unbranched or dichotomously branched which later becomes monopodial.
It is covered with microophylls which in most species are spirally arranged.
However, in some species leaves are arranged in whorled or decussate manner (Fig.
2.6D-G) decussate x-shaped, with pair of opposite leaves each at right angles to the pair below: 111 BIO 208 SEEDLESS PLANTS Strobila Fig.2.6: Lycopodium: A-C) Portion of plant of Lycopodium phlegmaria, L. volubile and L. clavatum respectively.
D-G) Leaf form and arranged in different species.
Selaginella Classification; Division - Lycopodiophyta Class - Isoetatae Order - Selaginellales.
Most of the species of Selaginella are restricted to damp areas of the tropical and subtropical regions of the world.
A few species are markedly xerophytic and inhabit desert regions.
These are sometimes called “resurrection plants” because of their extra-ordinary power of recovery after prolonged drought.
The plant may be prostrate, erect or sub-erect.
Only a few are epiphytic.
Some form delicate green mossy cushions, others are vine-like, with stems growing to a height of several metres, while many have creeping axes, from which arise leafy branch systems that bear a striking superficial resemblance to a frond of fern.
112 BIO 208 SEEDLESS PLANTS Branching in Selaginella is characteristic, terminal and unequal, forming weaker and stronger branches.
At each dichotomy there are one or two meristems on either side.
These angle-meristems develop into cylindrical outgrowths known as “rhizophores” (Fig.
2.7A).
In most species only the ventral angle-meristem develops into rhizophore, while the other remains as dormant papilla.
The rhizophores grow downwards into group and give rise to a small tuft of adventitious roots at their tips.
The morphological nature of rhizophore has been controversial.
It has been held to be a (a) root, (b) a branch of stem (c) a structure sui generis (falling in neither of the categories).
Earlier investigators reported a unique combination of characters of rhizophore: i exogenous origin from the stem at the time of branching, ii lack of root cap, iii production of roots endogenously behind the tip, and iv ability, in some instance, to be converted into leafy shoots.
Since these features are not typical of root these outgrowths are called rhizophores.
The features suggestive of their root nature are; i positive geotropism, ii in some species when these structure re less than 1 mm the root cap develops, in S. martensil cap differentiates when it nears the soil.
Using labeled auxin (C14 IAA) ‘it has shown that auxin transport in rhizophores of Selaginella is acropetalous as in case of angiosperms root, whereas it is basipetalous in stems.
Therefore, now the term “rhizophore” as well as the arguments regarding its nature are of historical significance.
In Selaginella the leaves are sessile with a single unbranched vein (Fig.2.7A).
Leaves of Selaginella are ligulate.
The ligule is present in or near 113 BIO 208 SEEDLESS PLANTS the axil of each leaf as a laminate outgrowth (Fig.
2.7B).
It differentiates and matures very early in the ontogeny of leaf.
A mature ligule is tongue-to fan-shaped.
Its basal region is made up of tubular, hyaline cells forming the sheath is a hemispherical region of thin and greatly vacuolated cells referred to as glossopodium.
The remaining cells are isodiametric.
The apical region is one cell thick and is made up of elongated cells with scanty contents.
Body of ligule Glosspodium Leaves Sheath Rhyzophores Fig.
2.7 Salaginella A) Portion of a plant B) T. S. of a part of leaf Pteris Classification; Division - Pterophyta (= Filicophyta) Class - Polypodiatae Order - Filicales Pteris is a widely distributed genus with about 250 species.
It grows abundantly in cool, damp and shady places in tropical and subtropical regions of the world.
In all there are 19 species recorded from Ind.
Pteris vitata is a low level fern which brings out new leaves throughout the year.
Its is very common along mountain walls and grows up to 1200 metres above sea level.
Pteris quadriauriata grows abundantly along roadsides and in the valley throughout North-Western Himalayas.
Another species, Pteris cretica grows well from 1200 to 2400 metres above sea level.
Some species 114 BIO 208 SEEDLESS PLANTS are also found in the rainforest but of South-West South-East and South- South parts of Nigeria.
All the species of Pteris are terrestrial, perennial herbs with either creeping or semi-erect rhizome covered by scales.
Roots arise either from the lower surface or all over the surface of rhizome.
You may have noticed that the most conspicuous part of a fern plant is its leaves which are called fronds.
The leaves are compound in most species but a few have simple leaves, for example Pteris cretica.
Look at (Fig.
2.8A), the stalk of leaf continues as rachis and bears leaflets called pinnae.
In Pteris vittata the pinnae present near the base and tip are smaller than those in the middle.
The leaf apex is occupied by an odd pinna.
Every pinna is transverse by a central midrib which gives off lateral veins that bifurcate.
The pinnae are sessile and broader at the base gradually decreasing in width towards the apex (Fig.
2.8B).
The leaves are bipinnate in P. biauriata.
The pinnules are rough in texture.
The young leaves show typical incurving known as circinate vernation.
The leaves bear spore producing structures on the underside of the leaflets.
They appear as rows of brown dots (sori, sing, sorus).
Each sorus is a cluster of sporangia.
Bifurcation Pinnae Rachis ` Fig.
2.8:Pteris A) A plant of Pteris vittata.
B) A leaf showing mid-rib and dichotomous vein 115 BIO 208 SEEDLESS PLANTS 4.0 CONCLUSION The Pteridophytes are vascular plants (with xylem and phloem) that produce neither flowers nor seeds.
They are therefore called vascular cryptogams.
Pteridophytes include horsetails, ferns and club mosses.
Specific generic members include Cooksonia, Psilotum, Lycopodium, Selaginella, Equisetum, Pteris, Dryopteris felixma, (Nigerian fern) and Marsilea.
Some members are fossils.
They are used for medicinal purposes and as ornamentals.
5.0 SUMMARY In these units you have learnt that • Pteridophytes are primitive, vascular, non-flowering land plants, • Like bryophytes, they show distinct alternation of generations, but instead of gametophyte, sporophyte is the dominant phase of life cycle.
• Fossils provide evidence for extinct member plants.
They are of four types: Petrifaction, Cast, Impression and Compresion, • Lycopodium stem is densely covered with microphylls.
It is also protostellic.
Roots are from pericycle and are diarchy.
• In Selaginella the main stem may be prostrate, semi-erect or erect, branched or unbranched.
It posses microphylls which are spirally arranged on the stem and are ligulate.
• Pteris has a creeping rhizome which bears scales or branched hairs.
The plant is characterized by prominent pinnately compound or digitate leaves.
The sporangia are generally grouped together in sori.
• Pteridophytes are found abundantly in Nigeria and are common in wet and hilly wet areas.
116 BIO 208 SEEDLESS PLANTS 6.0 TUTORMARKED ASSIGNMENTS a.
Match the fossil plant with the suffix used for its naming Plant Part -Suffix i Woody -pteris ii Microsporangium -canpon iii Cone -theca iv Fern-like -strobilus v Seed-like structure -xylon.
b.
Describe the typical life cycle of Pteridophytes 7.0 REFERENCES / FURTHER READING Campbell, Neil A and Reece Jane B.
(1991).
Biology.
6th Edition.
Benjamin Cummings, New York, Jan Francisc.
IGNOU.
(1997).
Indra Gandhi National Open University.
Plant Diversity – Pteridophytes.
117
