NATIONAL OPEN UNIVERSITY OF NIGERIA SCHOOL OF SCIENCE AND TECHNOLOGY COURSE CODE:NSS222 COURSE TITLE:PRACTICUM/CLINICAL ATTACHMENT INS222 PRACTICUM/CLINICAL ATTACHMENT I iiNS222 PRACTICUM/CLINICAL ATTACHMENT I COURSE GUIDE NSS222 PRACTICUM/CLINICAL ATTACHMENT I Course Team Emmanuel Olufemi Ayandiran (Developers/Writers) - OAU Joel Olayiwola Faronbi (Co-developer/Co-writer) - OAU Mrs. Iyabo Yewande Ademuyiwa (Co-developer/Co-writer) - LASU Kayode S. Olubiyi(Co-developer/Co-writer) - NOUN Prof. A. Adebanjo (Programme Leader) - NOUN Kayode S. Olubiyi (Coordinator) - NOUN NATIONAL OPEN UNIVERSITY OF NIGERIA iiiNS222 PRACTICUM/CLINICAL ATTACHMENT I National Open University of Nigeria Headquarters 14/16 Ahmadu Bello Way Victoria Island Lagos Abuja Office 5, Dar es Salaam Street Off Aminu Kano Crescent Wuse II, Abuja Nigeria.
e-mail: centralinfo@nou.edu.ng URL: www.nou.edu.ng Published By National Open University of Nigeria First Printed 2010 ISBN: 978-058-200-2 All Rights Reserved ivNS222 PRACTICUM/CLINICAL ATTACHMENT I CONTENTS PAGE Introduction………………………………………………………… 1 What You Will Learn in this Course………………………….......... 1 Course Aim………………………………………………………..... 1 Course Objectives………………………………………….……….. 1 Working through this Course……………………………….……… 2 Course Materials…………………………………………….…….... 2 Study Units………………………………………………………….
2 Textbooks and References…………………………………..……... 2 Presentation Schedule……………………………..………….…..... 3 Assessment………………………………………..……….……….. 3 Tutor-Marked Assignments……………………………..…….….... 3 Final Examination and Grading…………………………….……… 3 Course Marking Scheme…………………………………………… 4 Course Overview ………………………………………………….. 4 How to Get the Most Out of this Course…………………………… 5 Clinical and Practical Sessions….……………………………..…… 6 Introduction Nursing as a practice-related profession, involves both theory and clinical practice.
It involves the cognitive (knowledge), affective (attitudes, values) and psychomotor (skills and competencies) domains.
NSS222: Practicum and Clinical Attachment is a two credit course for nursing students designed to provide a layout for the appropriate, effective and qualitative nursing care which the nurse is expected to provide for his/her clients and patients.
The course is broken into 7 study units for the first part of the clinical posting.
The knowledge gained in this course will enable you to carefully and professionally implement relevant nursing care interventions based on the needs of the individuals, families and communities.
What You Will Learn in this Course The overall aim of this course NSS222 Practicum and Clinical Attachment is to introduce students to the clinical and practical sessions expected of them as professional nurses.
Course Aim The aim of this course is to: vNS222 PRACTICUM/CLINICAL ATTACHMENT I • Prepare you to be a polyvalent nurse provider at every level of health care • Acquint you with practical work in nursing practice • Provide you with the needed skills for effective practice • Understand the basic requirements for efficient management of clients/patients.
• Provide opportunities for individual care which nursing process clearly represents.
• Enable you to utilize the nursing process for patients’ care.
Course Objectives Note that each unit has specific objectives.
Students should read them carefully before going through the unit.
You may want to refer to them during your study of the unit to check on your progress.
You should always look at the unit objectives after completing a unit.
In this way, you can be sure that you have done what is required of you by the unit.
Working through this Course For you to complete this course successfully and be a professional nurse licensed by the Nursing and Midwifery Council of Nigeria to practice, ensure that you attend the practical/clinical sessions at designated points, meet with your receptors and be guided in the carrying out of various procedures.
Course Materials The major components of the course are: 8.
Course Guide 9.
Study Units 10.
Textbooks 11.
Assignment File 12.
Presentation Schedule Study Units There are 6 study units in this clinical course with an appendix on nursing process.
These include: Module 1 Unit 1 Ward Organisation Unit 2 Basic Patient Care viNS222 PRACTICUM/CLINICAL ATTACHMENT I Unit 3 Body Mechanics: Moving and Lifting Techniques Module 2 Unit 1 Hygiene and Comfort Measures Unit 2 Nutrition and Nasogastric Procedures Unit 3 Parenteral Procedures Including Blood Transfusions Each unit contains Learners Performance Evaluation Guide which you are required to attempt.
It is believed that this will assist you to achieve the learning objectives of the units.
Textbooks and References These texts will be of immense benefit to this course: Aiken, L.H.
Patrician PA. (2000).
Measuring Organisational Traits of Hospitals: the Revised Nursing Work Index.
Nurs Res; 49:146– 53.
[CrossRef] [Medline] Coulter, A.
& Cleary, P.D.
(2001).
Patients’ Experiences with hospital care in Five Countries.
Health Aff (Millwood); 20:244–52.
[Abstract/Free Full Text] Shamian J.
& Lightstone EY.
(1993).
Hospital Restructuring Initiatives in Canada.
Med Care 1997: 35:62–9.
Shortell, S.M.
; Gillies, R.R.
; Anderson DA, et al.
Creating Organised Delivery Systems: The Barriers and Facilitators.
Hosp Health Serv Admin; 38:447–66.[Medline].
Sitzia, J.
& Wood, N. (1997).
Patient Satisfaction: A Review of Issues and Concepts.
Soc Sci Med; 45:1829–43.
Veenstra, M.; Hofoss, D. (2003).
Patient Experiences with Information in a Hospital Setting: A Multilevel Approach.
Med Care;41:490– 9.
[CrossRef] [Medline] .
Presentation Schedule The presentation schedule included in this course guide provides you with important dates for completion of each Tutor-Marked Assignment.
You should therefore try to meet the deadlines.
Assessment viiNS222 PRACTICUM/CLINICAL ATTACHMENT I There are two aspects to the assessment of this course.
First, there is the Learners Performance Evaluation Guide and practical.
You are thus expected to apply knowledge, comprehension, information and problem solving skills gathered during the course.
Tutor-Marked Assignments This is represented in this course as the Learners Performance Evaluation Guide.
You will find it useful in achieving the overall objective of the practical session.
Final Examination and Grading The final examination of NSS222 will be a one hour practical examination which has a value of 70% of the total course grade.
The examination will consist of questions on the Self Assessment Exercise, practice exercises and Tutor-Marked Assignments that you have previously encountered.
All areas of the course will be assessed.
Course Marking Scheme The following table shows the course marking scheme Table 1 Course Marking Scheme Assessment Marks Practical/Clinical 70% sessions Care Study 20% Vival/Oral 10% Total 100% of Course Marks Course Overview This table indicates the units, the number of weeks required to complete them and the assignments.
Table 2: Course Organizer Unit Title of Work Weeks Assessment Activity (End of Unit) Course Guide Week 1 Module 1 1 Ward Organisation Weeks 1 & 2 Learners viiiNS222 PRACTICUM/CLINICAL ATTACHMENT I Performance Evaluation Guide 2 Basic Patient Care Weeks 3 & 4 As above 3 Body Mechanics: Moving Weeks 5 & 6 As above and Lifting Techniques Module 2 1 Hygiene and Comfort Weeks 7 & 8 As above Measures 2 Nutrition and Nasogastric Weeks 9 & 10 As above Procedures 3 Parenteral Procedures: Weeks 11 & 12 As above Blood transfusion, Intake and Output and Monitoring of Intake and Output How to Get the Most Out of this Course In distance learning, the study units replace the university lecturer.
This is one of the huge advantages of distance learning mode; you can read and work through specially designed study materials at your own pace and at a time and place that suit you best.
Think of it as reading the teacher, the study guide tells you what to read, when to read and the relevant texts to consult.
You are provided exercises at appropriate points, just as a lecturer might give you an in-class exercise.
Each of the study units follows a common format.
The first item is an introduction to the subject matter of the unit and how a particular unit is integrated with the other units and the course as a whole.
Next to this is a set of learning objectives.
These learning objectives are meant to guide your studies.
The moment you complete a unit, you must go back and check whether you have achieved the objectives.
If this is made a habit, then you will significantly improve your chances of passing the course.
The main body of the units also guides you through the required readings from other sources.
This will usually be either from a textbook or from other sources.
Self Assessment Exercises are provided throughout the unit to aid personal studies.
Working through these Self Tests will help you to achieve the objectives of the unit ixNS222 PRACTICUM/CLINICAL ATTACHMENT I The following are practical strategies for working through this course - Read the course guide thoroughly - Organize a study schedule.
Refer to the course overview for more details.
Note the time you are expected to spend on each unit and how the assignment relates to the units.
Important details, e.g.
details of your tutorials and the date of the first day of the semester are available.
You need to gather all these information in one place such as a diary, a wall chart, calendar or an organizer.
Whatever method you choose, you should decide on, and write in, your own dates for working on each unit.
- Once you have created your own study schedule, do everything you can to stick to it.
The major reason why students fail is that they get behind with their course work.
If you get into difficulties with your schedule, please let your tutor know before it is too late for help.
- Turn to Unit 1 and read the introduction and the objectives for the unit.
- Assemble the study materials.
Information about what you need for a unit is given in the table of content at the beginning of each unit.
You will almost always need both the study unit you are working on and one of the materials recommended for further readings, on your desk at the same time.
- Work through the unit, the content of the unit itself has been arranged to provide a sequence for you to follow.
As you work through the unit, you will be encouraged to read from your set books (Further reading).
- Keep in mind that you will learn a lot by doing all your assignments carefully.
They have been designed to help you meet the objectives of the course and will help you pass the examination.
- Review the objectives of each study unit to confirm that you have achieved them.
If you are not certain about any of the objectives, review the study material and consult your tutor.
- When you are confident that you have achieved a unit’s objectives, you can start on the next unit.
Proceed unit by unit through the xNS222 PRACTICUM/CLINICAL ATTACHMENT I course and try to pace your study so that you can keep yourself on schedule.
- When you have submitted an assignment to your tutor for marking, do not wait for its return before starting on the next unit.
Keep to your schedule.
When the assignment is returned, pay particular attention to your tutor’s comments, both on the Tutor-Marked Assignment form and also written on the assignment.
Consult you tutor as soon as possible if you have any questions or problems.
- After completing the last unit, review the course and prepare yourself for the final examination.
Check that you have achieved the unit objectives (listed at the beginning of each unit) and the course objectives (listed in this course guide).
Clinical and Practical Sessions There are 6- 8 weeks of practical session for this course in the designated clinical centres closest to you.
You will be notified of the dates, time and location together with the name and phone number of your preceptors as soon as you are allocated a group by the Centre Manager.
Your preceptor will provide the needed guidance and instructions for effective clinical skills acquisition.
Records and reports will be made to the Centre Manager as part of your overall evaluation.
At least two hours in any of the working days of the week is required for this purpose.
Do not hesitate to contact your tutor by telephone, e-mail or discussion board if you need help.
The following might be circumstances in which you would find help necessary.
Contact your tutor if: 1.
You do not understand any part of the study units or the assigned readings.
2.
You have difficulty with the self test or exercise.
3.
You have questions or problems with an assignment, with your tutor’s comments on an assignment, or with the grading of an assignment.
You should try your best to attend the tutorials.
This is the only chance to have face to face contact with your tutor and ask questions which are answered instantly.
You can raise any problem encountered in the course of your study.
To gain the maximum benefit from the course tutorials, prepare a question list before attempting them.
You will learn a lot from participating in discussion actively.
xiNS222 PRACTICUM/CLINICAL ATTACHMENT I Best of Luck xiiNS222 PRACTICUM/CLINICAL ATTACHMENT I Course Code NSS222 Course Title Practicum/Clinical Attachment I Course Team Emmanuel Olufemi Ayandiran (Developers/Writers) - OAU Joel Olayiwola Faronbi (Co-developer/Co-writer) - OAU Mrs. Iyabo Yewande Ademuyiwa (Co-developer/Co-writer) - LASU Kayode S. Olubiyi(Co-developer/Co-writer) - NOUN Prof. A. Adebanjo (Programme Leader) - NOUN Kayode S. Olubiyi (Coordinator) - NOUN NATIONAL OPEN UNIVERSITY OF NIGERIA xiiiNS222 PRACTICUM/CLINICAL ATTACHMENT I National Open University of Nigeria Headquarters 14/16 Ahmadu Bello Way Victoria Island Lagos Abuja Office 5, Dar es Salaam Street Off Aminu Kano Crescent Wuse II, Abuja Nigeria.
e-mail: centralinfo@nou.edu.ng URL: www.nou.edu.ng Published By National Open University of Nigeria First Printed 2010 ISBN: 978-058-200-2 All Rights Reserved xivNS222 PRACTICUM/CLINICAL ATTACHMENT I CONTENTS PAGE Module 1 …………………………………………………….….
1 Unit 1 Ward Organisation…………………………………... 1 Unit 2 Basic Patient Care………………………………….... 32 Unit 3 Body Mechanics: Moving and Lifting Techniques… 77 Module 2 ………………………………………………………... 86 Unit 1 Hygiene and Comfort Measures………………..…….
86 Unit 2 Nutrition and Nasogastric Procedures……………… 134 Unit 3 Parenteral Procedures Including Blood Transfusion... 148 xvNoneNS222 PRACTICUM/CLINICAL ATTACHMENT I MODULE 1 Unit 1 Ward Organisation Unit 2 Basic Patient Care Unit 3 Body Mechanics: Moving and Lifting Techniques UNIT 1 WARD ORGANISATION CONTENTS 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objectives 3.0 Main Content 3.1 Organisation and Care of Patient’s Unit 3.2 Patient Care Environment and Safety Measures 3.3 Hospital Electrical Safety and Fire Safety Measures 3.4 Use, Storage and Care of Ward Equipment 3.5 Ward Management 3.6 Supervision of Ancillary Staff 3.7 Communication 3.7.1 What is Communication?
3.7.2 Purpose of Communication 3.7.3 Guidelines for Communication with Patient and Their Family 3.7.4 SBAR Technique.
What is it?
3.8 Handing and Taking over of Patients and the Ward Unit 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutor-Marked Assignment 7.0 References/Further Reading 1.0 INTRODUCTION The patient care unit is the area of the hospital in which the patient receives medical and nursing care and treatment as well as the place in which he/she lives during his/her hospital stays.
It must be maintained as a safe, pleasant, clean, and orderly environment for the patient's physical and mental well being.
Constant effort is needed to achieve and maintain the necessary high level of order and sanitation that is a sine-qua-non to patient safety (http://64.78.42.182/sweethaven /MedTech).
This cannot be of more relevance than in this era of expanded role of the nurse.
In McGibbon (1997) words, the traditional role of ward sister/charge nurse has been redefined as ward manager with the evolving of many new responsibilities, including acting as 'on site' manager out of hours.
This 1NS222 PRACTICUM/CLINICAL ATTACHMENT I development calls for a reorientation in the training of nurses as the custodian of care for optimal performance.
2.0 OBJECTIVES At the end of this unit, you should be able to: • identify articles/equipment required in the patient care area • identify and apply the hospital fire, electrical and general safety measures when providing care for patients • identify guidelines for cleaning the patient care unit • recognize rules for the use of disposable and non-disposable items • demonstrate correct sequence of activities during handing and taking over of patients and the ward unit.
3.0 MAIN CONTENT 3.1 Organisation and Care of Patient’s Unit Rules of General Cleaning 1.
Collect all articles required before commencing work.
2.
Brooms, dusters, polishers and clean water.
3.
Sweep first, except for high dusting, with a proper brush, of walls, ledges and blinds.
4.
Dusting should be done with a damp duster, polished surfaces dried afterwards with a soft dry duster.
Dust from top to bottom of article using firm even strokes.
5.
All rubbish must be removed from tables and lockers with patient’s permission.
6.
Furniture including locker tops and bed tables should be polished once weekly using furniture cream sparingly.
7.
Glossy paintwork should be washed with soapy water.
Scouring powder should be used to remove marks only.
8.
Use all cleaning materials with care and economy.
Requirements 2NS222 PRACTICUM/CLINICAL ATTACHMENT I  Cleaning cloth or dusters  Bowl of warm water  Scouring powder e.g.
Vim  Disinfectant Procedure Required Steps Scientific Rationale  Assemble all requirements on a trolley Promotes organisation and time or portable table.
management.
 Check and inspect ward equipment.
Aids in detecting and repairing defects.
 Open windows.
Ensure proper ventilation at all times.
 Keep window blind even and window Promotes a sense of aesthetics and at the sills free from all particles.
same time reduces microbial population.
 Remove all articles from tabletops.
Facilitates cleaning.
 With wet cloth, soaked in disinfectant This prevents raising dusts and ensure water, dust tabletops, side lockers and thorough cleaning.
bed frames daily.
 With scouring powder such as Vim, Helps in removing stubborn stains and weekly wash tables and side lockers promotes medical asepsis.
inside and outside.
 Obtain patient’s permission before Demonstrates concern for patient’s discarding newspapers, magazines e.t.c.
property and facilitates cooperation.
 See that beds are well arranged in an Shows orderliness and promotes aesthetics.
even line.
 Arrange articles needed by patient neatly Demonstrates organisation and enhances and within easy reach for the patient.
housekeeping.
 Heads of beds should be turned in, Reduces accidental falls and possible castors facing each other.
injuries to patient, relatives and even health workers.
 Always ensure that bedside locker is at For uniformity and easy reach of patients.
the right hand side of the patient.
 Clean and return equipment used for Enhances housekeeping and get equipment cleaning to proper place.
ready for another use.
Note – General ward cleaning is usually done by ward orderlies but the nurse must know how it should be done so that one may supervise cleaning and be able to correct when necessary.
3NS222 PRACTICUM/CLINICAL ATTACHMENT I 3.2 Patient Care Environment and Safety Measures One of the most important aspects of patient care is to ensure safety for each patient throughout the day.
It may be impossible to prevent accidents completely.
However, there are ways to limit the potential for accidents that may cause injury to the patient or health care personnel and the unnecessary loss of equipment.
Maslow, states that, our safety and security needs are second only to the need for food, air, and water.
The daily responsibility for protecting the patient from additional injury or illness rests with the nursing team.
The skillful and knowledgeable nurse can be just as dangerous as the incompetent one if safety measures are not applied in the health care environment (http://64.78.42.182/sweethaven/MedTech).
1.
Identify Patients at Risk for Injury Those at special risk include: a.
Elderly or confused patients.
b.
Patients with impaired vision or hearing.
c. Patients with impaired mobility (wheelchairs, walkers, and partial paralysis).
d. Patients with a history of falls.
e. Patients with a history of substance abuse.
f. Patients receiving medication that interferes with reasoning or motor functions.
2.
Protect the patients at risk from injury.
3.
Prevent falls a.
Place the bed in the low position.
b.
Keep the side rails up when the patient is not receiving bedside care.
c. Advise the patient to wear low-heeled shoes that fit well when walking.
d. Ensure that nonskid strips or mats are affixed to the bottom of bathtubs and shower floors.
4NS222 PRACTICUM/CLINICAL ATTACHMENT I e. Ensure that bathtubs have sturdy handrails and shower stools are in place when needed.
f. Warn patients and visitors when floors are wet and slippery.
Also see that signs are pasted.
4.
Use protective restraints cautiously: a.
Use restraints when careful assessment indicates that these are needed.
(Some facilities require a doctor's order for restraints).
b.
Movement is essential to the patient's well being.
Use the least restrictive type of restraint, which will protect the patient.
c. Apply the restraint for the shortest period necessary.
The vest restraint may only be necessary while a patient is sitting in a wheelchair.
d. Provide for as much movement as possible.
The waist restraint protects the patient from falling out of bed but still allows the patient to change position independently.
e. Restrain the fewest limbs or body parts possible.
However, if leg restraints are necessary, use wrist restraints also.
If this is not done, the patient may remove the leg restraints or he may accidentally hang by his heels in the restraints.
f. Tie the restraint with a knot that is not likely to come loose, yet can be released easily by the nurse in an emergency.
A half-bow knot (figure 6-4) meets these criteria.
g. Explain to the patient the reason for the restraint.
Position him comfortably and change his position every 2 hours.
Feed the patient who must remain restrained during meals.
Help him use the toilet, bedpan, or urinal at regular intervals.
5.
Prevent scalds and burns a.
Place coffee, tea, pap, and other hot liquids where the patient can reach them easily and safely.
b.
Assist the patient if there is any doubt about whether he can safely regulate the temperature of water in tubs or showers.
c. Carefully follow policy when using hot-water bags or heating pads.
Because of the danger of burning patients, many health care facilities do not allow their use.
5NS222 PRACTICUM/CLINICAL ATTACHMENT I 6.
Prevent the spread of infection A health care facility may adopt its own infection control policies and practices.
However, the procedures generally follow the recommendations from the Centers for Disease Control (CDC).
This is a Federal agency that studies pathogens, outbreaks of contagious diseases, and methods used to control these outbreaks.
a.
Preventing disease, including infections, is a high priority in health care.
Nurses should use techniques that prevent microorganisms from living, growing, and spreading.
b.
Two methods are used to reduce or eliminate the presence of microorganisms and thus prevent infections.
These two methods are called surgical asepsis and medical asepsis.
• Surgical asepsis refers to the practice that eliminates the presence of all microorganisms (bacteria, viruses, fungi, yeasts, molds, rickettsia, and protozoa).
This practice is sterilization.
• Medical asepsis refers to practices that help reduce the number and inhibit the growth of microorganisms, especially pathogens (those that cause infections or contagious diseases).
Medical asepsis, also called clean technique includes use of antimicrobial agents, hand washing, cleaning supplies and equipment, and disinfection.
c. It is equally important that the nurse teach patients facts and practices about surgical and medical asepsis.
When teaching a patient you should: • Observe the patient to identify areas where instruction would be helpful in controlling the spread of infection.
• Act as a model by using sound practices of asepsis when giving care.
• Provide guidance to the patient for selfcare at home in the proper way to handle sterile equipment and supplies and in how to sterilize reusable items.
7.
Report Infections Health care workers must report any infection that occurs.
The Infection Control Committee will investigate any case of infection to determine 6NS222 PRACTICUM/CLINICAL ATTACHMENT I the cause.
If a break in nursing technique is identified, the committee will propose different procedures to eliminate the problem.
3.3 Hospital Electrical and Fire Safety Measures Hospital Electrical Safety Measures 1.
Use electrical equipment for the intended purpose only.
2.
Keep television sets, telephones, radios, hair dryers, electric shavers, and all other electrical equipment and appliances away from bathtubs and washbasins.
3.
Test all small appliances before use to see that they are in good working order.
Ensure periodic service checks of all electrical equipment.
4.
Remove a plug from a wall socket by grasping the plug, not the cord.
5.
Use plugs and outlets with a ground when possible.
Do not overload an electrical outlet.
6.
Do not kink electric cords; this may cause the fine wires inside the cord to break.
7.
Never use faulty equipment.
If an appliance overheats, produces a shock or gives off an odour while being used, remove the appliance from the area.
Follow procedures to have the appliance evaluated by medical maintenance.
Warning – An electric spark near a high concentration of oxygen or certain anaesthetics gases may cause an instant and serious fire.
Hospital Fire Safety Measures 1.
Despite the use of fire retardant material, and compliance with fire regulations, fires still occur.
As such health care facilities should have regular fire drills so that all personnel know exactly what to do.
Besides health care personnel should be trained and drilled in: a.
Fire prevention.
b.
Location and use of fire alarms.
c. Location and use of fire extinguishers.
d. Location of emergency exits.
e. Evacuation procedures.
7NS222 PRACTICUM/CLINICAL ATTACHMENT I 2.
Oxygen supports combustion.
Post signs to show that oxygen is in use where applicable.
If a patient is receiving oxygen as part of his treatment, be sure that the patient, his roommates, and visitors know that smoking is prohibited.
Note: Smoking is prohibited in treatment areas of most health care facilities.
3.
If a fire occurs, follow these steps: a. Activate the fire alarm procedures.
b.
Turn off oxygen, lights, and any electrical equipment in the vicinity of the fire.
c. Remove the patients who are in immediate danger.
d. Notify the hospital "switchboard" of the location of the fire.
e. Using the fire extinguisher, attempt to extinguish the fire.
f. Close windows and doors to reduce ventilation.
g. Return patients who are not endangered to their rooms.
h. Post a guard to direct the fire department.
3.4 Use, Storage and Care of Ward Equipment Rules for Use of Disposable or Non-Reusable Items 1.
Do not attempt to reuse (for another patient) or resterilize disposables.
2.
Sterile disposables are considered sterile provided the wrapper is not broken or torn or the expiration date has not elapsed.
3.
Sterile disposables with torn or broken wrappers must be discarded.
4.
Use disposables for the specific purpose(s) for which they were designed.
5.
Follow manufacturer's directions when using disposables.
List of Reusable Equipment/Articles Necessary for Providing Basic Nursing Care a. Linens  Bed linens.
 Towels.
8NS222 PRACTICUM/CLINICAL ATTACHMENT I  Washcloths.
 Blankets.
b.
Toilet Equipment  Wash basin.
 Soap dish.
 Emesis bowl.
 Bedpan.
 Urinal.
 Toilet paper.
c. Other Articles  Water pitcher.
 Glass.
 Call button.
 Disposable facial tissues.
Note: The list is inexhaustible but below is an excerpt of how to care for some of these hospital equipments/articles.
1.
Trolleys and Screens • Clean all trolleys daily before commencing work in the morning.
• Dust metal frames of screens before commencing work.
• Remove dirt from wheels of screens and trolleys on a weekly basis.
• Oil wheels weekly to prevent stiffness.
2.
Cupboards and Tables including Patient’s Bedside Lockers • Clean patient’s bedside locker and table on a daily basis.
• Clean patient’s bedside locker and table before admission of a new patient.
• Clean linen cupboard and other cupboards weekly and rearrange.
• Re-label where necessary.
3.
Urine Testing Room • Tidy up the room daily.
• Replenish the reagents as necessary.
• Discard specimen not needed again and wash test-tubes after use.
4.
Rubber Goods 9NS222 PRACTICUM/CLINICAL ATTACHMENT I • Rubber Sheets or Mackintoshes - Remove traces of blood or other body discharges with cold water.
- Spread on a flat surface Wash with soap and water.
Rinse well and dry away from direct heat.
When dry, dust lightly with powder.
Roll or hang over a rod to avoid creases from folding.
• Rubber Gloves - Wash in cold water, turning so that both sides are washed.
- Wash with soap and water.
- Rinse well.
- Hang to dry with cuffs down.
- If used for infectious patient, soak in carbolic lotion or izal for 30 mins.
- Pack dry powdered gloves in drums for autoclaving.
• Hot Water, Bottles, Ice Bags, Air Cushions, etc - Remove traces of blood or body discharges with cold water - Wash with soap and water - Rinse and dry outside of bag - Hang with neck end down to dry inside - Inflate with air to avoid sticking together - Keep washers in screw tops - Hang up in proper place Special Points to Note (1)Avoid sticking pins into rubber.
(2)Oils, grease and acids destroy rubber, so prevent contact with these.
(3)Rubber deteriorates when not used – occasionally soak them in cold water to prevent cracking.
(4)Rub talcum powder into rubber goods before storage to keep them soft and from sticking together.
(5)Store rubber goods in dark, cool and dry atmosphere.
• Care of Stainless Steel, Forceps, Bowls, Gallipots Receivers etc - Wash with soap and water after use, and then allow drying.
- Return back to proper places.
- If needed for a sterile procedure, put into an already boiling sterilizer to boil for 5 minutes.
• Stitch and Surgical Scissors 10NS222 PRACTICUM/CLINICAL ATTACHMENT I - Wash with soap and water, using brush under running tap - Immerse in hibitane-in-spirit, methylated spirit, or Ethicon fluid in a receiver lined within gauze, with blades open.
- Change solution weekly.
• Care of Oxygen Apparatus - Dust cylinder daily - Check the gauge and flowmeter daily to ensure that they are functioning - Change water in humidifier weekly - Ensure that the key is available all the time - Ensure always that cylinder is not empty • Care of Suction Machine - Dust daily - Wash glass bottles daily and change lotion - Make sure that the washers around bottles are intact - If manually operated, oil the hinges on the pedals weekly.
• Care of Drainage Bottles - Empty content - Wash with soapy water and rinse - Soak with disinfectant - Send for autoclaving if need be.
3.5 Ward Management Today, hospital has become more of a complex institution oriented not only towards public service and customers’ satisfaction but towards efficiency and maximization of profit.
Consequently, good and efficient management of every unit of the hospital has become the order of the day.
Really, the term management means different things to different people but the traditional view of management as the process of working with others and capital to achieve Organisational goals holds true to the present day.
Management has also been described as a creative problem solving approach.
Creative problem solving is broader than problem finding, choice making or decision making.
It extends from analysis of the environment within which the business is functioning to evaluation of the outcomes from the alternative implemented.
This creative problem solving is accomplished through the five functions of Management: Planning, organising, leading, coordinating, and controlling.
11NS222 PRACTICUM/CLINICAL ATTACHMENT I The intended outcome is: using the Organisational resources in such a way to achieve its mission and goals.
It is important to remind ourselves that irrespective of the setting we find ourselves, management is management.
Management is generic and management principles are general rather than specific to a type of firm or organisation.
However, management is universal only if the manager has become familiar with the specific situation in which it is applied.
Production technology, customer characteristics and the culture of the industry are examples of specifics that managers need to learn to be effective in applying their generic management skills.
As the ward manager, nurses therefore need to be equipped with basic management skills: technical, human and conceptual.
A technical skill is the ability to use tools, techniques, and specialized knowledge to carry out a method, process, or procedure.
Human skills are used to build positive interpersonal relationships, solve human relations problems, build acceptance of one's co-workers, and relate to them in a way that their behavior is consistent with the needs of the organisation.
Conceptual skills involve the ability to see the organisation as a whole and to solve problems in a way that benefits the entire organisation.
Analytical, creative and intuitive talents make up the manager's conceptual skills.
This said what a ward manager does and how he/she does it can be subsumed under the five traditional tasks of management.
Through these functions, the nurse manager can be a catalyst for change or by definition, a change agent.
Planning The difference between a successful and unsuccessful manager lies within the planning procedure.
Planning is the first step in management and is essential as it facilitates control, is valuable in decision making and in the avoidance of business ruin.
It is the ongoing process of developing the business' mission and objectives and determining how they will be accomplished.
Stated differently, planning is the logical thinking through goals and making the decision as to what needs to be accomplished in order to reach the organisations’ objectives.
Planning should be futuristic, comprehensive and perspective.
However, creating a plan of action is the most difficult of the five tasks and requires the active participation of the entire organisation.
Managers use this process to plan for the future, like a blueprint to foresee problems, decide on the actions to evade difficult issues and to beat the competition.
(Bateman, Snell, 2007).
12NS222 PRACTICUM/CLINICAL ATTACHMENT I The nurse manager’s first work is to decide what s/he wants to accomplish and to set short, medium or long range goals for the ward.
The nurse draws up duty roster and nursing care plan that takes cognisance of the clients’ condition, peculiarity of the ward situation, resources available within the ward setting, type and significance of work and future trends.
This requires sensing the need of the clients and the health team as a whole, forecasting the economic, socio-political environment and of course selecting resources available.
Planning also involves budgeting for the resources and evaluation of performance.
Organising In order to reach the objective outlined in the planning process, structuring the work of the organisation is a vital concern.
So organising has to do with establishing the internal organisational structure of the organisation.
The focus is on division, coordination, and control of tasks and the flow of information within the organisation.
It is in this function that managers distribute authority to job holders i.e.
appointing individuals to assignments or responsibilities that blend together to develop one purpose, to accomplish the goals.
These goals will be reached in accordance with the institutional values and procedures.
There are four (4) steps in organising: 1.
Organising the structure of the department 2.
Organising the procedure measure of the department 3.
Determination of requirements of the department 4.
Allocation of resources viz: (a) Materials and (b) Personnel.
In the health system and nursing in particular, organising start soon after the nurses determined nursing action designed to achieve a desired nursing objective.
The nurse manager must then go over the plans with the team, break the assignments into units that one person can complete, link related jobs together in an understandable well-organised style and appoint the jobs to individuals (Allen, 1998).
Furthermore, the method of acquiring and distributing resources must be well defined, the type of activities to be performed and the line of responsibility must be clearly spelt out, and of course the mode of control and coordination must be in place.
This facilitates the accomplishment of tasks in a logical sequence e.g.
medications and treatments, diets served on time, tests completed in accordance with schedules of other departments e.t.c.
Therefore for a successful performance of this function, it becomes imperative for the manager to know his/her subordinates and what they are capable of in order to organize the most valuable resources the institution has, its employees.
(Bateman, Snell, 2007).
13NS222 PRACTICUM/CLINICAL ATTACHMENT I Directing/Leading Organisational success is determined by the quality of leadership that is exhibited.
"A leader can be a manager, but a manager is not necessarily a leader," says Gemmy Allen (1998).
Leadership is the power of persuasion of one person over others to inspire actions towards achieving the goals of the company.
Besides, people, not things, are directed and this implies that managers must act to get people do as he would like them to.
Thus directing could be defined as influencing people's behavior through motivation, communication, group dynamics, leadership and discipline.
Consequently the purpose of directing is to channel the behavior of all personnel to accomplish the organisation's mission and objectives while simultaneously helping them accomplish their own career objectives; optimizing return from all employees in the interest of the entire enterprise.
Directing others however involves knowing what they should do, and assisting them to do it.
Assisting may involve improving morale of the worker.
The ward manager must therefore be able to influence/motivate other health team members to an elevated goal and direct themselves to the duties or responsibilities assigned during the planning process.
S/he must possess interpersonal skills, communicate clearly and base his or her judgments on regular audits.
Their thorough knowledge of personnel creates unity, energy, initiative and loyalty and eliminates incompetence.
Authorizing staff to have the capability to deal with situations is also a significant part of leading (Allen, 1998).
Coordinating A good coordinating system is vital to effective organisation, directing and good practice.
Coordinating entails unifying and harmonizing activities and efforts to maintain the balance between the activities of the various units/segments of the organisation.
Coordinating takes place when common superiors are provided for workers whose works are related.
Coordinating is achieved through good interaction and communication.
Controlling By controlling, we mean, the method of ensuring that all our plans succeed.
Control is concerned with proper execution of the plan and measuring of performances of the employee.
According to Allen (1998) ‘Controlling is the final link in the functional chain of management activities and brings the functions of management cycle full circle’.
It allows for the performance standard within the group to be set and communicated.
Control also allows for ease of delegating tasks to team 14NS222 PRACTICUM/CLINICAL ATTACHMENT I members but as managers may be held accountable for the performance of subordinates, they may be wise to extend timely feedback of employee accomplishments.
Controlling can therefore be construed as a four-step process of: 1.
Establishing performance standards based on the organisation’s/firm's objectives.
2.
Measuring and reporting actual performance.
3.
Comparing the two, and taking corrective or preventive action as necessary.
4.
Identifying weaknesses and errors by controlling feedback, and conforming activities to plans, policies and instructions.
In synopsis, the process that guarantees plans are being implemented properly is the controlling process.
Effective ward management therefore entails planning, organising, directing, coordinating and controlling.
In simple sentences, it involves: 1.
Planning and organising work efficiently.
2.
Effective allocation of human and material resources.
3.
Recognizing priorities and ensuring efficient time management.
4.
Teaching and motivating team members towards the attainment of corporate goals.
5.
Appropriate delegation and supervision of subordinates.
6.
Maintaining consistencies and taking initiatives to help others.
7.
Demonstrating readiness to accept responsibility.
8.
Counselling patients and relatives.
9.
Resolving conflicts among staff, patients and relatives.
10.Exhibiting good professional conduct (ethics, firmness, gentleness and self discipline).
3.6 Supervision of Ancillary Staff The extract below from MAQ paper number 4, 2002 flow chart and subsequent summary perfectly outlines the process of supervision that can be adopted at any level of ward organisation and management.
Therefore at whatever level it occurs, the process of supervision may be thought of as consisting of four basic tasks as shown in figure 1.
These tasks are consistent with a wide variety of approaches, tools, and methods used for supervision and quality improvement interventions.
To emphasize the ongoing nature of the process, the diagram shows an action loop with no starting or end points.
Figure 1: The Process of Supervision 15NS222 PRACTICUM/CLINICAL ATTACHMENT I Set Expectations Monitor and Take Assess Action performance Identify Problems and Opportunities Adapted from Supplement on Population Report Volume XXX, No 4, 2002 The supervisor facilitates this process by communicating about, assessing, and facilitating the work of others.
The supervisor’s activities include the following: 1.
Set Expectations A prerequisite for effective supervision is the existence of clear expectations or standards against which performance and results can be measured.
Where these do not exist, the supervisor helps define and implement them.
2.
Monitor and assess Performance Once the standard or guidelines are set, the task of gauging the extent to which they are met becomes an ongoing activity that occurs at all levels of the system: for individual health care providers, within and among facilities, and at the district (regional) and national (central) levels.
3.
Identify Problems and Opportunities Where there are gaps between expectations and results, the supervisor facilitates a team process for examining potential causes and possible solutions.
By facilitating open communication and teamwork, the supervisor can help spot opportunities to improve the overall quality of care.
4.
Take Action The supervisor helps marshal the resources necessary (human, financial, material, political, institutional) and motivates and supports providers to implement interventions and activities to address performance gaps or opportunities for improvement.
The process continues as new activities begin, with the establishment of expectations for results.
16NS222 PRACTICUM/CLINICAL ATTACHMENT I 3.7 Communication Communication is an important and integral part of our daily activities and social interactions.
It is the foundation upon which interpersonal relationships are built.
Effective communication is the corner stone to good nursing care.
This is true regardless of the setting in which one is working.
The basic aim of communication is to establish and maintain harmonious and productive relationship with the clients and other people.
Besides, the quality of care you can provide is, in many ways, dependent on the quality of communication that exists between you and your patient.
It is essential that you develop and maintain an understanding of the methods and skills of communication in order to meet the needs of the patient.
3.7.1 What is Communication?
Communication has been defined as a meaningful exchange of ideas, statistical data, opinion, attitudes / emotions from a source to a receiver to produce intelligent, desirable actions that will accomplish Organisational objectives.
Scott (1967), believed that it is a dynamic process and involves the process of transmitting and accurate reception of ideas accompanied by a feedback to foster expected outcomes.
Stated differently, communication is the giving, receiving and interpreting of information directed to any of the five senses (sight, hearing, touch, taste, or smell) by two or more interacting people.
Implicit in the above statement is that communication embraces all modes of behaviour that an individual employs consciously or unconsciously to influence another, not only the spoken and written but also gesture, body movements, semantics and symbolism in arts.
Communication does not take place if the message being sent was not accurately received.
Therefore, the success or otherwise of communication process is evaluated from the point of view of how closely the elicited actions compare to the expected actions.
3.7.2 Purpose of Communication People communicate for many reasons.
We communicate to inform, instruct, command, comment, change, seek opinion, persuade, influence, educate, entertain, guide and to control other people’s view as well as changing their opinions.
More importantly, communication is the KEY to Patient Safety Goals and a standardized approach provides effective message relay.
In addition most errors in healthcare institutions can be directly linked to failure of communication between various disciplines such as physician to nurse, physician to pharmacy, nurse to nurse.
Characteristics / Quality of a Good Communication 17NS222 PRACTICUM/CLINICAL ATTACHMENT I A good communication process must be candid, complete, concise, clear, concrete, cautious and correct (7Cs).
3.7.3 Guidelines for Communicating with Patients and their Families 1.
Convey to the patient and family that they are important to you and that you want to help them.
There are many ways to do this; you must do what is comfortable and natural for you.
However, there are some things everyone can do.
2.
Convey honesty and trustworthiness.
• Try not to overwhelm the patient with embarrassing or personal questions.
When it is necessary to ask personal questions, explain why and keep it short and matter-of-fact.
• Don't make promises you can't keep.
If you say you are going to do something, make every effort to do it or see that it gets done.
• Try to be there when you say you will.
If you are late, explain why.
3.
Communicate with each patient as an individual.
(This is especially important in a hospital setting, where patients often experience a loss of identity.)
In order to do so, you must try to get to know the patient.
Listen to him.
Put yourself in his place.
4.
Accept and respect the patient despite the symptoms of his illness.
Techniques for Communicating with Patients 1.
Establishing the Setting • Provide a comfortable environment (lighting, temperature, furnishings).
• Establish a relaxed, unhurried setting.
• Sit down when speaking to the patient.
Although you probably have dozens of things you need to be doing at that moment, try to relax.
Don't stand at the doorway or sit on the edge of your seat, as if you are preparing to jump and run as soon as you can get away.
18NS222 PRACTICUM/CLINICAL ATTACHMENT I • Face the speaker and maintain eye contact.
• Provide for privacy.
• Avoid interruptions and other distracting influences.
2.
Verbal Communication Skills • Let the patient do the talking.
• Keep questions brief and simple.
• Use language that is understandable to the patient.
Avoid acronyms and medical/nursing jargon if the patient is nonmedical.
• Ask one question at a time.
Give the patient time to answer.
• Clarify patient responses to questions, not just for your own use, but also to let the patient know that you are listening (be sure you really are) and that you understand.
• Avoid leading questions.
You want the patient to tell you what he is feeling, not what he thinks you want to hear.
So avoid putting words in his mouth.
For example, it might be better to ask, "How are you feeling?"
rather than "I suppose you're feeling rested after your nap.
• Avoid how or why questions; they tend to be intimidating.
• Avoid the use of cliché statements like, "Don't worry; it'll be all right."
or "Your doctor knows best."
• Avoid questions, which require only a simple "yes" or "no" response.
You want to encourage the patient to talk to you.
• Avoid interrupting the patient.
If you need to ask a question, wait until he has completed his thought.
3.7.4 SBAR Technique – What is it?
SBAR is an acronym for situation, background, assessment, and recommendation.
The technique was developed by the US Navy.
SBAR is useful in everyday conversation but its strength is when there is critical situation.
The technique provides a framework for communication between members of the health care team about a 19NS222 PRACTICUM/CLINICAL ATTACHMENT I patient’s condition.
SBAR is an easy to remember, concrete mnemonic useful for framing any conversation, especially critical ones, requiring a clinician’s immediate attention and action.
Nurses are trained to be narrative and descriptive in their charting and verbiage i.e.
SOAPE charting, nursing narrative/comments and care planning.
We often get so into the details that we really don’t clearly communicate the need of the patient.
Physicians on the other hand often want the “bottom line”.
So when we fail to communicate the issue at stake and the urgency of the situation we fail to get the kind of response we desire for the patient.
SBAR therefore allows for an easy and focused way to set expectations for what will be communicated and how between members of the team; which is essential for developing teamwork and fostering a culture of patient safety.
SBAR- Why use it?
1.
Standardizes communication to help everyone 2.
Places every clinical person on the same communication level 3.
Creates a safe, respectful, organised way to communicate 4.
Prevents sentinel or untoward events by improving communication 5.
Provides an appropriate way for clinical staff to be assertive 6.
Staff are often trained to be narrative and descriptive The SBAR Process 1.
S – Situation • What is the situation (problem) or what is the matter at hand?
• Identify - Self - Unit - Patient - Code status if applicable • Briefly state the problem - What is it?
- When did it happen or start?
- How severe is it?
20NS222 PRACTICUM/CLINICAL ATTACHMENT I • Pertinent background information relating to the situation; could include the following: - Admitting diagnosis, date of admission - Pertinent medical history: age, allergies, weight, height, etc… - Current orders: medications, IV fluids, labs, etc… - Most recent vital signs - Test results: • Name, date and time test was done and results • Previous test results for comparison • Other pertinent clinical information 2.
B” Give the Background • Briefly state the information that matters to the problem.
• This could include some, most or all of the above.
Please give only the most important information.
3.
A – Assessment • First, what this is NOT: This is NOT a head to toe patient assessment!
It is an assessment of the Problem list under “S” – Situation.
It is an opportunity for you to communicate what you think the problem is.
• What is your assessment of the problem or situation?
• I think the problem is: (state in your own words) Examples: - The problem seems to be: cardiac, infection, respiratory, pain, etc… - I am not sure what the problem is, but the patient is deteriorating.
- The patient is increasingly unstable and we need to do something.
4.
R - Recommendation/Request This is the recommendation /request or what is it that you want regarding the situation or problem.
What is your recommendation or request?
- I suggest you or would like to.
.
- Transfer the patient - Come and see the patient at this time 21NS222 PRACTICUM/CLINICAL ATTACHMENT I - Talk to the patient or family about code status - Have an order for .
.
.
.?
- A consult for .
.
.
- Other suggestion When to use SBAR communication: • MD – MD • RN – MD • RN – RN • Pharmacy – MD or RN • Ancillary clinical staff – RN or MD • RN-PCA or Tech • Staff to patient • Hand-off between licensed professionals • Rapid Response Team • Anytime it is useful Practical useful Tips to Effective Communication • Prior to calling the Physician: • Ask yourself these KEY questions: • Have I seen and assessed the patient recently?
• Should I discuss this with my preceptor or supervisor?
• Have I reviewed the chart?
• Am I calling the correct MD?
• Do I have the admitting Diagnosis and Date of admission?
• Have I read the most recent progress notes and current shift notes?
22NS222 PRACTICUM/CLINICAL ATTACHMENT I • Gather patient’s medical record, including hard chart, LLUCIS info, any other pertinent documentation prior to calling the physician • Plan out what you need to say • Remember always, that the more critical your communication needs is, the more carefully you need to plan your communication • Have available the following information: • Patient’s hard chart • Patient’s Power Chart & flow sheet - open • List of current medications, allergies, IV fluids and labs • Most recent vital signs • If reporting test results: • Name, date, time and result of the test • Results of previous tests if applicable • Code status or Limitations of Treatment Completing the Loop of Communication • Document change in patient’s condition • Physician/Nurse Practitioner notification, interventions and follow- up.
• Be sure to document in the chart who you talked to, when, why and the response or lack of response.
• If there was no response, you need to document your next steps Source: Loma Linda University Medical Centre.
3.8 Handing and Taking Over the Care of a Patient 23NS222 PRACTICUM/CLINICAL ATTACHMENT I Overview From the dawn of civilization to the present, evidence prevails that nurses are the only set of health professionals who stay longest with the patients.
In a bid to provide a 24hours coverage, the works of nurses are organised into shift and call duties in many hospitals.
And many times patients are transferred from one unit of the hospital to another as their condition demands.
Therefore to provide a smooth transition of care and ensure continuity, there is need to hand over patients’ care from one shift to the other and from one unit to another.
However for smooth and efficient transfer of care, the handover report must be detailed and systematic.
Although studies have shown that about 20 % of information is lost during handing over the care of a patient, but a good handover report is essential to ensure efficient patient care.
It should be added also that many systems of handing over the care exist, but the body systems approach is the most commonly used method in the hospital setting.
Other approaches include the head to toe, chronological, acuity, and procedural.
Indication • Provide effective message relay.
• Helps nurses to be conversant with patients’ current health status and prevent errors in patients’ management.
• Maintain patient safety goals as identified by regulatory agencies.
• Fosters communication between various disciplines such as physician to nurse, orders, physician to pharmacy, nurse to nurse.
Provides hand-off reports as required.
When do we need to handover the care of patients?
There are many situations in which the care of a patient is handed over to other nurses.
The following are some examples: • Change in a patient’s condition: improvement or deterioration.
• Transfer from one unit to another.
• Transfer from one specialty to another.
• Transferring a patient to a more skilled or less skilled care giver.
24NS222 PRACTICUM/CLINICAL ATTACHMENT I • Meal breaks & educational breaks.
• Injury or illness of caregiver.
• End of shift or work scheduled.
Requirements • Patient’s folder or case note.
• Wheel chair or stretcher depending on patient’s condition.
Procedure Suggested Action Rationale Assessment  Caring of patients is a legal and Only duly qualified persons can moral responsibility of the care for patients.
Registered Nurse in the Hospital setting.
 Therefore before you handover This is necessary to protect the the care of a patient, ensure that patient and the community.
the person you are handing over to is authorized and duly qualified to receive the information and care for the patient.
Most of the time it is a colleague whom you already know, therefore this should not be a major difficulty.
However when in new surroundings establish the qualification and role of the person in that environment before you handover the patient’s information and care.
Planning  Obtain the name, admitting Provides preliminary data from diagnosis, condition of the which to plan the activities that patient, and the ward/room to may be involved in admitting the which the patient has been patient.
assigned.
25NS222 PRACTICUM/CLINICAL ATTACHMENT I  Assemble all needed equipments Enhances organisation and as outlined above.
efficient time management.
 Obtain special equipment, like Facilitates immediate care of the an IV stand or oxygen that may patient without causing be needed according to the unnecessary delay or discomfort.
unique needs of the patient.
Intervention/Implementation  Identify the patient by name, This will prevent major errors.
date of birth, bed number and diagnosis.
If there are two or more patients with the same name, state this to the nurse receiving the report.
In this situation it is important to identify the patient by patient’s file number.
 Mention the time, date and Facilitates smooth transition and circumstances which led to this continuity of care.
admission.
Give a brief description of medical and surgical histories including allergies (if any).
State all the medications the patient is taking or has taken.
 When using the body systems, Clear, factual, accurate, current, the person handing over the care complete and orderly information of a patient, gives as much is needed in delivering health care information about each system because it helps the person taking as is known to him or is over to be conversant with considered necessary to care for patient’s current health status and the patient.
The following prevent errors in patient’s systems are usually discussed.
management.
• Central Nervous System • Cardiovascular System.
• Respiratory System • Gastrointestinal System 26NS222 PRACTICUM/CLINICAL ATTACHMENT I • Renal System • Integumentary system • Skeletal system • Lymphatic System • Metabolic system  Psychological status: Assess the Helps to nip in bud any patients Affect.
State how the psychosocial problem that patient patient is coping with the disease may develop.
/ condition.
Are other people involved in decision making?
Is patient compliant / non- compliant?
Is the patient agitated?
e.t.c.
If the patient is quiet and not eating it may be first sign of depression.
 Social status: Describe the social, cultural, political and religious connections of the patient e.g.
Patient is Jehovah witness, a community leader e.t.c.
 Report Treatment and Discharge This not only enhances plans: These are short term and collaboration but also assist in long term plans of care for the effective implementation of care patient e.g.
Patient was seen by plan.
the Urology team, for probable surgery on Tuesday and Discharge home on Friday.
Discharge planning actually begins when the patient is admitted.
 Also update the person taking Every little detail is important in over about special circumstances matters of safety and speedy e.g.
social worker needs to be recovery of the client.
contacted; the next of kin has requested that no visitors are to be allowed to visit the patient because …….
; the patient knows of the prognosis which is 27NS222 PRACTICUM/CLINICAL ATTACHMENT I guarded; Do Not Disturb order in place e.t.c.
 Make appropriate Essential to ensure efficient documentation.
patient care and for medico-legal purposes.
Source – Adapted from http://www.brooksidepress.org/Products/ Nursing_Fundamentals Example of how to Report findings using the System Approach Central Nervous System Alert, conscious and orientated to time, person, place & situation.
Moves all limbs, describe if there is equal strength bilaterally.
If there is limb weakness then give details.
Assess level of consciousness (LOC) using Glasgow Coma Scale.
Do pupil reaction: Document and report.
Strength: Patient has strong grip, push, pull etc.
(Subjective) Weak: able to raise lift limbs against gravity.
Very weak: able to move extremities but unable to raise limbs against gravity.
Dermatome tests: must be included for spinal anaesthesia/injury.
Neurovascular observation of affected area: Motion, colour, sensation.
The patient’s sleep pattern can be included here or in the psychological section.
Cardiovascular System Give TPR & BP, do these observations more frequently if patient is unstable.
State if the patient is well perfused, capillary refill time, warm or cool to touch.
Diaphoresis (sweating), if any.
Comment on ankle oedema.
Describe the presence or absence of pedal and radial pulses.
If absent use doppler.
Indicate who has been notified.
State if Bloods have been sent and what tests have been ordered.
ECG: if done, routinely done for patients over forty years old.
Chest pain: Describe when, where, duration, how relieved.
Cardiac Medications, if any.
Mention abnormal results and who has been notified.
Planned interventions.
28NS222 PRACTICUM/CLINICAL ATTACHMENT I Respiratory System State the patient’s respiratory rate and pattern.
State if the patient is on oxygen and how it is being administered.
Be sure to mention if the saturation is on room air or on supplemental oxygen.
State if the patient is able to maintain clear airway and has a cough reflex / SOB on exertion.
Report your observations: auscultation, percussion, palpation, any sign of circulatory overload?
Comment on cough, sputum, crackles and wheezes.
Underwater seal drain etc.
Gastrointestinal System Begin by describing the patient’s nutritional status: mucosa of the mouth, size of abdomen, weight, body mass index (BMI), bowel action etc.
Describe nausea and vomiting if present.
Mention any medications if given and its effectiveness.
If no abdominal sounds, then notify physician & describe actions.
If tenderness present then describe the area.
If guarding present, describe.
Rebound tenderness, describe.
Nasogastric Tube / Drainage: amount and describe what it looks like.
Stool: Frequency and type.
Renal System Describe if the patient is passing urine or not (Anuric).
Patient may be able to stand up and pass urine.
Describe the urine: amount, colour, odour, presence of casts, urinalysis.
State if specimen sent to lab for microscopy, culture and sensitivity (MC&S).
State if patient’s bladder is distended, residual urine, nocturia, frequency, hematuria, oliguria, renal calculi.
State if the patient has a Foley catheter and if urine is being measured hourly.
Integumentary (Skin) System Start of by describing the patient’s skin e.g.
clean, dirty, shaved etc.
Describe sores, wounds, abrasions, parasites, evidence of IV drug use and mutilation.
Describe the natural skin colour of the patient.
Skeletal System Describe the patient’s body built and bone structure.
Describe bone fractures (if any), pain in joints, swollen joints, malformed bones – indication of malnutrition in early childhood.
29NS222 PRACTICUM/CLINICAL ATTACHMENT I Metabolic System Describe the patient’s metabolic status e.g.
Diabetes Mellitus, temporary Diabetes due to high doses of steroids.
State if insulin dependent or not.
State time insulin or BSL due.
State if patient able to care for self, presence of complications.
4.0 CONCLUSION The Hospital environment in which the patient receives medical and nursing care and treatment must be safe, pleasant, clean, and orderly for the patient's physical and mental well being.
Nothing could be too much to do so as to achieve and maintain the necessary high level of order and sanitation that is a sine-qua-non to patient safety 5.0 SUMMARY In this unit, we have been able to present the layout for ward organisation in relation to the care of patients in the ward, his/her environment, safety measures, use, storage and care of the ward equipment, ward management, supervision of ancillary staff, communication as well as handing and taking over of patients and the ward unit.
6.0 TUTOR-MARKED ASSIGNMENT 1.
Identify articles/equipment required in the patient care area.
2.
Maintain ward cleanliness and tidiness.
3.
Maintain and take hospital equipment for repair when necessary.
4.
Identify and apply the hospital fire, electrical and general safety measures when providing care for patients.
5.
Identify guidelines for terminally cleaning the patient care unit.
5.
Recognize rules for the use of disposable and non-disposable items.
6.
Organize work efficiently.
7.
Delegate/explain duties according to ward routines and responsibilities.
8.
Recognize priorities in nursing care.
9.
Developed a mastery of communication techniques as evidenced by candid, complete, concise, clear, concrete, cautious and correct communication with clients and other health professionals in a variety of settings.
10.Demonstrate correct sequence of activities during handing and taking over of patients and the ward unit.
7.0 REFERENCES/FURTHER READING 30NS222 PRACTICUM/CLINICAL ATTACHMENT I Aiken, L.H.
& Patrician, P.A.
(2000).
Measuring Organisational Traits of Hospitals: the Revised Nursing Work Index.
Nurse Res: 49:146–53.
[CrossRef] [Medline] , Aiken, L.H.
(1989).
The Hospital Nursing Shortage.
A Paradox of Increasing Supply and Increasing Vacancy Rates.
West J Med; 151:87–92.[Medline].
Allred, C.A.
& Arford, P.H.
& Michel, Y.
(1995).
Coordination as a Critical Element of Managed Care.
J Nurse Admin; 25:21–8.
Davies, H.T.
& Marshall, M.N.
(1999).
Public Disclosure of Performance Data: Does The Public Get What the Public Wants?
Lancet; 353:1639–40.
[CrossRef] [Medline] .
Davies, H.T.
; Nutley, S.M.
& Mannion, R. (2000).
Organisational Culture and Quality of Health Care.
Qual Health Care; 9:111–9.
[Free Full Text] .
Davies, H.T.
; Nutley, S.M.
& Smith PC.
(2000).
What Works?
Bristol, UK: The Policy Press.
Epstein, A.M. (1990).
The Outcomes Movement—will it get us where we want to go?
N Engl J Med; 323:266–70.
[Medline] Scholten, G.R.
& van der Grinten, T.E.
(1998).
Between Physician and Manager: New Co-Operation Models in Dutch Hospitals.
J Manag Med; 12:33–43.[Medline].
Shamian, J.; Lightstone, E.Y.
(1997).
Hospital Restructuring Initiatives in Canada.
Med Care; 35:62–9.
Shortell, S.M.
; Gillies, R.R, Anderson, D.A.
& et al.
(1993).
Creating Organised Delivery Systems: The Barriers and Facilitators.
Hosp Health Serve Admin; 38:447–66.[Medline].
31NS222 PRACTICUM/CLINICAL ATTACHMENT I UNIT 2 BASIC PATIENT CARE CONTENTS 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objectives 3.0 Main Content 3.1 Admission of Patients 3.2 Routine Observation 3.3 History Taking 3.4 Assessing Vital Signs 3.4.1 Taking of Temperature 3.4.2 Assessing Pulse Including Taking of Apex Beat 3.4.3 Assessing Respiration 3.4.4 Measuring Blood Pressure 3.5 Routine Investigations 3.5.1 Collection, Observation, Testing and Disposal of Urine 3.5.2 Throat Culture 3.5.3 Collection, Observation, Testing and Disposal of Sputum 3.5.4 Collection, Observation, Testing and Disposal of Stool 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutor-Marked Assignment 7.0 References/Further Reading 1.0 INTRODUCTION Nursing is consistently described as an emphatic and compassionate inter person process that supports dependent needs of patient and promotes independence (Yura and Walsh, 1983).
As an art and science directed toward meeting both the health and illness needs of man and his family, the nurse observes, supports, communicates, ministers and teaches.
Patients admitted to a hospital not only face many unknown, but strange environment, a new role, and unfamiliar persons must be dealt with at a time when illness may impair the ability to make rapid adjustments (Donnelly, 1980, Fajemilehin and Fabayo, 1991).
The nurse therefore assumes responsibility for facilitating adjustment of the individuals admitted to hospital through special and professional skills designed to increase their understanding of hospitalization and its routines through continuous nurse – patient interaction from the moment of admission through to discharge (Fajemilehin and Fabayo, 1991).
32NS222 PRACTICUM/CLINICAL ATTACHMENT I 2.0 OBJECTIVES At the end of this unit, you should be able to: • state the scientific principles underpinning the basic patient care • identify supplies/equipment and follow procedures that apply to obtaining all kinds of specimen • demonstrate ability to assist the patient to use the designated equipment to void or defecate in safe and effective manner • collect specific specimens, be it urine, feaces, vomitus, and sputum in a correct, logical and systematic manner • conduct simple tests on urine for sugar, protein, acetone, and other abnormalities following prescribed procedure • follow the correct procedure of admitting patients into hospital wards • demonstrate mastery of a range of essential nursing skills to meet basic healthcare needs of patients.
3.0 MAIN CONTENT 3.1 Admission of Patients Definition Admission is the process of official acceptance of patients into the hospital for the purpose of receiving care.
Indication: To 1.
Make patient and family feel welcome and facilitate their adjustment to the hospital environment.
2.
Obtain pertinent information from patient.
3.
Observe and evaluate the patient’s condition.
4.
Institute primary diagnostic measures.
5.
Give pertinent information to patient and family/relatives.
6.
Maintain the individuality of the person being admitted.
Types 33NS222 PRACTICUM/CLINICAL ATTACHMENT I Routine/Scheduled/Planned Admission As the name implies, this is a planned admission.
Patient is already aware and sometimes on waiting list for admission.
Appointment for admission would have been given and a bed would have been booked for the patient.
Non-Routine/Emergency Admission This is sudden or abrupt; no prior notice or preparation.
Nursing Considerations 1.
Determine the patient’s previous experience with hospitalization to anticipate patient’s needs.
2.
Maintain patient’s personal identity.
3.
Promote patient’s self-esteem/self concept.
4.
Secure patient’s valuables and clothing.
5.
Orient patient to facility, answer questions, anticipate concerns, needs.
[Golub & Keegan, 1988] Requirements This is a trolley procedure.
The admission trolley should have on the: Top shelf 1.
Top sheet 2.
Observation Tray 3.
Patients gown 4.
Admission assessment form(s) Bottom Shelf 4.
Weighing scale 5.
Container for urine specimen Procedure 34NS222 PRACTICUM/CLINICAL ATTACHMENT I Suggested Action Rationale Assessment  Receive information about This allows necessary preparation to be the need for admission made.
from the outpatient department.
 Obtain the name, admitting Provides preliminary data from which diagnosis, condition of the to plan the activities that may be patient, and the ward/room involved in admitting the patient.
to which the patient has been assigned.
 Assess the appearance of Demonstrates concern for cleanliness, the ward and availability of orderliness and patient’s convenience.
basic supplies.
Planning  Assemble all needed Enhances organisation and efficient equipment as outlined time management.
above.
 Obtain special equipment, Facilitates immediate care of the like an IV stand or oxygen patient without causing unnecessary that may be needed delay or discomfort.
according to the unique needs of the patient.
 Lay the bed and adjust the Facilitate care and reduces strain to height to suit patient’s patient.
condition.
Intervention/Implementation  Before diving in, take a Gives you not only a quick insight into minute or so to look at his/ patient’s condition but also a rough her entirety, making your idea about the person of the patient.
observations, if possible, from an out-of-the way perch.
 Accord the patient and his Friendliness and personal regard helps 35NS222 PRACTICUM/CLINICAL ATTACHMENT I relatives a warm reception.
to reduce the patient and relatives initial anxiety.
 Introduce yourself to Helps to develop positive nurse-patient patient and relatives or relationship.
significant others.
 Place patient on bed or on Demonstrate concerns for patient’s a chair depending on well-being and comfort.
his/her condition.
 Observe the patient from Determines if the admission process head to toe and for signs of requires modification.
acute distress.
 Attend to urgent needs for Promotes comfort and well-being.
comfort and breathing.
 Carry out prescribed Ensures safety and well-being.
orders.
 Do a quick but fairly Serves as baseline data and assists in comprehensive history detecting any abnormality.
taking, physical examination including vital signs and weight, and collect urine specimen.
 Give patient hospital gown Facilitates easy identification of to wear.
patients.
 Offer explanations Knowing what to expect reduces concerning hospital unnecessary fear and apprehension.
regulations for valuables, Besides it also enhances compliance visiting hours, operation of with care and hospital regulations.
equipment, hospital routines and consent forms to patient and relatives.
 Orient patient and relatives Helps to relieve anxiety.
to ward and co-patients.
 Answer questions readily Diffuses tension and aids in building and convey confidence by confidence and trust in the health manner and attitude.
facility.
 If patient is dirty and Promotes comfort and contributes to 36NS222 PRACTICUM/CLINICAL ATTACHMENT I condition permits, give a patient’s feeling of emotional well- bed bath.
being.
 If patient is a child, Promotes the psychological and reassure the mother and emotional well-being of both child and allow her to stay with the mother.
child.
Where the mother does not stay, the nurse plays the role of the mother.
 If patient is for surgery, Enhances organisation and effective ensure that consent is management.
signed and arrangement made for blood donors if required.
 In emergency, use your This ensures that patient’s pressing initiative in assessing the needs are taken care of first thereby patient and prioritise care.
enhancing his/her survival.
 Initiate the nursing care Engenders continuity of care and plan and record time, date, serves as a vehicle of communication and mode of admission.
with other members of the health team.
Evaluation  Have the patient’s pressing needs been met?
 Has the patient’s need for orientation to his role and his new environment been met?
 Does the patient perceive the nurses’ understanding of his fears?
 Are the patient’s valuables in safe custody?
 Does the patient demonstrate understanding of hospital routines and functions of members of the health team?
 Are the patient’s preferences and habit patterns supported whenever possible?
3.2 Routine Observation Before delving in, take a minute or so to look at the patient in his entirety, making your observations, if possible, from an out-of-the way perch.
Does the patient seem anxious, in pain, upset?
What about his dress and hygiene?
Remember, the examination begins as soon as you lay eyes on the patient.
37NS222 PRACTICUM/CLINICAL ATTACHMENT I 3.3 History Taking This is a planned communication or a conversation with a purpose.
For example, to get or give information, identify problems of mutual concern, evaluate change, teach, provide support, or provide counseling or therapy (Wilkinson, 2000).
During assessment, the purpose of interview is to gather information about client’s health history.
The goal of history taking is to get from the client an accurate account of his complaint and view this against the background of his life as a whole.
How well this is achieved is a factor of the nurse’s knowledge and skill at eliciting information from the client using appropriate techniques of communication and observation of nonverbal cues.
Effective communication is therefore a key factor in the interview process (Cecere & McCash, 1992).
Guidelines for an Effective Interview/History Taking 1.
Be prepared – The interview is more productive if the nurse has an opportunity to prepare for the interaction.
Such preparation includes the review of client’s clinical record, conversation with other health care personnel, and literatures about client’s health problem (Moffett, 1998, Wilkinson, 2000).
This will focus the interview and prevent tiring the client, and save your time.
2.
Appropriate Timing – Schedule interviews with client at a time when the client is physically comfortable and free of pain, and when interruptions by friends, family, and other health professionals are minimal.
3.
Create a Pleasant Interviewing Atmosphere – A quiet, well- lighted, well-ventilated and relaxed setting, relatively devoid of noise and interruptions enhances communication.
A relaxed atmosphere eases the patient’s anxiety, promotes comfort, and conveys your willingness to listen.
Ensure privacy, as some clients will not share personal information if they suspect others can overhear.
In all instances, the client should be made to feel comfortable and unhurried.
4.
Establish a Good Rapport – Greet the client by name if possible; sit and chat with the client before the interview.
Be sure to explain the purpose of the interview and show concern for the patient’s story.
5.
Set the Tone and be Focused – Encourage the client to talk about his chief complaint.
This helps you to focus on his most troublesome symptoms.
Keep the interview informal while still being 38NS222 PRACTICUM/CLINICAL ATTACHMENT I professional.
Speak clearly and simply, avoiding medical jargons and be sure patient understands you.
6.
Choose your Words Carefully – Ask open-ended questions to encourage the client to provide complete and pertinent information.
7.
Take Notes – Avoid documenting everything during the interview but make sure you jot down important information such as date, times.
Health History and Nursing History The primary focus of the data collection interview is the health history and Nursing history.
A health history is designed to collect data to be used primarily by the physician to diagnose a health problem and it is usually collected by the medical team.
Often the admitting nurse also collects this same information during the admission interview.
However, there is a growing disapproval of the nurse repeating this process, as credibility is lost when the nurse repeats virtually all the questions that others have already asked.
A nursing history on the other hand has a different focus – the client’s response to the health problems, which assist the nurse more accurately in identifying nursing diagnoses (Cecere, & McCash, 1992).
While the health history concentrate on symptoms and progression of disease, the nursing history focuses on client’s functional patterns, responses to changes in health status and alterations in lifestyle.
Health History The components of a health history include: • Demographic information – encompasses demographic variables such as name, date, age, sex, e.t.c.
• Chief/Presenting complaint – try to define what has motivated the client to seek health care and its duration.
• History of present illness (HPI) – HPI provides detailed data about the chief complaint or reason for entering the health care system.
• Past health history – provides information about the client’s prior state of health.
Includes questions about childhood and adult illnesses, immunizations, injuries, hospitalizations, surgeries, therapeutic regimens, allergies, travels, habits, and use of supportive devices.
39NS222 PRACTICUM/CLINICAL ATTACHMENT I • Family health history (FHH) – FHH notes illnesses that have environmental, genetic, or familial tendency or that are communicable.
A genetic chart or family tree of three generations can be developed to illustrate the family health history.
• Social and occupational history – Enquire about what may be grouped as the client’s physical and emotional environment, his surroundings both at home and work, his habits and his own mental attitude to life and to his work.
• Review of systems – This is the final portion of health history.
It is the systematic collection of specific information about the client’s past and present health status related to common problems of body systems.
(Swash & Mason, 1986; Cecere, & McCash, 1992).
It is important to mention here as Swash & Mason, (1986) noted, that in taking history, it is neither possible nor desirable to tie a patient down to a particular sequence.
The client must be allowed to tell his own story.
Besides, a good clinician begins the examination of a patient as the latter walks into the room – his appearance, the way he walks, the way he answers questions and so on – and only finishes taking the history when the consultation is over.
Occasionally a vital piece of information may come out just when the patient is leaving.
Swash & Mason, (1986) remarked that while the list of headings is formidable, it does take some experience to know in a given case which part of the history is particularly worth pursuing.
And following the health history, a general survey statement is made, which is a statement of the provider’s impression of a client, including behavioral observations.
Nursing History Numerous nursing history/database formats are available in literatures (Carpenito, 1989; Christensen & Kenney, 1990; Cecere & McCash, 1992).
The format in use in most clinical setting is the 11 functional patterns credited to Majory Gordon.
This format (presented below) allows systematic data gathering and facilitates making inferences (nursing diagnosis).
Health-Perception-Health-Management Pattern Focuses on client’s perceived level of health and well-being and on personal practices for maintaining health.
It also embraces preventive screening activities such as breast and testicular examination; hypertension and cardiac risk factor screening e.t.c.
40NS222 PRACTICUM/CLINICAL ATTACHMENT I Nutritional-Metabolic Pattern Assesses food and fluid intake, food preferences and taboos, cultural factors relating to food and nutrition, e.t.c.
Also explores difficulties if any with ingestion, digestion, absorption, transport and metabolism of nutrients.
Elimination Pattern Assesses bowel and bladder functions such as frequency, amount, relationship of output to intake, and any discomfort or difficulty associated with each function.
Activity-Exercise Pattern Explores the client’s activities of daily living including client’s usual pattern of exercise, leisure and recreation.
Sleep-Rest Pattern – This inquires about the client’s pattern of sleep, rest and relaxation in a 24hour period, noting any deviation from client’s premorbid rest and sleep pattern.
Cognitive-Perceptual Pattern Assessment of this pattern involves a description of all the senses (vision, hearing, taste, touch, smell and pain) and the cognitive functions (such as communication, memory, and decision making).
Self-Perception-Self-Concept Pattern This pattern explores the client’s self-concept, which is critical to determining the way the client interacts with others.
Attitudes about self, perception of personal abilities and body image, and general sense of worth are also addressed under this pattern.
Role-Relationship Pattern Describes the client’s role and relationships including major responsibilities of the individual.
It examines person’s self-evaluation of the performance of expected behaviors related to these roles.
Sexuality-Reproductive Pattern 41NS222 PRACTICUM/CLINICAL ATTACHMENT I This pattern describes satisfaction or dissatisfaction with personal sexuality and describes the reproductive pattern.
Coping-Stress Tolerance Pattern This pattern explores the client’s general coping pattern and the effectiveness of the coping mechanisms.
It encompasses analyzing the specific stressors or problems that confront the client, the client’s perception of the stressor and the person’s response to the stressor.
Value-Belief Pattern Describes the values, goals, and beliefs (including spiritual) that guide health related choices.
(Cecere & McCash, 1992).
3.4 Assessing Vital Signs (Temperature, Pulse, Respiration and Blood Pressure) Definition Vital signs or cardinal signs, as they are sometimes called, could be defined as signs reflecting the body’s physiological state, which are governed by body’s vital organs (brain, heart, lungs) and are necessary for sustaining life.
They include: Temperature, Pulse, Respiration, Blood pressure, and, where appropriate, blood oxygen saturation, all of which are indicators of vital functions of the body that are necessary to sustain life.
These parameters provide critical information about a patient's state of health and as such must be taken and recorded at least once per shift.
Abnormal variations could indicate deterioration in patient’s condition or be a pointer to imminent complications.
In simple sentences, they: 1. can identify the existence of an acute medical problem.
2. are means of rapidly quantifying the magnitude of an illness and how well the body is coping with the resultant physiologic stress; the more deranged the vitals, the more sick the patient.
3. are markers of chronic disease states e.g.
hypertension is defined as chronically elevated blood pressure beyond what is considered normal for that age and sex.
(Goldberg, 2006) 42NS222 PRACTICUM/CLINICAL ATTACHMENT I Therefore if a patient's vital signs have changed significantly within a short period of time, a double check for accuracy may be warranted and unusual findings should be brought to the attention of the nurse in charge or attending medical officer.
As you will soon discover, there is significant potential for measurement error, so repeated determinations can provide critical information.
Indication: To 1.
Establish a baseline data for subsequent evaluation.
2.
Recognise changes and abnormal variations.
3.
Determine changes in the vital signs response to specific therapies.
4.
Monitor clients at risk of alterations in vital signs.
5.
Assess vital signs before and after administration of medication and general anaesthetics.
6.
Monitor and assess changes in the client’s health status.
7.
Identify the existence of an acute medical problem Equipment: A tray containing 1.
Clinical thermometer 2.
Galipot with dry cotton swabs 3.
Galipot containing spirit cotton swabs 4.
Watch with a second hand or pulsometer 5.
Stethoscope 6.
Sphygmomanometer 7.
Kidney receiver for used swabs Procedure Required Steps Rationale Assessment  Collect demographic and social Facilitates patient identification data, past and present health and accurate inferences.
history.
43NS222 PRACTICUM/CLINICAL ATTACHMENT I  Determine the patient baseline Assists in making comparison and vital signs from the patient identifying changes.
records.
 Assess factors that normally Ensures accuracy of the data.
influence the patient’s vital signs.
 Determine the best site for each Different sites may bring type of vital signs to be checked.
alteration in the value.
 Develop individualized goals Each patient is a unique being and based on assessment data.
often has needs that require individualistic care.
Planning  Prepares appropriate Prevents disruption and environment interference.
 Ensures adequate lighting in the Enhances visibility and accuracy room of measurement.
 Minimizes or stops noise in the Noise interferes in the perception room of sounds.
 Identifies the patient, introduce Knowing the reason for procedure self and notify him/her about may facilitate cooperation.
rationale for the procedure.
 Explain procedure to patient and Demonstrates concern for gain consent patient’s right and human dignity and may also enhance patient’s cooperation.
 Let patient be at rest, provide This will enhance accuracy of safety and position the patient data comfortably.
 Prepares all necessary Enhances organisation of work equipment and materials and time management.
 Measure the vital sign under the Ensures consistency and avoids same condition false impression.
NB – Wait for correct time before measuring vital signs if you identify any factors that may influence the reading.
44NS222 PRACTICUM/CLINICAL ATTACHMENT I Implementation 3.4.1 Temperature This is generally obtained through a variety of routes viz: oral, axillary, rectal, and tympanic membrane.
The health facility policy, patient’s age cum patient’s condition dictates which site is eventually used.
Depending on the bias of a particular institution, temperature is measured in either Celsius or Fahrenheit.
Rectal temperatures, which most closely reflect internal or core values, are approximately 0.5 – 1 degree F higher than those obtained orally.
Assessing Temperature through the Axillary’s Route Required Steps Rationale  Wash hands Helps to prevent cross infection  Wipe thermometer with a wet Ensure thorough removal of clean swab soaked in cold disinfectants which may cause water from bulb towards finger irritation if not wiped from the to remove disinfectants thermometer.
 Shake down the thermometer Forces mercury down the vigorously using a firm thermometer glass so as to have a twisting motion to below valid reading.
35oC.
 Wipe the patient’s axilla dry Safeguards against false reading.
with dry swab.
 Insert thermometer in centre of When arms are placed across the axilla, lowers the patient arm chest, it helps hold the over the thermometer and places thermometer in situ and prevents arms across the patient’s chest.
possible displacement.
 Leaves the thermometer for 3 – Enables accurate reading to be 5 minutes.
obtained.
 Remove and read the Rotating the thermometer slowly thermometer accurately while tends to magnify the mercury gently rotating it at eye level.
making it easy to read.
 Remove and wipe thermometer Helps to prevent cross infection.
from shaft to bulb with alcohol impregnated swabs.
45NS222 PRACTICUM/CLINICAL ATTACHMENT I  Shake the thermometer down to In preparation for another use.
below 35oC before replacing in to its container.
 Ensure patient comfort.
Answer Relieves fear and anxiety and any questions regarding the tends to facilitate compliance recording.
with medical regimen.
 Chart temperature recording.
Fosters communication of Report any abnormality.
findings to other health team members for necessary action.
 Clean discards and store Aids the control of communicable materials appropriately diseases.
3.4.2 Pulse The pulse rate is a measurement of the heart rate, or the number of times the heart beats per minute.
As the heart pushes blood through the arteries, the arteries expand and contract with the flow of the blood.
Taking a pulse not only measures the heart rate, but also can indicate the following: heart rhythm, strength of the pulse (volume) and tension.
The pulse can be measured at any place where a large artery runs over a bone or simply by placing the diaphragm of the stethoscope over the left fifth intercostal space, mid-clavicular line.
However for reasons of convenience it is generally done by palpating the radial pulse.
The normal pulse rate for healthy adults ranges from 60 to 100 beats per minute.
The pulse rate may also fluctuate and increase with exercise, illness, injury, and emotions.
Required Steps Rationale  Place the index (second) and The fingertips are sensitive to middle (third) fingers over the wave of distension and relaxation appropriate artery and press of the arteries as blood passes firmly but gently on the arteries through them.
Pressing too hard until you feel a pulse.
can obliterate the patient’s pulse.
 Begin to count the rate only The forefingers have pulses of when pulse is felt regularly.
their own that may be mistaken for the patient’s pulse.
46NS222 PRACTICUM/CLINICAL ATTACHMENT I  The most accurate way to count Promotes speed and accuracy.
is to wait until the second hand Besides, 15 seconds provide of the watch is a whole number sufficient time to detect and count for 15 seconds, and abnormalities.
then multiply by 4.
 In addition to rate, assess for Gives a broad picture of the rhythm (regular or irregular), patient’s cardiovascular status.
strength (bounding, strong, weak, thready) and tension.
 If irregularities are detected Enhances greater accuracy.
within a 15- second count, count the pulse for a full minute.
 Record pulse rate; note the Serves as a vehicle of volume, rhythm, and tension.
communication with other Chart any unusual findings members of the health team.
Apical pulse Required Steps Rationale  Screen the patient.
Demonstrates respect for patient’s privacy.
 Have him lie in fowler’s or This positions the heart as near dorsal position so that his chest front of the chest as possible and becomes expanded.
facilitates the hearing of the heart beat.
 Clean stethoscope ear pieces and Aids in the control of the diaphragm with alcohol communicable diseases.
wipe.
 Expose patient’s sternum and This provides unhindered access left side of chest for to the chest.
auscultation.
• Palpate correctly and locate apex Guarantees accuracy of the result.
of heart at points of maximal impulse.
 Warm diaphragm of stethoscope Patient may be sensitive to cold between hands.
and that could be startling enough to momentarily elevate the pulse rate thus defeating your purpose of obtaining a resting rate.
47NS222 PRACTICUM/CLINICAL ATTACHMENT I • Place diaphragm over the chest Heart sounds are most easily just below the left nipple.
Start picked in this region.
listening in this area and move the stethoscope slightly left or right as necessary until the beat are quite distinct.
• Hold the diaphragm firmly Facilitates sound transmission and against the chest wall; keep the prevents the perception of added/ stethoscope tubing hanging free extraneous sounds thus ensuring and its head motionless.
accuracy of findings.
 Concentrate on the heart sounds, You can lose count with any remembering that each ‘lub-dub’ slight distraction or loss of (S1 and S2) represents one beat.
concentration with resultant error.
 Count for a full minute and Allows sufficient time to detect determine any rhythm irregularities and/or other defects.
irregularities.
• Replace patient’s gown and Demonstrates concern for assist patient to assume a patient’s privacy and well-being.
comfortable position.
 Record the rate promptly and Enhances communication with describe any rhythm other team members and irregularities in patient’s chart.
engenders continuity of care.
3.4.3 Respiration Respirations are recorded as breaths per minute.
A complete cycle of inspiration and expiration constitutes one act of respiration.
They should be counted for at least 30 seconds as the total number of breaths in a 15 second period is rather small and any miscounting can result in rather large errors when multiplied by 4.
Try to do this as surreptitiously as possible so that the patient does not consciously alter their rate of breathing.
This can be done by observing the rise and fall of the patient's chest while you appear to be taking their pulse.
Required Steps Rationale  It may be helpful to count the Prevents patient from being aware respirations immediately after that his respirations are being counting the pulse with the counted.
48NS222 PRACTICUM/CLINICAL ATTACHMENT I fingertips still on the patient’s artery.
 Proceed to count respiration If patient becomes conscious of with fingers still on patient’s your counting, he/she may artery.
inadvertently alter his/her usual breathing rate.
 Observe the movement of the This not only helps in detecting chest wall.
In order to abnormalities but enhances sufficiently observe the rate, accuracy.
depths, and rhythm of respirations, count for at least 30 seconds.
 Evaluate the sounds made when Assist in detecting respiratory the patient breathes.
obstruction and assessing the need for suctioning.
 Count for one full minute (60 Allows sufficient time to detect seconds) if abnormality is noted.
irregularities or other defects.
 Record your findings.
In order not to forget them and to share information with other team members.
3.4.4 Blood Pressure Blood pressure is the force of the blood pushing against the artery walls measured in mmHg.
Each time the heart beats, it pumps blood into the arteries, resulting in the highest blood pressure as the heart contracts (http://www.uen.org/Lessonplan/preview.cgi).
The blood pressure is therefore a measure of two pressures against the arterial wall: the systolic (ventricular contraction) and the diastolic – ventricular relaxation (Curren, 1983).
This explains why two numbers are recorded when measuring blood pressure.
The higher number, or systolic pressure, refers to the pressure inside the artery when the heart contracts and pumps blood through the body.
The lower number, or diastolic pressure, refers to the pressure inside the artery when the heart is at rest and is filling with blood.
Both the systolic and diastolic pressures are recorded as "mm Hg" (millimeters of mercury).
This recording represents how high the mercury column is raised by the pressure of the blood (http://www.uen.org/Lessonplan/preview.cgi).
The blood pressure is routinely measured on the brachial artery of the arm using the sphygmomanometer which is most commonly called a 49NS222 PRACTICUM/CLINICAL ATTACHMENT I blood pressure ‘cuff’ or manometer.
The cuff is inflated to temporarily stop the arterial blood flow, and sounds of returning circulation, called the korotkoff sounds are listened to with a stethoscope to determine the blood pressures.
Korotkoff sounds start as a faint rhythmic tapping which increases in intensity, then suddenly muffles, and quickly becomes inaudible.
The systolic pressure is that point at which the initial tapping sound is heard while the point at which the sound ceases is considered the best index of diastolic pressure (Curren, 1983).
Required Steps Rationale  Have the patient sit, and support This will ensure the accuracy of his arm comfortably at his heart the reading.
level.
 Position patient’s forearm at Facilitates measurement and heart level with palm of hands ensure accuracy of measurements.
turned up.
Turn down radio or Cleaning with alcohol sponge TV, clean stethoscope ear pieces helps to remove any transient with an alcohol wipe and place organisms left on the stethoscope them around your neck in by previous user.
preparation for use.
 Roll the patient’s sleeve Facilitates proper application of completely to his shoulder.
If it the cuff and easy access to the is too tight to do this, have the brachial pulsation.
patient remove it and turn his/her arm upward.
 The blood pressure cuff should If the blood pressure cuff is too be of appropriate size.
small, the readings will be artificially elevated.
The reverse is the case if the cuff is too large.
 Wrap the cuff fabric around the This ensures even inflation of the patient's upper arm to secure it.
pressure bladder and complete The cuff must be smooth, snug occlusion of blood flow.
and overlap perfectly.
 Ensure that the line marked For easy location of the brachial "artery" is roughly placed over artery and proper placement of the brachial artery.
This is the diaphragm of the stethoscope.
located towards the medial aspect of the antecubital fossa.
 Palpate for brachial artery.
To Helps in measuring the systolic locate the brachial artery put pressure by palpatory method 50NS222 PRACTICUM/CLINICAL ATTACHMENT I your hand under the patient’s while enhancing the accuracy of elbow and hyperextend his arm.
auscultatory method.
 If you are using an aneroid Prevents parallax error.
gauge adjust it so that you are able to read it straight on.
Position manometer correctly for viewing.
 If you are using potable mercury Angles of viewing other than eye gauge set it on a level surface.
level can result in inaccuracies.
Get a chair ready so you can sit The degree of error increases with to read it at eye level, or be the distance above or below eye prepared to bend so as to level that the gauge is read.
accomplish this.
 Identify approximate systolic The systolic blood pressure is the pressure by palpating brachial or point at the pulse first becomes radial pulse during cuff perceptible corresponding to the inflation.
point at which blood is first able to force its way through against the pressure exerted by the inflated cuff.
 Wait for 30 seconds after This ensures complete deflation.
deflating cuff before auscultation.
 Next examine the stethoscope Note that the diaphragm is usually amplification of sound when the used for higher pitched sounds switch or head is in correct like s & s while the bell is more 1 2 position by tapping on the suited for low pitched sounds.
diaphragm.
 Apply stethoscope correctly A stethoscope will magnify all over the brachial artery while sounds, not just the one you are keeping the tubing hanging free trying to hear.
of your uniform, bed clothes, blood pressure cuff, e.t.c.
 Tighten the thumb-screw valve Closing the valve generates of pressure bulb by turning it in pressure in the cuff.
Over- clockwise direction.
Avoid tightening is a common mistake overtightening the valve.
which interferes with skilful manipulation of the sphygmomanometer.
51NS222 PRACTICUM/CLINICAL ATTACHMENT I  Correctly inflate cuff to The systolic pressure is the point 30mmHg above that of the at which the korotkoff sound is palpated systolic pressure and first heard i.e.
the point at which then slowly release the pressure blood in the artery is able to force valve and at the same time its way through against the auscultate for the brachial pulse.
pressure exerted by the inflated cuff.
 Continue cuff deflation at a The diastolic pressure is the point steady rate and notes points on at which the last distinct sound is manometer at which sound heard and is synonymous with the muffles and eventually becomes pressure normally exerted on the inaudible.
wall of the artery when the heart is at rest.
 Remove cuff from patients arm, This not only makes the patient roll it up neatly and return the comfortable but gets equipment equipment.
ready for another use.
 Wash and dry hands.
Prevents transfer of communicable infection.
 Chart and records findings on Helps to monitor trends and appropriate documents.
Any detect abnormality.
Also ensures irregularities should be reported.
continuity of care.
 Clean, discards and stores To prevent the spread of infection materials appropriately.
Evaluation  Is the patient made comfortable after the procedure?
 Are the vital signs – temperature, pulse, respiration and blood pressure – within normal limit for age and sex?
 Is there any marked difference in the values of the vital signs when compared with baseline data?
 With your knowledge of pathophysiology, what are the possible aetiology/contributory factors to the observed values and what possible impacts on the overall well-being of the patient?
 Is the patient anxious, worried, or calm in bed?
 Has the patient been carried along in his care and appropriate measures taken to correct any abnormal variation?
52NS222 PRACTICUM/CLINICAL ATTACHMENT I 3.5 Routine Investigations One of the means of gathering information about the patient's health status is by identifying pathogens and analyzing urine, blood, sputum, and farces.
As a registered nurse, you may be responsible for collecting and labeling specimen for analysis and ensuring their delivery to the laboratory.
For self-protection and to prevent the spread of disease, wear gloves whenever you work with body fluids.
Washing your hands carefully also prevents the spread of disease.
Universal Body Substance Precautions 3.5.1 Collection, Observation, Testing and Disposal of Urine The living body naturally engages in metabolic activities (building up and breaking down processes).
As vital as these building up (anabolism) and breaking down (catabolism) processes are to well-being, they equally result in generation of wastes (both endogenous and exogenous wastes) which are toxic or injurious to the body, hence the need for their removal.
The urinary system plays a vital role in elimination of these waste products from the body.
Urine therefore essentially contains wastes and excess water and electrolytes otherwise referred to as the normal constituents of urine.
Implicit in that statement is that the presence of certain other substances in urine constitutes abnormality.
This underscores the need for routine urine examination in the management of our clients.
Thus urinalysis is included in a health examination and as part of the admission process for all inpatients.
Besides, nurses usually conduct simple urine tests, such as for sugar, protein, acetone, to mention but a few.
The onus therefore is that of the nurse to become conversant with the procedure for collection, observation and testing of urine to ensure the overall well-being of her clients.
(a) Urinalysis This literary means the analysis of a freshly voided urine to have an overall picture of its characteristics which include a description of its colour, its degree of cloudiness, pH, specific gravity, presence of protein or glucose, and a microscopic examination of the sediment.
Therefore a regular urinalysis often includes the following tests:  Volume – The volume of urine passed by individuals varies with the age of the individual, weather, fluid consumption, and state of health.
However a range of 1200 – 1700ml within 24 hours is considered normal for a healthy adult.
When the quantity of urine voided by an individual over 24 hours duration exceeds the upper normal limit, 53NS222 PRACTICUM/CLINICAL ATTACHMENT I that individual is described as being polyuric.
When the total urine passes over 24 hours duration is less than 400ml, it is described as oliguria, and when less than 10ml it is referred to as anuria.
Polyuria is manifested when there is excessive consumption of fluids and certain disease conditions such as nephritic syndrome, polyuric phase of acute renal failure, diabetes mellitus and diabetes insipidus.
Oliguria and anuria are however regular features of certain renal conditions such as acute and chronic renal failure, end stage renal disease e.t.c.
 Colour – The urine colour is amber or pale amber but can however be golden yellow when too concentrated as it is the case in dehydration.
There are however, some abnormal variations in colour.
This is because many things affect urine colour, including fluid balance, diet, medicines, and diseases.
Vitamin B supplements can turn urine bright yellow.
Some drugs (such as nitrofurantoin, rifampicin, septrin in people with G6PD deficiency, e.t.c) blackberries, beets, or blood in the urine can turn urine reddish- brown.
 Clarity – Urine ordinarily should be clear and without deposit.
When urine becomes cloudy or turbid, then abnormalities have set in.
Bacteria, blood, sperm, crystals, pus or mucus when present in urine are some of the things that can make urine appear cloudy.
 Odour – Urine does not smell very strong, but has a slightly "nutty" odour or what is generally referred to as characteristic urine odour.
However when urine has been passed over a long time it gives a pungent smell.
This is usually due to the decomposition of the urine into ammonia.
In addition some diseases cause a change in the odour of urine.
For example, an infection with E. coli bacteria or urinary tract infection can cause a bad odour, while diabetes or starvation can cause a sweet, fruity odour (diabetes ketoacidosis).
In addition, some foods (such as asparagus), vitamins, and antibiotics (such as penicillin) can cause urine to have a different odour.
Urine that smells like maple syrup can indicate maple syrup urine disease that is when the body cannot break down certain amino acids.
 Specific gravity – This checks the amount of substances in the urine.
It also shows how well the kidneys balance the amount of water in urine.
The higher the specific gravity, the more solid material is in the urine.
 When an individual drinks a lot of fluid, the kidneys produce urine with a high amount of water with resultant low specific gravity.
The corollary is also true that when an individual fails to take sufficient 54NS222 PRACTICUM/CLINICAL ATTACHMENT I fluids, the kidneys produce urine with high solute concentration and a small amount of water hence the high specific gravity.
However when the specific gravity ranges between 1.010 – 1.025, it is considered normal.
Anything outside this range is considered abnormal.
In essence, a very high specific gravity means very concentrated urine, which may be caused by not drinking enough fluid, loss of too much fluid (excessive vomiting, sweating, or diarrhea), or presence of substances (such as sugar or protein as it is the case in diabetes mellitus or some kidney disease) in the urine.
Very low specific gravity means dilute urine, which may be caused by drinking too much fluid, severe kidney disease, diabetes insipidus or the use of diuretics.
 pH – This is the degree of acidity and alkalinity of a substance.
The pH is thus a measure of how acidic or alkaline (basic) the urine is.
The pH ranges from 1 to 14 with 7 as the neutral point (neither acidic nor alkaline) but a slightly acidic pH is considered normal.
The lower the figure the higher the acidity.
However as the figure or value increases from 7 the higher the alkalinity.
A urine pH of 4 is therefore strongly acidic, and 9 is strongly alkaline.
Normal urine pH ranges from 4.6 – 8.0.
Sometimes the pH of urine is affected by certain treatments.
For example, some foods (such as citrus fruit and dairy products) and medicines (such as antacids) can affect urine pH.
A high (alkaline) pH can be caused by severe vomiting, a kidney disease, some urinary tract infections, and asthma.
A low (acidic) pH may be caused by severe lung disease (emphysema), uncontrolled diabetes, aspirin overdose, severe diarrhea, and dehydration, starvation, drinking too much alcohol, or drinking antifreeze (ethylene glycol).
 Protein – Protein is normally not found in the urine.
Fever, hard exercise, pregnancy, and some diseases, especially kidney diseases, may cause protein to be in the urine.
Protein in the urine may therefore mean kidney damage, an infection, cancer, high blood pressure, diabetes, systemic lupus erythematosus (SLE), or glomerulonephritis is present.
Protein in the urine may also mean that heart failure, leukemia, poison (lead or mercury poisoning), or pre-eclampsia (in pregnant individuals) is present.
 Glucose – Glucose is the end product of carbohydrate digestion.
It is the type of sugar found in blood which liberates energy during the process of chemical oxidation of food substances.
Normally excess sugar is stored away as glycogen in the liver and the muscles.
Therefore urine should be devoid of glucose.
However when the blood sugar level becomes elevated, as in uncontrolled diabetes, it crosses the renal threshold and begin to spill over into the urine.
This 55NS222 PRACTICUM/CLINICAL ATTACHMENT I possibly explains why glucose can be found in urine of clients on IV infusion.
Healthy pregnant women can have glucose in their urine which is normal during pregnancy.
 However too much glucose in the urine may be caused by uncontrolled diabetes, an adrenal gland problem, liver damage, brain injury, certain types of poisoning, and some types of kidney diseases.
 Nitrites – Bacteria that cause a urinary tract infection (UTI) make an enzyme that changes urinary nitrates to nitrites.
Nitrites in urine show a UTI is present.
 Leukocyte esterase (WBC esterase) – Leukocyte esterase shows leukocytes (white blood cells [WBCs]) in the urine.
WBCs in the urine may mean a UTI is present.
 Ketones –When fats are broken down for energy, the body makes substances called ketones (or ketone bodies).
These are passed in the urine.
Normally urine should contain no ketones.
However ketones are often found in the urine when a person does not eat (fasts) for 18 hours or longer.
This may occur when a person is sick and cannot eat or vomits for several days.
Similarly, a diet low in sugars and starches (carbohydrates), starvation, or severe vomiting may also cause ketones to appear in the urine.
Low levels of ketones are also sometimes found in the urine of healthy pregnant women.
Therefore, when present in urine, ketones could mean uncontrolled diabetes, a very low-carbohydrate diet, starvation or eating disorders (such as anorexia nervosa or bulimia), alcoholism, or poisoning from drinking rubbing alcohol (isopropanol).
Large amounts of ketones in the urine may indicate the development of very serious condition (diabetic ketoacidosis).
 Microscopic analysis.
In this test, urine is spun in a special machine (centrifuge) so the solid materials (sediment) settle at the bottom.
The sediment is spread on a slide and looked at under a microscope.
Things that may be seen on the slide include: o Red or white blood cells.
Blood cells are not found in urine normally.
Inflammation (e.g.
glomerulonephritis), kidney stone, some renal diseases such as kidney or bladder tumor, or injury to the kidneys, ureters, bladder, or urethra can cause blood in urine.
Strenuous exercise, such as running a marathon, can also cause blood in the urine.
White blood cells may be a sign of infection, bladder tumor, inflammation of the kidneys, or systemic lupus erythematosus (SLE), or inflammation in the vagina or under the foreskin of the penis.
or other kidney diseases.
56NS222 PRACTICUM/CLINICAL ATTACHMENT I o Casts.
Some types of kidney disease can cause plugs of material (called casts) to form in tiny tubes in the kidneys.
The casts then get flushed out in the urine.
Casts can be made of red or white blood cells, waxy or fatty substances, or protein.
The type of cast in the urine can help show what type of kidney disease may be present.
o Crystals.
Healthy people often have only a few crystals in their urine.
A large number of crystals, or certain types of crystals, may mean kidney stones are present or there is a problem with how the body is using food (metabolism).
o Bacteria, yeast cells, or parasites.
There are no bacteria, yeast cells, or parasites) in urine normally.
If these are present, it indicates that there is an infection.
- Squamous cells.
The presence of squamous cells may mean that the sample is not as pure as it needs to be.
These cells do not mean there is a medical problem, but there may be a need for a repeat examination.
- Red blood cells in the urine may be caused by kidney or bladder injury, kidney stones, a urinary tract infection (UTI), inflammation of the kidneys (glomerulonephritis), a kidney or bladder tumor, or systemic lupus erythematosus (SLE).
White blood cells (pus) in the urine may be caused by a urinary tract infection.
- Depending on the type, casts can mean inflammation or damage to the tiny tubes in the kidneys, poor blood supply to the kidneys, metal poisoning (such as lead or mercury), heart failure, or a bacterial infection.
- Large amounts of crystals, or certain types of crystals, can mean kidney stones, damaged kidneys, or problems with metabolism.
Some medicines and some types of urinary tract infections can also increase the number of crystals in urine.
- Bacteria in the urine mean a urinary tract infection (UTI).
Yeast cells or parasites (such as the parasite that causes trichomoniasis) can mean an infection of the urinary tract.
- The presence of squamous cells may mean that the sample is not as pure as it needs to be.
These cells do not mean there is a medical problem, but your doctor may ask that you give another urine sample Indication for Urinalysis: To 57NS222 PRACTICUM/CLINICAL ATTACHMENT I • Establish and exclude diagnoses.
• Assess effectiveness of kidney function.
• Assess the severity of some disease process and determine their prognosis.
• Ascertain urine contents and characteristics for proper patient management.
• Identify any abnormality in the urine as to guide therapy.
• Monitor the effectiveness of the treatment.
• Serve as part of regular physical examination.
Equipment • Beaker containing urine specimen • Measuring jars/Graduated container • Urinometer – An instrument that contains mercury bulb attached to a stem with a graduated scale indicating a range of concentration from 1:000 to 1:040.
• A rack of test tubes, brush, dropper, and test tube holder.
• Spirit lamp & test-tube holder.
• Filter papers, litmus papers and other reagents including esbach reagents.
• Disposable gloves.
• Sink with running tap, soap and hand towel.
• A pen or pencil.
These items are usually kept in urine testing room or side wards.
Required Steps Rationale Assessment Planning 58NS222 PRACTICUM/CLINICAL ATTACHMENT I  Inform the client about the Enhances consent gaining and procedure.
cooperation.
 Obtain a fresh urine specimen Urine specimens quickly from the client; have client void deteriorate while standing at room into a clean urinal to prevent temperature resulting in changes contamination.
in chemical composition of urine and resultant incorrect readings.
 Take specimen to the side lab or Promotes orderliness and side ward.
organisation.
 Get the reagents and equipment Also enhances organisation and ready at the side ward/lab.
prevents disruption of the procedure.
Implementation  Wash your hands, mop dry and Helps to prevent cross infection.
don gloves.
 Perform a naked eye observation Assists in detecting abnormalities on the urine; observe the urine in urine; note abnormal variation for colour, clarity, volume in colour, odour, and clarity.
(quantity), pH, specific gravity, deposits, and odour.
 Measure the urine by pouring Ensures accuracy and prevent out into the graduated measuring parallax error.
jar or pitcher and note the bottom meniscus.
 For PH, dip the tip of the blue Acid turns blue litmus paper to and/or red litmus paper into red while base turns red litmus urine, remove immediately and paper to blue.
The observed observe for colour change.
colour change indicates whether the urine is slightly acidic or alkaline.
 To measure the specific gravity, This is sufficient volume for the fill a glass cylinder with urine urinometer to float while still until it is ¾ full.
preventing spillage.
 Gently drop the urinometer in The urinometer is fragile and can the cylinder and at an eye level break if not handled with care.
59NS222 PRACTICUM/CLINICAL ATTACHMENT I read the measurement at the Reading at eye level helps to base of the meniscus.
prevent parallax error.
 Discard the urine appropriately Prevents environmental pollution and clean the equipment with and demonstrates concern for soap and water.
safety.
 Return equipment to their proper In readiness for another use.
place.
 Document findings.
For reference purposes as well as indication for action.
Simple Tests for Sugar There are several methods of testing the urine for glucose.
They include: Clinistix Strip This a cold test for sugar.
It is a simple qualitative dipstick test for sugar.
Required Steps Rationale  Completely immerse all reagent Demonstrates compliance with areas of the clinistix strip in a manufacturer’s instruction, fresh, well-mixed, uncentrifuged facilitates reaction, and ensures urine and remove immediately.
accuracy of result.
 Tap edge of the strip against the Helps to remove excess urine and side of the urine container.
prevent possible soiling.
 Hold the strip close to colour Apart from preventing possible chart in a horizontal position.
soiling, enhances visualization.
 Compare test areas carefully Enhances good visualization and with corresponding colour charts accuracy of readings.
on the bottle label at the time specified.
 Document findings.
For reference purposes as well as indication for action.
Clinitest Test This is another cold test for sugar but unlike clinistix it is a quantitative test.
Rationale Required Steps 60NS222 PRACTICUM/CLINICAL ATTACHMENT I  Place 5 drops of urine into a test Demonstrates knowledge of tube with the aid of the special correct proportion of water to dropper provided.
Rinse the urine for procedure and dropper and add 10 drops of facilitates accuracy of result.
water to the urine.
 Drop in one clinictest tablet.
Demonstrates understanding of Effervescence will occur.
Watch the right sequence of events and the test carefully until ensures complete reaction of effervescence stops and for urine with tablet.
15secs longer.
 Then shake the tube gently and A colour change from blue to compare the colour with the greenish yellow, brown, or brick- colour range on the chart to red colouration indicates the determine the approximate presence of sugar.
percentage of glucose.
 Document findings.
For reference purposes as well as indication for action.
Benedict Qualitative Test This is a hot test for sugar.
Required Steps Rationale  Place 5ml of Benedict Demonstrates understanding of qualitative reagent in a boiling procedure.
tube and add 8 drops of urine.
 Boil the mixture vigorously for When subjected to heat, copper 2 minutes over a flame, or place sulphate (a constituent of the tube in boiling water for 5 Benedict solution) reacts with minutes.
sugar with resultant colour change.
 Observe for colour change.
Any change in colour from blue 61NS222 PRACTICUM/CLINICAL ATTACHMENT I to green, yellow, orange or brick red, indicates the presence of glucose.
 Document findings.
For reference purposes as well as indication for action.
Simple Tests for Protein Like the simple tests for sugar, there are a number of simple tests for protein ranging from simple dipstick tests to the hot tests.
Albustix – This is a simple dipstick test for protein that can be rapidly performed at side wards.
Required Steps Rationale  Completely immerse all reagent Demonstrates compliance with areas of the albustix strip in a manufacturer’s instruction, fresh, well-mixed, uncentrifuged facilitates reaction, and ensures urine and remove immediately.
accuracy of result.
 Tap edge of the strip against the Helps to remove excess urine and side of the urine container.
prevent possible soiling.
 Hold the strip close to colour Apart from preventing possible chart in a horizontal position.
soiling, enhances visualization.
 Compare test areas carefully Enhances good visualization and with corresponding colour accuracy of readings.
charts on the bottle label at the time specified.
 Document findings.
For reference purposes as well as indication for action.
Salicylsulphonic Acid Test This is a cold qualitative test for protein.
Required Steps Rationale  Add 5 drops of 25% Demonstrates knowledge of salicylsulphonic acid to about correct sequence of procedure.
5ml of urine in a test tube.
 Shake the tube and look for The appearance of opacity 62NS222 PRACTICUM/CLINICAL ATTACHMENT I cloudiness in the urine.
indicates the presence of protein and the degree of cloudiness gives some idea of the relative protein concentration.
 Document findings.
For reference purposes as well as indication for action.
Esbach Quantitative Test As the name implies, this is a quantitative test for protein.
It is also a cold test as no heat is required.
Esbach urinometer and reagent are used for this test.
Required Steps Rationale  Collect all urine passed by the patient/client over a period of 6 hrs in a clean stopper bottle and mix.
 Measure its specific gravity.
If it exceeds 1.010, dilute a portion with an equal volume of water.
 Check the PH with litmus paper.
If the urine is alkaline, acidify with a few drops of 10% acetic acid.
 Then fill the Esbach urinometer with urine to the level marked U and add Esbach reagent up to the level marked R.  Cork the tube and invert it This ensures thorough mixing of gently several times to mix the urine with reagents.
contents.
 Stand the tube upright and leave it in a constant temperature for 24 hrs.
 Then read the level of the This gives the protein concentrate 63NS222 PRACTICUM/CLINICAL ATTACHMENT I precipitate of protein on tube’s of the urine in parts per 1000 (g/l).
scale with eye level at the top of the sediment.
 Document findings.
For reference purposes as well as indication for action.
Acetest Hot Test Acetic acid - Check that the urine pH is If mildly acidic or just acidic to cloudiness litmus paper (if it is not so, persists, add 10% acetic acid solution).
proteins are - If the urine is cloudy, filter indicated.
some for this procedure If cloudiness - Fill a boiling tube about ¾ disappears, full with the urine and boil phosphate the top inch of liquid gently are over a spirit lamp, turning the indicated tube while heating it to prevent cracking - Let it boil for a few minutes - Compare the top boiled part of the urine with the lower part to see if any cloudiness has appeared (if so, it may have been caused by either protein or phosphates - Add 3 drops of 10% acetic acid and reboil the top portion Why It Is Done A urine test may be done: • To check for a disease or infection of the urinary tract.
Symptoms of a urine infection may include colored or bad-smelling urine, pain when urinating (dysurea), and difficulty in passing urine, flank pain, blood in the urine (haematuria), or fever.
64NS222 PRACTICUM/CLINICAL ATTACHMENT I • To check the treatment of conditions such as diabetes, kidney stones, a urinary tract infection (UTI), high blood pressure (hypertension), or some kidney or liver diseases.
• As part of a regular physical examination.
How to Prepare Do not eat foods that can colour the urine, such as blackberries, beets, and rhubarb, before the test.
Do not exercise strenuously before the test.
Tell your health professional if you are menstruating or close to starting your menstrual period.
Your health professional may want to wait to do the test.
Your health professional may ask you to stop taking certain medicines that colour the urine.
These include vitamin B, phenazopyridine (Pyridium), rifampin, and phenytoin (Dilantin).
Be sure to tell your health professional if you are taking diuretics, which may affect the test results.
Talk to your health professional about any concerns you have regarding the need for the test, its risks, how it will be done, or what the results will mean.
To help you understand the importance of this test, fill out the medical test information form.
How It Is Done A routine urine test can be done in your health professional's office, clinic, or lab.
You may also be asked to collect a urine sample at home and bring it with you to the office or lab for testing.
Clean-catch midstream one-time urine collection • Wash your hands to make sure they are clean before collecting the urine.
• If the collection cup has a lid, remove it carefully and set it down with the inner surface up.
Do not touch the inside of the cup with your fingers.
• Clean the area around your genitals.
- A man should retract the foreskin, if present, and clean the head of his penis with medicated towelettes or swabs.
65NS222 PRACTICUM/CLINICAL ATTACHMENT I - A woman should spread open the genital folds of skin with one hand.
Then use her other hand to clean the area around the urethra with medicated towelettes or swabs.
She should wipe the area from front to back so bacteria from the anus is not wiped across the urethra.
• Begin urinating into the toilet or urinal.
A woman should hold apart the genital folds of skin while she urinates.
• After the urine has flowed for several seconds, place the collection cup into the urine stream and collect about 2fl oz of this "midstream" urine without stopping your flow of urine.
• Do not touch the rim of the cup to your genital area.
Do not get toilet paper, pubic hair, stool (feces), menstrual blood, or anything else in the urine sample.
• Finish urinating into the toilet or urinal.
• Carefully replace and tighten the lid on the cup then return it to the lab.
If you are collecting the urine at home and cannot get it to the lab in an hour, refrigerate it.
Double-voided urine sample collection This method collects the urine your body is making right now.
• Urinate into the toilet or urinal.
Do not collect any of this urine.
• Drink a large glass of water and wait about 30 to 40 minutes.
• Then get a urine sample.
Follow the instructions above for collecting a clean-catch urine sample.
Return the urine sample to the lab.
If you are collecting the urine at home and cannot get it to the lab in an hour, refrigerate it.
How It Feels There is no discomfort in collecting a one-time urine sample.
Risks There is no chance for problems in collecting a one-time urine sample.
Results A urine test checks different components of urine, a waste product made by the kidneys.
Normal results may vary from lab to lab.
66NS222 PRACTICUM/CLINICAL ATTACHMENT I Colour Normal: Pale to dark yellow (amber) Abnormal: Many foods and medicines can affect the colour of the urine.
Urine with no colour may be caused by long-term kidney disease or uncontrolled diabetes.
Dark yellow urine can be caused by dehydration.
Red urine can be caused by blood in the urine.
Clarity Normal: Clear Abnormal: Cloudy urine can be caused by pus (white blood cells), blood (red blood cells), sperm, bacteria, yeast, crystals, mucus, or a parasitic infection, such as trichomoniasis.
Odour Normal: Slightly "nutty" odour Abnormal: Specific Normal: 1.005–1.030 gravity Abnormal: .
pH Normal: 4.6–8.0 Abnormal: Protein Normal: None Abnormal: Glucose Normal: None Abnormal: .
Ketones Normal: None Abnormal: .
Microscopic Normal: .
analysis Abnormal: .
What Affects the Test Reasons you may not be able to have the test or why the results may not be helpful include: • If you are having your menstrual period.
67NS222 PRACTICUM/CLINICAL ATTACHMENT I • Taking medicines, such as diuretics, erythromycin, trimethoprim (Trimpex), or high doses of vitamin C (ascorbic acid) taken with an antibiotic, such as tetracycline.
• Having an X-ray test with contrast material in the past 3 days.
• Not getting urine sample to lab in 1 hour.
What to Think About • Some urine tests can be done using a home test kit.
For more information, see the medical test Ketones or Home Test for Urinary Tract Infections.
• In some cases, the amount of urine you make in 24 hours may be measured.
Most adults make about 1litres to 2liters per day.
Children make about 0.3liters to 1.6liters per day.
• Other substances that may be checked during a urine test include: - Bilirubin .
This is a substance formed by the breakdown of red blood cells.
It is passed from the body in stool.
Bilirubin is not found in urine.
If it is present, it often means the liver is damaged or that the flow of bile from the gallbladder is blocked.
For more information, see the medical test Bilirubin.
- Urobilinogen.
This is a substance formed by the breakdown of bilirubin.
It is also passed from the body in stool.
Only small amounts of urobilinogen are found in urine.
Urobilinogen in urine can be a sign of liver disease (cirrhosis, hepatitis) that the flow of bile from the gallbladder is blocked.
- Bence Jones protein.
This is an abnormal protein found in the urine of about 50% of people with a rare type of cancer called multiple myeloma.
A urine test is often done when multiple myeloma is suspected.
The protein test done during a regular urine test does not check for Bence Jones protein.
• Collecting a urine sample from a small child or baby is done by using a special plastic bag with tape around its opening.
The bag is placed around the child's genitals until he or she urinates.
Then you carefully removed the bag.
To collect a urine sample from a very sick baby, a health professional may use a urinary catheter through the urethra or a needle through the baby's belly directly into the bladder (suprapubic tap).
68NS222 PRACTICUM/CLINICAL ATTACHMENT I • To lower the chance of contaminating the urine sample with bacteria, a health professional may collect a urine sample by using a urinary catheter.
A catheter may be used to collect urine from a person in the hospital who is very ill or who cannot give a clean-catch sample.
Using a catheter allows a clean sample to be collected.
• If an abnormal result is found during a urine test, more tests may be done, such as a urine culture, X-ray of the kidneys (intravenous pyelogram [IVP]), or cystoscopy.
3.5.2 Throat Culture Throat cultures are done to isolate and identify any pathogens, which may be medium.
The slide or medium is incubated in the laboratory to determine which organisms are causing a throat disorder.
A sample of mucus and secretions from the back of the throat is collected on a cotton-tipped applicator, incubated, cultured and then put on a slide for viewing.
A determination of which drug is most effective against a particular organism may be done also.
A full culture and sensitivity test takes several days because the organisms must have time to grow.
If strept infection is suspected a quick strept test may be done, so that antibiotic therapy can be started immediately.
Sterile cotton-tipped applicator specimen collection kit (culturette).
69NS222 PRACTICUM/CLINICAL ATTACHMENT I Supplies and Equipment The supplies and equipment required to obtain a sample for throat culture are: a. Sterile cotton-tipped applicator specimen collection kit (culturette).
b. Tongue depressor.
c. Laboratory request form.
d. Flashlight.
Procedure for a Throat Culture Always wash your hands before the procedure.
Explain to the patient what you are going to do.
Have the patient sit comfortably on a bed or chair and tilt his head back.
a.
Use the flashlight to illuminate the back of the throat.
Check for inflamed areas using the tongue depressor.
b.
Ask the patient to say "Ahhh" as you swab the tonsillar areas from side to side.
Be sure to include any inflamed or purulent sites.
c. Avoid touching the tongue, cheeks, or teeth with the applicator, as this will contaminate it with oral bacteria.
d. Place the cotton-tipped applicator into the culture tube immediately.
e. Label the culture tube with the patient's name, serial number, and ward number if applicable.
f. Complete the request form with the following information: (1) Patient's name.
(2) Patient's rank or status.
(3) Ward number if inpatient, or phone number if outpatient.
(4) Source of the specimen (that is, throat).
(5) Any antibiotics the patient is taking.
(6) Date and time the specimen was obtained.
(7) Name of the physician who ordered the culture.
70NS222 PRACTICUM/CLINICAL ATTACHMENT I 3.5.3 Sputum Specimen For some respiratory disorders, a sputum specimen is obtained for culture or other examination to determine if any pathogen or blood is present.
The specimen should be collected early in the morning before the patient eats, brushes his teeth, or uses mouthwash.
The specimen is more likely to contain sputum at this time, rather than just saliva.
Specimens are often taken for three consecutive days because it is difficult for the patient to cough up enough sputum at one time, and an organism may be missed if only one culture is done.
Supplies and Equipment Supplies and equipment required to collect a sputum specimen are a. Sterile container with tight-fitting lid.
b.
Box of tissues.
c. Gloves.
d. Laboratory request form.
Procedure for Sputum Specimen a. Wash your hands and gather the equipment.
b.
Provide privacy for the patient and explain the procedure.
Place the tissues nearby and have the patient rinse his mouth with clear water to remove any food particles.
c. Assist the patient to a sitting position, if necessary and ask him to cough deeply and spit into the container.
Tell the patient to avoid touching the inside of the container because it is sterile.
d. A sputum specimen is considered highly contaminated and must be treated with caution.
To prevent contamination by particles in the air, keep the container closed until the patient is ready to spit into it.
Close the container immediately after collecting the specimen to prevent the spread of any organisms from the specimen.
Offer tissues for the patient to wipe his mouth.
71NS222 PRACTICUM/CLINICAL ATTACHMENT I e. Wash your hands, label the container, and complete the laboratory request form.
Take the specimen to the laboratory immediately; allowing the specimen to remain in a warm place will result in overgrowth of any organisms that may be present.
f. Record the amount, consistency, and color of the sputum collected, as well as the time and date in the nursing notes.
3.5.4 Stool Specimen Stool specimens are collected for many examinations.
The most common is the ova and parasites test, a microscopic examination of faeces for detecting parasites such as amoebas or worms.
Stools specimens are often tested for blood.
Guaiac or Hem Occult test may be done in the laboratory but are sometimes done at the nursing station to test a stool for occult blood.
Supplies and Equipment Supplies and equipment required to collect a stool specimen are a. Gloves b.
Clean bedpan and cover (an extra bedpan or urinal if the patient must void).
c. Specimen container and lid.
d. Wooden tongue blades.
e. Paper bag for used tongue blades.
f. Labels.
g. Plastic bag for transport of container with specimen to laboratory.
Procedure for Stool Specimen a.
Explain the reason for the test and the procedure to the patient.
Ask the patient to tell you when he feels the urge to have a bowel movement.
b.
Wear gloves when handling any bodily discharge (see universal precautions in the introduction to this subcourse).
72NS222 PRACTICUM/CLINICAL ATTACHMENT I c. Give the bedpan when the patient is ready.
If the patient wants to urinate first, give a male the urinal or give a female the extra bedpan.
d. Remove the bedpan.
Use the tongue blade to transfer a portion of the feces to the specimen container.
Do not touch the specimen because it is contaminated.
It is not necessary to keep this specimen sterile however, because the gastrointestinal tract is not sterile.
e. Cover the container and label it with the patient's name and National Health Insurance number.
f. Complete the appropriate laboratory request form, noting any special examination ordered.
g. Take the specimen to the lab immediately; examination for parasites, ova, and organisms must be made while the stool is warm.
Watch a video demonstrating the test for occult blood in the stool (6.1 MB) 73NS222 PRACTICUM/CLINICAL ATTACHMENT I h. If an infant's stool is to be examined, place the diaper in a leak proof bag, label it, and take the diaper and request form to the lab immediately.
Guaiac Test The purpose of this test, using guaiac as a reagent, is to detect the presence of occult blood (blood that appears from a nonspecific source, with obscure signs and symptoms), which is not visible.
Each method of testing has a specific procedure, which must be followed to get accurate results.
If it is done at the nursing station, instructions should be kept with the reagents used.
Follow the manufacturer's instructions or consult hospital standing operating procedures (SOP).
4.0 CONCLUSION Since patients admitted to a hospital not only face many unknown but strange environment.
The nurse therefore assumes responsibility for facilitating adjustment of the individuals admitted through special and professional skills designed to increase their understanding of hospitalization and its routines through continuous nurse – patient interaction from the moment of admission through to discharge.
5.0 SUMMARY This unit has described the procedures required for basic patient care.
These included admissions of patients, routine observation, history taking, assessing of vital signs namely: pulse, temperature, respiration and blood pressure as well as the collection, observation, testing and disposal of urine, feaces, vomitus and sputum.
6.0 TUTOR-MARKED ASSIGNMENT 1.
State the scientific principles underpinning the basic patient care.
2.
Identify supplies/equipment and follow procedures that apply to obtaining all kinds of specimen.
3.
Exhibit knowledge on the development and documentation of nursing assessment through observation and participation with other healthcare professionals in a variety of care settings.
4.
Interact well with patients, identify patients’ learning needs, and educate patients appropriately.
5.
Demonstrate ability to assist the patient to use the designated equipment to void or defecate in safe and effective manner.
74NS222 PRACTICUM/CLINICAL ATTACHMENT I 6.
Collect specific specimens, be it urine, feaces, vomitus, and sputum in a correct, logical and systematic manner.
7.
Identify significant observations about the urinary output: amount, colour, odour, specific gravity, e.t.c.
and record appropriate information on the patient’s record.
8.
Conduct simple tests on urine for sugar, protein, acetone, and other abnormalities following prescribed procedure.
9.
Identify where and why to take vital signs and demonstrate competence in assessing vital signs.
10.Records the vital signs correctly on vital signs chart and nurses’ notes, reports abnormal findings to the nurse in charge/physician, and takes appropriate measures in case of abnormalities.
11.Follow the correct procedure of admitting patients into hospital wards.
12.Identify those aspects which allow healthcare professionals to help patients maximize their potential for health & maintenance of optimal health.
13.Demonstrate mastery of a range of essential nursing skills to meet basic healthcare needs of patients.
7.0 REFERENCES/FURTHER READING Assisting with the Physical Examination (2008).
From http://www.brooksidepress.org/Products/Nursing_Fundamentals_ I/lesson_3_Section_1A.htm Family Medicine Specialist Medical Reviewer Avery L. Seifert, MD.
For More Information, see the Medical Tests Urine Culture, Intravenous Pyelogram (IVP), and Cystoscopy.
Goldberg, C. (2006).
Vital Signs in ‘A Practical Guide to Clinical Medicine’ Retrieved from http://meded.ucsd.edu/clinicalmed/ vital.htm Jan Nissl, R.N.
B.S.
Editor Susan Van Houten, RN, BSN, MBA Associate Editor Tracy Landauer Primary Medical Reviewer Martin Gabica, MD 75NS222 PRACTICUM/CLINICAL ATTACHMENT I Specimen collections Retrieved (2008).
From http://www.brooksidepress.org/Products/Nursing_Fundamentals_ II/lesson_3_Section_1A.htm Urologyhttp://www.webmd.com/a-to-z-guides/urine-test page=5 76NS222 PRACTICUM/CLINICAL ATTACHMENT I UNIT 3 BODY MECHANICS: MOVING AND LIFTING TECHNIQUES CONTENTS 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objectives 3.0 Main Content 3.1 Principles and Rules of Body Mechanics 3.2 Positioning a Patient for Examination or Treatment 3.3 Turning a Patient from Side to Side 3.4 Assisting a Patient to Transfer from Bed to Chair 3.5 Assisting a Patient to Sit Up in Bed 3.6 Moving a Patient towards the Head of the Bed 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutor-Marked Assignment 7.0 References/Further Reading 1.0 INTRODUCTION Body mechanics is defined as the efficient use of the body in moving and lifting.
Its goals is to conserve energy and prevent injury, most specifically to the vulnerable and weak lower back muscles, by encouraging the use of the body’s largest and strongest muscles, of the legs and arms.
The rules of body mechanics are based on the physical principles of balance as these relate specifically to the human body.
Thus they provide scientifically based guidelines for moving and lifting techniques.
2.0 OBJECTIVES At the end of this unit, you should be able to: • explain the relationship of the centre of gravity, line of gravity, and base of support in balance • correlate the physical principles with the rules of body mechanics.
3.0 MAIN CONTENT 3.1 Principles and Rules of Body Mechanics 1.
The balance of every object depends on the geometric relationship of three things: 77NS222 PRACTICUM/CLINICAL ATTACHMENT I - its base of support (that part of the object in contact with its supporting surface) - its centre of gravity (that point at which its weight is centered and balanced) - its line of gravity (an imaginary line passing vertically through the centre of gravity to the base of support).
Hence, balance is maintained as long as an object’s line of gravity passes through its base of support.
2.
An object’s centre of gravity is constant; therefore when the object is tilted, its line of gravity begins to shift away from the centre of its base and support.
The further from centre the line of gravity shifts, the more unstable the object becomes.
When the line of gravity falls outside the base of support, the object will inevitably fall.
3.
An object’s centre of gravity will be about midway down its length.
3.2 Positioning a Patient for Examination or Treatment Patients are put in special positions for examination, for treatment or test, and to obtain specimens.
You should know the positions used, how to assist the patient, and how to adjust the drapes.
a. Horizontal Recumbent Position – Used for most physical examinations.
Patient is on his back with legs extended to relax the abdominal wall.
Arms may be above the head, alongside the body or folded on the chest.
b. Dorsal Recumbent Position – Patient is on his back with knees flexed and soles of feet flat on the bed.
Fold sheet once across the chest.
Fold a second sheet 78NS222 PRACTICUM/CLINICAL ATTACHMENT I crosswise over the thighs and legs so that genital area is easily exposed.
c. Fowler's Position – Otherwise known as sitting up position.
Used to promote drainage or ease breathing.
The head of the bed is elevated to desired height (450 angle).
Where this is impossible the back rest is pulled into position with 3 – 5 pillows arranged in arm-chair fashion and bed is raised slightly under patient's knees.
d. Dorsal Lithotomy Position – Used for examination of pelvic organs.
Similar to dorsal recumbent position, except that the patient's legs are well separated and thighs are acutely flexed.
Feet are usually placed in stirrups.
Fold sheet or bath blanket crosswise over thighs and legs so that genital area is easily exposed.
Keep patient covered as much as possible.
e. Prone Position – Face- lying.
Used to examine spine and back.
Patient lies on abdomen with head turned to one side for comfort.
Arms may be above head or alongside body.
Cover with sheet or bath blanket.
Note: An unconscious patient or one with an abdominal 79NS222 PRACTICUM/CLINICAL ATTACHMENT I incision or breathing difficulty usually cannot lie in this position.
f. Sim's Position – Used for digital rectal examination.
Patient lies on his/her left side with right knee flexed against abdomen and left knee slightly flexed.
Left arm is extended behind the back and right arm is placed forward comfortably.
Note: Patient with leg injuries or arthritis usually cannot assume this position.
g. Knee-Chest Position – Used for rectal and vaginal examinations and as treatment to bring uterus into normal position.
The patient assumes a kneeing position with chest resting and elbows resting on bed or arms above head.
Head is turned to one side.
Thighs are straight and lower legs are flat on bed.
Note: Do not leave patient alone; he/she may become dizzy, faint, and fall.
80NS222 PRACTICUM/CLINICAL ATTACHMENT I Figure 1-1.
Horizontal recumbent position.
Figure 1-2.
Dorsal recumbent position.
Figure 1-3.
Fowler's position.
Figure 1-4.
Dorsal lithotomy position.
81NS222 PRACTICUM/CLINICAL ATTACHMENT I Source – Adapted from http://www.brooksidepress.org/Products/ Nursing_Fundamentals 3.3 Moving Patient from side to side Requirements as above Method: 1.
Strip top of the bed in the usual manner, leaving patient covered by the top sheet 2.
Turn the patient to one side, arranging pillows and limbs carefully 3.
Nurse on opposite side untucks bottom sheet from top to bottom, roll it well under the patient and pull mattress cover straight 4.
She then unfolds the clean bottom sheet and arrange it on the bed with the center increased in the middle 5.
She then makes up her own side of bed in the usual manner 6.
The patient is gently rolled to the already made side of the bed 7.
The other nurse untucks the bottom sheet from top to bottom of bed.
Remove carefully, and discard.
She then makes up her own side 8.
The patient is made comfortable and top of bed made up in the usual way 3.4 Lifting from bed to Chair-Orthodox lift 1.
Position patient’s chair on right side of bed facing foot of bed 2.
Two lifters are required to work together 3.
Remove top bedclothes, patient is covered with top sheet or in pyjamas.
Cross patient’s lower arms over the chest 82NS222 PRACTICUM/CLINICAL ATTACHMENT I 4.
Lifters on either side of patient join hands under patient’s thighs and at his lumber curve 5.
With lifters back straight and legs slightly bent patient is lifted and moved to right edge of bed.
Lifter on right side supports patient in sitting position, facing foot of bed.
6.
Lifter from left side of bed joins colleague on right side.
While the former supports and turn the trunk clockwise the latter carries patient’s legs, turns them simultaneously both stooping when patient faces the right side of bed.
The latter then drops the legs gently leaving them to hang freely 7.
Both lifters join hands again under patient’s thighs and at the lumber curve 8.
With patient’s hands over lifters’ shoulder, facing same direction, lifters move anti-clock-wise till patient faces foot bed, then to the right in front of chair 9.
Patient is then lowered gently on to the chair 10.Cover patient with top bed sheet.
To return patient to bed, remove cover clothes and repeat the process in ascending order substituting “raise” for “lower” “clockwise” for “anti- clockwise” and vice-visa.
Shoulder lift 1.
Two lifters are required.
Place a chair on right side of bed 2.
Top clothes are removed leaving patient in pyjamas or covered with top sheet 3.
Patient places each upper arm on the far side shoulder of each lifter 4.
Lifters, facing patient back, join their hands on the far side under patient’s thighs supporting patient’s lumber curve with unjoined hands on the near side, they lift and sit patient on the right edge of bed 5.
Lifter from left side joins colleague on the right side, support patient in sitting position.
The latter carries patient’s legs and turn them clockwise as the former turns the trunk 83NS222 PRACTICUM/CLINICAL ATTACHMENT I 6.
Both join hands as before and lift patient from bed, turn anti- clockwise till patient is in front of chair and lower patient gently on to the chair 7.
Cover patient with top bed sheet.
(Shoulder Lift Contd.)
To return patient to bed, remove cover clothes and repeat process upward substituting “raise/lift” for “lower”, “clockwise” for “anti- clockwise” and vice-visa.
One lifter’s free hand on patient’s back may be used to arrange pillows before lowering patient gently into bed.
Turning Patient Requirements: 1.
Chair for resting stripped top sheet e.g.
draw sheet: to replace soiled ones.
2.
Soiled linen bin Back to Side Procedure 1.
Remove counterpane 2.
Leave patient covered with only top sheet 3.
Lift patient’s head 4.
Remove all pillows but one except for patient in sitting up position 5.
Position patient’s heads on pillow 6.
Lift patient’s hands on pillow 7.
Cross patient’s opposite hand across chest 8.
Put own hands, one under far shoulder (Scapula) the other under far buttock (Sacrum) 9.
Straighten own arms and move patient towards self 84NS222 PRACTICUM/CLINICAL ATTACHMENT I 10.Support patient in the position with own hands at the back and thighs in front while the procedure is completed For Prolonged Lying on Side (Lateral) 1.
Put hands under head and should move to middle of bed.
Support head with pillows 2.
Put hands under lower hip and move to middle of bed.
Rest top lower leg and arm on one pillow each.
Side to Front 1.
Put patient in lateral position on one half of half of the bed, facing the middle of bed 2.
Return patient to his face 3.
Use one pillow to support head and if desired, chest 4.
Separate legs.
4.0 CONCLUSION The rules of body mechanics are based on the physical principles of balance as these relate specifically to the human body.
Thus they provide scientifically based guidelines for moving and lifting techniques.
5.0 SUMMARY This unit provided you with the principles and rules of body mechanics, positioning a patient for examination or treatment, turning a patient from side to side, moving a patient towards the head of the bed, assisting a patient to sit up in bed, assisting a patient to transfer from bed to chair, ambulating a patient and range of motion exercises 6.0 TUTOR-MARKED ASSIGNMENT 1.
State the scientific principles underpinning the body mechanics.
2.
Identifies supplies/equipment and follow procedures that apply to positioning and examination of patients.
85NS222 PRACTICUM/CLINICAL ATTACHMENT I 3.
Interacts well with patients, identifies patient learning needs, and educates patient appropriately.
4.
Identifies significant observations during the process of moving patient up in bed, transfers from bed to chair as well as ambulating a patient coupled with the range of motion exercises and patient’s record.
5.
Follows the correct procedure of positioning a patient for examination or treatment.
6.
Identifies those aspects which allow healthcare professionals to help patients maximize their potential for health & maintenance of optimal health.
7.
Demonstrates mastery of a range of essential nursing skills to meet basic healthcare needs of patients.
7.0 REFERENCES/FURTHER READING Assisting with the Physical Examination Aug. 12 2008 from http://www.brooksidepress.org/Products/Nursing_Fundamentals_ I/lesson_3_Section_1A.htm Goldberg, C. (2006).
Vital signs in ‘A Practical Guide to Clinical Medicine’ Retrieved from http://meded.ucsd.edu/clinicalmed/vital.htm Specimen collections Retrieved Aug. 12 2008 from http://www.brooksidepress.org/Products/Nursing_Fundamentals_ II/lesson_3_Section_1A.htm 86NS222 PRACTICUM/CLINICAL ATTACHMENT I MODULE 2 Unit 1 Hygiene and Comfort Measures Unit 2 Nutrition and Nasogastric Procedures Unit 3 Parenteral Procedures Including Blood Transfusions UNIT 4 HYGIENE AND COMFORT MEASURES CONTENTS 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objectives 3.0Main Content 3.1 Hand Washing 3.1Oral Care 3.2Bed Bath 3.3Bed Making 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutor-Marked Assignment 7.0 References/Further Reading 1.0 INTRODUCTION Attending to the hygiene needs of a patient is an important role of the nurse.
This is because not only does it promote patient’s health and comfort, but also contributes immeasurably to the patient's feeling of emotional well-being.
Many a nurses have had experience of seeing a sick and uncomfortable patient drop off into a restful sleep after taking his bath and having his bed changed.
While it is true that some patients are capable of meeting their own hygiene need, not a few are so much incapacitated by their ill health that they require the nurses’ assistance to meet all their hygiene needs.
For such individuals, procedure for care of the mouth, hair, nails and skin are a routine part of daily nursing care.
When these areas are left unattended, the patient looks and feels more miserable than his state of health warrants.
The onus is therefore on the nurses to assess the person’s ability to perform self-care, plan necessary 87NS222 PRACTICUM/CLINICAL ATTACHMENT I intervention to meet any deficit, and evaluate the effectiveness of the care.
It must however be noted that maintaining personal hygiene is a very intimate role and the safety, privacy and comfort of the patient must be considered at all times throughout the procedure.
It is equally imperative that the nurse possesses a professional caring attitude whilst assisting the patient in all aspects of personal hygiene, including dressing and grooming needs (McLaurin).
2.0 OBJECTIVES At the end of this unit, you should be able to: • demonstrate an understanding of the basic principles underpinning each of the hygiene and comfort measures • explain and demonstrate correct sequence of hand washing techniques to others • determine who an oral needs care, when to give oral care and its significance • identify principles for and purposes of hair care • determine purposes for giving a patient a bath and observations to make during the bathing procedures • recognize conditions that encourage skin breakdown and institute interventions aimed at preventing skin breakdown.
3.0 MAIN CONTENT 3.1 Hand Washing Handwashing is the single most important procedure for preventing the spread of biological contamination.
Even though hands may appear to be clean, they may carry germs or microorganisms that are capable of causing diseases.
Handwashing therefore is a simple habit that can help keep you healthy.
Indication 1.
Remove organic materials.
2.
Reduces the number of transient microorganisms on the hand.
3.
Reduce the risk of transmission of infectious organism to clients.
4.
Reduce the risk of cross-transmission among clients.
88NS222 PRACTICUM/CLINICAL ATTACHMENT I When do we need to wash hands?
1.
On arrival at work, after touching body fluids with or without gloves.
2.
Before and after each patient contact.
3.
Following each patient contact where significant care is given.
4.
In between procedures on same patient.
5.
Before and after serving food.
6.
Before and after removing gloves following invasive procedures.
7.
After using the toilet.
8.
After changing a diaper — wash the diaper-wearer's hands, too 9.
Before and after dressing wounds or cuts.
10.After handling garbage.
11.Before inserting or removing contact lenses.
When using public restrooms, such as those in airports, train stations, bus stations and restaurants.
Equipment and supplies required  A sink  Running water from a tap or basin  Soap (tablet or mounted  Disposable paper preferably towel liquid soap) or clothing NB: Bar soap should be kept in a self draining holder that is cleaned thoroughly before new bars are put out.
.
Liquid soap containers should be used until empty and then disposed of.
Hand Hygiene Techniques/Procedure Suggested Action Rationale  Keep your nails short and Long nails and ornate jewelry clean and remove all ornate harbors microbes.
In addition to jewelry.
harboring microbes both promote skin injury to the client and yourself.
89NS222 PRACTICUM/CLINICAL ATTACHMENT I  Remember the sink is dirty so Reduces the chances of stand in such a way that your transmission of microorganism uniform will not touch it.
from nurse to client.
 Turn on the water and adjust Prevents water from splashing out the water to a moderate flow.
of the sink.
 Run the water long enough to Warm water facilitates the removal be sure that the temperature is of dirt from the hands and at the adjusted to only warm NOT same time removes less of the hot water.
protective oil of the skin than hot water.
 Leave the water Touching the taps once you running throughout the entire commence handwashing will procedure.
recontaminate your hands.
 Wet your hands Prevents hand chapping and thoroughly to above wrist enhances lather formation.
The soap before dispensing soap or lather suspends both the dirt and picking up bar soap and work germs trapped inside and make it up a good lather.
easy for them to be washed away.
 If you have used a bar Keep soap from becoming a soap, rinse it thoroughly breeding place for microorganisms.
before dropping it back in the soap dish.
 During the washing Gravity will push the suds and hold the hands lower than the water downward, away from the elbows at all times so that the less contaminated upper arms to the water flows from the arms to most contaminated area.
the fingertips.
 Vigorously rub together The rubbing and circular action all surfaces of the lathered generates friction which helps to hands for at least 10 seconds loosen dirt and removes using firm, rubbing and microorganisms mechanically.
circular movements.
Proceed Interlacing the fingers and the in this sequence: Wash the thumbs cleans the interdigital palms, interlace the fingers spaces.
and the thumbs, then the back of hands, move to the wrist of each hand and finally the finger tips.
Note that the length of wash is less important than its 90NS222 PRACTICUM/CLINICAL ATTACHMENT I thoroughness and should be suited to occasion.
 When the wash is If soap is not removed it acts as an complete, rinse your hands irritant, and irritated or chafed thoroughly under clean hands harbor microorganisms and running water.
invite infection.
 When you have One will not be enough unless it is finished rinsing, shake the double thickness.
Squeezing motion excess water off your hands is less damaging to the skin.
Damp over the sink.
Pick up two hands chafe very quickly.
paper towels for drying.
Use a squeezing rather than a rubbing motion for drying and dry thoroughly.
 Use same paper towel It prevents recontaminating the to turn off tap (if not elbow or washed hands with microbes from pedal controlled).
tap.
 Discard used paper Helps to prevent hands from towel in appropriate container becoming dry and sore.
and use hands lotion as necessary.
Friction helps remove dirt and microorganisms.
Wash around and under rings, around cuticles, and under fingernails 3.2 Oral Care Definition: It is the act of cleaning and activating the mouth so as to refresh the patient.
Indication: To • Keep the teeth, gum, tongue, and oral mucosa in good condition.
• Remove offensive odors and food debris from the mouth.
• Promote patient comfort and a feeling of well-being.
• Preserve the integrity and hydration of the oral mucosa and lips.
• Alleviate pain and discomfort, thereby enhancing oral intake.
91NS222 PRACTICUM/CLINICAL ATTACHMENT I • Facilitate rapid healing after mouth surgery.
General Guidelines • Oral hygiene should be performed before breakfast, after each meal, and at bedtime.
• Oral hygiene is especially important for patients receiving oxygen therapy, patients who have nasogastric tubes, and patients who are Nil per Oral (NPO).
Their oral mucosa dries out much faster than normal due to their mouth-breathing.
• Provide for patient privacy during the procedure, as this is an extremely personal procedure for most patients.
• Oral care for the unconscious patient should be performed at least every four hours.
• Lipstick, Chap Stick, or Vaseline may be applied to the lips to keep them from drying out.
General Considerations • Patients with dentures - Many patients are sensitive or embarrassed about wearing dentures; therefore, the patient's privacy should be respected when the dentures are cleaned.
- Dentures must be handled carefully; they are fragile and expensive, and the patient is handicapped without them.
- If the dentures are left out of the mouth for any period of time, place them in a covered opaque container with the patient's name on the container.
- Dentures must be kept in water to preserve their fit and general quality; the color may change if they become dry.
- You may avoid breaking the dentures while cleaning them by holding them over a basin of water with a washcloth folded in the bottom.
- Dentures are brushed in the same way as natural teeth; be sure to rinse them well.
92NS222 PRACTICUM/CLINICAL ATTACHMENT I - The denture cup should be labeled with the patient's name and room number.
- Never use hot water to rinse the dentures as it could warp them; use cool or lukewarm water.
- The patient's gums and soft tissues should be cared for at least twice per day while the dentures are out of the mouth; a soft-bristled toothbrush, swab, or gauze-covered tongue blade dipped in mouthwash should be used to cleanse the gums, tongue, and soft tissues.
• Patients with Mouth Complications.
The following problems are common in patients receiving chemotherapy and radiation therapy: • Bleeding (a) Observe the patient's mouth frequently for the amount of bleeding present and the specific areas; (b)Do not floss the patient's teeth; use a water-pik; (c) Brush the teeth carefully with a very soft toothbrush and do not use lemon/glycerine swabs or commercial mouthwash because they contain alcohol which causes burning.
• Infection (a) Observe the patient's mouth for appearance, integrity, and general condition; (b) Wear clean gloves during the procedure; (c) Obtain a culture, if ordered; (d) Do not floss the teeth if the mouth is irritated or painful; (e) Assist the patient with brushing the teeth and cleaning the mouth, using a soft toothbrush or a gauze-padded tongue blade; (f) Rinse the mouth with water and the prescribed solution, if ordered.
93NS222 PRACTICUM/CLINICAL ATTACHMENT I • Ulcerations including Stomatitis (a) Basic procedure for the patient with an infection should be followed; (b) If the patient's mouth is extremely painful, rinsing the mouth with a local anesthetic, as prescribed by a physician, may be necessary; (c) Mouthwash and other solutions which contain alcohol should not be used for the patient with ulcerations as they are frequently very painful; • Unconscious Patients.
- Oral care should be performed at least every four hours.
- Oral suctioning may be required for the unconscious patient to prevent aspiration.
- A soft toothbrush or gauze-padded tongue blade may be used to clean the teeth and mouth.
- The patient should be positioned in the lateral position with the head turned toward the side to provide for drainage and to prevent aspiration.
Equipment  Towel  Bite-block to hold mouth open and teeth apart (optional)  Emesis bowl or basin  Tissue or piece of gauze to remove dentures (optional)  Disposable gloves  Denture pot or container as needed  Toothbrush  Mouthwash  Cup of tepid water  Suction catheter with suction apparatus (optional)  Dentifrice or denture  Petroleum jelly (Vaseline) cleaner  Rubber-tipped bulb  Applicators and cleaning solution for syringe cleaning the mucus membrane 94NS222 PRACTICUM/CLINICAL ATTACHMENT I  Cotton wool  Wooden spatula and/or Orange stick  Mouth gag for  Non tooth dissecting forceps for unconscious patient unconscious patient Procedure Suggested Action Rationale Assessment  Assess extent of client’s Helps to determine the need for abilities, usual mouth care mouth care and the type of practices and status of the oral materials needed.
cavity.
 Note presence of halitosis.
Gives an insight into patient’s oral status.
Planning  Inform and explain procedure to This not only helps in gaining patient.
patient’s cooperation but facilitates consent gaining.
 Gain patient’s consent.
For ethical and legal reasons.
 Assemble all necessary Demonstrates organisation and equipment needed for the aids time-management.
procedure.
 Prepare the required oral wash Solution must always be prepared solution.
immediately prior to use to maximize their efficacy and minimize the risk of microbial contamination.
Implementation  Wash and dry hands and Reduces the chances of observe appropriate infection transmission of infection to the control measures.
nurse as well as to the patient.
 Don gloves.
Prevents possible soiling of hands and development of nosocomial infection.
 Provide privacy for patient.
Gives patient a sense of security.
95NS222 PRACTICUM/CLINICAL ATTACHMENT I  Position patient in a sitting Proper positioning facilitates position if health permits.
If not, access to patient’s mouth, assist to a side-lying position enhances nurses’ body mechanics with head turned.
and prevents aspiration.
 Place towel under patient’s chin, Protect the patient’s clothing and moisten the bristles of the the bed linen from getting wet.
toothbrush with tepid water and hold receptacle under patient’s chin, fitting the receptacle around neck or chin.
 Remove the patient’s dentures if Removal of the denture is necessary, using paper tissues or necessary for the cleaning of the topical swabs, and place them in underlying tissue.
denture pot.
 Hand the toothbrush to the Involving patient in his care patient or brush the teeth, stimulates cooperation and holding the brush against the promotes active and passive teeth with the bristles at a 45- exercises.
degree angle.
 Move bristles up and down Sulcular technique removes gently in short strokes from the plaques and cleans under the sulcus to the crown of the teeth.
gingival margins.
 Clean all the mouth tissues Ensures the removal of all debris including the biting surfaces, the including bacteria and freshens roof of the mouth, base of the breath.
mouth, and then the tongue with short strokes.
 Hand the patient the water cup Vigorous rinsing loosens food or mouthwash to rinse mouth particles and washes out already vigorously, and then spit the loosened particles.
water into the basin.
 Repeat the preceding step until Ensures that mouth is thoroughly mouth is free of particles, clean clean and breath refreshed.
and remove receptacle and help patient wipe the mouth.
 Observe the mouth tissues The mouth is examined for closely.
changes in condition in respect to moisture, cleanliness, infected or bleeding areas, ulcer etc.
96NS222 PRACTICUM/CLINICAL ATTACHMENT I  Replace artificial dentures if Enhances patient’s self esteem indicated and usage.
 Lubricate client’s lips with Prevents cracking of the lip due to petroleum jelly dehydration and to increase patient’s comfort.
 Remove and dispose of Proper disposal keeps patient equipment appropriately.
environment clean and makes patient comfortable.
 In cases where the patient’s Removal facilitates thorough teeth are wholly dentures, cleaning of the dentures.
remove the dentures using gloves and lower it in the denture container.
 Take denture container to the Dentures are fragile and sink; handle carefully taking expensive, and the patient is care not to drop the dentures.
handicapped without them.
 Place a washcloth in the bowl of This is to prevent damage in case the sink of accidental dropping of dentures.
 Use a toothbrush or special stiff- Stiff toothbrush would facilitate bristled brush to scrub the removal of debris.
Hot water dentures with a cleaning agent could distort, pervert or cause and tepid water.
Rinse the dentures to bend or shrink dentures with tepid not hot unevenly.
Rinsing removes the running water.
cleaning agent and food particles.
 Inspect and observe the dentures Inspection and observation helps and the mouth particularly in ascertaining the state of assessing whether the dentures cleanliness of the mouth and the are not defective.
fitness of the dentures.
 Return the dentures to the Ensures total cleanliness of the mouth and offer some mouth.
mouthwash to rinse the mouth.
 Assist patient as needed, wipe Dentures must be kept in water to patient’s hand and mouth with preserve their fit and general towel.
If patient does not want quality; the colour may change if to or cannot wear the dentures, they become dry.
97NS222 PRACTICUM/CLINICAL ATTACHMENT I store them in an opaque denture container with water.
Label the container with patient’s name and identification number.
 In case of an unconscious Enables the nurse to have access patient or patient that is unable to inside the mouth there by to follow verbal instruction, facilitating oral care.
The mouth apply pressure to the outside of care should be used with caution the lower jaw to open the mouth in order not to injure the patient.
and keep it open gently with a mouth gag or a padded wooden spatula inserted to the side of the mouth.
 Roll cotton wool or gauze The cotton wool is wrapped firmly over orange sticks or split securely over the orange stick or wooden spatula.
split wooden spatula so that it will not pull off during use.
 Moisten the wool or gauze Facilitate the removal of debris slightly with mouth wash and and freshens breath.
carefully and sequentially clean the mouth with as many sponges as necessary until the mouth is clean.
 Then rinse the patient’s mouth Careful delivery of solution from by drawing out 10mls of water the syringe ensures that minimal or alcohol-free mouthwash into amount of fluid are used and the syringe and injecting it consequently prevent aspiration.
gently into each side of the mouth.
 Rinse the client’s mouth by Rinsing removes loosened debris drawing about 10 ml of water or and makes the mouth taste mouth wash into the syringe and fresher.
injecting it gently into each side of the mouth.
 Watch carefully to make sure Fluid remaining in the mouth may that all the rinsing solution has be aspirated to the lungs.
drained out of the mouth into the basin.
If not, suction the fluid from the mouth.
98NS222 PRACTICUM/CLINICAL ATTACHMENT I  Repeat rinsing until the mouth is If lotion is left in the mouth, it free of the cleansing lotion.
may be irritating to the mouth.
 Lubricate client’s lips with Prevents cracking of the lip due to petroleum jelly dehydration and to increase patient’s comfort.
Evaluation  Evaluate status of oral tissues, Helps to assess whether the lips and tongue; any irritation, intervention impacts positively on dryness or lesions the health of the patient.
 Document and report significant Enhances accountability and findings.
continuity of care.
3.3 Bed Bath Definition This is the process of removing accumulated oil, perspiration, dead skin cells, and some bacteria.
Objectives • Helps to remove transient micro organisms, body secretions and excretions, and dead skin cells.
• Stimulates circulation to the skin.
• Produce a sense of well-being.
• Promotes relaxation and comfort.
• Prevents or eliminates unpleasant body odours.
• Induce sleep.
• Reduces body temperature.
• Provides the nurse with an opportunity for health assessment and health teaching.
• Boost patient morale, emotional and mental well-being as well as promoting patient's self-image.
99NS222 PRACTICUM/CLINICAL ATTACHMENT I • The process of building rapport may begin during the initial bath.
• The bath aids in the development of the therapeutic nurse-patient relationship as the patient has the nurse's undivided attention.
Basic Principles • Follow infection control guidelines because bathing increases the chance of exposure to body fluids.
• Encourage personal choice and participation in care decisions when possible.
• Protect your patient’s right to privacy and confidentiality of information.
• Promote comfort and safety.
• Use proper body mechanics to protect your patient’s safety as well as your own.
• Select equipment based on your patient needs and agency policy.
Equipment  Warm Water between 38C and  Basin 46C  Soap  Two bath towels  Face and body flannel  Bath blanket  Gloves (if giving perineal care)  Additional bed linen and towels, if required  Hygiene supplies such as  Clean gown or pyjamas as lotion, powder, and deodorant.
needed.
 Urinal or bedpan  100NS222 PRACTICUM/CLINICAL ATTACHMENT I Suggested Actions Rationale Assessment  Read the nursing report and To ascertain need for bedbath.
care plan.
 Assess the condition of the To determine the hygienic status of hair and skin (colour, texture the patient and need to pay special and tugor; pigmented spots; attention to some parts of the body.
lesions; excoriations; and abrasions)  Assess for presence of pain Demonstrate concern for patient and need for adjunct measures comfort as well as ensuring (e.g.
analgesics) before the patient’s cooperation.
bath.
 Assess range of motion of the This helps to identify any limitation joints and any other aspects of in mobility of part of the body.
health that affects the bathing process.
 Assess for need of special It gives an organised working equipment, special needs of environment for the nurse.
client.
 Inquire if the client needs a Warm bath or activity may bedpan or urinal, if he wishes stimulate the urge to void or to defecate or urinate.
defecate.
The client will be more comfortable after voiding.
Voiding before cleaning the perineum is advisable.
Planning  Inform, take consent and ask This gives the patient a sense of for preferences of client belonging  Invite a parent or family It provides sense of security for the member to participate if patient desired and with consent of client.
 Request for an assistance from One may need extra hands during 101NS222 PRACTICUM/CLINICAL ATTACHMENT I among nursing staff and give the procedure information on nature of assistance required  Close the windows and doors Air current increases loss of heat by to make sure the room is free convention.
from draught.
 Provide privacy by drawing Hygiene is a personal matter.
the curtains or closing the door.
 Lower head of bed and This avoids undue reaching and remove pillows if permitted.
straining and promotes good body mechanics.
 Remove the top and bottom Bath blanket provides comfort, linen and replace it with bath warm, and privacy.
blankets.
 Remove all patients clothing.
Hygiene is a personal matter.
 Avoid undue exposure.
This provides warmth and undue exposure  Maintain temperature of water Appropriate temperature is necessary for comfort and normal physiological functioning • Fold wash cloth to avoid Folded cloth retains heat and water dripping (bath mitt) than a loosely held one and prevents end of washcloth from dragging across the skin.
Implementation Wash the face • Place one towel across the Prevent the bed linen from getting patient’s chest wet • Begin the bath at the cleanest area and work downward toward the feet.
• Wash the client’s face with This allows for individual water only, if he doesn’t want preference soap and dry them well.
102NS222 PRACTICUM/CLINICAL ATTACHMENT I • Wash, rinse and dry client’s face, neck and ears.
• Wipe from the inner to the This prevents secretion from outer canthus entering the eye.
• Use a separate corner of the Using separate corners prevents washcloth for each eye.
transmitting micro organism from one eye to another.
• Assist or allow client to wash This enhances client participation as desirable Wash the arms and hands • Place the bath towel It protects the bed from becoming lengthwise under the arm wet.
• Wash, rinse and dry the arm Washing from the distal to proximal using long, firm strokes from area promotes circulation by distal to proximal areas stimulating venous blood flow.
• Wash the axilla well Due to increase of sweat pore and air makes the place conducive for the growth of microbes and the tendency for offensive odour.
• Repeat for the other arm • Place a towel directly on the This protects the bed from getting bed and put the basin on it wet.
• Place the client hands in the Many clients enjoying immersing basin, wash rinse and dry the their hands in the basin and washing hands paying particular themselves.
Soaking loosens dirt attention to the spaces in under the nails.
between the fingers Firm strokes from distal to proximal area promote circulation by • Wash, rinse and dry the arm increasing venous return.
using long, firm strokes from distal to proximal areas.
• Repeat for the other arm Wash the chest and abdomen 103NS222 PRACTICUM/CLINICAL ATTACHMENT I • Place the bath towel This keeps the client warm while lengthwise over the chest and preventing undue exposure of the abdomen.
chest.
Wash, rinse, and dry the chest and abdomen, while giving special attention to the skin fold under the breast.
• Replace the bath blanket when the areas have been dry Wash the legs and the feet Covering the perineum promotes • Wrap one of the client’s leg privacy and maintains client’s and the feet with the bath dignity.
blanket; ensure that the pubic area is well covered.
Washing from the distal to proximal areas promotes circulation by • Expose the leg that is farthest stimulating venous blood flow.
from you by folding the bath blanket toward the other leg being careful to keep the perineum covered.
• Place the bath towel lengthwise under the other leg, and wash that leg.
Use long, smooth, firm strokes, washing from the ankle to the knee to the thigh) • Rinse and dry that leg.
Water may become dirty or cold • Reverse the coverings, and repeat for the other leg.
• Wash the feet by placing them in the basin of water.
• Dry each foot and pay particular attention to the spaces between the toes.
Obtains fresh warm bathwater now or when 104NS222 PRACTICUM/CLINICAL ATTACHMENT I necessary Wash the back and then the perineum • Assist the client to a prone or It provides proper body alignment side-lying position facing and ensure comfort of the patient away from you.
• Place the bath towel This protect the bed lien from being lengthwise alongside the back wet and buttocks.
• Wash and dry the back, It ensures scrutiny washing of the buttocks, and upper thighs unexposed area of the body.
paying particular attention to the gluteal folds • Assist the client to a supine Perineal region is a sensitive area position and determine and patient needs to be asked his whether the client can wash preference.
the perineal-genital area independently • Note status of skin, client’s It helps the Nurse to determine strength and percentage of coping level of the patient.
bath done without assistance • Record assessment, such as Enhances prompt identification of excoriation in the folds patient’s health problems.
beneath the breast or reddened Documentation also provides for areas over bony prominences accountability in nursing practice.
and other relevant information.
Evaluation 1.
Assess client’s tolerance of procedures 2.
Note skin status, client’s strength and percentage of bath done without assistance 3.
Record assessment, such as excoriation in the folds beneath the breast or reddened areas over bony prominences and other relevant information Basic Care Procedures – Showering and Bed-Bathing 105NS222 PRACTICUM/CLINICAL ATTACHMENT I Suggested Student Responses While Viewing the Program Bed Bath 1.
Explain why it is necessary for the carrier or nurse to read the nursing care plan prior to preparing the patient for a bed bath.
To be aware of the patient’s strength, mobility and capabilities 2.
When does the carrier or nurse wash their hands?
a) Before the procedure b) During the procedure c) Before and after the procedure d) On completion of the procedure 3.
How do you prepare the surroundings?
Ensure comfortable room temperature and privacy 4.
What do you do when you approach the patient?
Introduce yourself, establish how the patient prefers to be addressed, e.g.
Christian name or Mr./Mrs/Miss and explain the procedure you are about to undertake 5.
Explain why it is important to offer the patient toilet facilities before the procedure?
For the comfort of the patient 6.
What materials do you need and when do you collect and assemble them?
What - toiletries, linen including bed linen, two towels, two face cloths, tooth brush/paste, hair brush/comb, shaving equipment, nail care items, makeup (if appropriate), clean clothes, gloves, and linen 106NS222 PRACTICUM/CLINICAL ATTACHMENT I When - prior to commencing procedure 7.
Where do you place the linen skip?
a) In the pan room/clean up room b) In the passage outside the room c) Nearby 8.
When attending to a bed bath, what parts of the body do you wash and where do you start?
Whole body starting with the face 9.
Explain the action you use to dry the patient and why.
Pat, do not rub as it may damage fragile skin Basic Care Procedures – Showering and Bed-Bathing 10.
When drying the body, what areas do you pay particular attention to?
The skin folds, e.g.
under the breasts, perineal area, abdominal flap, groins and between the fingers and toes 11.
How do you ensure that the patient does not get cold throughout the procedure?
Ensure the room temperature is comfortable and free of draughts, keep the patient covered and change the water frequently maintaining appropriate temperature 12.
How do you leave the patient on completion of the procedure?
Warm, comfortable with all personal items within reach, e.g.
glasses, drink, book, call bell Showering 13.
Explain the general preparation prior to showering.
Read the nursing care plan, assess strength and mobility Assemble the items as for bed bath but include non slip surface or bath mat, shower chair 107NS222 PRACTICUM/CLINICAL ATTACHMENT I Prepare the surroundings, attention to warmth, comfort, safety, and privacy of the patient Introduce yourself and explain procedure Offer toilet facilities prior to procedure 14.
Why is it important to assess for any assistance that may be required?
To maintain the safety of the patient and encourage the patient to participate 15.
What sort of assistance may be provided?
Another staff member, lifting machine or other aids to assist transfer, e.g.
walking stick or wheel chair 16.
It is important to have the water temperature constant and at the right warmth.
How is this achieved?
Preset by a thermostatic valve 17.
What do you do if a patient collapses during the procedure?
Seek assistance of other staff members alerting them via the nurse call bell system 18.
Why is it important to encourage the patient to participate?
It promotes activity and range of movement, provides the patient with a sense of achievement, encourages independence rather than helplessness and dependency 19.
On the completion of the procedure it is important to attend the peripherals.
What does this refer?
Ensuring spectacles are cleaned, hearing aids are cleaned, no wax in either of the ears or the aids, batteries are functioning and the aids are correctly placed in the ears 20.
How should the bathroom be left on completion of the procedure?
The bathroom should be left clean, tidy and free of any of the patient’s personal items which should be returned to the bedside locker.
All 108NS222 PRACTICUM/CLINICAL ATTACHMENT I soiled items such as linen, clothing and gloves should be disposed in the appropriate receptacles 3.4 Bedmaking A clean comfortable bed is important for hospital patient, some of whom may have to spend varying length of time in bed because of illness, injury or treatments.
Consequently, the need to improve and maintain, for as long as possible, the physical and psychological comfort of these patients as well as promoting sleep and optimal wellness forms the primary reason for bedmaking.
A related reason is the need to relieve pressure from certain parts of the body and stimulate circulation thereby preventing the development of decubitus ulcer (pressure sore).
Purpose: To • Promote patient physical and psychological comfort.
• Prevent cross-contamination.
• Receive patient for admission and from the theatre.
• Promote patient’s optimum safety.
• Prevent development of decubitus ulcer by ensuring a crumb/creases-free bed.
• Beautify environment or for aesthetic purposes.
• Boost patient’s morale.
Definition and Types The process of applying or changing linens is what is referred to as bed making.
It has also been described as the art of putting the bed in comfortable and suitable state for the patient.
Types of bedmaking include: • The Unoccupied Bed: There are two types of unoccupied bed viz – The Closed Bed and the Open Bed.
A closed bed is the bed making process that is performed following the discharge or transfer of a patient when no new patient is expected.
An Open Bed on the other hand is the bed making process that is carried out when the occupant is able to be up while the bed is being made i.e.
the type that is made for an ambulant or out-of-bed patient.
109NS222 PRACTICUM/CLINICAL ATTACHMENT I • The Occupied Bed: Bed making process in which the bed is made while the patient is in it.
• Special Beds: These include – Fractured Bed (Characterized by a firm lying surface it offers the patient.
It is often employed in the care of patient with back pain and those with fractures); Divided Bed (So named by the fashion in which it is made.
Used mostly in the care of amputees.
It is also employed after application of Plaster of Paris to enhance its dryness).
Post Operative Bed/Operation Bed – This is the bed that is prepared to receive a post surgical patient with minimal disturbance.
Cardiac Bed – Usually employed in the management of patients with cardiac and respiratory disorder to ease respiration and promote comfort.
With the aid of the back rest and pillows that are arranged in arm-chair fashion, the patient is put in sitting position and a bed table with an extra pillow placed in front for the patient to lean on.
Special Appliances used in Bed making Bed tables preferably of adjustable height for eating or leaning arms on when sitting upright or when in respiratory embarrassment.
Bed cradles - Made of metal.
Used for keeping the weight of bedclothes off the patient’s legs or body, especially in weak or debilitated patients.
Particularly useful after Plaster of Paris (POP) has been applied to fractured leg or patient with burns.
Bed rest – Usually attached to but may be separate from the bed.
More often than not metal but occasionally could be made of wood especially the separate type.
Most commonly used in putting the patient in sitting up position with pillows placed between it and the patient.
Bed elevators & bed blocks – A number of beds have elevators built into them so that the head or foot of the bed may be raised as required.
In some cases, the elevators, which are usually metal, have several rungs at varying heights on which the bar of the bed may be supported at desired height.
Sometimes portable wooden bed block may be used for the same purpose.
Such blocks usually have a depression at their tops into which the castors of the bed can fit.
They also vary in height.
Bed – strippers – These are stands placed at the foot of the bed over which bedclothes are draped during bedmaking.
Sometimes, two chairs placed back to back can be improvised for this.
110NS222 PRACTICUM/CLINICAL ATTACHMENT I Air rings /Air cushions/Foam rubber rings – These may be placed under the patient’s buttocks to relieve pressure.
Fracture boards – Wooden.
May be placed under the mattress to provide a firmer base on which to lie.
In other words, they prevent the mattress from sagging.
Patients with spinal conditions, back injuries and some fractures find this most helpful.
Sand bags – These are made of impermeable materials, which are filled with sand.
They are used for immobilisation of limb(s) in the treatment of special conditions e.g.
amputation to control phantom movement/pain.
They must always be covered with cotton.
Hot water bottles – These are made of rubber or aluminum.
They are used to give added warmth to patient.
However, this is being discouraged to avoid burning the patient.
Others are Drip stand, Bed stirrup e.t.c Basic Principles Bed making is essentially a two-man procedure.
Some of the principles guiding this procedure are outlined below: Principle of Organisation – Bedclothes and other materials needed must be arranged in order of priority.
The two nurses must work from top to bottom of the bed.
They must work in unison/harmony i.e.
there must be synchronicity of action; or uniformity of action.
Principle of Body Mechanics – Use proper body mechanics.
Body mechanics is described as the use of the safest and most efficient methods of moving and lifting i.e.
the use of mechanical principles as applied to human body.
Maintain good body alignment.
It is easier to pull, push, or roll an object than to lift it.
So, as much as possible, push, roll, rather than lift.
Work smoothly and rhythmically.
If you must lift, remember that it takes less effort to lift an object when you work as close to it as possible.
Use your leg and arm muscle as much as possible and your back muscles, which are not as strong, as little as possible.
Avoid reaching.
Rocking backward or forward on your feet uses your body weight as a force for pulling or pushing.
Always use your own weight to counteract the weight of the object or client/patient being lifted (Roark, 1995).
http://www.brooksidepress.org/Products/Nursing_Fundamentals).
Personal Choice – Encourage personal choice and participation in care decision as much as possible.
Any conversation during bed-making 111NS222 PRACTICUM/CLINICAL ATTACHMENT I should include the patient and should not be on personal matters between the nurses.
Principle of Comfort and Safety – Promote comfort and safety.
Support the patient as necessary.
The two nurses must maintain a near erect position and avoid straining or overstretching their back to prevent injury.
The bed should be crump and wrinkle-free to promote patient comfort and prevent development of decubitus ulcer.
Always lift the patient off the bed or roll him from side to side in case of occupied bed.
On no account should the patient be dragged on bed.
Call for help when necessary to move heavy or very ill patient.
Be sure that the patient is comfortable after bed making.
Principle of Asepsis / Infection Control Guidelines – Follow infection control guidelines because bedmaking increases the chance of exposure and transmission of microorganisms.
Note that patients are often less resistant to infections because of the stress resulting from an existing disease process.
Therefore put off fans during the bedmaking.
Avoid jarring or flying of bed sheets in the air and do not allow beddings to drag on the floor.
This is to prevent cross infection.
Prevent uniforms from touching bedclothes.
Fold and place on chair linen to be reused.
Soak and rinse linen soiled with faeces or blood before placing in hamper and always have a receptacle or hamper on hand for dumping soiled linen.
Lastly, ensure that hands are washed before and after the procedure.
Principle of Privacy and Confidentiality – Protect privacy and confidentiality.
Keep patient well covered throughout the procedure.
Appropriate Equipment – Select equipment based on patient’s needs and agency policy.
Principle of Time Management – The goal here is speed and accuracy.
This implies that the two nurses must work with utmost speed while not denigrating on accuracy of actions.
Besides there must be economy of movement.
When does the bed get changed?
• Usually after client’s bath.
• When bed is rumpled and client is sitting out of bed.
• When client is out of room for tests.
• After meals, if eating in bed.
• When linen are soiled or wet.
112NS222 PRACTICUM/CLINICAL ATTACHMENT I • Throughout the day as often as necessary.
Making the Unoccupied Bed Equipments Needed 1.
Cotton quilted mattress cover.
2.
2 large sheets.
3.
Rubber or plastic draw sheet, if it is the policy to use one.
4.
Cotton draw sheet.
5.
Blanket, if needed.
6.
Bedspread/Counterpane.
7.
Pillowcase for each pillow used.
8.
Hamper.
Planning  Wash your hands scrupulously Unclean hands may spread disease before selecting linen.
germs to clean linen and to patients.
 Take everything needed to Demonstrates organisation.
patient unit.
 Put off all fans.
Fanning soiled linen can aid spread of microorganisms through the air.
Implementation Required Steps Rationale  Wash your hands before Unclean hands may spread disease selecting linen.
germs to clean linen and to patients.
 Take everything needed to Demonstrates organisation.
patient unit.
113NS222 PRACTICUM/CLINICAL ATTACHMENT I  Place linen on straight chair near Stacking linens in this manner foot of bed.
Stack the items in saves time and effort later on.
order of use, that is, bedspread and pillowcase on bottom and draw mackintosh and bottom sheet on top.
 Adjust bed to suitable height and The higher the bed the lesser the ensure that wheels are locked.
strain on the back and leg muscles and immobilizing the bed makes bedmaking relatively stress-free.
 Place the folded quilted mattress Lifting and shaking any item of pad on near side of bed and linen may stir up dust and lint unfold it without lifting or which may carry disease-causing shaking it out.
organisms.
 Place folded sheet on near side Lifting and flapping linen at of bed and unfold it lengthwise shoulder level to unfold it also in the same manner described causes unnecessary strain and above, that is, without shaking fatigue on the back, shoulder, and or flapping it out.
Arrange sheet arm muscles.
in this way: Placing the bottom sheet correctly is the most important step in (a) Spread the bottom sheet right bedmaking.
side up, wide hem at top, even The foundation sheet should be and straight.
secured against anything that might tend to loosen it.
For this (b)Allow 15 to 18 inches at head of reason, never skimp on this 15– bed to tuck under mattress.
If the to–18 inches allowance to tuck sheet is short, tuck in at top and under head of mattress.
Covering at sides, and keep taut.
foot of mattress is far less important.
(c) With center of sheet at center The sheet is doubled back on of bed, fanfold the far half of itself in folds of several inches - sheet beyond the center of like a fan.
Placing this foundation bed.
sheet straight on the bed is also important.
 Lift the head of mattress If you face in the direction of with one hand and pull your work and move along in this sheet under the mattress position, you will avoid twisting with the other hand.
See groups of muscles, thus reducing that material is smooth strain and fatigue.
A sheet that is after tucking under.
even but just a little crooked on Leave no wrinkles.
the base will always have wrinkles.
114NS222 PRACTICUM/CLINICAL ATTACHMENT I  Make a mitered corner at head A mitered corner will hold the of mattress.
bedding firmly and makes bed attractive.
How to mitered a corner of a sheet or how to make half envelope corner: (a) Take corner of sheet between thumb and finger and draw around corner of the mattress.
(b) At the same time, slip other hand under side edge of sheet and draw upward into a diagonal fold.
(c) Lay this fold up over the mattress.
(d) Now turn under mattress the part of sheet left hanging.
(e) Drop upper fold and tuck in under mattress.
This makes a box like corner.
 Grasping bottom sheet with both Helps in preventing wrinkles and hands, tuck under mattress along securing bottom sheet firmly.
By side of bed, tightening and keeping your back straight and smoothing it, as you move from feet slightly separated you will head to foot of bed.
Keep your reduce strain.
back as straight as possible and feet slightly separated.
 If rubber draw sheet is used, Prevents bed from getting soiled place it about 12 to 15 inches and soaked.
This not only helps to from head of mattress.
Grasp maintain the bed as safe and with both hands, holding palms comfortable as possible for the downward on level with mattress; patient, it also helps to prolong tighten the sheet and tuck the lifespan of the bed.
When smoothly under side of mattress.
holding the sheet with palms Where plasticized mattresses are downward, the strong muscles of 115NS222 PRACTICUM/CLINICAL ATTACHMENT I used, it is often the policy to omit the shoulders and arms are used.
a waterproof sheet.
It is sometimes placed over the mattress and under the quilted mattress pad.
 Cover rubber sheet with cotton Lying directly on even a small draw sheet or a large sheet strip of the rubber sheet will be folded once cross-wise.
Place uncomfortable and may cause this cotton sheet about two or skin irritation to patient.
three inches higher than the rubber sheet and see that it is completely covered.
 Tuck cotton draw sheet Guarantees availability of an smoothly under side of extra dry section of draw sheet mattresses simultaneously on when a side gets wet and there is both sides.
Fanfold far side of no spare draw sheet.
the sheet at center of bed.
Now you are ready to make the top part of the bed  Place the folded top sheet on Lifting and flapping linen at near side of bed and unfold it shoulder level to unfold it causes without shaking it and flapping unnecessary strain and fatigue on it.
Spread the top sheet even and the back, shoulder, and arm straight, right side down, with muscles.
If wrong side of hem is wide hem at top, and upper edge up, when the top edge of the sheet of sheet even with the head of is turned down over the edge of mattress and ensuring that center bedspread, the right side of hem of sheet is straight and at the will show.
center of bed.
 Tuck sheet (and blanket if used) A mitered corner will hold the under foot of mattress and make bedding firmly and makes bed a mitered corner.
Tuck under attractive.
When the top sheet, mattress at corner but DO NOT blanket and bed spread are tuck in along the side of the bed.
allowed to hang free, it creates Allow it to hang free.
enough room for patient to move freely in bed without the bed getting roughened.
 Place folded spread on bed and unfold it in such a way that it is centered (its upper edge even with head of mattress) and hangs evenly, covering the sheet and blanket completely.
Lay spread smooth and even.
116NS222 PRACTICUM/CLINICAL ATTACHMENT I  Tuck bedspread under the Promotes aesthetics.
mattress at foot of bed.
Make a mitered corner on near side, but do not tuck the finished corner under mattress.
 Make up the pillow this way: Facilitates the covering of pillow without denigrating on the (a) Slip your hand inside pillowcase principle of asepsis and body and grasp the inside seam at end mechanics.
of case.
(b)Still holding the inside seam, place this same hand over the end of pillow and pull on pillowcase.
This also promotes aesthetics.
(c) Fit corners of case over corners of pillow.
(d) If pillowcase is considerably wider than the pillow, tuck the excess material into a smooth fold on one side, making the case fit well over the pillow.
Keep this tuck in place when placing on bed.
 Place the pillow(s) flat at the Placing open end away from door head of bed with open end away also promotes aesthetics.
from door.
 If you wish to "open" this bed, Opening the bed, that is, turning here is one of various ways it the covers down, makes it look might be done: more inviting to the patient sitting for a time in a chair.
Besides, it (a) With both hands grasp the upper makes it easier to assist patient edge of the top covers; carefully back in bed.
bring your arms toward foot of bed, until the upper edge of cuff is at the foot of the bed.
(b)With hands still in place, bring the cuff up to the fold halfway up the bed.
Straighten and smoothen the cuff.
117NS222 PRACTICUM/CLINICAL ATTACHMENT I  If you wish a "closed" bed for a Indicates that bed is still patient not yet admitted, the unoccupied.
upper edge of bedspread is left even with the head of mattress.
 When the bed has been made, Demonstrate organisation and the nurse must see that the concern for patient’s safety.
locker has been returned to its position at the bedside and that the two chairs used have been replaced in their proper position.
Admission Bed Requirements: Same as for simple Hospital Bed plus the following:  1 bath towel  Clean nightdress or pyjamas Procedure: 1.
Make up bed to the draw sheet as for the simple hospital bed 2.
Spread on the bed the top sheet make as usual and cover with counterpane/bed spread 3.
Place the pyjamas or night dress on the bed Operation Bed – This is a special kind of bed that is purposely made to receive patient post surgery.
Purpose: To • Get patient into bed as quickly and safely as possible.
• Prevent shock.
• Protect bed linen from vomits and saliva.
• Clear the mouth of post anesthetic thereby maintaining a clear airway.
Requirements: Same as for simple unoccupied bed but plus the following: • Dressing mackintosh and towel • Bed elevator or blocks • Drip stand 118NS222 PRACTICUM/CLINICAL ATTACHMENT I • Oxygen apparatus • Suctioning machine • Bedside tray containing: • One Sponge holding forceps or long • A pair of dissecting artery forceps forceps • A pair of tongue holding forceps • Tongue depressor • One oxygen spanner • Mouth wash • Cold water in a gallipot • Sterile gauze in a bowl • Vomit bowl or receiver • Receiver for used swabs Assessment: As for simple unoccupied bed.
Planning: As for simple unoccupied bed.
Implementation  Assemble requirements.
Demonstrates organisation.
 Make foundation of bed in Shows understanding of correct usual manner.
sequence of procedure.
 Place top linen on bed in usual Facilitate transfer of the returning manner; omit tucking in at foot patient from the stretcher to the of bed.
Fold top clothes into bed without undue exposure and three, and then fold in the edges strain.
in an envelope manner to one side of the bed.
 Place dressing mackintosh and The use of pillows is towel to replace the pillow.
contraindicated in patients recovering from certain general anesthesia.
The mackintosh protects the bed from getting soaked with secretion.
 Provide and place appropriately Prevents bed from getting soaked any other bed protection and stained.
according to the type of operation being performed.
119NS222 PRACTICUM/CLINICAL ATTACHMENT I  Place chair on the side of bed This is to allow stretcher as near where linen has been folded the bed as possible.
and bed table/bedside locker away from bed.
 Place prepared post-anesthetic For emergency resuscitation.
tray on beside locker and oxygen cylinder nearby.
 Position the movable drip stand Facilitates intravenous therapy, close to the bed; the suctioning suctioning, and enhances shock machine and bed elevator also management if the need arises.
at easy reach.
Cardiac Bed – This is another special bed made for patients with cardiac failure and those with respiratory disease experiencing respiratory embarrassment.
The patient finds it easier to breathe when nursed on this bed as it affords them to assume an upright position.
Requirements In addition to the basic requirement for bed making, the following extra appliances are used: • Back rest • 5 pillows or more as needed by patient • Bed table and soft pillow • Air-ring • Bed cradle (if there is pedal oedema) • Sand bags or pillows to rest the feet • Oxygen apparatus and its accessories • Sputum mug • Call bell Assessment: As for simple unoccupied bed.
120NS222 PRACTICUM/CLINICAL ATTACHMENT I Planning: As for simple unoccupied bed.
Implementation • Assemble requirements.
Demonstrates organisation.
• Make up the bed until the draw Demonstrates knowledge of sheet is in position.
correct sequence of procedure.
• Place back rest at the top of the Enables the patient to assume and bed and place pillows on the maintain a near erect position back rest in an arm-chair while still offering as much fashion.
comfort as possible.
• Place the air-ring on the Relieves pressure on the gluteal middle of the draw sheet.
muscles and thereby helping to prevent the development of decubitus ulcer.
• Place the sand bags at the foot Offers support to the feet and of the bed.
prevent foot drop.
• Place the bed cradle on the Takes the weight of top bed linens bottom part of the bed.
Cover off the possibly oedematus it with top bed clothes.
patient’s legs thereby preventing decubitus ulcer.
• Place the bed table with soft For client to lean forward: for pillow in front of the patient.
comfort and to ease respiration.
Besides, could be used for eating, writing, and reading.
• Place the sputum mug and call Prevents indiscriminate spitting of bell on the table.
sputum on the floor and helps to summon assistance and relieve the stress of talking.
• Place the oxygen cylinder near For easy reach when the need for the top of the bed in case the oxygen therapy arises.
patient needs it.
• Tidy patients unit.
Promotes aesthetic feelings.
Amputation Bed (Below Knee) – This is yet another special bed for nursing patient who had just undergone below knee amputation.
Requirements 121NS222 PRACTICUM/CLINICAL ATTACHMENT I In addition to the basic requirements for making simple unoccupied bed, the following extra bed appliances are used: • Dressing mackintosh and towel; dressing towel • 2 sand bags • Bed cradle • Bed elevators • 1 bed sheet Assessment: As for simple unoccupied bed.
Planning: As for simple unoccupied bed.
Implementation  Assemble requirements.
Demonstrates organisation.
 Make foundation of bed as Demonstrates knowledge of usual.
correct sequence of procedure.
 Place pillows as required.
Promotes comfort.
 Place dressing mackintosh and towel on bed where the stump will be.
 Arrange dressing towel over the stump, fix in position with two sand-bags.
 The bed sheet is placed over the patient’ chest, trunk and good leg.
 Place small bed cradle over stump.
 Spread top clothes length –wise over bed and bed cradle.
 Fold back on the cradle to allow for easy observation of the 122NS222 PRACTICUM/CLINICAL ATTACHMENT I stump.
 Tuck in sides of top bed clothes.
 Place bed elevator near the bed.
Amputation Bed (Above Knee) Requirement: As for simple hospital Bed plus: 1 set of extra top clothes Dressing mackintosh and towel 2 covered sand bags Dressing towel Bed cradle Bed elevator Procedure 1.
Make foundation of bed as usual 2.
Place dressing mackintosh and towel, under stump 3.
Arrange roller bandage over stump 4.
Support sides with two sand bags 5.
Place a small bed cradle over stump 6.
Top bedclothes are made into two packs.
The top pack must overlap the lower pack by about 20cm 7.
The lower pack is tucked in at the foot of the bed 8.
The two sets of top clothes are tucked in at the sides of the unaffected leg 123NS222 PRACTICUM/CLINICAL ATTACHMENT I 9.
Place bed elevator ready near bed.
Changing of Bottom Sheet on an Occupied Bed Purpose To prepare a clean unwrinkled bed surface with a minimum of energy expenditure while a client remains in bed.
To create a bed that provides for easy access To contribute to patient’s comfort with little or no exposure Moving patient from top to bottom Requirements 2 Chairs placed back to back at foot of bed Clean sheets and any other clean requirements placed on the trolley Dirty linen bag Screen Latex gloves (when necessary)- Method 1.
Provide privacy by screening.
Remove pillow 2.
Strip the top of the bed in the usual manner, leaving the patient covered by the top sheet 3.
Move patient towards the foot of the bed 4.
Untuck the bottom sheet roll down, pull mattress cover straight 5.
Unfold the clean sheet and tuck in at the top loosely or the lower end and pull down to reach the buttocks 6.
Move patient to the top of the bed to sit on the clean sheet already placed there 7.
Untuck bottom sheet at the bottom of bed.
Remove and place in the dirty linen bin 124NS222 PRACTICUM/CLINICAL ATTACHMENT I 8.
Pull mattress cover straight.
Pull the clean sheets and tuck in at the bottom, then pull and tuck in at the middle 9.
Change pillow cases if necessary and place the pillow on the bed 10.Move patient to the center of the bed and make patient comfortable 11.Make up the top of the bed in the usual manner.
Making the Occupied bed Points to Keep in Mind 1.
Making the bed with a patient in it is necessary when the patient is too ill or disabled to be out of bed.
It is a long procedure and if not accomplished skillfully, can be an extremely exhausting experience for the patient.
It is therefore a time when individual adjustments are needed to save time and to lessen the exertion of the patient.
And it calls for skills in handling each step smoothly and avoiding irritations, such as bumping and jarring the bed.
2.
It is also a time to observe the patient and to give him chance to talk about anything on his mind.
This may be done by listening, not talking about your own problems and experiences.
3.
If this procedure follows the patient's bath in bed, the first steps as given here will have already been accomplished.
For instance, all the top linen would have been removed and the patient covered with a bath blanket.
However, to give a complete description here, this procedure starts with all bed linens in place.
Equipments Needed 1.
2 large sheets, or as many as policy calls for 2.
Cotton draw sheet, if used.
Top sheet is now used for draw sheet 3.
Bedspread 4.
Pillowcase for each pillow 5.
Bath blanket.
Important Steps Reasons for Action 125NS222 PRACTICUM/CLINICAL ATTACHMENT I 1.
Wash your hands before selecting If this procedure follows linens.
Take everything needed to the patient's bath, start patient's unit and stack items on with step 5 and loosen all the chair in order of use.
lower sheets.
The reason is that the clean linen will already be stacked on chair at bedside.
If top covers are removed and bath blanket is on the patient, move on to step 10.
2.
Provide for privacy by placing screen or pulling curtain.
3.
Adjust the bed to level position and lock the wheels.
Remove all but one pillow from under the patient's head.
4.
See that laundry bag is in a place Close-by.
5.
Loosen all bottom sheets all around You will be delayed later if the bed.
sheets are still tucked securely under mattress.
6.
Remove bedspread by grasping it at top edge and folding it to foot of bed.
If it is not to be used again, fold and bunch it and drop in laundry hamper.
7.
Place the folded bath blanket on If patient is not familiar with this near side of bed and unfold it so step for removing sheet, tell him that he can be sure that he will not what you will do.
If patient is not be too exposed.
ill, can ask him to hold the top edge of bath blanket.
13.
Slip hands under side of blanket and grasp upper edge of sheet and pull it from under the blanket to the foot of bed.
9.
Bring the top and bottom hems Shaking and flapping linens together and fold the sheet on (especially used linen) stirs up lower part of bed without shaking dust and lint which carry disease- it out.
causing organisms into the air.
10.
Place folded top sheet on back of This top sheet will be used again chair.
as a bottom sheet or to cover rubber draw sheet.
11.
Go to other side of bed and help It is much easier to remove sheets patient move toward you, then turn and replace them if there are no 126NS222 PRACTICUM/CLINICAL ATTACHMENT I him to side-lying position, facing pillows on the sheets.
However, you.
Position him in good one pillow can be managed, if alignment without pillow, if this patient is uncomfortable without is not too uncomfortable for him.
it.
12.
Raise the side rail on that side of If patient is turned away from bed before returning to your you to his side, he may just keep original position.
on turning and fall out of bed.
There is real danger of this.
13.
Fold the near half of used cotton draw sheet close against the patient's back.
14.
Fanfold the rubber draw sheet These sheets are folded separately smoothly to the back of patient.
Because each will be removed later (except the rubber draw sheet) one at a time.
15.
Fanfold the entire length of the used bottom sheet to the center of bed and close to the patient's back.
Tuck each sheet under the one before.
16.
Place the folded clean bottom sheet on the near side of bed and unfold it length-wise in this manner: (a) With center fold straight withFace the direction of your work mattress with it.
and move, Keeping back straight but not rigid;bend at hips.
Knees (b) Allow 15 to 18 inches at head should be slightly flexed and feet of mattress.
apart throughout action.
(c) With bottom hem even with foot of mattress.
This sheet will be placed under the patient later.
Do not wrinkle (d) Fanfold far half of sheet or pull it out of shape.
carefully to patient's back 17.
Lift corner of mattress with one hand as you tuck sheet under head of mattress with the other hand.
18.Make a mitered corner at head of mattress 19.
Tuck sheet smoothly under mattress along side of bed from head to foot.
127NS222 PRACTICUM/CLINICAL ATTACHMENT I 20.
Locate the free end of the rubber sheet near patient and pull it toward you, without disturbing the folded bottom sheet 21.
Straighten the rubber sheet in place Make sure that rubber sheet will and tuck it under mattress at side of never be next to patient's skin, bed.
because it will be irritating.
Allow the cotton draw sheet to overlap the rubber sheet by two or three inches at upper and lower edges.
22.
Place the used top sheet (folded once crosswise) over the rubber draw sheet and completely cover it.
Fold far half of sheet next to patient's back.
Tuck hanging part under mattress, and make sure both rubber sheet and draw sheet are smooth.
23.
Let the patient know that it is time At this point, the patient has to for him to roll back toward you and roll over the clean as well as that he is to roll over the folded soiled linen folded next to him.
sheets which are at the center of the bed.
24.
First, cradle the patient's feet Try to keep the patient's body in and lower legs in your arms and as good' alignment as possible.
It move towards you over the "bump" will be much - less strain on him.
of folded line.
Also, it will cause you less strain and bath blanket folded up on your knees slightly flexed.
Keep one foot a little in front of the other.
This allows you to use the long thigh muscles rather than the small muscles of the back.
25.
Next, give patient the assistance he needs to move his hips and shoulders as he rolls toward you to his side.
26.
Reach over the patient and push If patient has a drainage tube of folded sheets away from patient's any kind, see that there is enough back toward the far side of bed.
slack in tube for turning.
27.
Raise the side guard on your side, Use these side guards if available then go the other side of bed.
because the patient may misjudge 128NS222 PRACTICUM/CLINICAL ATTACHMENT I the width of bed and move to near edge.
28.
Lower side guard.
Starting with Hold linens away from uniform soiled bottom sheet, fold and and drop in bunch laundry it as you remove it from the bed.
hamper.
29.
Remove and discard cotton draw If patient is becoming sheet in the same manner.
uncomfortable Without a pillow, reach for the one you put aside earlier, change pillowcase and place under patient's head.
30.
Pull clean bottom sheet in place; tuck under mattress at head of bed; make mitered corner and tuck under mattress along side of bed.
31.
Pull both draw sheets toward you and straighten them.
Tuck free end of rubber draw sheet under mattress, keeping it smooth and tight.
32.
Straighten clean cotton draw sheet There is no reason to overdo the in place over rubber sheet.
tugging Grasping and pulling at With both hands (palms down), this step.
If you lift the draw with mattress.
Pull it tightly and sheet up higher than mattress tuck under side of mattress without level, hold it at level The cause causing the patient to roll out of and effect of this is something bed.
You may cause the patient to like using crowbar to pry or roll out of bed.
lifting it up, 33.
Place clean top sheet on near side of bed and unfold it on blanket top of bath blanket 34.
Have patient hold upper edge This is done to prevent exposing of sheet while you fold bath patient.
At the same time, folding blanket to foot of bed and remove the blanket toward the foot of bed it.
under the top sheet does not stir up dust.
35.
Arrange top sheet to extend high enough to cover patient's shoulders; leave excess at foot of bed; see that it hangs evenly on both sides.
36.
Before tucking sheet (and Tight top covers not only are blanket, if used) under foot of uncomfortable for patient's feet mattress, make a toe pleat to allow but may cause a serious condition.
129NS222 PRACTICUM/CLINICAL ATTACHMENT I room for patient's feet.
When If the feet are restrained in a blanket is used, make the pleat in forward position overa period of sheet and blanket together.
time, the muscles of the soles of The toe pleat may be made in this the feet are weakened This result way.
in a serious deformity called drop foot.
37.
Place folded bedspread on near Another type of toe pleat may be side of bed and unfold as described made from the width of the sheet earlier.
Arrange it in this way: and blanket (if used) (a) With upper edge high enough to cover patient's shoulders.
(b) Center it so it will hang evenly on both sides.
(c) With excess at foot of bed to tuck under mattress and to loosen over patient's feet.
38.
Tuck bedspread under mattress at foot of bed.
Make a corner but stop short of last step and do not tuck hanging part under mattress.
Allow it to hang free.
39.
Fold top edge of spread down During this long procedure it is under edge of blanket, if used.
easy to drift into the habit of Turn edge of top sheet down over chattering unceasingly to your spread making a cuff.
patient.
This may be tiresome to most patients.
About this time before finishing procedure, check drainage tube, if any, and see that there are no kinks in tube which might stop 40.
Go to other side of bed and the flow.
Also see that signal finish repeat steps above to cord is where patient can reach it.
second side of bed.
41.
Change pillowcase on remaining pillow in the manner described earlier.
Smooth pillows and position under patients head.
Evaluation Inspect bed – Clean 130NS222 PRACTICUM/CLINICAL ATTACHMENT I – Neat – Wrinkle free When finished evaluate – Safety of bed position – Call light – Side rails – Untidiness – Personal belongings are within reach 4.0 CONCLUSION While it is true that some patients are capable of meeting their own hygiene need, not a few are so much incapacitated by their ill health that they require the nurses’ assistance to meet all their hygiene needs.
The care of the mouth, hair, nails and skin are a routine part of daily nursing care and when these areas are left unattended, the patient looks and feels more miserable than his state of health warrants.
5.0 SUMMARY In this unit we have described the procedures for hand washing, oral care, hair care, bed bath, and various bed making.
6.0 TUTOR-MARKED ASSIGNMENT 1.
Identify articles/equipment required in the patient care area.
2.
Maintain ward cleanliness and tidiness.
3.
Maintain and take hospital equipment for repair when necessary.
4.
Identify and apply the hospital fire, electrical and general safety measures when providing care for patients.
5.
Identify guidelines for terminally cleaning the patient care unit.
6.
Recognize rules for the use of disposable and non-disposable items.
7.
Organize work efficiently.
8.
Delegate, explain duties according to ward routines and responsibilities.
9.
Recognize priorities in nursing care.
10.Develop a mastery of communication techniques as evidenced by candid, complete, concise, clear, concrete, cautious and correct communication with clients and other health professionals in a variety of settings.
11.Demonstrate correct sequence of activities during handing and taking over of patients and the ward unit.
7.0 REFERENCES/FURTHER READING 131NS222 PRACTICUM/CLINICAL ATTACHMENT I Aiken, L.H.
; Patricia, P.A.
(2000).
Measuring Organisational Traits of Hospitals: the Revised Nursing Work Index.
Nurs Res;49:146–53.
[CrossRef] [Medline] .
Aiken, L.H.
(1989).
The Hospital Nursing Shortage.
A Paradox of Increasing Supply and Increasing Vacancy Rates.
West J Med; 151:87–92.[Medline].
Allred, C.A.
; Arford, P.H.
& Michel, Y.
(1995).
Coordination as a Critical Element of Managed Care.
J Nurse Admin;25:21–8.
Davies, H.T.
& Marshall, M.N.
(1999).
Public Disclosure of Performance Data: does the Public Get what the Public Wants?
Lancet;353:1639–40.
[CrossRef] [Medline] Davies, H.T.
; Nutley, S.M.
& Mannion, R. (2000).
Organisational Culture and Quality of Health Care.
Qual Health Care; 9:111–9.
[Free Full Text] Davies, H.T.
; Nutley, S.M.
& Smith, P.C.
(2000).
What Works.
Bristol, UK: The Policy Press.
Epstein, A.M. (1990).
The Outcomes Movement—will it get us where we want to go?
N Engl J Med; 323:266–70.[Medline].
Scholten, G.R.
& van der Grinten, T.E.
(1998).
Between Physician and Manager: New Co-Operation Models in Dutch Hospitals.
J Manag Med; 12:33–43.[Medline].
Shamian, J.
& Lightstone, E.Y.
(1997).
Hospital Restructuring Initiatives in Canada.
Med Care; 35:62–9.
Shortell, S.M.
; Gillies, R.R.
; Anderson, D.A.
& et al.
(1993).
Creating Organised Delivery Systems: the Barriers and Facilitators.
Hosp Health Serve Admin; 38:447–66.[Medline].
132NS222 PRACTICUM/CLINICAL ATTACHMENT I UNIT 2 NUTRITION AND NASOGASTRIC PROCEDURES CONTENTS 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objectives 3.0 Main Content 3.1 Meal Service 3.2 Nasogastric Tube Intubation 3.3 Enteral/Nasogastric (Tube) Feeding (Colostomy Irrigation) 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutor-Marked Assignment 70 References/Further Reading 1.0 INTRODUCTION Nutrition and health are inextricably interwoven.
Dietary therapy has not only become an essential adjunct of care but the bedrock of treatment in some illnesses like chronic renal failure, diabetes mellitus, to mention a few (Locatelli, Grazian, Buccinati, Radaelli and Giangnade, 1991; Mitch, 1995; and Rosman, 1995).
The link between diet, health, illness and indeed longevity is well documented in literature (Parry, 1985; Mainland 1998 and Turrel, 1998).
While it is a general belief that to stay healthy, man must eat nutritious food that will enhance his growth, repair worn out tissue and fortify his immune system, it is not uncommon to find supposedly healthy individuals having a poor eating pattern.
When illness sets in, this poor and inadequate food intake becomes amplified due to poor appetite, anxiety, strange hospital environment, negative effects of certain drugs, e.t.c.
Yet the full benefit of hospital menu in terms of health promotion and maintenance can only be fully realized when it is adequately consumed by these patients..
This unit therefore discusses meal service, alternate feeding methods and related nasogastric procedures.
2.0 OBJECTIVES At the end of this unit, you should be able to: • carry out routine meal service • identify alternate feeding methods • successfully conduct nasogastric intubation • perform nasogastric and gastrostomy feeding.
133NS222 PRACTICUM/CLINICAL ATTACHMENT I 3.0 MAIN CONTENT 3.1 Serving of Meals Equipments needed Food trolley containing the following: 1.
Dietary trays 2.
Serving plates 3.
Serving spoons 4.
Cutleries 5.
Drinking cups 6.
Jug containing clean water 7.
Napkins 8.
Serviettes 9.
Straws Suggested Actions Scientific Rationale Assessment  Check on the usual time for Facilitates planning.
meals  Determine which patients are Ensures that therapeutic outcomes undergoing tests, or for some are not affected by eating other reasons require that food be withheld  Note the type of diet that is Follows the patient therapeutic currently prescribed for each management plan patient.
 Review patients case note for Reduces the potential for adverse information concerning patients’ reactions food allergies or food intolerance.
134NS222 PRACTICUM/CLINICAL ATTACHMENT I Planning  Inform patient about procedure It prepares patient and ensures and about designated mealtime that food is served at its appropriate temperature  Meet patients’ needs for Promotes appetite and eating comfort, hygiene, and elimination before dietary trays arrive.
 Help patient to sitting position as Provides for patients’ comfort and condition allows safety  Remove unnecessary article Promotes patients’ comfort and from overhead table or bedside reduces inconveniences during locker and place table or locker mealtimes conveniently for the meal tray Implementation  Wash hands before serving trays Prevents transmission of microbes  Deliver dietary trays containing Facilitates enjoyment of eating diet in plates, one by one, as through prompt delivery of food soon as possible at its intended temperature.
 Ask patient to identify himself Avoids dietary errors or herself by name  Place the tray within the reach of Provides ease of access to the patient food  Spread diet cloth across the Protects patients’ cloth from patients’ chest getting soiled  Uncover the food and check its Ensures that tray is complete, appearance orderly, and tidy  Notice patients’ reaction to the food  Check on patients’ progress Indicates a willingness to provide from time to time assistance  Remove dietary tray and diet Restores order and cleanliness to cloth when the patient has patients’ environment.
Leaving finished eating and leave patient patient in feeding position for a 135NS222 PRACTICUM/CLINICAL ATTACHMENT I to remain in the feeding position short while helps the nurse to for a short while assess patient.
 Tidy bedclothes, replace lockers Restores order to patients’ unit or tables with articles taken off  Record the amount of fluid Ensures accurate fluid assessment consumed from the dietary tray on the patients’ fluid chart, if patient fluid intake is being monitored  Note the percentage of food that Ensures that dietary intake is the patient has eaten documented  Assist patient to brush or floss Removes food deposit that may teeth, if desired support microbial growth  Put patient back into Demonstrate care and concern comfortable position to rest Evaluation  Consumes a major portion of meal.
 Claimed to be full / Express satiety.
3.2 Nasogastric Intubation Purpose 1.
To administer tube feedings and medications to clients unable to eat by mouth or swallow without aspirating food or fluids into the lungs 2.
To establish a means of suctioning stomach contents to prevent gastric distension, nausea and vomiting 3.
To remove stomach contents for laboratory analysis 4.
To lavage the stomach in case of poisoning or overdose of medications Equipment Large- or small- bore tube Guidewire or stylet for small bore-tube 136NS222 PRACTICUM/CLINICAL ATTACHMENT I Solution basin filled with warm water Nonallergenic adhesive tape Disposable gloves Water-soluble lubricant Facial tissues Glass of water and drinking straw 20-50ml syringe with an adapter Basin PH test strip or meter Stethoscope Disposable pad or towel Clamp or plug (optional) Suction apparatus it required Gauze Square or plastic specimen bag and elastic band Safety pins and elastic band Suggested Actions Rationale Assessment • Assesses for patency of nares and To identify any obstruction intactness of nasal tissues liable to prevent intubation.
137NS222 PRACTICUM/CLINICAL ATTACHMENT I • Assesses presence of gag reflex Gag reflex will assist in pushing the tube down.
• Determines mental status of client To prevent patient from or ability to cooperate with chocking procedure Planning • Explain to the client what you To gain his consent and plan to do cooperation.
• Assist the client in a semi-fowler To allow easy passage of the position if health permits tube.
This position also enables easy swallowing and ensures that the epiglottis is not constricting the oesophagus.
• Arrange a signal by which the The patient is often less patient can communicate if he/she frightened if he/she feels able to wants the nurse to stop e.g.
by have some control over the raising his/her hands procedure.
• Place a towel or disposable pad To protect the patient and linen across the chest from water.
• Select the nostrils that has the greater airflow • Use the tube to mark of the To indicate the length of the distance from the tip of the tube required for entry into the client’s nose to the tip of the ear stomach lobe and then to the tip of the sternum.
Mark this length with adhesive tape if the tape does not have markings Implementation • Don disposable gloves To maintain asepsis • Lubricate the tip of the tube with To reduce the friction between water soluble lubricant or water the mucous membranes and the tube.
• Ask the client to hyperextend the To facilitate the passage of the 138NS222 PRACTICUM/CLINICAL ATTACHMENT I neck, and gently advance the tube tube by following the natural towards the nasopharynx anatomy of the nose.
• If the tube meets resistance, To prevent trauma to the nasal withdraw it, relubricate it, and mucosa.
insert it in the other nostril • In cooperation with the client, The swallowing action closes pass the tube 5-10 cm with each the glottis, enabling the tube to swallowing until the desired pass into the oesophagus.
length is inserted.
• Ascertain correct placement of To avoid placing the tube in the the tube by aspirating stomach lung content, and checking the PH, or auscultating air insufflation.
• Secure the tube by taping it to the To prevent the tube from bridge of the client’s nose.
Secure dangling and pulling.
the tube to the client’s gown.
Evaluation • Determines the degree of client’s Patient will feel comfortable if comfort the tube is well placed in the gastro intestinal tract.
• Determines client tolerance of the This is demonstrated by patient tube calmness and quietness.
• Assesses correct placement of Wrong placement may result in nasogastric tube in the stomach aspiration.
• Assesses colour and amount of To confirm that the tube is in the gastric contents, if attached to stomach suction or contents aspirated and document • Document the type of tube To monitor and communicate inserted, date and time of tube progress.
insertion and client tolerance of the procedure Care of Nasogastric Tube 139NS222 PRACTICUM/CLINICAL ATTACHMENT I Inspect the nostrils for discharge To identify any trauma to the nostril and irritation Clean the nostrils and tube with To remove crust and prevent growth moistened cotton tipped- of micro organism.
applicators Change the adhesive tape as To prevent growth of micro required organism Give frequent mouth care To promote patient’s comfort and prevent growth of micro organism Removal of Nasogastric Tube Equipment Disposable pad Tissues Disposable gloves 50-ml syringe (optional) Plastic disposable bag Suggested Actions Rationale Assessment • Assesses for dryness of the Nostril is often dry if not attended nostrils and lips to after a long time.
Planning • Confirm the physician’s order To ensure that there is no need for to remove it untimely removal.
• Inform the client of the To obtain consent and cooperation procedure • Assist the client to a sitting This position will facilitate easy position if health permits removal.
140NS222 PRACTICUM/CLINICAL ATTACHMENT I • Place disposable pad across the This will prevent secretion from client’s chest to collect any getting to the patient.
spillage of mucous and gastric secretions from the tube • Unpin the tube from the This will aid the removal client’s gown • Remove the adhesive tape To prevent the tube from dangling.
securing the tube to the nose Implementation • Put on disposable gloves To prevent cross infection • Ask the client to take a deep This will push the tube up breath and hold it • Pinch the tube with the gloved Quick removal will lessen patient hand, and then quickly and discomfort.
smoothly withdraw the tube • Place the tube in a plastic bag To ascertain that there is no and observe the intactness of dislodgement of any part of the the tube tube • Provide mouth care if desired For hygiene and comfort • Assist the client as required to To ensure that there is no blow the nose obstruction • Dispose the equipment To avoid environmental appropriately contamination Evaluation • Document date and time For accountability and continuity of removal of tube and any of care other relevant information 3.3 Colostomy Irrigation Objectives To encourage an action in a recently established colostomy 141NS222 PRACTICUM/CLINICAL ATTACHMENT I To relief the constipation for a patient who finds difficulty in managing colostomy To achieve and maintain comfort and security To maintain good skin and stoma hygiene Equipment A bowl containing funnel, rubber tubing, clip, glass connector and catheter A basic dressing pack Jug of solution (Normal saline or plain tap water at 400C) Lotion thermometer Two receivers Lubricant (Vaseline or K.Y.
Jelly) Mackintosh or towel Dressing bin Receiver for used instrument Covered bed pan Bandage/disposable colostomy bag Suggested Actions Rationale Assessment • Assess stoma size and shape, This may indicate presence of colour, presence of swelling infection • Assess status of peristomal skin To determine if there is retraction • Note amount and type of This may help to detect changes in effluent the health condition of the patient • Inspect allergy to tape Any allergic material should be avoided.
142NS222 PRACTICUM/CLINICAL ATTACHMENT I • Inspect type and size of This ill help to determine what appliance currently used materials will be used for the patient • Note client’s emotional status This may indicate acceptance or and complaints of discomfort denial of the colostomy • Assess client’s learning needs To identify learning needs.
Planning • Explain procedure To gain his consent and cooperation • Screen the bed and close nearby To maintain privacy windows • Position patient accordingly Ensure exposure of only the body and, expose the site of the part that you are working on.
colostomy • Place mackintosh and towel to To protect the bed from soiling protect bed clothes Implementation • Wash hands and remove soiled To prevent water from spilling on dressing then, place receiver in the patient a convenient position under colostomy • Don disposable gloves To prevent cross infection • Lubricate catheter and expel air To prevent friction as for enema • Insert catheter into colostomy The thickness of the colon is for about 5-7 cm between 5-7cm • Hold funnel for about 25 cm The liquid should flow by gravity above colostomy • Pour in the required solution, This is the require amount to avoid 143NS222 PRACTICUM/CLINICAL ATTACHMENT I usually 500-1000mls over distension of the colon.
• Leave catheter in for about 5 To allow the water to dissolve and minutes cleanse the colon • Remove catheter and allow Water and the content of the colon colostomy to drain into the will drain out with ease receiver • Clean colostomy and To avoid spread of infection and surrounding area, apply ensuring patient comfort.
dressing and disposable colostomy bag • Unscreen and open windows.
This signifies the end of the Make patient comfortable procedure.
• Wash and sterilize used To avoid spread of micro equipment organism Evaluation Note amount, colour and For early detection of any consistency of faeces abnormality.
Notes colour and size of stoma To detect changes in the condition of the patient Record pertinent data For continuity of care and accountability.
4.0 CONCLUSION Dietary therapy has become an essential adjunct of care and the bedrock of treatment in some illnesses like chronic renal failure, and diabetes mellitus among others.
Man must therefore eat nutritious food that will enhance his growth, repair worn out tissue and fortify his immune system.
When illness sets in, poor and inadequate food intake becomes amplified due to poor appetite, anxiety, strange hospital environment, negative effects of certain drugs.
5.0 SUMMARY 144NS222 PRACTICUM/CLINICAL ATTACHMENT I This unit had examined the related procedures to patient’s nutritional status in his care.
These included: meal service, nasogastric tube intubation, enteral / Nasogastric (tube) feeding, gastrostomy feeding, gastric aspiration and gastric lavage 6.0 TUTOR-MARKED ASSIGNMENT 1.
Identify articles/equipment required in the patient care area.
2.
Maintain ward cleanliness and tidiness.
3.
Maintain and take hospital equipment for repair when necessary.
4.
Identify and apply the hospital fire, electrical and general safety measures when providing care for patients.
5.
Identify guidelines for terminally cleaning the patient care unit.
6.
Recognize rules for the use of disposable and non-disposable items.
7.
Organize work efficiently.
8.
Delegate/explain duties according to ward routines and responsibilities.
9.
Recognize priorities in nursing care.
10.
Develop a mastery of communication techniques as evidenced by candid, complete, concise, clear, concrete, cautious and correct communication with clients and other health professionals in a variety of settings.
11.
Demonstrate correct sequence of activities during handing and taking over of patients and the ward unit.
7.0 REFERENCES/FURTHER READING Aiken, L.H.
& Patrician, P.A.
(2000).
Measuring Organisational Traits of Hospitals: the Revised Nursing Work Index.
Nurse Res; 49:146–53.
[CrossRef] [Medline] .
Aiken, L.H.
(1989).
The Hospital Nursing Shortage.
A Paradox of Increasing Supply and Increasing Vacancy Rates.
West J. Med; 151:87–92.[Medline].
Allred, C.A.
; Arford, P.H.
& Michel, Y.
(1995).
Coordination as a Critical Element of Managed Care.
J Nurse Admin; 25:21–8.
Davies, H.T.
(1999).
Marshall M.N.
Public Disclosure of Performance Data: does the public get what the public wants?
Lancet; 353:1639–40.
[CrossRef] [Medline] .
Davies, H.T.
; Nutley, S.M.
& Mannion, R. (2000).
Organisational Culture and Quality of Health Care.
Qual Health Care; 9:111–9.
[Free Full Text] .
145NS222 PRACTICUM/CLINICAL ATTACHMENT I Davies, H.T.
; Nutley, S.M.
& Smith, P.C.
(2000).
What Works?
Bristol, UK: The Policy Press.
Epstein, A.M. (1990).
The Outcomes Movement—will it get us where we want to go?
N Engl J Med; 323:266–70.[Medline].
Scholten, G.R.
& van der Grinten, T.E.
(1998).
Between Physician and Manager: New Co-Operation Models in Dutch Hospitals.
J Manag Med; 12:33–43.[Medline].
Shamian, J. Lightstone, E.Y.
(1997).
Hospital Restructuring Initiatives in Canada.
Med Care; 35:62–9.
Shortell, S.M.
; Gillies, R.R.
; Anderson, D.A.
& et al.
(1993).
Creating Organised Delivery Systems: the Barriers and Facilitators.
Hosp Health Serve Admin; 38:447–66.
[Medline] .
UNIT 3 PARENTERAL PROCEDURES INCLUDING BLOOD TRANSFUSIONS CONTENTS 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objectives 3.0 Main Content 3.1 Blood Transfusion 3.2 Procedure and Rationale for Blood Transfussion 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutor-Marked Assignment 7.0 References/Further Reading 1.0 INTRODUCTION This unit discusses the parenteral procedures which includes administration of Intravenous fluids, monitoring of intake and output and blood transfusion 146NS222 PRACTICUM/CLINICAL ATTACHMENT I 2.0 OBJECTIVES At the end of this unit, you should be able to: • describe the procedures for administration of intraveinous fluids and other parental infusions • list the requirements for blood transfusion • understand the rationale for blood transfusion.
3.0 MAIN CONTENT 3.1 Blood Transfusion Definition A transfusion consists of the administration of whole blood or any of its components to correct or treat a clinical abnormality.
General Aim 1.
To restore blood volume after severe haemorrhage 2.
To restore the capacity of the blood to carry oxygen 3.
To provide plasma factors, such as antihemophilic factor (AHF) or factor VIII, or platelets concentrates, which prevent or treats bleeding Equipment • Units of whole blood, or packed Red Blood Cells(RBC) • Blood administration set • 250 ml normal saline for infusion • IV pole • Venipuncture set • Alcohol swabs • Tape • Gloves 147NS222 PRACTICUM/CLINICAL ATTACHMENT I 3.2 Procedure for administration of Intravenous fluids, intake and Output and blood transfusion Procedure Rationale Assessment • Verify that a signed consent For documentation form was obtained • Assess vital signs for base line To establish base line data for data subsequent evaluation • Determine any known allergies or previous adverse reactions to drugs • Assesses status of infusion To confirm the patency of the site intravenous line • Determine any unusual symptoms Planning • Instruct the client to report These are earlier signs of promptly any sudden chills, transfusion reaction nausea, itching, rash, dyspnea, back pain or other unusual symptoms • Obtain the correct blood Blood should be collected just component for the client immediately before use.
• Make sure that the blood is To avoid lyses and growth of micro left at room temperature for organism no more than 30 minutes before starting the transfusion • Verify the client’s identity To ensure that the right patient receive the blood.
• Set up the infusion equipment This will ensure organised working environment.
Implementation 148NS222 PRACTICUM/CLINICAL ATTACHMENT I • Put on Gloves To maintain asepsis • Hang the normal saline Blood bag should be high above the container on the IV pole about patient so as to allow flow by 1 meter above the planned gravity.
venipuncture site and prime the tubing • Invert the blood bag gently This will guarantee even transfusion several times to mix the cells of the blood and components • Establish the blood This is done by opening the flow transfusion tap.
• Run the blood slowly for the So as to identify any early sign of first 15 minutes at 20dpm and transfusion reaction observe the client closely for the first 5-10 minutes • Observe for any adverse To identify any sign of transfusion reaction for 15 minutes after reaction which include chills, initiating the blood nausea, itching, rash, dyspnea, back transfusion, check the vital pain etc.
signs and then every 30 minutes or more often depending on the client’s health status.
• Do not transfuse for longer Bacteria growth may occur if blood than 4 hours run for more than four hours.
• Put on gloves, clamp the To discontinue the line blood tubing and remove the needle if no infusion is to follow • Remove gloves and monitor To identify any variation in the vital signs health status • Do not discard the blood bag For reference in case of blood of immediately but keep it in the post transfusion reaction.
ward • Dispose off blood bag To avoid environmental according to agency protocol contamination.
149NS222 PRACTICUM/CLINICAL ATTACHMENT I Evaluation • Assess changes in vital signs Absence of any of these sign will or health status of the client confirm that the transfusion is (Presence of chills, nausea, successful vomiting or skin rash)  Document pertinent data For legal accountability and to continuity of care.
4.0 CONCLUSION The process by which drugs and fluids are introduced into the body to maintain the electrolyte balance and quicken the effect of any drug mechanism is of great importance in the saving of lives of patients in serious clinical problems such as anaemia and burns among others.
5.0 SUMMARY In this unit, we have been able to identify and explain the procedure for the administration of Intravenous fluids, monitoring of intake and output and blood transfusion.
6.0 TUTOR-MARKED ASSIGNMENT 1.
Identify articles/equipment required in the patient care area.
2.
Maintain ward cleanliness and tidiness.
3.
Maintain and takes hospital equipment for repair when necessary.
4.
Identify and apply the hospital fire, electrical and general safety measures when providing care for patients.
5.
Identify guidelines for terminally cleaning the patient care unit.
6.
Recognize rules for the use of disposable and non-disposable items.
7.
Organize work efficiently.
8.
Delegate/explain duties according to ward routines and responsibilities.
9.
Recognize priorities in nursing care.
10.Developed a mastery of communication techniques as evidenced by candid, complete, concise, clear, concrete, cautious and correct communication with clients and other health professionals in a variety of settings.
11.Demonstrate correct sequence of activities during handing and taking over of patients and the ward unit.
150NS222 PRACTICUM/CLINICAL ATTACHMENT I 7.0 REFERENCES/FURTHER READING Aiken, L.H.
& Patrician, P.A.
(2000).
Measuring Organisational Traits of Hospitals: the Revised Nursing Work Index.
Nurse Res; 49:146–53.
[CrossRef] [Medline] .
Aiken, L.H.
(1989).
The Hospital Nursing Shortage.
A Paradox of Increasing Supply and Increasing Vacancy Rates.
West J. Med; 151:87–92.[Medline].
Allred, C.A.
; Arford, P.H.
& Michel, Y.
(1995).
Coordination as a Critical Element of Managed Care.
J Nurse Admin; 25:21–8.
Davies, H.T.
(1999).
Marshall M.N.
Public Disclosure of Performance Data: does the public get what the public wants?
Lancet; 353:1639–40.
[CrossRef] [Medline] .
Davies, H.T.
; Nutley, S.M.
& Mannion, R. (2000).
Organisational Culture and Quality of Health Care.
Qual Health Care; 9:111–9.
[Free Full Text] .
Davies, H.T.
; Nutley, S.M.
& Smith, P.C.
(2000).
What Works?
Bristol, UK: The Policy Press.
Epstein, A.M. (1990).
The Outcomes Movement—will it get us where we want to go?
N Engl J Med; 323:266–70.[Medline].
Scholten, G.R.
& van der Grinten, T.E.
(1998).
Between Physician and Manager: New Co-Operation Models in Dutch Hospitals.
J Manag Med; 12:33–43.[Medline].
Shamian, J. Lightstone, E.Y.
(1997).
Hospital Restructuring Initiatives in Canada.
Med Care; 35:62–9.
Shortell, S.M.
; Gillies, R.R.
; Anderson, D.A.
& et al.
(1993).
Creating Organised Delivery Systems: the Barriers and Facilitators.
Hosp Health Serve Admin; 38:447–66.
[Medline] .
151
