 NATIONAL OPEN UNIVERSITY OF NIGERIA SCHOOL OF SCIENCE AND TECHNOLOGY COURSE CODE: PHY207 COURSE TITLE: THERMODYNAMICS PHY207 COURSE GUIDE COURSE GUIDE PHY207 THERMODYNAMICS Course Team Dr. O.A.
Oladipo (Developer/Writer) - UNILORIN Dr. Ogabi (Editor) - LASU Dr. B. Abiola (Programmed Leader) - NOUN Dr. S.O.
Ajibola (Coordinator) - NOUN NATIONAL OPEN UNIVERSITY OF NIGERIA ii PHY207 COURSE GUIDE National Open University of Nigeria Headquarters 14/16 Ahmadu Bello Way Victoria Island Lagos Abuja Office No.
5 Dar es Salaam Street Off Aminu Kano Crescent Wuse II, Abuja Nigeria e-mail: centralinfo@nou.edu.ng URL: www.nou.edu.ng Published By: National Open University of Nigeria First Printed 2011 ISBN: 978-058-429-3 All Rights Reserved iii PHY207 COURSE GUIDE CONTENTS PAGE Introduction ………………………………..……………………….. 1 What you will Learn in this Course…………………………….…… 1 Course Aims ……………………………………………...……....… 1 Course Objectives ……………………………………..…………….
2 Working through this Course…………………………..………….... 2 Course Materials ……………………………………….................... 3 Study Units ………………………………………………………… 3 Presentation Schedule…………………………………………….… 4 Assessment …………………………………………………….…… 5 Tutor-Marked Assignment………………………………………..… 5 Final Examination and Grading…………………………………..….
5 Course Marking Scheme………………………………………..…… 6 Facilitators/Tutors and Tutorials………………………………....….
6 Summary…………………………………………………………….. 7 iv Introduction Thermodynamics is a one-semester course.
It is a three - credit hour degree course available to all students to take towards their B.Sc.
Physics, B.Sc.
Education and other related programmes in the faculty of science.
Thermodynamics owes its origin to the attempt to convert heat energy into mechanical work and to develop the theory of operation of devices for this purpose.
Two basic concepts in thermodynamics are work and heat.
The zeroth law establishes the existence of thermal equilibrium and allows temperature to be measured using a thermometer.
The first law places work and heat as the only way the internal energy of a system or a body can be increased.
The second law talks about the entropy of a system.
The first and second laws are used in explaining the operations of the Carnot engine, real heat engines and the refrigerators.
Refrigerators are devices used to cool a system of a body and the process of doing this is called refrigeration cycle.
The third law gives the condition for which a body or a system can be cooled to absolute zero i.e.
an infinite number of refrigeration cycle.
These four laws of thermodynamics i.e.
zeroth, first, second and third laws are based on the observations made in the field of thermodynamics.
What you will Learn in this Course The course consists of units and a course guide.
This course guide tells you briefly what the course is about, what course materials you will be using and how you can work with these materials.
In addition, it advocates some general guidelines for the amount of time you are likely to spend on each unit of the course in order to complete it successfully.
It gives you guidance in respect of your Tutor-Marked Assignment which will be available in the assignment file.
There will be regular tutorial classes that are related to the course.
It is advisable for you to attend these tutorial sessions.
The course will introduce you to the four laws of thermodynamics and their implications; and also to prepare you for other specialised courses in physics like atmospheric thermodynamics, geophysics, statistical physics and thermal physics among others.
Course Aims The aim of this course is to give a comprehensive teaching on the principles and applications of thermodynamics; it is also to prepare students towards scientific advancement in atmospheric physics, geophysics, and thermal Physics among others.
PHY207 THERMODYNAMICS Course Objectives To achieve the aims set out, the course has a set of objectives.
Each unit has specific objectives which are included at the beginning of the unit.
You should read these objectives before you study the unit.
You may wish to refer to them during your study to check on your progress.
You should always look at the unit objectives after completing the unit.
Below are the comprehensive objectives of the course.
By meeting these objectives, you should have achieved the aims of the course as a whole.
In addition to the aims above, this course sets to achieve some objectives.
Thus, after going through the course, you should be able to: • Explain basic concepts of thermodynamics.
• Explain process of temperature measurement and state zeroth law of thermodynamics.
• Explain the concept of heat, work and internal energy; and also state the first law of thermodynamics.
• Explain the processes involve in Carnot / heat engines cycles and derive expression for efficiency in each case • Explain the entropy of a system and state the second law of thermodynamics • Define each of the four thermodynamic potentials and derive their differential forms • Derive the four Maxwell relations and the three TdS equations and their usefulness • Explain the process of phase transition and derive the Clapeyron’s equation • Use relevant thermodynamic potential to describe throttling process and free expansion of a gas • Discuss the methods being used to achieve low temperature, explain low temperature phenomena and state the third law of thermodynamics.
Working through this Course To complete this course you are required to read each study unit, read the textbooks and read other materials which may be provided by the National Open University of Nigeria.
Each unit contains self-assessment exercise and at certain points in the course you would be required to submit assignments for assessment purposes.
At the end of the course there is a final examination.
The course should take you about a total of 17 weeks to complete.
Below you will find listed all the components of the course, what you have to ii PHY207 THERMODYNAMICS do and how you should allocate your time to each unit in order to complete the course successfully.
This course entails that you spend a lot of time to read.
I would advice that you avail yourself the opportunity of attending the tutorial sessions where you have the opportunity of comparing your knowledge with that of other learners.
Course Materials Major components of the course include: 1.
The Course Guide 2.
Study Units 3.
Tutor Marked Assessment (TMA) 4.
Presentation Schedule 5.
References/Further Reading Study Units The study units in this course are as follows: Module 1 Unit 1 Basic Concept of Thermodynamics Unit 2 Differential Calculus Unit 3 Measurement of Temperature Unit 4 Heat Transfer Mechanism Module 2 Unit 1 First Law of Thermodynamics Unit 2 Consequences of the First Law Unit 3 Entropy and the Second Law of Thermodynamics Unit 4 Heat Engines Unit 5 Refrigerators Module 3 Unit 1 Combined First and Second Law Unit 2 Thermodynamic Potentials Unit 3 Maxwell Relations Unit 4 TdS Equations iii  PHY207 THERMODYNAMICS Module 4 Unit 1 Phase Transition Unit 2 Throttling Process Unit 3 Production of Low Temperature Unit 4 Phenomena at Low Temperature and the Third Law of Thermodynamics The first unit of the course focuses on the basic concept and definitions in thermodynamics.
The second unit reviews the mathematical tools required for better understanding of the course-differential calculus.
The third unit is on measurement of temperature, different thermometers and the zeroth law of thermodynamics.
The fourth unit focuses on the three mechanisms of heat transfer and the equation for the energy loss rate under each mechanism.
Module 2 comprises of five study units.
Units five and six treat the first law of thermodynamics and its consequences.
Unit seven unit is on entropy and the second law; and unit eight and nine focus on the heat engine cycles and the reversed of these cycles.
Unit ten is on the combined first and second law and the useful relations that can be derived for this.
Units 11, 12 and 13 focus on thermodynamic potentials, their differential forms, Maxwell relations and the TdS equations.
Units 14 and 15 deal with the use of thermodynamic potentials in describing thermodynamic processes like phase transition, throttling process and free expansion of a gas.
Units 16 and 17 focus on methods of production of low temperature and the third law of thermodynamics.
Each study unit consists of three hours work.
Each study unit includes introduction, specific objectives, directions for study, reading materials, conclusions, summary, Tutor- Marked Assignments (TMAs), references and other resources.
The units direct you to work on exercise related to the required readings.
In general, these exercises test you on the materials you have just covered or require you to apply it in some way and thereby assist you to evaluate your progress and to reinforce your comprehension of the material.
Together with TMAs, these exercises will help you in achieving the stated learning objectives of the individual units and of the course as a whole.
Presentation Schedule Your course materials have important dates for the early and timely completion and submission of your tutor-marked assignment and attending tutorials.
You should remember that you are requested to submit all assignments by the stipulated time and date.
You should guard against falling behind in your work.
iv PHY207 THERMODYNAMICS Assessment There are three aspect of the assessment of the course.
First is made-up of self-assessment exercises, second consists of the tutor-marked assignments and third is the written examination/end of the course examination.
You are advised to do the exercises.
In tackling the assignments, you are expected to apply information, knowledge and techniques you gathered during the course.
The assignments must be submitted to your facilitator for formal assessment in accordance with the deadlines stated in the presentation schedule and the assignment file.
The work you submit to your tutor for assessment will count for 30 percent of your total course work.
At the end of the course you will need to sit for a final or end of course examination of about three hours duration.
This examination will count for 70 percent of your total course mark.
Tutor-Marked Assignment (TMA) The TMA is a continuous assessment component of your course.
It account for 30 percent of the total score.
You will be given at least four TMAs to answer.
Three of these must be answered before you are allowed to sit for the end of course examination.
The TMAs will be given by your facilitator and you are to return each assignment to your facilitator/tutor after completion.
Assignment questions for the units in this course are contained in the assignment file.
You will be able to complete your assignment from the information and the material contained in your reading, references and study units.
However, it is desirable in all degree level of education to demonstrate that you have read and researched more into your references, which will give you a wider view point and may provide you with a deeper understanding of the subject.
Make sure that each assignment reaches your facilitator/tutor on or before the deadline mentioned by the course coordinator in the presentation schedule and assignment file.
If, for any reason, you cannot complete your work on time, contact your facilitator/tutor before the assignment is due to discuss the possibility of an extension.
Extensions will not be granted after the due date unless there are exceptional circumstances.
Final Examination and Grading The end of course examination for Thermodynamics will be about three hours and it has a value of 70% of the total course work.
The examination will consist of questions, which will reflect the type self- v  PHY207 THERMODYNAMICS assessment exercise, practice exercise and tutor-marked assignment problems you have previously encountered.
All areas of the course will be assessed.
You are advised to use the time between finishing the last unit and sitting for the examination to revise the entire course.
You might find it useful to review your self-assessment exercise, Tutor-Marked Assignments and comments on them before the examination.
Course Marking Scheme Assignment Marks Assignments 1- 4 Four assignments, best three marks of the four count at 10 % each – 30 % of the course marks End of course examination 70 % of overall course marks Total 100 % of course materials Facilitators/Tutors and Tutorials There are 16 hours of tutorials provided in support of this course.
You will be notified of the dates, times and location of these tutorials as well as the name and phone number of your facilitator, as soon as you are allocated a tutorial group.
Your facilitator will mark and comment on your assignments, keep a close watch on your progress and any difficulty you might face and provide assistance to you during the course.
You are expected to mail your Tutor Marked Assignment to your facilitator before the schedule date (at least two working days are required).
They will be marked by your tutor and returned to you as soon as possible.
Do not delay to contact your facilitator by telephone or e-mail if you need assistance.
The following might be circumstances in which you would find assistance necessary, hence you would have to contact your facilitator if: • You do not understand any part of the study or the assigned readings • You have difficulty with the self-tests • You have a question or problem with an assignment or with the grading of an assignment.
You should endeavour to attend the tutorials.
This is the only chance to have face to face contact with your course facilitator and to ask vi PHY207 THERMODYNAMICS questions which may/may not be answered instantly.
You can raise any problem encountered in the course of your study.
To gain much benefit from the course tutorials, prepare a question list before attending them.
You will learn a lot from participating actively in discussions.
Summary PHY207 is a course that intends to give a comprehensive teaching on the principles and applications of thermodynamics.
Upon completion of this course, you will be able to explain each of the four laws of thermodynamics and also give the implications and applications of these laws.
In addition, you will be able to answer the following type of questions: • Differentiate between a system and its surroundings • Discuss the process of calibrating a thermometer and describe the principle of operation of some thermometers.
• Show that the entropy of an irreversible process increases • Differentiate between heat and temperature • With the aid of PV diagram, describe all the processes involved in an ideal Stirling heat engine cycle and obtain the expression for its efficiency.
• Derive the Clapeyron’s equation.
• Discuss the process of cooling by adiabatic demagnetisation • State the third law of thermodynamics These are, by no means, all the questions you should be able to answer upon completion of this course.
The basic thing is to understand all that you have learnt in this course and be able to apply them in solving different problems on the course.
I wish you a splendid study time as you go through the course.
vii  PHY207 THERMODYNAMICS Course Code PHY207 Course Title Thermodynamics Course Team Dr. O.A.
Oladipo (Developer/Writer) - UNILORIN Dr. Ogabi (Editor) - LASU Dr. B. Abiola (Programmed Leader) - NOUN Dr. S.O.
Ajibola (Coordinator) - NOUN NATIONAL OPEN UNIVERSITY OF NIGERIA viii PHY207 THERMODYNAMICS National Open University of Nigeria Headquarters 14/16 Ahmadu Bello Way Victoria Island Lagos Abuja Office No.
5 Dar es Salaam Street Off Aminu Kano Crescent Wuse II, Abuja Nigeria e-mail: centralinfo@nou.edu.ng URL: www.nou.edu.ng Published By: National Open University of Nigeria First Printed 2011 ISBN: 978-058-429-3 All Rights Reserved ix  PHY207 THERMODYNAMICS CONTENTS PAGE Module 1 ………………………………..……………………….
1 Unit 1 Basic Concept of Thermodynamics…………..……... 1 Unit 2 Differential Calculus……………………………..….. 10 Unit 3 Measurement of Temperature………………..……… 17 Unit 4 Heat Transfer Mechanism…………………….……... 29 Module 2 …………………………………………….………….
39 Unit 1 First Law of Thermodynamics………………….…… 39 Unit 2 Consequences of the First Law……………………... 47 Unit 3 Entropy and the Second Law of Thermodynamics… 60 Unit 4 Heat Engines………………………………………… 70 Unit 5 Refrigerators………………………………………… 81 Module 3 ……………………………………………..….…….. 90 Unit 1 Combined First and Second Law……………..…….
90 Unit 2 Thermodynamic Potentials……………………..….. 97 Unit 3 Maxwell Relations………………………………….. 104 Unit 4 TdS Equations……………………………………… 110 Module 4 ……………………………………………………….. 116 Unit 1 Phase Transition…………………………………….. 116 Unit 2 Throttling Process…………………………………… 127 Unit 3 Production of Low Temperature…………………….
135 Unit 4 Phenomena at Low Temperature and the Third Law of Thermodynamics………………………….… 143 x PHY207 THERMODYNAMICS MODULE 1 Unit 1 Basic Concepts of Thermodynamics Unit 2 Differential Calculus Unit 3 Measurement of Temperature Unit 4 Heat Transfer Mechanism UNIT 1 BASIC CONCEPTS OF THERMODYNAMICS CONTENTS 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objectives 3.0 Main Content 3.1 Definition of Thermodynamics 3.2 Idea of a System and its Surrounding 3.3 Thermodynamic Properties/Coordinates 3.4 Thermodynamic System 3.5 Thermodynamic Processes 3.6 Thermodynamic Equilibrium 3.6.1 Mechanical Equilibrium 3.6.2 Chemical Equilibrium 3.6.3 Thermal Equilibrium 3.7 State of a System 3.8 Equation of State 3.8.1 The Ideal Gas 3.8.2 Van der Waals Equation of State 3.8.3 Extensive and Intensive Properties 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutor-Marked Assignment 7.0 References/Further Reading 1.0 INTRODUCTION Thermodynamics is a branch of physics that deals with heat and flow of energy.
The basic idea is that objects are made up of atoms and molecules, which are in ceaseless motion.
The faster the motion the hotter the object.
However, thermodynamics deals only with the large- scale response of a system, i.e.
response that can be observed and measured, to heat flow.
This unit examines the basic concepts of thermodynamics as a way of introducing the course.
11  PHY207 THERMODYNAMICS 2.0 OBJECTIVES By the end of this unit, you should be able to: • explain what thermodynamics is • mention all thermodynamics coordinates and explain change of state • describe all thermodynamics processes • write equation of state and its usefulness • differentiate between a system and its surrounding.
3.0 MAIN CONTENT 3.1 Definition of Thermodynamics Thermodynamics is the study of the effects of work, heat, and energy on a system.
It deals only with the large-scale response of a system, which can be observed and measured in an experiment, of heat and work.
Small-scale gas interactions are described by the kinetic theory of gases.
3.2 Idea of a System and its Surrounding System is a restricted region of space or a finite portion of matter one has chosen to study.
Or the part of the universe, with well-defined boundaries, one has chosen to study.
Surrounding is the rest of the universe outside the region of interest (i.e.
the rest of space outside the system).
Boundary or Wall is the surface that divides the system from the surroundings.
This wall or boundary may or may not allow interaction between the system and the surroundings.
3.3 Thermodynamic Properties/Coordinates These are macroscopic coordinates or properties used to describe or characterise a system.
Because they are macroscopic properties or coordinates, they can be observed and measured.
Some examples are Temperature (T), Pressure (P), Volume (V), density (rrrr ), mass (m), specific heat capacity at constant volume (C ), specific heat capacity at V constant pressure (C ), thermal conductivity (k ), thermal diffusivity P a(aaa ), and chemical potential m(mmm ).
12 PHY207 THERMODYNAMICS 3.4 Thermodynamic System This is a system that could be described in terms of thermodynamic coordinates or properties.
Thermodynamic Systems can be categorised into the followings depending on the type of boundary: Open System: This is a system that its boundary allows transfer of mass and energy into or out of the system.
In other words, the boundary allows exchange of mass and energy between the system and the surrounding.
Closed System: This is a system that its boundary allows exchange of energy alone (inform of heat) between the system and its surrounding (i.e.
the boundary allows exchange of energy alone).
This type of boundary that allows exchange of heat is called diathermal boundary.
Isolated System: This is a system that its boundary allows neither mass nor energy between it and the surrounding.
In other words, the boundary does not allow exchange of mass nor energy.
3.5 Thermodynamic Processes A system undergoes a thermodynamic process when there is some sort of energetic change within the system, generally associated with changes in pressure, volume, internal energy, temperature, or any sort of heat transfer.
There are several specific types of thermodynamic processes that happen frequently enough (and in practical situations) that they are commonly treated in the study of thermodynamics.
Each has a unique trait that identifies it, and which is useful in analyzing the energy and work change related to the process.
Adiabatic process: This is a thermodynamic process in which there is no heat transfer into or out of the system.
For this process, change in quantity of heat is zero (i.e.
D Q====0 during this process) Isochoric process: This is a thermodynamic process that occurs at constant volume (i.e.
D V ==== 0 during this process).
This implies that during this process no work is done on or by the system.
Isobaric process: This is a thermodynamic process that occurs at constant pressure (i.e.
D p====0 during this process).
Isothermal process: This is a thermodynamic process that takes place at constant temperature (i.e.
D T ==== 0 during this process) 13  PHY207 THERMODYNAMICS It is possible to have multiple processes within a single process.
A good example would be a case where volume and pressure change during a process, resulting in no change in temperature and no heat transfer.
This kind of a process would be both adiabatic and isothermal.
Cyclic Processes: These are series of processes in which after certain interchanges of heat and work, the system is restored to its initial state.
For a cyclic process D U ====0, and if this is put into the first law (unit 5) Q ====W This implies that the net work done during this process must be exactly equal to the net amount of energy transferred as heat; the store of internal energy of the system remains unchanged.
Reversible Process: A reversible process can be defined as one which direction can be reversed by an infinitesimal change in some properties of the system.
Irreversible Process: An irreversible process can be defined as one which direction cannot be reversed by an infinitesimal change in some properties of the system Quasi-static Process: This is a process that is carried out in such a way that at every instant, the system departs only infinitesimal from an equilibrium state (i.e.
almost static).
Thus a quasi-static process closely approximates a succession of equilibrium states.
Non-quasi-static Process: This is a process that is carried out in such a way that at every instant, there is finite departure of the system from an equilibrium state.
SELF ASSESSMENT EXERCISE 1 Explain the following: i. open system ii.
isolated system iii.
isochoric process iv.
isobaric process v. quasi-static process 3.6 Thermodynamic Equilibrium Generally, a system is said to be in equilibrium when its properties do not change appreciably with time over the interval of interest (i.e.
observation time).
14 PHY207 THERMODYNAMICS A system is said to be in thermodynamic equilibrium with its surrounding or with another system if and only if the system is in thermal equilibrium, in chemical equilibrium and in mechanical equilibrium with the surrounding or with another system.
If any one of the above conditions is not fulfilled, the system is not in thermodynamic equilibrium.
3.6.1 Mechanical Equilibrium A system attains mechanical equilibrium with its surrounding or with another system when there is no unbalance or net force in the interior of the system and also none between the system and its surroundings or another system.
Suppose two systems are separated by a movable boundary that does not allow exchange of mass or heat as shown in figure 1.1.
If P1 is greater thanP2, the partition will continue to move toward system 2 until P1 is equal toP2.
When this occurs, the two systems are said to be in mechanical equilibrium.
3.6.2 Chemical Equilibrium A system attains chemical equilibrium when there are no chemical reactions going on within the system or there is no transfer of matter from one part of the system to other due to diffusion.
Two systems are said to be in chemical equilibrium with each other when their chemical potentials are same.
3.6.3 Thermal Equilibrium This occurs when two systems in thermal contact or a system that is in thermal contact with the surrounding attains the same temperature.
For example if system 1 with temperature T and system 2 with temperature 1 T are in thermal contact, there will be exchange of heat between the 2 two systems if there is a temperature gradient (i.e.
when T„ „„„ T ).
This 1 2 process of heat exchange will continue until thermal equilibrium is attained (i.e.
T1 ====T2).
System 1 System 2 P P 1 2 V V 1 2 T T 1 2 movable partition Fig.
1.1: Two Systems Separated by a Movable Partition 15  PHY207 THERMODYNAMICS SELF ASSESSMENT EXERCISE 2 Explain what is meant by thermodynamic equilibrium.
3.7 State of a System This is a specific situation in which macroscopic properties (thermodynamic properties) of a system have certain values (e.g.
P=10 Pa, V=100 cm3, and T=300 K would be a state of a gas).
It is important to note that the state of a pure substance or a system can be defined or specified by any two of its properties.
Change of state occurs when there is change in one, two or all the properties of the system.
Using figure 1.1 above as example, suppose P1 is greater than P2 the partition will continue to move towards system 2 until P1 is equal toP2.
When this happens, the system 1 and 2 have a new set of coordinates in which Temperature remain constant for the two systems but pressure and volume changed.
Then we say that the state of system 1 and system 2 has changed.
Note: Change of state is not exactly the same thing as change of phase (Phase change).
Change of phase or phase transition is a special case of change of state and it will be treated fully in module 4, unit 1.
3.8 Equation of State This is the known relationship between the thermodynamic variables or properties.
It is an equation which provides a mathematical relationship between two or more state functions associated with matter such as its temperature, pressure, volume, or internal energy.
From the above descriptions, Boyle’s law, Charles’ law, Dalton’s law of partial pressures are examples of equation of state.
Some other examples of equation of state are: 3.8.1 The Ideal Gas The equation of state for ideal gas is PV ====nRT where P is the pressure, V is the volume, R is the molar gas constant (R=8.314 JK-1mol-1), T is temperature in Kelvin, and n is the number of mole of gas.
16 PHY207 THERMODYNAMICS 3.8.2 Van der Waals Equation of State The equation of state for real gas also known as Van der Waals Equation is a (P ++++ )(V - --- b)====RT m V m where quantities a and b are constants for a particular gas but differ for different gases.
There are many more equations of state besides these two given above.
3.9 Extensive and Intensive Properties Thermodynamic properties of a system can be categorised into two namely: Extensive properties: These are properties of system that depend on the mass of the system (e.g.
n, V and total energy U) Intensive properties: These are properties of system that are independent of the mass of the system (e.g.
T, P and ρ).
Block 1 As an illustration of these two categories of thermodynamic properties, assuming you cut into two equal parts a hot bar of metal of uniform temperature T. Each half will still have almost the same temperature T. This clearly shows that temperature is independent of mass of the ‘system’ (i.e.
metal bar).
But what about the volume of each part, are they going to be the same as the original volume?
This indicates that volume of a system is dependent of mass (volume is extensive property).
Specific Value of an extensive property (for example Volume, V) is defined as the ratio of the volume of the property to the mass of the system, or as volume per unit mass.
Specific volume V is s V V ==== s m Note that the specific volume is evidently the reciprocal of the density ρ, defined as the mass per unit volume: m 1 rrrr ==== ==== V V s 17  PHY207 THERMODYNAMICS Molar Value of an extensive property (for example Volume, V) is defined as the ratio of the volume of the property to the number of moles of the system, or as volume per unit mole.
Molar volume V is m V V ==== m n SELF ASSESSMENT EXERCISE 3 Differentiate between extensive and in-extensive properties of a system.
4.0 CONCLUSION You have learnt in this unit, as way of introducing the course, the basic concepts of thermodynamics.
This of course will help you in understanding the succeeding topics.
5.0 SUMMARY In this unit, you have leant that: • thermodynamics is a branch of physics that deals with heat and flow of energy • thermodynamics coordinates are used to characterise the state of a system and that a change in any or all of these coordinates brings about a change of state • base on the type of constraint imposed on a system, the system can undergo thermodynamics processes like adiabatic, isochoric and isothermal processes • equations of state are the known relation between the thermodynamic coordinate of a system • a system is a restricted region of space one has chosen to study while the rest of the universe is its surroundings.
And that the system and its surrounding constitute the universe.
6.0 TUTOR-MARKED ASSIGNMENT 1.
Explain the followings: a. thermodynamic coordinate b. thermodynamic system c. cyclic process d. isobaric process e. extensive and inextensive properties of a system 18 PHY207 THERMODYNAMICS 2.
The equation for ideal gas isPV ====nRT , suppose an ideal gas is in equilibrium at initial state with temperature T = 187 ºC, pressure P = 0.75 x 107 Nm-2, and volume V = 0.75 m3.
If there is a change of state in which the gas undergoes an isothermal process to a final state of equilibrium during which its volume doubled, calculate the temperature and pressure of the gas at this final state.
7.0 REFERENCES/FURTHER READING Adams, Steve & Halliday, Jonathan, (2000).
Advanced Physics.
UK: Oxford University Press.
Francis, W. Sears & Gerhard, L. Salinger.
(1975).
Thermodynamics, Kinetic Theory, and Statistical Thermodynamics (Third Edition), Philippines: Addison-Wesley Publishing Company Inc.. Halliday, David., Resnick, Robert & Walker, Jeanrl.
(2001).
Fundamentals of Physics-Extended (Sixth edition).
New York: John Wiley and Sons, Inc. John, D. Cutnell & Kenneth, W. Johnson (1989).
Physics.
USA: John Wiley & Sons, Inc. Mark, W. Zemansky & Richard, H. Dittmann (1981).Heat and Thermodynamics (Sixth Edition).
New York: McGraw-Hill Book Company.
Stuart, B. Palmer & Mircea, S. Rogalski (1996).
Advance University Physics.
SA: Gordon and Breach Science Publisher.
Rao, Y.V.C.
(2004).
An Introduction to Thermodynamics (Revised Edition).India: University Press (India) Private Limited.
19  PHY207 THERMODYNAMICS UNIT 2 DIFFERENTIAL CALCULUS CONTENTS 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objectives 3.0 Main Content 3.1 Partial Derivatives 3.2 Exact Differential 3.3 Implicit Differential 3.4 Product of Three Partial Derivatives 3.5 Chain Rule of Partial Derivatives 3.6 Second Derivatives or Second Order Derivatives 3.7 Functions of More than Two Variables 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutor-Marked Assignment 7.0 References/Further Reading 1.0 INTRODUCTION One of the useful mathematical topics in thermodynamics is partial derivative.
This unit gives a brief summary of some of the most useful formulas involving partial derivatives that we are likely to use in subsequent units and modules of this course.
2.0 OBJECTIVES By the end of this unit, you should be able to: • explain what partial derivatives are • explain what exact differentials are • derive partial derivative of a given function • solve some problems on partial derivatives • state some rules of partial derivatives.
3.0 MAIN CONTENT 3.1 Partial Derivatives A partial derivative of a function of several variables is its derivative with respect to one of those variable with the others held constant.
x====x(z,y) 2.1 20 PHY207 THERMODYNAMICS From equation 2.1, x a dependent variable is a function of two independent variables z and y.
Partial derivative of x with respect to ¶ ¶¶¶ x y with z held constant is ( ) .
¶ ¶¶¶ y z For example, if x====zy2 2.2 then, the partial derivative of x with respect to y with z held constant is ¶ ¶¶¶ x ( ) ====2zy 2.3 ¶ ¶¶¶ y z Similarly, the partial derivative of x with respect to z with y held constant is ¶ ¶¶¶ x ( ) ==== y2 2.4 ¶ ¶¶¶ z y 3.2 Exact Differential Suppose that there exists a relation among the three coordinates x, y, and z in such a way that x is a function of y and z (i.e.
x(z, y)); thus f(x,y,z)====0 2.5 The exact differential of x (dx)is ¶ ¶¶¶ x ¶ ¶¶¶ x dx====( ) dy++++( ) dz 2.6 ¶ ¶¶¶ y z ¶ ¶¶¶ z y Generally for any three variables x, y, and z we have relation of the form dx ==== M(y,z)dy++++ N(y,z)dz 2.7 If the differential dxis exact, then ¶ ¶¶¶ M ¶ ¶¶¶ N ( ) ==== ( ) 2.8 y z ¶ ¶¶¶ z ¶ ¶¶¶ y 3.3 Implicit Differential Consider an equation of the form xy====x2y2 2.9 21  PHY207 THERMODYNAMICS One can differentiate the two sides of the equation 2.9 using equation 2.6 (i.e differentiating both the left and right hands side with respect to x while y is held constant and with respect to y while x is held constant).
¶ ¶¶¶ (xy) ¶ ¶¶¶ (xy) ¶ ¶¶¶ (x2y2) ¶ ¶¶¶ (x2y2) ( ) dx++++( ) dy ==== ( ) dx++++( ) dy 2.10 ¶ ¶¶¶ x y ¶ ¶¶¶ y x ¶ ¶¶¶ x y ¶ ¶¶¶ y x Equation 2.10 gives ydx++++ xdy ==== 2xy2dx++++2x2ydy 2.11 Collecting like term and then factorize to have dy 2xy2- --- y ==== 2.12 dx x- --- 2x2y dy Another way to obtain expression for is to consider equation 2.9 as dx f ==== xy- --- x2y2 (i.e.
moving the expression in the right side of equation 2.9 to the left side and then equate the result to f ).
Then dy ¶ ¶¶¶ f ¶ ¶¶¶ f ====- --- 2.13 dx ¶ ¶¶¶ x ¶ ¶¶¶ y 3.4 Product of Three Partial Derivatives Suppose that there exists a relation among the three coordinates x, y, and z; thus f(x,y,z)====0 2.14 Then x can be imagined as a function of y and z ¶ ¶¶¶ x ¶ ¶¶¶ x dx====( ) dy++++( ) dz 2.15 ¶ ¶¶¶ y z ¶ ¶¶¶ z y Also, y can be imagined as a function of x and z, and ¶ ¶¶¶ y ¶ ¶¶¶ y dy====( ) dx++++( ) dz 2.16 ¶ ¶¶¶ x z ¶ ¶¶¶ z x Insert equation 2.16 in 2.15 ¶ ¶¶¶ x ¶ ¶¶¶ y ¶ ¶¶¶ y ¶ ¶¶¶ x dx====( ) [( ) dx++++( ) dz]++++( ) dz ¶ ¶¶¶ y z ¶ ¶¶¶ x z ¶ ¶¶¶ z x ¶ ¶¶¶ z y Rearrange to get ¶ ¶¶¶ x ¶ ¶¶¶ y ¶ ¶¶¶ x ¶ ¶¶¶ y ¶ ¶¶¶ x dx====( ) ( ) dx++++[( ) ( ) ++++( ) ]dz 2.17 ¶ ¶¶¶ y z¶ ¶¶¶ x z ¶ ¶¶¶ y z¶ ¶¶¶ z x ¶ ¶¶¶ z y 22 PHY207 THERMODYNAMICS If dz====0 and dx„ „„„ 0, it follows that ¶ ¶¶¶ x ¶ ¶¶¶ y ( ) ( ) ====1 ¶ ¶¶¶ y z¶ ¶¶¶ x z ¶ ¶¶¶ x 1 ( ) ==== 2.18 ¶ ¶¶¶ y z ¶(¶¶¶ y¶ ¶¶¶ x) z Take note of the z in the expression on both sides of the equation 2.18, indicating that the derivatives in equation 2.18 are at constant z.
Block 1 Suppose that there exists a relation among the three coordinates x, y, and z; thus f(x,y,z)====0.
Going by equation 2.18, then the following hold ¶ ¶¶¶ x 1 ¶ ¶¶¶ z 1 ¶ ¶¶¶ y 1 ¶(¶¶¶ y)z ====¶(¶¶¶ y¶ ¶¶¶ x)z , ¶(¶¶¶ x)y ====¶(¶¶¶ x¶ ¶¶¶ z)y , and ¶(¶¶¶ z)x ====¶(¶¶¶ z¶ ¶¶¶ y)x Also from equation 2.17, if dx ====0 and dz„ „„„ 0, it follows that ¶ ¶¶¶ x ¶ ¶¶¶ y ¶ ¶¶¶ x ( ) ( ) ++++( ) ====0 ¶ ¶¶¶ y z¶ ¶¶¶ z x ¶ ¶¶¶ z y ¶ ¶¶¶ x Move ( ) to the other side of equation to get ¶ ¶¶¶ z y ¶ ¶¶¶ x ¶ ¶¶¶ y ¶ ¶¶¶ x ( ) ( ) ====- --- ( ) 2.19 ¶ ¶¶¶ y z¶ ¶¶¶ z x ¶ ¶¶¶ z y ¶ ¶¶¶ z Then divide both sides of the equation 2.19 by ( ) ¶ ¶¶¶ x y ¶ ¶¶¶ x ¶ ¶¶¶ y ¶ ¶¶¶ z ( ) ( ) ( ) ====- --- 1 2.20 ¶ ¶¶¶ y z¶ ¶¶¶ z x¶ ¶¶¶ x y This is called minus-one product rule.
3.5 Chain Rule of Partial Derivatives Another useful relation is called chain rule of partial derivatives.
Suppose T is a function of V and P, and that each of V and P is a function of Z, then 23  PHY207 THERMODYNAMICS ¶ ¶¶¶ T ¶ ¶¶¶ T ¶ ¶¶¶ Z ( ) ==== ( ) ( ) 2.21 ¶ ¶¶¶ V P ¶ ¶¶¶ Z P¶ ¶¶¶ V P Equation 2.21 is the chain rule of partial derivative.
Going by 1.2.21, the following can as well be written: ¶ ¶¶¶ S ¶ ¶¶¶ S ¶ ¶¶¶ V ( ) ==== ( ) ( ) 2.22a ¶ ¶¶¶ P T ¶ ¶¶¶ V T ¶ ¶¶¶ P T ¶ ¶¶¶ U ¶ ¶¶¶ U ¶ ¶¶¶ T ( ) ==== ( ) ( ) 2.22b ¶ ¶¶¶ V P ¶ ¶¶¶ T P¶ ¶¶¶ V P Equations 2.21 and 2.22 are called chain rule of partial derivatives.
3.6 Second Derivatives or Second Order Derivatives Let f(x,y)be a function with continuous order derivatives, then we can ¶ ¶¶¶ f ¶ ¶¶¶ f calculate first derivatives to be ( ) and ( ) .
One can further ¶ ¶¶¶ x z ¶ ¶¶¶ z x ¶ ¶¶¶ 2 f ¶ ¶¶¶ 2 f ¶ ¶¶¶ 2 f ¶ ¶¶¶ 2 f calculate the second derivatives , , and .
Take note ¶ ¶¶¶ x2 ¶ ¶¶¶ z2 ¶ ¶¶¶ x¶ ¶¶¶ y ¶ ¶¶¶ ¶y¶¶¶ x ¶ ¶¶¶ 2 f ¶ ¶¶¶ 2 f of these two second order derivates i.e.
and , they are called ¶ ¶¶¶ x¶ ¶¶¶ y ¶ ¶¶¶ ¶y¶¶¶ x mixed second derivatives.
It can be shown that the mixed second derivatives are equal, i.e.
it does not matter the order will perform the differentiation.
¶ ¶¶¶ 2 f ¶ ¶¶¶ 2 f ==== 2.23 ¶ ¶¶¶ x¶ ¶¶¶ y ¶ ¶¶¶ ¶y¶¶¶ x SELF ASSESSMENT EXERCISE dy 2xy2- --- y 1.
For xy====x2y2, by using equation 1.2.13 show ==== .
dx x- --- 2x2y ¶ ¶¶¶ 2u ¶ ¶¶¶ 2u 2x 2.
Given that u ==== x2ln y show that ==== ==== .
¶ ¶¶¶ x¶ ¶¶¶ y ¶ ¶¶¶ ¶y¶¶¶ x y 3.7 Functions of More than Two Variables Suppose that f(x,y,z), the derivative of f with respect to one of the variables with the other two constant (e.g.
derivative of f x with y and z constant) can be written as ¶ ¶¶¶ f ¶ ¶¶¶ f ¶ ¶¶¶ f ( ) , ( ) , and ( ) ¶ ¶¶¶ x yz ¶ ¶¶¶ y xz ¶ ¶¶¶ z xy 24 PHY207 THERMODYNAMICS 4.0 CONCLUSION You have learnt in this unit some rules in partial derivatives that you are likely to apply in this course.
5.0 SUMMARY In this unit you have learnt that: • the partial derivates for three variables xyz, if x====zy2, the partial derivative of x with respect to y with z held constant is ¶ ¶¶¶ x ( ) ====2zy ¶ ¶¶¶ y z • for x(z, y)); thus f(x,y,z)====0, the exact differential of x (i.e.
¶ ¶¶¶ x ¶ ¶¶¶ x dx)is dx====( ) dy++++( ) dy ¶ ¶¶¶ y z ¶ ¶¶¶ z y ¶ ¶¶¶ x ¶ ¶¶¶ y ¶ ¶¶¶ z • for any three variables xyz, ( ) ( ) ( ) ====- --- 1.
¶ ¶¶¶ y z¶ ¶¶¶ z x¶ ¶¶¶ x y this is called minus-one product rule • for T a function of V and P, and that each of V and P is a ¶ ¶¶¶ T ¶ ¶¶¶ T ¶ ¶¶¶ Z function of Z, then ( ) ==== ( ) ( ) ¶ ¶¶¶ V P ¶ ¶¶¶ Z P¶ ¶¶¶ V P ¶ ¶¶¶ 2 f ¶ ¶¶¶ 2 f • for any f(x,y), ==== .
¶ ¶¶¶ x¶ ¶¶¶ y ¶ ¶¶¶ ¶y¶¶¶ x dy 2xy2- --- y ==== dx x- --- 2x2y 6.0 TUTOR-MARKED ASSIGNMENT 1.
If z ==== 4x3y2, show that ¶ ¶¶¶ 2z ====¶ ¶¶¶ 2z ¶ ¶¶¶ x¶ ¶¶¶ y ¶ ¶¶¶ ¶y¶¶¶ x 2.
If u ==== x2 ++++ y2 and v ==== 4xy, determine ¶ ¶¶¶ x ¶ ¶¶¶ x ¶ ¶¶¶ y ¶ ¶¶¶ y , , , ¶ ¶¶¶ u ¶ ¶¶¶ v ¶ ¶¶¶ u ¶ ¶¶¶ v 25  PHY207 THERMODYNAMICS 7.0 REFERENCES/FURTHER READING Francis, W. Sears & Gerhard, L. Salinger (1975).
Thermodynamics, Kinetic Theory, and Statistical Thermodynamics(Third Edition).
Philippines: Addison-Wesley Publishing Company, Inc. Mark, W. Zemansky & Richard, H. Dittmann (1981).
Heat and Thermodynamics (Sixth Edition).
New York: McGraw-Hill Book Company.
Stroud, K.A.
(1996).
Further Engineering Mathematics (Third Edition).
London: Macmillan Press Limited.
26 PHY207 THERMODYNAMICS UNIT 3 MEASUREMENT OF TEMPERATURE CONTENTS 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objectives 3.0 Main Content 3.1 Definition 3.2 Temperature and Heat 3.3 Zeroth Law of Thermodynamics 3.4 Temperature Scales 3.4.1 Triple Point of Water 3.4.2 Conversion between Temperature Scales 3.5 Thermometers 3.5.1 Thermometric Properties 3.5.2 Calibration 3.6 Types of Thermometers 3.6.1 Thermocouple Thermometer 3.6.2 Resistance Thermometer 3.6.3 Constant-Volume Gas Thermometer 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutor-Marked Assignment 7.0 References/Further Reading 1.0 INTRODUCTION Temperature is one of the seven SI base quantities and it is measure in Kelvin (K).
Temperature measurement has its basis in the Zeroth law of thermodynamics.
This unit deals with temperature measurements and different thermometers.
2.0 OBJECTIVES By the end of this unit, you should be able to: • explain the concept of heat and temperature • state the zeroth law of thermodynamics • define thermometric property and mention different thermometers • do some calculations on temperature scales.
27  PHY207 THERMODYNAMICS 3.0 MAIN CONTENT 3.1 Definition Temperature (T) is defines as the degree of hotness or coldness of a body.
Temperature is one of the seven SI base quantities and it is measure in Kelvin (K).
Temperature of a body has no upper limit but it has lower limit (absolute zero or zero Kelvin) Heat (Q) is a form of energy that is transferred from one part of a substance to another, or from one body to another by virtue of a difference in temperature (i.e.
temperature gradient).
The unit of heat is in Joules (J).
Sign of heat (Q) Q is positive when there is a flow of heat into the system Q is negative when there is a flow of heat out of the system 3.2 Temperature and Heat Temperature is the degree of hotness or coldness of a body.
Heat, on the other hand, is a form of energy that flows from a body of higher temperature to a body of lower temperature.
From the definition of heat, it is clear that temperature gradient gives the direction of heat flow (i.e.
from a body of higher temperature to a body of lower temperature).
The process of heat flow is called heat exchange.
For two bodies in thermal contact, this process of heat exchange will continue until the two bodies attained thermal equilibrium (i.e.
equal temperature) For example, in figure 3.1 (a) the temperature of the system is greater than that of the surroundings, so heat flows out of the system -(--- Q).
In (b) the temperature of the system Ts is less than that of the surrounding, so heat flow into the system (++++Q).
In (d) the temperature of the system and that of the surrounding Te are equal (i.e.
they are in thermal equilibrium), hence no flow of heat (Q ==== 0).
28 PHY207 THERMODYNAMICS Environment Environment Environment T T T e e e System System System T Ts Ts s T ====T Q is T >>>>T Q is - Ts <<<< Te Q is s e zero s e +ve ve (a) (b) (c) Fig.
3.1: Heat Flow 3.3 Zeroth Law of Thermodynamics From the concept of heat and temperature discussed above in section 3.2, it is now clear that if two bodies are in thermal contact there will be heat exchange (provided they are not at the same temperature).
This process of heat transfer will continued until the two bodies attained the same temperature.
Then it is said that thermal equilibrium is reached.
Supposed one of the two bodies is in thermal contact with third body, after some time thermal equilibrium will be reached between these two bodies.
Using figure 3.2 as an illustration, suppose body B is in thermal contact with bodies A and C but bodies A and C are not in thermal contact.
If B is in thermal equilibrium with each of A and C, then A and C are in thermal equilibrium.
Adiabatic wall C A B Fig.
3.2: A Body in Thermal Contact with Two Separated Bodies Zeroth Law of thermodynamics states that if bodies A and C are each in thermal equilibrium with a third body B, then they are in thermal equilibrium with each other.
29  PHY207 THERMODYNAMICS 3.4 Temperature Scales Available temperature scales are; the Celsius scale (also known as the Centigrade scale), the Fahrenheit scale, the Kelvin scale, the Rankine scale, and the international thermodynamic temperature scale 3.4.1 Triple Point of Water In setting up a temperature scale, there is need to pick some reproducible thermal phenomenon and, quite arbitrarily, assign a certain Kelvin temperature to its environment; that is, we select a standard fixed point and give it a standard fixed-point temperature.
Triple point of water is the temperature at which solid ice, liquid water, and water vapour coexist in thermal equilibrium at the same temperature and pressure.
By international convention, the triple point of water is 273.16 K and this value is a standard fixed-point temperature (T ) for the calibration of 3 thermometers.
T ==== 273.16K 3.1 3 Other fixed-point temperatures besides T are boiling point of water, 3 and absolute zero temperature.
The boiling point of water is 100 ºC while the absolute zero temperature (0 K) is the all gases have zero volume.
3.4.2 Conversion between Temperature Scales There is possibility of changing from one temperature scale to another.
The conversion formulas are listed below.
Kelvin Scale to Celsius Temperature Scale The relation between Kelvin scale and Celsius scale is o T ==== (T- --- 273.15) C , 3.2 c where T is the temperature in degree centigrade, and T is the c temperature in Kelvin.
Kelvin Temperature scale The relation between Celsius scale and Kelvin scale is T ==== (T ++++273.15)K , 3.3 c 30 PHY207 THERMODYNAMICS where T is the temperature in degree centigrade, and T is the c temperature in Kelvin.
Fahrenheit Temperature scale The relation between Celsius scale and Fahrenheit scale is T ==== 9T- --- 32, 3.4 F c 5 where T is the temperature in degree centigrade, and T is the c F temperature in Fahrenheit.
3.5 Thermometers Thermometers are instruments used to measure the temperature of a body or a system.
3.5.1 Thermometric Properties It has been observed experimentally that the properties of many bodies or objects change with temperature.
Examples of such properties are volume of liquid, length of metal rod, and electrical resistance of a wire.
These properties of material can be used as the basis of an instrument to measure temperature and they are called Thermometric Properties.
3.5.2 Calibration Generally, calibration is the process of comparing the output value an instrument is given with that of a standard instrument (i.e.
the one that its output is known to be true or correct value).
From this process, adjustment can then be made to the instrument to be calibrated to give a correct output.
When this is done, the instrument is said to be calibrated.
The method being employed in calibrating thermometers is to use the device to measure the easily reproducible temperatures like triple point of water and boiling point of water.
If the thermometric property being used is recorded at these two temperatures, a linear graph can be plotted using these two set of variables.
From this graph, a linear relationship can be obtained between temperature and the thermometric property.
In another way, one can measure the thermometric property, say X , when the thermometer is placed in contact with the system or body which temperature is to be measured.
Then we have T(X) ==== aX , 3.5 31  PHY207 THERMODYNAMICS where T is the temperature of the body to be measured, a is a X constant, and X is the value of the thermometric property at T .
X Equation 3.5 is also applies when the thermometer is placed in contact with easily reproducible temperature.
The triple point of water is mostly used.
Then we have T ==== 273.16K ==== aX , 3 3 so we obtain 273.16K a ==== .
3.6 X 3 Insert equation 3.6 into equation 3.5 X T(X) ==== (273.16K) 3.7 X 3 Equation 3.7 is generally applicable to all thermometers.
SELF ASSESSMENT EXERCISE 1 1.
Explain what is meant by triple point of water.
2.
State zeroth law of thermodynamics.
3.6 Types of Thermometers Thermometer is named after the thermometric property used for the construction.
For example, thermometric property of the mercury-in- glass thermometer is the length of mercury column, while in the constant-volume gas thermometer the thermometric property is the pressure of the gas.
Examples of thermometer are thermocouple thermometer, resistance thermometer, liquid in gas thermometer (e.g.
mercury in glass thermometer), and gas thermometer (e.g.
constant volume gas thermometer) among others.
Three types of thermometer are discussed below.
3.6.1 Thermocouple Thermometer It has been observed that when two dissimilar metals are joined together to make two junctions, an electromotive force (emf) will flow in the circuit.
This emf can be measured using a voltmeter and its value depends on the temperature difference between the junctions.
The arrangement is called thermocouple and the observation is known as Seebeck effect.
Thermocouple thermometer is based on the Seebeck effect.
Thermometric property: emf generated when two junctions made from two different metals are maintained at different temperature.
32 PHY207 THERMODYNAMICS Copper Terminals to Test Voltmeter Junction Copper Constantan Reference Junction at constant Temp.
0 ºC Fig.
3.3: Thermocouple Thermometer The diagram for Figure 3.3 shows the arrangement for the copper- constantan thermocouple thermometer.
The test junction is placed on the body or inside the system whose temperature is to be measured, while the reference junction is maintained at constant temperature at 0 ºC.
The potentiometer is connected to the terminals to the voltmeter.
The relationship between the emf and temperature is emf ==== a++++bT ++++cT2 ++++dT3 3.8 Where a, b, c, and d are constant and they are different for each thermocouple.
Using equation 3.7, we can write emf T(emf) ==== (273.16K) 3.9 emf 3 The range of measurement of thermocouple thermometer depends on the choice of metals used.
For example, a platinum-10 % rhodium/platinum thermocouple has temperature range of 0 to 1600 ºC.
Thermocouple thermometer is used extensively in scientific laboratories.
3.6.2 Resistance Thermometer Electrical conductivity of a metal depends on the movement of electrons through its crystal lattice.
The electrical resistance of a conductor, due to thermal excitation, varies with temperature.
This forms the basic principle of operation of resistance thermometer Resistance thermometer 33  PHY207 THERMODYNAMICS therefore, uses the variation in electrical conductivity of a conductor to indicate temperature.
Figure 3.4 shows a generalized form of a resistance thermometer.
In the diagram, RT is the resistance element which could be any conductor (e.g.
platinum).
This is usually wound round a frame constructed so as to avoid excessive strains when the wire contracts upon cooling.
S is the power supply and the purpose is to maintain a known constant current in the thermometer while measuring the potential difference with the aid of a bridge output (usually a sensitive potentiometer).
Fig.
3.4: Resistance Thermometer The relationship between the temperature and the electrical resistance is usually non-linear and described by a higher order polynomial: R(T) ==== R (1++++ AT ++++ BT2 ++++CT3 ++++......) 3.10 o Where T is the Celsius temperature, Ro is the nominal resistance at a specified temperature, and A, B, C are constants.
The number of higher order terms considered is a function of the required accuracy of measurement.
The constants (i.e.
A, B and C etc.)
depend on the conductor material used and basically define the temperature-resistance relationship.
The value R is referred to as nominal value or nominal o resistance and is the resistance at 0°C.
Material most commonly used for resistance thermometers are Platinum, Copper and Nickel.
However, Platinum is the most dominant material internationally.
The calibration of this instrument requires the measurement of R(T) at various known temperatures and from these the constants in equation 3.10 can be obtained.
However, equation 3.7 can be used to obtained R T(R)====(273.16K) 3.11 R 3 34 PHY207 THERMODYNAMICS Where T(R) is the temperature of the body or system to be measured, R is the resistance at that temperature, and R is the resistance at triple 3 point of water?
The range of measurement of resistance thermometer depends on the choice of conductor used.
Platinum resistance has a very accurate measurement within -253 to 1200 ºC.
3.6.3 Constant-Volume Gas Thermometer Constant-Volume gas thermometer is normally referred to as the standard thermometer and is mostly used to calibrate other thermometers.
The working principle is based on the pressure of a gas in a fixed volume.
Figure 3.5 shows an example of a constant-volume gas thermometer.
It consists of a gas-filled bulb connected by a tube to a mercury manometer.
By raising and lowering reservoir R, the mercury level on the left can always be brought to the zero of the scale to keep the gas volume constant (Note that variation in the gas volume can affect temperature measurement).
The basic equation is P ==== P- --- rrrrgh, 3.12 o where P is the atmospheric pressure,r rrr is the density of the mercury in o the manometer, gis the acceleration due to gravity, and h is the measured difference between the mercury level in the two arms of the tube.
The difference in height h between the two arms of the manometer can be measured when the gas filled bulb is surrounded by the system which temperature is to be measured, and when it is surrounded with water at triple point.
Using equation 3.7, the relationship between temperature and the pressure of the gas is (((( )))) P  T(P) ==== 273.16K   3.13    P3  Where T(P) is the temperature of the system which temperature is to be measured, P is the pressure of the gas at that temperature, and P is the 3 pressure at triple point of water.
35  PHY207 THERMODYNAMICS Fig.
3.5: Schematic of Constant-Volume Gas Thermometer (after Halliday et al., 2001) SELF ASSESSMENT EXERCISE 2 1.
Name four types of thermometer and their thermometric properties.
2.
A certain resistance thermometer at triple point of water has resistance 152.0 W .
What is the temperature (T ) of a system in degree centigrade if the resistance of the thermometer is 230.51 W when inserted into the system?
4.0 CONCLUSION The zeroth law of thermodynamics establishes the existence of thermal equilibrium and allows temperature to be measured using a thermometer.. Thermometers are the instruments used to measure the temperature of a body or a system.
The basis for the working of thermometer is the variations in physical properties of materials with temperature.
Those properties being used for the construction of thermometers are called thermometric properties and thermometers are named after these properties.
36 PHY207 THERMODYNAMICS 5.0 SUMMARY In this unit, you have learnt that: • that heat is a form of energy that flows from one point of the system to another or from one system to another; while temperature is the degree of hotness or coldness of a body or system • thermal equilibrium is reach when systems in contact, directly or indirectly, attain the same temperature-statement of zeroth law • thermometric properties are the physical properties of materials that change linearly with temperature; and these properties are used for the construction or thermometers • difference temperature scales exist and one can convert from one temperature scale to another.
6.0 TUTOR-MARKED ASSIGNMENT 1.
Differential between temperature and heat.
2.
Discuss the process of calibrating a thermometer.
3.
With a well labeled diagram, describe a resistance thermometer.
7.0 REFERENCES/FURTHER READING Online Microsoft Encarta available at: http://encarta.msn.com/ encyclopedia_761575286/Heat_(physics).html Adams, Steve & Halliday, Jonathan (2000).
Advanced Physics.
UK: Oxford University Press.
Francis, W. Sears & Gerhard, L. Salinger (1975).
Thermodynamics, Kinetic Theory, and Statistical Thermodynamics (Third Edition).
Philippines: Addison-Wesley Publishing Company, Inc. Halliday, David, Resnick, Robert & Walker, Jeanrl (2001).
Fundamentals of Physics-Extended (Sixth edition).
New York: John Wiley and Sons, Inc. John, D. Cutnell & Kenneth, W. Johnson (1989).
Physics.
USA: John Wiley & Sons, Inc. Mark, W. Zemansky & Richard, H. Dittmann (1981).
Heat and Thermodynamics (Sixth Edition).
New York: McGraw-Hill Book Company.
37  PHY207 THERMODYNAMICS Stuart, B. Palmer & Mircea, S. Rogalski (1996).
Advance University Physics.
SA: Gordon and Breach Science Publisher.
Rao, Y.V.C.
(2004).
An Introduction to Thermodynamics (Revised Edition .India: University Press (India) Private Limited.
38 PHY207 THERMODYNAMICS UNIT 4 HEAT TRANSFER MECHANISM CONTENTS 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objectives 3.0 Main Content 3.1 Heat Energy 3.2 Methods of Heat Transfer 3.3 Conduction 3.3.1 Conductors and Insulators 3.3.2 Conduction of Heat through a Material 3.3.3 Thermal Resistance to Conduction (R-Value) 3.3.4 Conduction of Heat through a Composite Material 3.4 Convection 3.5 Radiation 3.5.1 Absorption and Emission of Radiant Energy 3.5.2 Stefan-Boltzmann Law of Radiation 3.6 Newton’s Law of Cooling 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutor-Marked Assignment 7.0 References/Further Reading 1.0 INTRODUCTION Heat is a form of energy which transferred from one part of the body to another or from one body to another.
As discussed in unit 3 the temperature gradient determines the direction of heat flow.
The transfer of heat energy is important in many aspects of our lives.
This unit is therefore examined the three fundamental processes of heat transfer and their useful applications in our daily lives.
2.0 OBJECTIVES By the end of this unit, you should be able to: • define heat • mention and discuss the three (3) methods / processes of heat transfer • write the useful equations for the heat transfer • state Newton’s law of cooling • mention useful applications of heat transfer.
39  PHY207 THERMODYNAMICS 3.0 MAIN CONTENT 3.1 Heat Energy Heat (Q) is a form of energy that is transferred from one part of a system to another or to another system by virtue of a difference in temperature.
As earlier discussed in unit 3, temperature gradient determines the direction of heat flow.
3.2 Methods of Heat Transfer The transfer of heat from one part of a system to another or to another system by virtue of a temperature difference can only be by one or more of the three processes namely; conduction, convection, and radiation.
Each of these mechanisms or processes is discussed in the preceding sections.
3.3 Conduction This is the process of heat transfer whereby heat energy is transferred directly through a material without any bulk movement of the material.
3.3.1 Conductors and Insulators Materials can be divided into two groups based on their ability to conduct thermal energy namely; thermal conductor and thermal insulator.
Conductors Materials that conduct heat well are called thermal conductors.
Examples of thermal conductors are metals (most metals are conductors) like aluminum, copper, silver, and gold.
Why do conductors conduct?
The behaviour of conductors in terms of thermal conductivity can be explained with two mechanisms namely; collision mechanism and free electrons in metals.
Molecular collision: Atoms and molecules in a hot part of the material vibrate or move with greater velocity (i.e.
higher kinetic energy) than those at the colder part.
By means of collisions, the more energetic molecules pass on a portion of their energy to their less energetic neighbours.
As the more energetic molecules collide with their less energetic neighbours they transfer some of their energy to the neighbours.
The collision mechanism does not depend on bulk movement of the material.
40 PHY207 THERMODYNAMICS Free electrons in metals: Good conductors of thermal energy, like metals, have pool of electrons that are more or less free to wander through the volume of the metal.
These free electrons are capable of transporting energy round the whole volume of conductors.
Free electrons are also responsible for the excellent electrical conductivity in metals.
Insulators Materials that conduct heat poorly are called thermal insulators.
Examples of thermal insulators are wood, glass, and most plastics.
These materials poorly conduct heat energy because the two above discussed mechanisms for conduction are not possible with these materials (i.e.
the molecules of these materials are not free to move and or the material don’t contain free electrons).
3.3.2 Conduction of Heat through a Material Consider a bar of material of area A and thickness L, heat Q transfer through the material by conduction is kAD Tt Q ==== 4.1 L where D T is the temperature difference between the ends of the bar and k is the thermal conductivity of the material.
Unit of k is J/(s.m.Cº) 3.3.3 Thermal Resistance to Conduction (R-Value) There is a term similar to the electrical resistance R used for thermal resistance to conduction called R-value.
To differentiate this from R that we are familiar with, R is used here for thermal resistance to t conduction.
Thermal resistance R of a slab of thickness L is defined as t L R ==== 4.2 t k High value of R indicates a bad thermal conduction or a good thermal t insulation.
Note: R is a property attributed to a slab of a specified thickness, and t not to a material.
41  PHY207 THERMODYNAMICS 3.3.4 Conduction of Heat through a Composite Material Consider two materials of thickness L1 and L2 with different thermal conductivities k1 andk2 respectively as shown in figure 4.1.
The outer surfaces of the slab are in thermal contact with hot reservoir at temperature TH and cold reservoir at temperature TC .
Assuming that the heat transfer through the slabs is a steady rate process i.e.
the temperature everywhere in the slab and the rate of energy transfer do not change with time.
Then, the conduction rate through the two slabs must be equal.
Using equation 4.1, the conduction rate P is cond Q kAD T Pcond ==== ==== 4.3 t L Let T be the temperature of the interface between the two materials, so X k A(T - --- T ) k A(T - --- T ) P ==== 2 H X ==== 1 X C 4.4 cond L L 2 1 Solving for T in equation 4.4 gives X k L T ++++k L T T ==== 1 2 C 2 1 H 4.5 X k L ++++k L 1 2 2 1 Insert equation 4.5 in equation 4.4 to obtain A(T - --- T ) P ==== H X 4.6 cond L1 - --- L2 k1 k2 If we apply this to any number n of materials, equation 4.6 becomes A(T - --- T ) P ==== H X fori ==== 2:n 4.7 cond n (((( )))) ∑∑∑∑ Li ki 2 42 PHY207 THERMODYNAMICS L L 2 1 Cold reservoir at Hot reservoir at k k 2 1 T C T H Q T X Fig.
4.1: Heat Transfer through a Composite Slab 3.4 Convection Convection is the process in which heat energy is transferred from place to place by the bulk movement of a fluid.
A good example of this process is convection current in liquid.
This bulk movement of a fluid can be explained in terms of buoyant force.
When a portion of a liquid, such as water, is warmed the volume m of the liquid or fluid expands, and density decreases (rrrr ==== ).
From V Archimedes’ principle, the surrounding cooler and denser fluid exerts a buoyant force on the warmer fluid and thus pushes the warmer fluid upward.
As the warmer fluid is pushed upward, the surrounding cooler fluid moved downward to replace the warmer fluid.
The cooler fluid, in turn, is warmer and pushes upward.
This cycle is continuously repeated and this is called convection current.
This phenomenon is called natural convection.
The phenomenon described above is called natural convection.
Forced convection occurs if the fluid is made to move in a similar way as natural convection by the action of a pump or a fan.
Consider a fluid in contact with a flat or curved wall which temperature is higher than that of the main body of the fluid, the rate of heat transfer due to both conduction through the film and convection in fluid is Q ==== hAD T 4.8 t where h is the convection coefficient and it includes the combined effect of conduction through the film and the convection in the fluid, A 43  PHY207 THERMODYNAMICS is the area of the wall, and D T is the temperature difference between the surface of the wall and the main body of the fluid.
Finding the value of h that is appropriate for a particular arrangement is problematic because h depends on the following factors: • whether the wall is flat or curved • whether the wall is horizontal or vertical • whether the fluid in contact with the wall is a gas or a liquid • the density, viscosity, specific heat, and thermal conductivity of the fluid • whether the velocity of the fluid is small enough to give rise to larminar flow or large enough to cause turbulent flow • whether evaporation, condensation, or formation of scale takes place.
3.5 Radiation This is a process in which energy is transferred by means of electromagnetic waves.
A good example of this is the solar radiation from the sun traveling in all directions in space.
Part of this radiation is reaching the earth on daily basis and in actual sense; the bulk of energy on earth is from the sun.
All bodies, hot or cold, continuously radiate energy in form of electromagnetic waves.
But the amount of this radiation is proportional to the temperature of the body and the nature of its surface.
3.5.1 Absorption and Emission of Radiant Energy The surface of an object is very important in the determination of the amount of radiant energy a body or object can absorb or emit.
An experiment set-up to justify this is shown in figure 4.2.
Figure 4.2 consists of two identical blocks, one coated in black and the other coated with silver.
If a thermometer is inserted on each of the blocks and they are exposed to direct sunlight as shown in the diagram.
It will be observed that the temperature of the block coated in black will rise faster than that of the one coated with silver.
The reason for this is that the block coated in black absorbed larger percentage of the solar radiation falling on it and thus rapid rise in temperature due to large heat energy input.
Perfect Blackbody: This is a body that absorbs all the electromagnetic waves falling on it.
Generally, all objects can emit and also absorb electromagnetic waves.
So when an object is in thermal equilibrium with its surroundings, it 44 PHY207 THERMODYNAMICS implies that the amount of radiant energy the object absorbs balances with the amount the object emits.
However, if the absorption is greater than the emission, the object will experience a net gain of radiant energy and thus the temperature will rise.
If the emission is greater than the absorption, the object will experience a net loss of radiant energy and the temperature will fall.
A good absorber is also a good emitter while a poor absorber is also a poor emitter.
Hence, a perfect black body is a perfect absorber and also a perfect emitter of radiant energy.
Fig.
4.2: (After Cutnell and Johnson, 1989) 3.5.2 Stefan-Boltzmann Law of Radiation All matter constantly radiates energy in form of electromagnetic waves.
Q ====sssseeeeAT4 4.9 t wheres sss is the Stefan-Boltzmann constant, eeee is emissivity and it has value between 0 and 1.
For a perfect reflector,e eee =0 and for a black body eeee =1.
Equation 4.9 is known as the Stefan-Boltzmann law of radiation, and the law stated that the radiant energy, emitted in a time t by an object that has a Kelvin temperature of T, a surface area A, and an emissivity e, is given by Qes====eesses T4At.
45  PHY207 THERMODYNAMICS Emissivity eeee of an Object: This is the ratio of radiant energy emitted by an object to the one it would have emitted if it were to be a perfect black body.
Assuming that the radiation a body would emit if it were to be a perfect body is represented by Rad , then pbb radiation emitted e eee ==== 4.10 Radpbb 3.6 Newton’s Law of Cooling Energy is lost to the surroundings by conduction, convection, and radiation.
The rate at which an object loses energy to the surrounding is determined by the temperature difference between the object (To) and the surrounding (Ts).
By conduction energy loss rate = kA(T- --- T )/l s o By convection, energy loss rate depends on whether the air is forced to flow (e.g.
by a fan) or moves by natural convection.
Energy loss rate = hA(Ts- --- To) By radiation, energy loss rate = ssssA(T4- --- T4) o s The total effect of these three processes is to give a rate of energy loss per second that is proportional to the temperature difference between the object and its surroundings.
This is known as Newton’s law of cooling.
SELF ASSESSMENT EXERCISE 1.
State the Stefan-Boltzmann Law of Radiation 2.
In a light bulb, the tungsten filament has a temperature of 3.0 x 103 ºC and radiates 60 W of power.
Assuming the emissivity of the filament is 0.36, estimate the surface area of the filament.
ssss ==== 5.67· ··· 10- --- 8J(s.m2.K4) 4.0 CONCLUSION The three (3) mechanisms of heat transfer are conduction, convection and radiation.
Heat can be transferred in or out of a system by one or more of these three mechanisms.
46 PHY207 THERMODYNAMICS 5.0 SUMMARY In this unit you have learnt that: • heat is a form of energy that can be transferred from one body to another • heat can be transferred by three (3) main mechanisms • the rate of heat loss by conduction is kA(T- --- T )/l , by s o convection is hAD T , and by radiation iss sssA(T4- --- T4) o s • the Newton’s law of cooling gives the rate at which energy is lost to the surrounding by the three mechanisms.
6.0 TUTOR-MARKED ASSIGNMENT 1.
Name the three main methods of heat transfer and write the expression for the rate of heat transfer for each method.
2.
A perfect blackbody has a temperature of 605 ºC.
An identically shaped object whose emissivity is 0.400 emits the same radiant power as the blackbody.
What is the Celsius temperature of this second body?
3.
The amount of radiant power produced by the sun is approximately 3.9 x 1026 W. assuming that the sun is a perfect blackbody sphere with a radius of 6.96 x 108 m, find its surface temperature.
7.0 REFERENCES/FURTHER READING Adams, Steve & Halliday, Jonathan (2000).
Advanced Physics.UK: Oxford University Press.
Francis, W. Sears & Gerhard, L. Salinger (1975).
Thermodynamics, Kinetic Theory, and Statistical Thermodynamics (Third Edition).
Philippines: Addison-Wesley Publishing Company, Inc. Halliday, David; Resnick, Robert & Walker, Jeanrl (2001).
Fundamentals of Physics-Extended (Sixth edition).
New York: John Wiley and Sons, Inc. John, D. Cutnell & Kenneth, W. Johnson (1989).
Physics.
USA: John Wiley & Sons, Inc. Mark, W. Zemansky & Richard, H. Dittmann (1981).
Heat and Thermodynamics (Sixth Edition).
New York: McGraw-Hill Book Company.
47  PHY207 THERMODYNAMICS Stuart, B. Palmer & Mircea, S. Rogalski (1996).
Advance University Physics.
SA: Gordon and Breach Science Publisher.
Rao, Y.V.C.
(2004).
An Introduction to Thermodynamics (Revised Edition).
India: University Press (India) Private Limited.
48 PHY207 THERMODYNAMICS MODULE 2 Unit 1 First Law of Thermodynamics Unit 2 Consequences of the First Law of Thermodynamics Unit 3 Entropy and the Second Law of Thermodynamics Unit 4 Heat Engines Unit 5 Refrigerators UNIT 1 FIRST LAW OF THERMODYNAMICS CONTENTS 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objectives 3.0 Main Content 3.1 Work 3.1.1 Different Forms of Work 3.1.2 Work in Quasi-Static Process 3.1.3 Work and Internal Energy 3.2 Heat 3.3 First Law of Thermodynamics 3.4 Response Functions 3.4.1 Heat Capacities 3.4.2 Force Constant 3.4.3 Thermal Response 3.5 Special Cases of First Law of Thermodynamics 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutor-Marked Assignment 7.0 References/Further Reading 1.0 INTRODUCTION This unit focuses on heat and work as the only means by which the internal energy U of a system can change.
2.0 OBJECTIVES By the end of this unit, you should be able to: • write expression for work for different systems • explain heat transfer Q into or out of a system • state first law of thermodynamics • write modified equation of the first law under different known processes.
49  PHY207 THERMODYNAMICS 3.0 MAIN CONTENT 3.1 Work Imagine a hydrostatic system contained in a cylinder with a movable piston like the one shown in figure 5.1 below.
From the diagram, suppose an external force F acted in the direction showed moving the piston from initial point 1 to final point 2 through a distancedx.
Suppose that the cylinder has a cross section area A, that the pressure exerted on the system at the piston face is P, and that the force is PA.
The system also exerts an opposing force on the piston.
The work done dW on the system in the process described above is dW ==== PAdx 5.1 but Adx ==== dV Therefore dW ====- --- PdV 5.2 The negative sign in the last equation indicate negative change in volume (i.e.
a decrease in volume).
Point 2 Point 1 dx Force F Fig.5.1: The Work Done on a System Compressed by External Force In a finite quasi-static process in which the volume changes from V to i V , the work done is f Vf W ====- --- ∫∫∫∫PdV 5.3 Vi Note the sign convention, work done on a system is positive work, and work done by system is negative work.
50 PHY207 THERMODYNAMICS 3.1.1 Different Forms of Work System Force Displacement Work Wire Tension (F) Length (L) F∆L Film Surface Tension (S) Area (A) S∆A Fluid Pressure (P) Volume (V) P∆V Magnet Magnetic Field (H) Magnetization H∆M (M) Dielectric Electric Field (E) Polarization (P) E∆P Chemical Chemical Potential (µ) Particle number µ∆N reaction (N) 3.1.2 Work in Quasi-Static Process For a quasi-static isothermal expansion of compression of an ideal gas Vf W ====- --- ∫∫∫∫PdV 5.4 Vi But an ideal gas is the one which equation of state is PV ==== nRT , where nRT n and R are constant.
Replace P with in equation 5.4 V Vf nRT W====- --- ∫∫∫∫ dV V Vi and since T is constant for isothermal process, Vf dV W====- --- nRT ∫∫∫∫ V Vi Integration gives V f W ====- --- nRTln 5.5 V i 3.1.3 Work and Internal Energy When an adiabatic work (dW ) is done on or by the system, the ad internal energy of the system changes.
The change in internal energy (D U ) is equal to the adiabatic work done.
dU ==== dW 5.6 ad 51  PHY207 THERMODYNAMICS If a system changes from state 1 to state 2 by doing adiabatic work, and if the states are differed by a finite amount, then ∫∫∫∫U2dU ====U - --- U ==== ∫∫∫∫2dW ====- --- W 5.7 2 1 ad ad U1 1 Suppose the work done is mechanical work (i.e.
mechanical adiabatic work), then 2 U - --- U ====- --- ∫∫∫∫ PdV 5.8 2 1 1 3.2 Heat Heat (Q) is a form of energy that is transferred from one part of a system to another or to another system by virtue of a difference in temperature.
As earlier discussed in unit 3, temperature gradient determines the direction of heat flow.
When heat flows in or out of a system from its surroundings, the temperature of the system increases or decreases.
And the internal energy of the system changes from initial state (U ) to final state (U ).
This change in internal energy D U must i f be equal to the heat flow i.e.
D U ====U - --- U ====Q 5.9 f i Sign of Q Q is positive when there is a flow of heat into the system Q is negative when there is a flow of heat from the system Heat bath or heat reservoir: This is a body that is so large that its temperature does not change appreciably when heat flows in or out of it.
Heat sink: Just like heat bath, this is a body that is so large that its temperature does not change appreciably when heat flows in or out of it.
The temperature of heat sink is lower compare to that of the heat bath.
3.3 First Law of Thermodynamics From the previous discussions in this unit, we have learnt that the internal energy of a system can change only if: a. there is flow of heat into the system or out of the system b. work is done on the system or by the system.
52 PHY207 THERMODYNAMICS Hence, the change in internal D U of a system is D U ====U - --- U ==== Q- --- W , 5.10 f i where Q is the heat and W is work.
Equation 5.10 is the first law of thermodynamic.
The differential for of first law of thermodynamics is dU ==== dQ- --- PdV 5.11 The Statement of First Law of Thermodynamics The internal energy of a system tends to increase if energy is added as heat Q and tends to decrease if energy is lost as work W done by the system.
3.4 Response Functions When heat is added or withdrawn from a system, there is change in one, two or all its properties.
This change in the measurable property/properties (macroscopic behaviour) is/are the basis of thermometer as we have discussed in unit 3.
We can characterise the macroscopic behaviour of a system response’s functions.
These functions can be measured experimentally from changes in the thermodynamic coordinates by the use of external probes.
Examples of response functions are Heat Capacities, force constant (e.g.
isothermal compressibility), and thermal response (e.g.
expansivity of a gas).
3.4.1 Heat Capacities When heat is added to a system, its temperature will change.
Heat capacities are obtained from change in temperature of a system upon addition of heat to the system.
From the equation of the first law, dQ ==== dU ++++ PdV Heat capacity at constant volume ¶ ¶¶¶ Q C ==== ( ) 5.12 V ¶ ¶¶¶ T V Heat capacity at constant pressure ¶ ¶¶¶ Q C ==== ( ) 5.13 P ¶ ¶¶¶ T P Heat capacities can be measured experimentally.
53  PHY207 THERMODYNAMICS 3.4.2 Force Constant Force constants measure the (infinitesimal) ratio of displacement to force and are generalisation of the spring constant.
Examples include isothermal compressibility of a gas 1 ¶ ¶¶¶ V k ====- --- ( ) , 5.14 T V ¶ ¶¶¶ P T and the susceptibility of a magnet 1 ¶ ¶¶¶ M c ccc ==== ( ) .
5.15 T V ¶ ¶¶¶ B T It can be shown using equation of state for an ideal gas (PV(cid:181) (cid:181)(cid:181)(cid:181) T ) that 1 k ==== .
T P 3.4.3 Thermal Response This probes the change in thermodynamic coordinate with temperature.
Example, the coefficient of volume expansion (expansivity of a gas) is given by 1 ¶ ¶¶¶ V b bbb ==== ( ) 5.16 V ¶ ¶¶¶ T P 1 And this is equal to for ideal gas.
T 3.5 Special Cases of First Law of Thermodynamics Here we consider four different thermodynamic processes in which certain restriction is imposed on the system and the corresponding implication when apply to the first law.
Adiabatic process, dQ ==== 0, and equation of first law reduces to dU ==== dW ==== PdV 5.17 Isochoric process, dV ==== 0, and the equation of the first law becomes dU ==== dQ ====C dT 5.18 V Cyclic Process, dU ==== 0, and the equation of the first law becomes Q ====W 5.19 Free expansion, Q ====W ==== 0, and the equation of the first law becomes dU ==== 0 5.19 54 PHY207 THERMODYNAMICS SELF ASSESSMENT EXERCISE 1.
Write the equation for work for the following system a.
Film b.
Wire c. Magnet 2.
State first law of thermodynamics.
3.
If there are 2 mole of gas kept at a constant temperature of 20 ºC and if this gas is compressed from a volume of 4 m3 to 2 m3, calculate the work done on the gas.
(R=8.31J/mol.K) 4.
Consider that 200 J of work is done on a system and 293.3 J is extracted from the system as heat.
In the sense of the first law of thermodynamics, what is the value of D U ?
4.0 CONCLUSION The first law of thermodynamics gives an insight to the internal energy of a system i.e.
work and heat as the only means by which the internal energy of a system can change.
The expression for work done a mechanical system is PdV and similar expression can be derived for work done under different systems.
The differential form of first law is dU ==== dQ- --- PdV .
In the next unit, we are going to be looking at some consequences of the first law of thermodynamics.
5.0 SUMMARY In this unit, you have leant that: • the expression for mechanical work done on or by a system is PdV • heat and work are the only way by which the internal energy of a system can change • the differential for the first law of thermodynamics is dU ==== dQ- --- PdV • the modified form of the first law can be obtained for each of the known thermodynamic processes.
6.0 TUTOR-MARKED ASSIGNMENT 1.
Derive the corresponding equation of the first law of thermodynamics under the following processes: (a) adiabatic process, (b) isochoric process, and (c) cyclic process 55  PHY207 THERMODYNAMICS B 2.
The equation of state of a gas is PV ==== nRT(1- --- ), where R is a V constant and B is a function of temperature alone.
Show that the work done by 1 mole of this gas during a quasi-static, isothermal expansion from initial volume Vi to a final volume Vf is - --- RTlnVf ++++ B- --- B   Vi Vf Vi  7.0 REFERENCES/FURTHER READING Adams, Steve & Halliday, Jonathan (2000).
Advanced Physics.
UK: Oxford University Press.
Francis, W. Sears & Gerhard, L. Salinger (1975).
Thermodynamics, Kinetic Theory, and Statistical Thermodynamics (Third Edition).Philippines: Addison-Wesley Publishing Company, Inc. Halliday, David, Resnick, Robert & Walker, Jeanrl (2001).
Fundamentals of Physics-Extended (Sixth Edition).
New York: John Wiley and Sons, Inc. John, D. Cutnell & Kenneth, W. Johnson (1989).
Physics.USA: John Wiley & Sons, Inc. Mark, W. Zemansky & Richard, H. Dittmann (1981).
Heat and Thermodynamics (Sixth Edition).
New York: McGraw-Hill Book Company.
Stuart, B. Palmer & Mircea, S. Rogalski (1996).
Advance University Physics.
SA: Gordon and Breach Science Publisher.
Rao, Y.V.C.
(2004).
An Introduction to Thermodynamics (Revised Edition).
India: University Press (India) Private Limited.
56 PHY207 THERMODYNAMICS UNIT 2 CONSEQUENCES OF THE FIRST LAW OF THERMODYNAMICS CONTENTS 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objectives 3.0 Main Content 3.1 Energy Equation 3.2 T and V Independent 3.3 T and P Independent 3.4 P and V Independent 3.5 Gay-Lussac-Joule Experiment 3.6 Joule-Thompson Experiment 3.7 Reversible Adiabatic Process 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutor-Marked Assignment 7.0 References/Further Reading 1.0 INTRODUCTION The focus of the unit will be to derive important relations from the first law of thermodynamics.
2.0 OBJECTIVES By the end of this unit, you should be able to: • explain what is meant by energy equations • derive expression for C in terms of derivative of U V • derive expression for C in terms of derivative of H P • explain Gay-Lussac-Joule and Joule-Thomson experiment • write the expressions for Joule coefficienth hhh and Joule-Thomson coefficientm mmm .
3.0 MAIN CONTENT 3.1 Energy Equation Energy equations are the equations which express the internal energy of a system as a function of the variables defining the state of the system.
The energy equations, like equation of state, are different for different systems or substances.
Equation of state and the energy equation together completely determine all the properties of a substance or 57  PHY207 THERMODYNAMICS system.
Energy equations are derived independently, but not from equation of state.
We are going to consider systems which state can be described by the properties P, V. and T. 3.2 T and V Independent Consider internal energy U as a function of T and V, U(T,V), then the change in internal engine dU between two equilibrium states in which temperature and volume differ by dT and dV is ¶ ¶¶¶ U ¶ ¶¶¶ U dU ====( ) dT ++++( ) dV 6.1 ¶ ¶¶¶ T V ¶ ¶¶¶ V T ¶ ¶¶¶ U ¶ ¶¶¶ U ( ) is the slope of isochoric line and ( ) is the slope isothermal ¶ ¶¶¶ T V ¶ ¶¶¶ V T ¶ ¶¶¶ U line in which U is plotted as a function of T and V .
( ) can be ¶ ¶¶¶ T V measured experimentally and it has physical significant.
The first law dQ ==== dU ++++ PdV , 6.2 put 6.2 in 6.1 ¶ ¶¶¶ U ¶ ¶¶¶ U dQ ==== ( ) dT ++++( ) dV ++++ PdV 6.3 ¶ ¶¶¶ T V ¶ ¶¶¶ V T Rearranging ¶ ¶¶¶ U ¶ ¶¶¶ U dQ ==== ( ) dT ++++[( ) ++++ P]dV 6.4 ¶ ¶¶¶ T V ¶ ¶¶¶ V T For a process at constant volume, dV ==== 0 and dQ ====C dT , then 6.4 V becomes ¶ ¶¶¶ U C dT ==== ( ) dT V ¶ ¶¶¶ T V So, ¶ ¶¶¶ U ( ) ====C 6.5 ¶ ¶¶¶ T V V 58 PHY207 THERMODYNAMICS The specific heat capacity at constant volume C is the slope of V isochoric line on U-T-V surface and its experimental measurement determines this slope at any point.
Equation 6.4 can be written for any reversible process as ¶ ¶¶¶ U dQ ====C dT ++++[( ) ++++ P]dV 6.6 V ¶ ¶¶¶ V T For a process at constant pressure, dQ ====C dT , so 6.6 becomes P ¶ ¶¶¶ U C dT ==== C dT ++++[( ) ++++ P]dV P V ¶ ¶¶¶ V T dV ¶ ¶¶¶ V Dividing through by dT and replacing by ( ) , we obtain dT ¶ ¶¶¶ T P ¶ ¶¶¶ U ¶ ¶¶¶ V C - --- C ====[( ) ++++ P]( ) 6.7 P V ¶ ¶¶¶ V T ¶ ¶¶¶ T P Equation 6.7 holds for a system in any one equilibrium state, but does not refer to a process between two equilibrium states.
3.3 T and P Independent The enthalpy H of a system, like the internal energy U, is a property of the system that depends on the state only and can be expressed as a function of any two variables P, V, and T. Each of these relations defines an enthalpy surface in a rectangular coordinate system in which H is plotted along one axis while the other two axes are P and V, P and T, or T and V. Consider enthalpy as function of T and P i.e.
H(T,P), ¶ ¶¶¶ H ¶ ¶¶¶ H dH ==== ( ) dT ++++( ) dP 6.8 ¶ ¶¶¶ T P ¶ ¶¶¶ P T From the definition of enthalpy (to be discussed in module 3 unit 2) for a PVT system: H ====U ++++ PV 6.9 Differential of H, dH is dH ==== dU ++++ PdV ++++VdP 6.10 59  PHY207 THERMODYNAMICS Combining 6.10 with the first law (i.e.
replace dU in 6.10 with dQ- --- PdV and make dQ the subject) gives dQ ==== dH- --- VdP 6.11 insert 6.8 in 6.11, to obtain ¶ ¶¶¶ H ¶ ¶¶¶ H dQ ==== ( ) dT ++++[( ) - --- V]dP 6.12 ¶ ¶¶¶ T P ¶ ¶¶¶ P T For an isobaric process (dP ==== 0), dQ ====C dT .
Hence P ¶ ¶¶¶ H ( ) ==== C 6.13 ¶ ¶¶¶ T P P Equation 6.13 means that the specific heat capacity at constant pressure C is equal to the slope of an isobaric line on the H- --- T- --- P surface.
P Equation 6.12 can be written for any reversible process as ¶ ¶¶¶ H dQ ====C dT ++++[( ) - --- V]dP 6.14 P ¶ ¶¶¶ P T In a process at constant volume, dQ ====C dT and V ¶ ¶¶¶ H ¶ ¶¶¶ P C - --- C ====- --- [( ) - --- V]( ) 6.15 p V ¶ ¶¶¶ P T ¶ ¶¶¶ T V If the temperature is constant, equation 6.14 becomes ¶ ¶¶¶ H dQ ====[( ) - --- V]dP 6.16 ¶ ¶¶¶ P T In an adiabatic process, dQ ==== 0, then equation 6.14 becomes ¶ ¶¶¶ T ¶ ¶¶¶ H C ( ) ====- --- [( ) - --- V] 6.17 P¶ ¶¶¶ P ¶ ¶¶¶ P T 3.4 P and V Independent Consider U as a function of P and V, U(P,V), then the change in internal energy dU between two equilibrium states is ¶ ¶¶¶ U ¶ ¶¶¶ U dU ==== ( ) dP ++++( ) dV 6.18 ¶ ¶¶¶ P V ¶ ¶¶¶ V P Consider also U(T,V) ¶ ¶¶¶ U ¶ ¶¶¶ U dU ==== ( ) dT ++++( ) dV 6.19a ¶ ¶¶¶ T V ¶ ¶¶¶ V T 60 PHY207 THERMODYNAMICS and T(P,V) gives ¶ ¶¶¶ T ¶ ¶¶¶ T dT ==== ( ) dP ++++( ) dV 6.19b ¶ ¶¶¶ P V ¶ ¶¶¶ V P Eliminating dT in equation 6.19a (i.e.
put 6.19b in 6.19a) we have ¶ ¶¶¶ U ¶ ¶¶¶ T ¶ ¶¶¶ U ¶ ¶¶¶ T ¶ ¶¶¶ U dU ====[( ) ( ) ]dP ++++[( ) ( ) ++++( ) ]dV 6.20 ¶ ¶¶¶ T V ¶ ¶¶¶ P V ¶ ¶¶¶ T V¶ ¶¶¶ V P ¶ ¶¶¶ V T By comparing equation 6.20 with 6.18, it implies that ¶ ¶¶¶ U ¶ ¶¶¶ U ¶ ¶¶¶ T ( ) ==== ( ) ( ) 6.21 ¶ ¶¶¶ P V ¶ ¶¶¶ T V¶ ¶¶¶ P V and ¶ ¶¶¶ U ¶ ¶¶¶ U ¶ ¶¶¶ T ¶ ¶¶¶ U ( ) ==== ( ) ( ) ++++( ) 6.22 ¶ ¶¶¶ V p ¶ ¶¶¶ T V¶ ¶¶¶ V P ¶ ¶¶¶ V T Generally, for any property w, and any three variables x, y,z the form of equations 6.21 and 6.22 are ¶ ¶¶¶ w ¶ ¶¶¶ w ¶ ¶¶¶ z ( ) ==== ( ) ( ) 6.23 ¶ ¶¶¶ x y ¶ ¶¶¶ z y¶ ¶¶¶ x y and ¶ ¶¶¶ w ¶ ¶¶¶ w ¶ ¶¶¶ z ¶ ¶¶¶ w ( ) ==== ( ) ( ) ++++( ) 6.24 ¶ ¶¶¶ y x ¶ ¶¶¶ z y¶ ¶¶¶ y x ¶ ¶¶¶ y z Note that equation 6.23 is the chain rule of partial derivatives.
Therefore for H(P,V,T) we have ¶ ¶¶¶ H ¶ ¶¶¶ H ¶ ¶¶¶ T ( )p ==== ( ) ( ) 6.25 ¶ ¶¶¶ V ¶ ¶¶¶ T P¶ ¶¶¶ V P and ¶ ¶¶¶ H ¶ ¶¶¶ H ¶ ¶¶¶ T ¶ ¶¶¶ H ( ) ==== ( ) ( ) ++++( ) 6.26 ¶ ¶¶¶ P V ¶ ¶¶¶ T P¶ ¶¶¶ P V ¶ ¶¶¶ P T From equation 6.21, using 6.5 we obtain ¶ ¶¶¶ U ¶ ¶¶¶ T ( ) ====C ( ) 6.27 ¶ ¶¶¶ P V V¶ ¶¶¶ P V 61  PHY207 THERMODYNAMICS Also from equation 6.25, using equation 6.13 we have ¶ ¶¶¶ H ¶ ¶¶¶ T ( ) ==== C ( ) 6.28 ¶ ¶¶¶ V P P¶ ¶¶¶ V P We can as well show that ¶ ¶¶¶ T ¶ ¶¶¶ T dQ ====C ( ) dV ++++C ( ) dP 6.29 P¶ ¶¶¶ V P V¶ ¶¶¶ P V and ¶ ¶¶¶ P ¶ ¶¶¶ P C ( ) ====C ( ) 6.30 V¶ ¶¶¶ V S P¶ ¶¶¶ V T 3.5 Gay-Lussac-Joule Experiment ¶ ¶¶¶ U The partial derivative ( ) describe the way in which the internal ¶ ¶¶¶ V T energy of a given system varies with volume at constant temperature.
¶ ¶¶¶ H Similarly, ( ) describe the way in which enthalpy of a given system ¶ ¶¶¶ P T varies with pressure at constant temperature.
These two derivatives can be calculated from equation of state of the system (see free expansion of gas for the partial derivative of U in module 4, unit 2).
Using ¶ ¶¶¶ U ¶ ¶¶¶ V ¶ ¶¶¶ T ( ) ( ) ( ) ====- --- 1 ¶ ¶¶¶ V T¶ ¶¶¶ T U¶ ¶¶¶ U V then ¶ ¶¶¶ U ¶ ¶¶¶ T ( ) ====- --- C ( ) 6.31 ¶ ¶¶¶ V T V¶ ¶¶¶ V U Also, ¶ ¶¶¶ H ¶ ¶¶¶ P ¶ ¶¶¶ T ( ) ( ) ( ) ====- --- 1 ¶ ¶¶¶ P T¶ ¶¶¶ T H¶ ¶¶¶ H P then ¶ ¶¶¶ H ¶ ¶¶¶ T ( ) ====- --- C ( ) 6.32 ¶ ¶¶¶ P T P¶ ¶¶¶ P H 62 PHY207 THERMODYNAMICS From equation 6.31, measurement of the rate of change of temperature with volume in a process at constant internal energy gives the desired ¶ ¶¶¶ U derivatives (i.e.
( ) ).
¶ ¶¶¶ V T Similarly, from equation 6.32, measurement of the rate of change of temperature with pressure in a process at constant enthalpy gives the ¶ ¶¶¶ H desired derivatives (i.e.
( ) ).
¶ ¶¶¶ P T Fig.
6.1: Gay-Lussac-Joule Experiment (After Sear and Salinger 1975) Gay-Lussac and Joule made an attempt to measure the dependence of the internal energy U of a gas on its volume.
The experimental set-up used by Gay-Lussac and Joule is shown in figure 6.1.
Vessel A contains a sample of the gas for the investigation and is connected to an evacuated vessel B by a tube in which there is a stopcock that is initially closed.
The whole arrangement is immersed in a water tank of known mass which temperature can be measure by a thermometer.
The whole set-up is allowed to attain thermal equilibrium and the temperature is measured and recorded.
Then the stopcock is opened and the gas is allowed to undergo a free expansion into the evacuated vessel.
The work done W during free expansion process is zero (see free expansion in module 4, unit 2).
The system will eventually come to a new equilibrium state if pressure is the same in both vessels.
If temperature of the gas changes during this process (i.e.
free expansion), there will be heat flow between the gas and the water bath and the final temperature will be different from the initial one already measured and recorded.
Gay-Lussac and Joule found that the temperature change of the water bath, if it changes at all, was too small to be detected.
The reason is that the heat capacity of the bath is so large that a small heat flow in or out of 63  PHY207 THERMODYNAMICS it produces only a very small change in temperature.
Similar experiments have been performed, using other technique, and the results showed that the temperature change of the gas during free expansion is not large.
Hence the postulate as an additional property of an ideal gas is that temperature change during a free expansion is zero.
The first law of thermodynamics (i.e.
D U ====U - --- U ====Q- --- W ), since both Q and W are f i zero, becomes D U ==== 0 6.33 Therefore the internal energy is constant, and for an ideal gas, ¶ ¶¶¶ T ( ) ==== 0 (idealgas) 6.34 ¶ ¶¶¶ V U The partial derivative in equation 6.34 is called the Joule coefficient and is represented byh hhh ¶ ¶¶¶ T h hhh” ””” ( ) 6.35 ¶ ¶¶¶ V U Note thath hhh is equal to zero for ideal gas but it is not zero for real gas.
From equation 6.31, since C is finite, then for ideal gas V ¶ ¶¶¶ U ( ) ==== 0 6.36 ¶ ¶¶¶ V T The implication of equation 6.36 is that the internal energy U, for an ideal gas, is a function of temperature only.
That is for an ideal gas, the ¶ ¶¶¶ U partial derivative ( ) is a total derivative and ¶ ¶¶¶ T V dU C ==== ,dU ====C dT 6.37 V V dT Integrating equation 6.37 from reference level (U , T ) to (U,T), and if o o C is constant that is V U T ∫∫∫∫ dU ====U- --- U ====C ∫∫∫∫ dT o V Uo To which gives U ====U ++++C (T- --- T ) 6.38 o V o Equation 6.38 is the energy equation of an ideal gas.
64 PHY207 THERMODYNAMICS 3.6 Joule-Thompson Experiment Joule and Thomson made an attempt to measure the dependence of the enthalpy of a gas on its pressure (i.e.
equation 6.30).
The experimental set-up used by Joule and Thomson is shown in figure 6.2.
The gas in compartment 1 (with T , P , and V ) was allowed to expand freely 1 1 1 through a porous plug.
The gas expands from pressure P to P by the 1 2 throttling action of the porous plug.
The entire system is insulated so that the expansion occurs adiabatically (i.e.
Q ==== 0).
Porous plug Fig.
6.2: Joule-Thomson Experiment (After Sear and Salinger 1975) The Gas is allowed to flow continuously through the porous plug, and when steady state condition have been reached the temperatures of the gas before and after expansion, T1 and T2, are measured directly with sensitive thermocouple thermometers.
The total work done during the expansion can be written as W ====W ++++W ==== PV- --- P V 6.39 1 2 1 1 2 2 The overall change in internal energy of the gas during the adiabatic expansion is then D U ==== Q++++W ==== 0++++W ==== ++++W 6.40 D U ==== PV- --- P V ====U - --- U 1 1 2 2 2 1 rearranging gives U ++++ P V ====U ++++ PV 6.41 2 2 2 1 1 1 65  PHY207 THERMODYNAMICS But H ====U ++++ PV , then, equation 6.41 becomes H ==== H 6.42 1 2 This is therefore an ISOENTHALPIC expansion and the experiment measures directly the change in temperature of a gas with pressure at constant enthalpy.
The Joule-Thomson coefficientm mmm is, ¶ ¶¶¶ T m mmm” ””” ( ) 6.43 ¶ ¶¶¶ P H For an ideal gas, ¶ ¶¶¶ H ( ) ==== 0 (ideal gas) 6.44 ¶ ¶¶¶ P T The implication of equation 6.44 is that the enthalpy H, for an ideal gas, is a function of temperature only.
That is for an ideal gas, the partial ¶ ¶¶¶ H derivative ( ) is a total derivative and ¶ ¶¶¶ P T dH C ==== ,dH ==== C dT 6.45 P P dT Integrating equation 6.45 from reference level (H , T ) to (H,T ) , and o o if C is constant that is P H T ∫∫∫∫ dH ==== H- --- H ====C ∫∫∫∫ dT o P Ho To gives H ==== H ++++C (T- --- T ) 6.46 o P o Equation 6.46 is the enthalpy equation for an ideal gas and is analogue of equation 6.38.
Therefore for ideal gas, from 6.36 and 6.44 ¶ ¶¶¶ U ¶ ¶¶¶ H ( ) ==== ( ) ==== 0 6.47 ¶ ¶¶¶ V T ¶ ¶¶¶ P T 66 PHY207 THERMODYNAMICS Then equations 6.7 and 6.17 become ¶ ¶¶¶ V ¶ ¶¶¶ P C - --- C ==== P( ) ====V( ) ==== nR P V ¶ ¶¶¶ T P ¶ ¶¶¶ T V And from equation of state of ideal gas, PV ==== nRT ¶ ¶¶¶ V ¶ ¶¶¶ P P( ) ====V( ) ==== nR ¶ ¶¶¶ T P ¶ ¶¶¶ T V Hence for ideal gas, C - --- C ==== nR 6.48 P V 3.7 Reversible Adiabatic Process From equation 6.30, for any substance in a reversible adiabatic process, ¶ ¶¶¶ P C ¶ ¶¶¶ P ( ) ==== P ( ) 6.49 ¶ ¶¶¶ V S C ¶ ¶¶¶ V T V For an ideal gas, ¶ ¶¶¶ P P ( ) ====- --- 6.50 ¶ ¶¶¶ V T V Check block 1 for how equation 6.50 could be derived If we representing the ratio C C byg ggg , P V That is, C p g ggg” ””” 6.51 C V and inserting 6.50 and 6.51 in 6.49, and omitting subscript S for simplicity then, dP dV ++++gggg ==== 0 6.52 P V Integrating equation 6.52 lnP ++++gggg lnV ==== lnK or gggg PV ==== K 6.53 67  PHY207 THERMODYNAMICS where K in equation 6.53 is a constant of integration.
From equation 6.53, eliminating V gives TP(1- ---gggg)/gggg ==== constant , 6.54 and eliminating P gives TVgggg- --- 1 ==== constant .
6.55 Equation 6.54 and 6.55 are based on the fact that the gas obeys its equation of state in any reversible process.
Block 1 I deal gas equation is PV ==== nRT PdV ++++VdP====nRdT a t constant T (i.e.
dT=0) V dP ====- --- PdV ¶ ¶¶¶ P P ( ) ====- --- ¶ ¶¶¶ V T V SELF ASSESSMENT EXERCISE 1.
What is energy equation?
2.
Obtain equation 6.54 and 6.55 from 6.53.
3.
The internal energy of a van der Waals gas is given by a U ==== C T- --- ++++constant V V shows that for a van der Waals gas 1 C - --- C ==== nR P V 2a(V- --- b)2 1- --- 3 nRTV 4.0 CONCLUSION Some of the consequences of the first law of thermodynamics were discussed in this unit.
From the first law, with partial derivatives as 68 PHY207 THERMODYNAMICS tools, we have derived the expressions for specific heat capacities.
Also discussed were the experiments by Gay-Lussac-Joule and Joule- Thomson which established that, for an ideal gas, the internal energy (U ) and the enthalpy (H ) are functions of temperature only.
7.0 SUMMARY In this unit, you have learnt that: • energy equations are the equations which expresses the internal energy of a system as a function of the variables defining the state of the system ¶ ¶¶¶ U • the specific heat capacity at constant volume is CV ==== ( )V ¶ ¶¶¶ T • the difference between the specific heat capacities ¶ ¶¶¶ U ¶ ¶¶¶ V C - --- C ====[( ) ++++ P]( ) P V ¶ ¶¶¶ V T ¶ ¶¶¶ T P • for adiabatic reversible process, PVgggg ==== K .
8.0 TUTOR-MARKED ASSIGNMENT ¶ ¶¶¶ U 1.
Show that ( ) ==== C - --- PbbbbV ¶ ¶¶¶ T P P ¶ ¶¶¶ U 2.
For an ideal gas show that (a) ( ) ==== 0.
¶ ¶¶¶ P T 7.0 REFERENCES/FURTHER READING Francis, W. Sears & Gerhard, L. Salinger (1975).
Thermodynamics, Kinetic Theory, and Statistical Thermodynamics (Third Edition).
Philippines: Addison-Wesley Publishing Company, Inc. Mark, W. Zemansky & Richard, H. Dittmann (1981).
Heat and Thermodynamics (Sixth Edition).
New York: McGraw-Hill Book Company.
Stuart, B. Palmer & Mircea, S. Rogalski (1996).
Advance University Physics.
SA: Gordon and Breach Science Publisher.
Rao, Y.V.C.
(2004).
An Introduction to Thermodynamics (Revised Edition).
India: University Press (India) Private Limited.
69  PHY207 THERMODYNAMICS UNIT 3 ENTROPY AND THE SECOND LAW OF THERMODYNAMICS CONTENTS 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objectives 3.0 Main Content 3.1 Entropy of a System 3.2 Change in Entropy 3.2.1 Reversible Process 3.2.2 Irreversible Process 3.2.3 Change in Entropy of Adiabatic and Isothermal Processes 3.3 Entropy as a State Function 3.4 The Second Law of Thermodynamics 3.5 Carnot Engine 3.5.1 Efficiency of a Carnot Engine 3.5.2 Another Statement of Second Law of Thermodynamics 3.5.3 Entropy Change of a Reversible Process 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutor-Marked Assignment 7.0 References/Further Reading 1.0 INTRODUCTION One of the statements of the second law of thermodynamics is that the change in entropy of a system cannot be negative (i.e.
it is either zero or positive).
This unit focuses on entropy, its value during reversible and irreversible processes, and the second law of thermodynamics.
2.0 OBJECTIVES By the end of this unit, you should be able to: • define entropy • write the equation for change in entropy during reversible and irreversible processes • state the second law of thermodynamics • describe the Carnot cycle / engine • calculate the efficiency of Carnot engine.
70 PHY207 THERMODYNAMICS 3.0 MAIN CONTENT 3.1 Entropy of a System In unit 1 we defined a system as a restricted region of space one has chosen to study.
Also, we mentioned that the properties or coordinates used to describe thermodynamic system are the thermodynamic properties or coordinates.
One of such properties is entropy.
Entropy, S, is the degree of disorderliness of a system.
Unlike energy, entropy of a system does not always obey a conservation law.
3.2 Change in Entropy The change in entropy D S of a system during a process that takes the system from initial state i to a final state f is defined as f dQ D S ==== S - --- S ==== ∫∫∫∫ 7.1 f i i T Equation 7.1 implies that change in entropy depends on both the energy transfer as heat during the process and the temperature of the system.
The S.I unit of entropy and change in entropy is Joule per Kelvin (JK-1).
3.2.1 Reversible Process For a reversible process that occurs in a closed system, the entropy always remains constant.
That is, the change in entropy for a reversible process is zero (D S ==== 0).
This statement can be explained using a Carnot cycle (See section 3.5.3 of this unit).
3.2.2 Irreversible Process An irreversible process can be defined as one which direction cannot be reversed by an infinitesimal change in some property of the system.
A good example of irreversible process is illustrated in figure 7.1.
Figure 7.1 shows a hot reservoir at temperature T in thermal contact through H a conductor with a cold reservoir at temperatureT .
Suppose the C arrangement is isolated from the surrounding (i.e.
no heat flows in or out of the arrangement), heat flows from hot reservoir to cold reservoir and not in reversed direction.
This process is an irreversible process.
Suppose heat Q flows from the hot reservoir to the cold reservoir, we can then write the equation for the total entropy change D S during the process.
71  PHY207 THERMODYNAMICS The change in entropy for the cold reservoirD S , using equation 7.1 is C Q D S ==== 7.2 C T C D S is positive because heat Q flows into the cold reservoir and is C positive Q.
Similarly the change in entropy of the hot reservoirD S , H using equation 7.1 is Q D S ====- --- 7.3 H T H D S is negative because heat Q flows out of the hot reservoir (i.e.
H - --- Q).
The total entropy is D S ==== D S ++++D S H C which gives Q Q D S ====- --- ++++ >>>> 0 7.4 T T H C The total entropy D S is greater than zero because T is greater H thanT .
C We can then say that D S >>>> 0 for irreversible process.
Conductor Q Hot reservoir Cold reservoir T T H C Fig.
7.1: Heat Q Flows from Hot Reservoir to Cold Reservoir 3.2.3 Change in Entropy during Adiabatic and Isothermal Processes Change in entropy is given by equation 7.1 and it is a function of Q and T .
72 PHY207 THERMODYNAMICS Reversible adiabatic process: during adiabatic process, dQ ==== 0, and this implies that during reversible adiabatic process dQ =0.
Then, going r by equation 7.1 dS ==== 0 7.5 Reversible isothermal process: An example of reversible isothermal process is phase change and this occurs at constant pressure during which the temperature also remains constant.
f dQ 1 f Q S - --- S ==== ∫∫∫∫ r ==== ∫∫∫∫ dQ ==== 7.6 f i r i T T i T where Q is the latent heat or latent heat of transformation.
3.3 Entropy as a State Function Entropy, like pressure, energy, and temperature, is a property of the state of a system and is independent of how that state is reached.
The above statement can be justify from the equation of the first law of thermodynamics dU ==== dQ- --- dW For a reversible isobaric process, dQ ==== PdV ++++nCPdT 7.7 Using the equation for the ideal gas, P in equation 7.7 can be replaced nRT with .
Then dividing through by T, gives V dQ dV dT ==== nR ++++nCP 7.8 T V T Suppose each term of equation 7.8 is integrated between an arbitrary initial state i and an arbitrary final state f we get f dQ f dV f dT ∫∫∫∫ ==== ∫∫∫∫ nR ++++∫∫∫∫ nCP i T i V i T dQ But change in entropy D S is already given to be in equation 7.1, so T Vf Tf D S ==== S f- --- Si ==== nRln ++++nCP ln 7.9 Vi Ti 73  PHY207 THERMODYNAMICS Equation 7.9 thus implies that the change in entropy D S between the initial state and final state of an ideal gas depends only on properties of the initial and properties of final state (i.e.
D S does not depend on how the gas changes between the two states).
3.4 The Second Law of Thermodynamics The change in entropyD S , as discussed in section 3.2, for a process occurring in a closed system is zero for reversible process and greater than zero for irreversible process.
This is one of the statements of the second law of thermodynamics.
The second law of thermodynamics gives the direction in which the natural process will take place.
Statement of the Second law of thermodynamics If a process occurs in a closed system, the entropy of the system increases for irreversible processes and remains constant for reversible processes.
Entropy of a system never decreases.
Mathematical statement of the Second law of thermodynamics D S‡ ‡‡‡ 0 7.10 3.5 Carnot Engine Carnot engine is the most efficient kind of heat engine and because of this it is sometime referred to as an ideal heat engine.
Ideal in the sense that all processes in the cycle are reversible and no wasteful energy transfer occur due to friction and turbulence.
This engine is after a French scientist and engineer N.L.
Sadi Carnot.
The P-V diagram of the Carnot cycle is shown in figure 7.2 and the arrow on the plot indicate the direction of the cycle (i.e.
clockwise).
During each cycle, the engine (i.e.
the working substance) absorbs energy Q as heat from a thermal H reservior at constant temperature T and ejects energy Q as heat to a H C second reservoir at a constant lower temperature T .
C Description of the Processes • Process de is an isothermal process during which heat Q is H transferred at temperatureT to the working from the hot H reservoir.
This causes the gas to undergo isothermal expansion from volume V to V .
d e 74 PHY207 THERMODYNAMICS • Process ef is an adiabatic expansion i.e no heat is added as the working substance expands from volume V to V .
Temperature e f decreases during the process from T to T H C • Process fg is an isothermal process during which heat Q is C transfered at temperature T from the working to cold reservior.
C This causes the gas to undergo isothermal compression from volume V to V .
f g • Processes gd is an adiabatic compression i.e.
no heat is transfreed as the working substance compresses from volume V to V .
g d Temperatures increases during the process from T and T .
C H Heat engine is discussed in more detail in the next unit (i.e.
Module 2, unit 4) d Q P H e W T H Q C g f T C 0 V Fig.
7.2: PV Plot for the Carnot Cycle Work: From the first law of thermodynamics (D U ==== Q- --- W ), the total work done during a cycle or cyclic process can be calculated.
For a cyclic processD U ==== 0, the total heat transfer per cycleQ ====Q - --- Q , and the H C total work done is W .
Then, the first law of thermodynamic for the Carnot cycle is W ====Q - --- Q 7.11 H C 75  PHY207 THERMODYNAMICS 3.5.1 Efficiency of a Carnot Engine The efficiency of a heat engine is W workoutput E ==== ==== (in one cycle) 7.12 Q heatin H Using equation 7.11, equation 7.12 becomes Q - --- Q Q E ==== H C ====1- --- C 7.13 Q Q H H But the ratio of the rejected heat Q to the input heat Q for a C H reversible process can be written as Q T C ==== C 7.14 Q T H H where temperature T and T are temperatures in Kelvin.
C H Rearranging 7.14 gives Q Q H ==== C 7.15 T T H C Insert equation 7.14 in equation 7.13 to obtain T E ====1- --- C 7.16 T H Equation 7.16 is the efficiency of a Carnot engine operating between two heat reservoirs in which heat is taking in at temperature T and H heat is ejecting at temperatureT .
Temperatures T and T must be in C H C Kelvin.
The relation in equation 7.16 gives the maximum possible efficiency for a heat engine operating between two Kelvin temperatures T and T .
H C 3.5.2 Another Statement of Second Law of Thermodynamics The efficiency of an ideal heat engine is given by equation 7.16.
The implication of this is that no heat engine can have efficiency greater than that of a Carnot engine.
It is clear from equations 7.13 and 7.16 that the efficiency of a Carnot engine is less that 100 %.
This of course is another statement of the second law of thermodynamics.
That is, the efficiency of heat engine is always less than 100 %.
This statement is called Kelvin’s statement 76 PHY207 THERMODYNAMICS Kelvin’s Statement: No process is possible whose sole result is the complete conversion of heat into work.
3.5.3 Entropy Change of a Reversible Process A good example of a reversible thermodynamic process is Carnot cycle.
In a Carnot engine, there are only two reversible energy transfers as heat (i.e.
entropy change at T and at T ).
The net entropy change per cycle H C is Q Q D S ==== D S ++++D S ==== H- --- C 7.17 H C T T H C where D S is the positive entropy because energy Q is added to the H H working substance (i.e.
increase in entropy) and D S is negative C entropy because energy Q is removed from the working substance as C heat (i.e.
decrease in entropy).
Using equation 7.15, then equation 7.17 becomes Q Q D S ==== D S ++++D S ==== H- --- C ==== 0 7.18 H C T T H C Therefore the entropy for a reversible process D S is zero (i.e.
D S ==== 0).
SELF ASSESSMENT EXERCISE 1.
Define entropy.
2.
How much heat is required for a reversible isothermal expansion of an ideal gas at 132 ºC if the entropy of the gas increases by 46.0 J/K?
3.
A Carnot engine does 20,900 J of work and rejects 7330 J of heat into the hot reservoir at 25 ºC.
What is the Kelvin temperature of the hot reservoir?
4.
State the second law of thermodynamics in relation to entropy 4.0 CONCLUSION Entropy of a system is the degree of disorderliness of a system.
The change in entropy of a reversible process is zero while that of an irreversible process is greater than zero.
This is the statement of the second law of thermodynamics and mathematically it is D S‡ ‡‡‡ 0.
Carnot engine is the most efficient heat engine and no real engine operating between two temperatures as that of Carnot engine has efficiency as high as that of Carnot engine.
77  PHY207 THERMODYNAMICS 7.0 SUMMARY In this unit you have learnt that: • entropy of a reversible process is constant and that of an irreversible process increases • the second law of thermodynamics is D S‡ ‡‡‡ 0 • Carnot engine is the most efficient heat engine • the efficiency of Carnot engine operating between two T temperatures T and T is E ====1- --- C .
H C T H 8.0 TUTOR-MARKED ASSIGNMENT 1.
A 2.50 mole sample of ideal gas expands reversibly and isothermally at 360 K until its volume is doubled.
What is the increase in entropy of the gas?
2.
A lump of steel weighing 30 kg at a temperature of 427 ºC is dropped in 150 kg of oil at 27 ºC.
The specific heats of the steel and oil are 0.47 KJ/kgK and 2.5 KJ/kgK respectively.
Estimate the entropy change of the steel, the oil and the system consisting of oil and the lump of steel.
3.
A Carnot engine operates between reservoirs which temperatures are 700 K and 400 K. To improve the efficiency of the engine, it is decided to either raise the temperature of the hot reservoir by 30 K or to lower the temperature of the cold reservoir by 30 K. Which of these options gives the greater improvement?
Justify your answer by calculating the efficiency in each case.
7.0 REFERENCES/FURTHER READING Adams, Steve & Halliday, Jonathan (2000).
Advanced Physics.
UK: Oxford University Press.
Francis, W. Sears & Gerhard, L. Salinger,(1975).
Thermodynamics, Kinetic Theory, and Statistical Thermodynamics (Third Edition) Philippines: Addison-Wesley Publishing Company, Inc. Halliday, David, Resnick, Robert & Walker, Jeanrl, (2001).
Fundamentals of Physics-Extended (Sixth edition).
New York: John Wiley and Sons, Inc. John, D. Cutnell & Kenneth, W. Johnson (1989).
Physics.USA: John Wiley & Sons, Inc. 78 PHY207 THERMODYNAMICS Mark, W. Zemansky & Richard, H. Dittmann (1981).
Heat and Thermodynamics (Sixth Edition).
New York: McGraw-Hill Book Company.
Stuart, B. Palmer & Mircea, S. Rogalski (1996).
Advance University Physics.
SA: Gordon and Breach Science Publisher.
Rao, Y.V.C.
(2004).
An Introduction to Thermodynamics (Revised Edition).
University Press (India) Private Limited.
79  PHY207 THERMODYNAMICS UNIT 4 HEAT ENGINES CONTENTS 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objectives 3.0 Main Content 3.1 Heat Energy 3.1.1 Basic Operation of Heat Engine 3.2 Thermodynamic Efficiency E of Real Engines 3.3 Otto Cycle/Engine 3.3.1 Descriptive of the Processes 3.3.2 Efficiency of Otto Cycle 3.4 Stirling Engine 3.4.1 Description of the Processes 3.4.2 Efficiency of Stirling Engine 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutor-Marked Assignment 7.0 References/Further Reading 8.0 INTRODUCTION As discussed in the last unit, Carnot engine is an ideal heat engine and no real heat engine has efficiency as high as that of a Carnot engine.
This unit discusses some of the available real engines.
9.0 OBJECTIVES By the end of this unit, you should be able to: • name some of the available heat engines and draw the P-V diagram for each of them • explain the processes involve in the cycle of a particular heat engine • derive expression for efficiency for each of these heat engines.
80 PHY207 THERMODYNAMICS 3.0 MAIN CONTENT 3.1 Heat Energy A heat engine is a device used to convert thermal energy (i.e.
heat) into mechanical work and then exhausts the heat which cannot be used to do work.
3.1.1 Basic Operation of Heat Engine The working body absorbed heat from the hot reservoir at relatively high temperature.
Part of the absorbed heat is used by the working body to do mechanical work.
The unused energy is then ejected as heat at lower temperature.
The process of converting thermal energy to mechanical work by heat engine is shown in figure 8.1.
T Q T H Q C C H working h ot reservoir cold reservoir body W work done Fig.
8.1: Heat Engine Heat engine as shown in the figure 8.1 above comprises of two heat reservoirs, one hot at T and the other cold atT .
The interaction H C between these two reservoirs and the working body leads to the conversion of heat energy to mechanical work.
Another explanation is that the working body absorbs heat Q at temperatureT , uses part of H H it do mechanical work, and then ejected the unused heat energy (Q ) at C temperature T through the cold reservoir.
C 3.2 Thermodynamic Efficiencye eee of Real Engines The efficiency of a heat engine is W workoutput E ==== ==== (in one cycle) 8.1 QH heatin 81  PHY207 THERMODYNAMICS The efficiency E measures the fraction of heat pumped into the working body that is converted to mechanical work by the working body.
The efficiency of real heat engines is always less than unity.
The Changes in energy of the working body are related to the changes in the thermodynamic properties.
Using the combined first and second laws of thermodynamics, dU ====TdS- --- PdV ==== dQ- --- dW 8.2 where dQ is the heat into the working body and dW is the mechanical work (i.e.
work output).
But the working body operates in a cycle (i.e.
cyclic process), returning the system back to its initial state.
We can integrate 8.2 over a complete cycle.
0==== ∫∫∫∫dU ==== ∫∫∫∫TdS- --- ∫∫∫∫PdV 8.3 cycle cycle cycle where ∫∫∫∫dU ====U - --- U ==== 0 since the system returns to its initial final initial cycle state.
∫∫∫∫PdV ====W is the work done in a cycle cycle ∫∫∫∫dQ ====Q - --- Q ====Q the total heat transfer to the working body in a H C cycle cycle.
So equation 8.3 becomes 0 ====Q - --- Q - --- W 8.4 H C Rearrange to have W ==== Q - --- Q 8.5 H C Insert equation 8.5 in equation 8.1 E ==== QH- --- QC ====1- --- QC 8.6 QH QH Therefore, E ====1- --- QC ====1- --- heatreleased 8.7 QH heatabsorbed Equation 8.7 is the generalized form of efficiency for heat engine.
82 PHY207 THERMODYNAMICS Some examples of real engines are Otto engine, Stirling engine, and steam engine.
We are going to treat here only Otto engine and Stirling engine.
3.3 Otto Cycle/Engine Otto cycle consists of two adiabatic processes and two constant volume (isochoric) processes or strokes.
The PV diagram of Otto cycle is shown in figure 8.2 and as indicated in the PV diagram, heat is absorbed during one of the isochoric processes and heat is rejected during the other isochoric process.
P f Q H Adiabatic e g Adiabatic Q C d V V V e d Fig.8.2: PV Diagram for Otto Cycle 3.3.1 Description of the Processes • Process de is an adiabatic compression i.e no heat is added as the volume of the working substance decreases from volume V to d V .
The temperature rises from T to T according to equation e d e T Vgggg- --- 1 ====T Vgggg- --- 1 d d e e • Process ef is an isochoric process during which heat Q is added H as the temperature of the working substance changes from T to e T and pressure also increases from P to P .
f e f • Process fg is adiabatic expansion i.e.
no heat is added as the volume of the working substance increases from volume V to e 83  PHY207 THERMODYNAMICS V .
The temperature decreases from T to T according to d f g equation T Vgggg- --- 1 ====T Vgggg- --- 1 f e g d • Processes gd is an isochoric process during which heat Q is C ejected as temperature changes from T to T .
g d 3.3.2 Efficiency of Otto Engine Generally, the efficiency of heat engine is given in equation 8.6 as E ====1- --- QC QH Heat is added during isochoric process ef and the temperature increases from T to T and pressure increase also from P to P .
Heat added e f e f Q is H Q ==== ∫∫∫∫Tf C dT ====C (T - --- T ) 8.8 H V V f e Te Heat is ejected during isochoric process gd and the temperature decreases from T to T and pressure increase also from P to P .
g d g d Heat added Q is C Q ==== ∫∫∫∫TgC dT ==== C (T - --- T ) 8.9 C V V d g Td Equation 8.9 is because heat ejected is negative Q, otherwise (T - --- T )would be (T - --- T ).
d g g d Put equations 8.9 and 8.8 in equation 8.6 to have E ====1- --- QC ====1- --- CV (Td- --- Tg) 8.10 QH CV (Tf- --- Te) (Td- --- Tg) E ====1- --- 8.11 (Tf- --- Te) Two adiabatic processes where involved in the cycle and these give T Vgggg- --- 1 ====T Vgggg- --- 1 8.12a g d f e and T Vgggg- --- 1 ====T Vgggg- --- 1 8.12b d d e e Subtracting equation 8.12b from equation 8.12a gives (T - --- T )Vgggg- --- 1 ==== (T - --- T )Vgggg- --- 1 g d d f e e 84 PHY207 THERMODYNAMICS Rearrange to have Tg- --- Td ==== (Ve )gggg- --- 1, 8.13 T - --- T V f e d And insert equation 8.13 in equation 8.11 to have E ====1- --- (Ve g)ggg- --- 1 Vd C Butg ggg ==== P , C V Therefore the efficiency of Otto cycle is C - --- C P V E ====1- --- (Ve ) CV 8.14 Vd where C and C are the specific heat at constant volume and pressure V P respectively 3.4 Stirling Engine The PV diagram for an ideal Stirling heat engine is shown in figure 8.4 below.
The cycle consists of two isochoric processes and two isothermal processes.
Three important components of Stirling engine are: Heat Exchangers: As the name implies, these transfer heat between the working gas and the outside of the system.
Displacer Mechanism: The purpose of this is to move the working gas between the hot and cold ends of the machine through the regenerator.
Regenerator: This is a device normally placed between hot and cold portions of the machine that is in contact with the hot and cold reservoirs respectively.
It consists of packing of steel wool or a series of metal baffles of low thermal conductivity.
The purpose of this device is to act as thermal barrier and also as thermal store for the cycle.
85  PHY207 THERMODYNAMICS T H P f T C Q H e g T H QC d TC V Fig.
8.3: PV Diagram for Stirling Engine 3.4.1 Description of the Processes • Process fg is an isothermal (constant temperature) expansion during which heat Q is absorbed at temperatureT .
Due to H H expansion, work is done during the process (i.e.
high pressure the working gas absorbs heat from the heat absorbing heat-exchanger and expands isothermally, thus work is done).
• Process gd is an isochoric (constant volume) process.
The displacer transfers all the working gas isochorically through the regenerator to the cold end of the machine.
Heat is absorbed from the gas as it passes through the regenerator, thus the temperature decreases from T to T and pressure also decreae from P to H C g P d • Process de is an isothermal compression.
During this process, work is done on the gas and this compresses the gas isothermally at temperatureT , then heat Q is ejected to the cold reservoir C C through the heat rejecting heat exchanger.
• Process ef is an isochoric process.
During this process, the displacer transfers all the working gas isochorically through the regenerator to the hot end of the machine.
Heat is added to the gas as it passes through the regenerator, thus raising the temperature of the gas from T to T and pressure also C H increases from P to P .
e f 86 PHY207 THERMODYNAMICS 3.4.2 Efficiency of Stirling Engine Generally, the efficiency E is W workoutput E ==== ==== 8.15 QH heatin The total work done in Stirling-cycle engine is W ====- --- ∫∫∫∫PdV 8.16 The integral in the equation 8.16 is over a closed loop.
From the PV diagram, two isochoric processes occurs during the cycle at T and T H C (i.e.
work is done only during isothermal expansion and compression processes).
No work is done during isochoric processes in the cycle.
Therefore total work done W is  g e  W ====- --- ∫∫∫∫ PdV ++++∫∫∫∫ PdV 8.17  f d  Suppose the equation of state is PV ==== nRT , and since T is constant for the isothermal process, then work done during isothermal process is ∫∫∫∫V2 PdV ==== ∫∫∫∫V2 nRT dV ==== nRT[[[[lnV]]]]V2 ==== nRTlnV2 8.18 V1 V1 V V1 V1 Substitute equation 8.18 into 8.17 W ====- --- nRT lnVg ++++nRT lnVe  8.19 H C  Vf Vd  We can further simplify equation 8.19 since we know that V ====V and f e V ====V and also know that lnVe ====- --- lnVg , so that we have g d V V g e V g W ====- --- nRln (T - --- T ) 8.20 H C V e The work done represents energy out of the system, and so has a negative value according to the sign convention we have been using.
87  PHY207 THERMODYNAMICS Heat Flow into an Ideal Stirling Engine The heat flowing into and out of a Stirling-cycle engine can be evaluated by considering the integral of temperature with respect to entropy: Q ==== ∫∫∫∫TdS 8.21 For this cycle, heat is transfer into and out of the system only during the two isothermal processes.
During closed cycle isothermal expansion process fg we have Q ==== ∫∫∫∫SgT dS 8.22 H H Sf This integral can be most easily evaluated by considering the first law of thermodynamics dQ ==== dU- --- dW 8.23 But we know that dQ ====TdS and dW ====- --- PdV , so 8.23 becomes TdS ==== dU ++++ PdV Therefore 8.22 now is U V QH ==== ∫∫∫∫ gdU ++++ ∫∫∫∫ g PdV 8.24 U V f f nRT Suppose the equation of state is PV ==== nRT , so that P ==== and since V T is constant for the isothermal process, then 8.24 becomes Q ==== ∫∫∫∫Ug dU ++++ ∫∫∫∫VgnRT dV ==== 0++++nRT [[[[lnV]]]]Vg H U f Vf H V H Vf But V ====V so we have f e V g Q ==== nRT ln 8.25 H H V e Similarly we can show that V g Q ====- --- nRT ln 8.26 C C V e 88 PHY207 THERMODYNAMICS The ratio Vg ==== Vd is called the expansion ratio of the working gas.
The V V e f inverse of this is called the compression ratio.
The efficiency of an ideal Stirling engine is therefore Vg nRln (TH- --- TC) E ==== Ve Vg nRTH ln Ve And it gives E ==== TH- --- TC 8.27 TH Recall that the efficiency of the Carnot engine is E ==== TH- --- TC .
This TH implies that the efficiency of the Carnot engine is equal to that of an ideal Stirling engine.
Hence the Stirling-cycle engine has the maximum efficiency possible under the Second Law of Thermodynamics.
However, the efficiency of a real Stirling engine is less than that of Carnot engine.
Note that no real engine can have an efficiency greater than that of a Carnot engine when both engines work between the same two temperatures.
SELF ASSESSMENT EXERCISE 1.
Draw the PV diagram for Otto engine and describe all the processes in the cycle.
2.
Show that the work done W by the ideal Stirling heat engine is V W ====- --- nRln 2 (T - --- T ) where V and V are the two volumes H C 1 2 V 1 at which the isochoric processes occur on the PV diagram and that V >>>>V 2 1 4.0 CONCLUSION Heat engines are devices used to convert heat energy to mechanical work.
Real heat engines always have efficiency less than that of Carnot engine when they operate between the same two temperatures.
Examples of real engines are Otto engine and Stirling engine.
In the next unit, you will learn about a reverse cycle of heat engine i.e.
refrigeration cycle.
89  PHY207 THERMODYNAMICS 5.0 SUMMARY In this unit you have learnt that: • heat engines are devices used to convert heat to mechanical work W workoutput • the efficiency of heat engine is E ==== ==== QH heatin C - --- C P V • the efficiency of Otto engine is E ====1- --- (Ve ) CV Vd • the work done by an ideal Stirling engine W ====- --- nRlnVg (T - --- T ), and its efficiency is E ==== TH- --- TC .
H C Ve TH 6.0 TUTOR-MARKED ASSIGNMENT An ideal Stirling engine operates between 325 K and 460 K. If the expansion ratio of the working gas is 2.5, calculate the amount of heat ejected by the engine at cold reservoir and the efficiency of the engine (n = 2mol and R = 8.3 JK-1Mol-1).
7.0 REFERENCES/FURTHER READING Adams, Steve & Halliday, Jonathan (2000).
Advanced Physics.
UK: Oxford University Press.
Francis, W. Sears & Gerhard, L. Salinger,(1975).
Thermodynamics, Kinetic Theory, and Statistical Thermodynamics (Third Edition) Philippines: Addison-Wesley Publishing Company, Inc. Halliday, David, Resnick, Robert & Walker, Jeanrl, (2001).
Fundamentals of Physics-Extended (Sixth edition).
New York: John Wiley and Sons, Inc. John, D. Cutnell & Kenneth, W. Johnson (1989).
Physics.
USA: John Wiley & Sons, Inc. Mark, W. Zemansky & Richard, H. Dittmann (1981).
Heat and Thermodynamics (Sixth Edition).
New York: McGraw-Hill Book Company.
Stuart, B. Palmer & Mircea, S. Rogalski (1996).
Advance University Physics.
SA: Gordon and Breach Science Publisher.
Rao, Y.V.C.
(2004).
An Introduction to Thermodynamics (Revised Edition).
University Press (India) Private Limited.
90 PHY207 THERMODYNAMICS UNIT 5 REFRIGERATORS CONTENTS 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objectives 3.0 Main Content 3.1 Refrigerator 3.1.1 Coefficient of Performance of Refrigerators 3.1.2 Coefficient of Performance of Heat Pumps 3.2 Carnot Refrigerator 3.2.1 Description of the Processes in the Carnot-Cycle Refrigerator 3.2.2 Coefficient of Performance of Carnot-Cycle Refrigerator 3.3 Ideal Stirling-Cycle Refrigerator 3.3.1 Description of the Processes in the Ideal Stirling- Cycle Refrigerator 3.3.2 Coefficient of Performance an Ideal Stirling-Cycle Engine 3.4 Clausius Statement of the Second Law 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutor-Marked Assignment 7.0 References/Further Reading 1.0 INTRODUCTION Refrigerator is necessary household equipment used for preservation of foods and drinks and also for laboratory uses.
This unit focuses on the principles of operation of refrigerators 2.0 OBJECTIVES By the end of this unit, you should be able to: • describe refrigeration cycles • distinguish between refrigerator and heat pump • explain what is meant by coefficient of performance of refrigerator • derive expression for coefficient of performance for each of the refrigeration cycle.
91  PHY207 THERMODYNAMICS 3.0 MAIN CONTENT 3.1 Refrigerator This is a device that uses work to transfer energy from a low temperature reservoir to a high temperature reservoir as is continuously repeats a set series of thermodynamic processes.
Refrigerator operates in a direction opposite to that of the heat engine.
The system that undergoes this reverse cycle of heat engine is called refrigerant.
Air conditioners, heat pumps are also example of refrigerators.
Carnot engine is capable of being reversed and when it is reversed it is called a Carnot refrigerator.
Just like Carnot engine, Carnot refrigerator is an ideal refrigerator.
The Stirling cycle is also capable of being reversed and is the most useful type of refrigerator.
This reversed cycle is called Stirling refrigeration cycle.
T Q T C Q H H C working cold reservoir hot reservoir body W work done Fig.
9.1: Refrigerator Figure 9.1 shows the refrigeration process.
Comparing this with figure 8.1 in the last unit (module 2, unit 4) and observe the directions of heat and work in the two diagrams.
For refrigeration process (figure 9.1) work is done on the working body (i.e.
on the refrigerant) and this work is supplied by an electric motor or by other means.
The work supplied is used to remove heat Q from the cold reservoir and deposit heat Q C H into the hot reservoir.
These processes are reversed of the one in heat engine.
The interior of a refrigerator (i.e.
the space inside where we put things like food, fruits and drinks) is the cold reservoir, while the exterior is the hot reservoir.
You should have noticed that the outside surfaces (usually the sides and back) of most refrigerators are warm to touch while they are operating.
The reason for this is because they are the hot reservoir.
92 PHY207 THERMODYNAMICS Energy conservation holds also for refrigeration process (i.e.
Q ====W ++++Q ).
H C Q T Equation C ==== C also holds for ideal refrigerators.
Q T H H Heat Pumps: Heat pumps work on the same principle as refrigerator.
The only difference is that for the heat pumps, the cold reservoir is the outdoor while the hot reservoir is the inside of the house.
Another name for the heat pump is electric heating system.
The electric heating system is normally used to warm the house during winter or cold weather.
Air conditioners: For the air conditioners, the cold reservoir is the inside of the house while the hot reservoir is the outside of the house.
Refrigerators, air conditioners, and heat pumps are similar devices and their principles of operation are similar.
3.1.1 Coefficient of Performance of Refrigerators A term similar to the efficiency of the heat engine used to measure the performance of a refrigerator is the coefficient of performancew www .
The Coefficient of performance is defined as the ratio of heat extracted from the cold reservoir Q to the work done W on refrigerant C Heatextracted fromcoldreservoir w www ==== workdoneonrefrigerant Therefore Q Q w www ==== C ==== C 9.1 W Q - --- Q H C 3.1.2 Coefficient of Performance of Heat Pumps Coefficient of performance of heat pumpsw www is defined as the ratio of heat delivered to the house Q to the work done W required to deliver H it.
Heatdelivered w www ==== workdoneonrequired Therefore Q w www ==== H 9.2 W 93  PHY207 THERMODYNAMICS Two examples of the refrigeration cycles (i.e.
Carnot-cycle refrigeration and Stirling-cycle refrigeration) are discussed here.
3.2 Carnot Refrigerator Carnot refrigeration is a reversed of Carnot cycle.
Carnot-cycle refrigerator is identical to Carnot-cycle engine except that the heat- absorbing end of the machine now becomes the cold region, while the heat rejecting end of the machine becomes the hot region.
The PV diagram of the Carnot-cycle refrigerator is shown if figure 9.2. d Q H P e W T H Q C g f T C 0 V Fig.
9.2: PV Diagram for Carnot-Cycle Refrigerator 3.2.1 Description of the Processes in the Carnot-Cycle Refrigerator The processes in Carnot-cycle refrigerator as shown in figure 9.2 are described below.
• Process gf is an isothermal expansion.
During this process, heat Q is absorbed from the cold reservoir at temperature T and C C the working substance undergoes isothermal expansion from volume V to V .
g f • Process fe is an adiabatic compression i.e no heat is added as the working substance compresses from volume V to V .
f e Temperature increases during the process from T to T .
C H 94 PHY207 THERMODYNAMICS • Process ed is an isothermal compression.
During this process, heat Q is ejected to the hot reservoir at temperature T .
H H • Process dg is an adiabatic expansion i.e.
no heat is transfered as the working substance expands from volume V to V .
d g Temperatures decreases during the process from T to T .
H C 3.2.2 Coefficient of Performance of Carnot-Cycle Refrigerator The purpose of any refrigerator is to extract as much heat as possible from a cold reservoir with the expenditure of as little work as possible.
The output is the heat extracted from the cold reservoir and the input is work.
Using equation 9.1, coefficient of performancew www is Q Q w www ==== C ==== C W Q - --- Q H C For a Carnot cycle, it has be established that Q Q H ==== C T T H C Then T w www ==== C 9.3 TH- --- TC w www may be considerably larger than unity.
3.3 Ideal Stirling-Cycle Refrigerator An ideal Stirling-cycle refrigerator is a reverse of an ideal Stirling-cycle engine.
The cycle consists of two isochoric processes and two isothermal processes.
The PV diagram of an ideal Stirling-cycle refrigerator is shown in figure 9.3 below.
95  PHY207 THERMODYNAMICS T H P f T C QH e g T H QC d TC Fig.
9.3: PV Diagram of an Ideal Stirling-Cycle Refrigerator 0 V 3.3.1 Description of the Processes in the Ideal Stirling-Cycle Refrigerator The processes in the ideal Stirling-cycle refrigerator as shown in figure 9.3 are described below.
Process ed is an isothermal expansion during which heat Q is C absorbed from the cold reservoir at temperatureT .
C Process dg is an isochoric process.
The temperature of the working substance increases from T to T and pressure also increases from H C P to P .
d g Process gf is an isothermal compression during which heat Q is H ejected to the hot reservoir at temperatureT .
H Process fe is an isochoric process.
The temperature of the working substance decreases from T to T and pressure also decreases from C H P to P .
f e 96 PHY207 THERMODYNAMICS 3.3.2 Coefficient of Performance an Ideal Stirling-Cycle Engine Coefficient of performance of refrigeratowrwww is Q w www ==== C W From Stirling engine, the expression for work W has been obtained to be V g W ==== nRln (T - --- T ) (i.e.
from equation 8.20) H C V e And heat Q as C V g Q ==== nRT ln (i.e.
from equation 8.26) C C V e Therefore V g nRT ln C V T w www ==== e ==== C 9.4 V T - --- T nRln g (T - --- T ) H C H C V e Equation 9.4 is the coefficient of performance for ideal Stirling-cycle refrigerator and is equal to that of Carnot-cycle refrigerator.
But the efficiency of the real Stirling-cycle refrigerator (i.e.
the practical Stirling-cycle refrigerator) is always less than that of Carnot-cycle refrigerator operating between the same temperatures T and T .
C H 3.4 Clausius Statement of the Second Law No process is possible whose sole results is the transfer of heat from a cooler body to a hotter body.
SELF ASSESSMENT EXERCISE 1.
A Carnot heat pump is used to heat a house to a temperature of 294 K. How much work must be done by the pump to deliver 3350 J of heat into the house when the outdoor temperature is 260 K. 2.
Draw the PV diagram of the Stirling-cycle refrigerator and describe all the processes.
97  PHY207 THERMODYNAMICS 4.0 CONCLUSION Refrigeration cycle is a reverse of heat engine cycle.
Refrigeration is the process of withdrawing heat from a cold system and ejecting it into a hot reservoir while the mechanical work is done on the system.
The Clausius statement of the Second Law of thermodynamics states that no process is possible whose sole results is the transfer of heat from a cooler body to a hotter body.
5.0 SUMMARY In this unit, you have learnt that: • refrigeration cycles is a reverse of heat engine cycle • heat pumps, air conditioner and refrigerators similar devices and their principles of operation are similar • the coefficient of performance of the Carnot cycle refrigeration is T w www ==== C TH- --- TC • the coefficient of performance of the ideal Stirling cycle T refrigeration isw www ==== C TH- --- TC • the coefficient of performance of real Stirling cycle refrigeration is always less than that of Carnot cycle refrigeration when both operate between the same temperatures.
6.0 TUTOR-MARKED ASSIGNMENT 1.
A Carnot air conditioner uses 25, 500 J of electrical energy, and the temperatures indoors and outdoors are 27 ºC and 39 ºC respectively.
Calculate the amount of heat deposited outdoors.
2.
Draw the PV diagram of a Carnot-cycle refrigerator and describe all the processes involve.
7.0 REFERENCES/FURTHER READING Adams, Steve & Halliday, Jonathan (2000).
Advanced Physics.
UK: Oxford University Press.
Francis, W. Sears & Gerhard, L. Salinger,(1975).
Thermodynamics, Kinetic Theory, and Statistical Thermodynamics (Third Edition) Philippines: Addison-Wesley Publishing Company, Inc. 98 PHY207 THERMODYNAMICS Halliday, David, Resnick, Robert & Walker, Jeanrl, (2001).
Fundamentals of Physics-Extended (Sixth edition).
New York: John Wiley and Sons, Inc. John, D. Cutnell & Kenneth, W. Johnson (1989).
Physics.
USA: John Wiley & Sons, Inc. Mark, W. Zemansky & Richard, H. Dittmann (1981).
Heat and Thermodynamics (Sixth Edition).New York: McGraw-Hill Book Company.
Stuart, B. Palmer & Mircea, S. Rogalski (1996).
Advance University Physics.SA: Gordon and Breach Science Publisher.
Rao, Y.V.C.
(2004).
An Introduction to Thermodynamics (Revised Edition).University Press (India) Private Limited.
99  PHY207 THERMODYNAMICS MODULE 3 Unit 1 Combined First and Second Laws Unit 2 Thermodynamic Potentials Unit 3 The Maxwell Relations of Thermodynamics Unit 4 TdS Equations UNIT 1 COMBINED FIRST AND SECOND LAWS CONTENTS 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objectives 3.0 Main Content 3.1.
Combined First and Second Laws of Thermodynamics 3.2 T and V Independent 3.3 T and P Independent 3.4 P and V Independent 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutor-Marked Assignment 7.0 References/Further Reading 1.0 INTRODUCTION The first and second laws of thermodynamics can be combined to obtain very important thermodynamics relations.
2.0 OBJECTIVES By the end of this unit, you should be able to: • write the equation for combined first and second laws of thermodynamics • derive some useful thermodynamics relations from the combine first and second laws.
3.0 MAIN CONTENT 3.1 Combined First and Second Laws of Thermodynamics The first law of Thermodynamics is dQ====dU++++dW 10.1 100 PHY207 THERMODYNAMICS And the second law of thermodynamics is dQ====TdS 10.2 but differential work dW ==== PdV 10.3 The combination of these three equations in any infinitesimal reversible process, for a PVT system gives TdS====dU ++++ PdV 10.4 Equation 10.4 is the combined form of the first and second laws of thermodynamics for a PVT system.
Some useful thermodynamics relations can be derived from equation 10.4 by selecting T and V, T and P, P and V as independent variables.
It is important to note that the state of a pure substance (Module 1 Unit 1) can be defined or specified by any two of its properties.
3.2 T and V Independent From equation 10.4 1 dS==== (dU ++++ PdV) 10.5 T Consider the internal energy U as a function of T and V, i.e.
U(T,V), then the derivative of U is ¶ ¶¶¶ U ¶ ¶¶¶ U dU====( ) dT ++++( ) dV 10.6 ¶ ¶¶¶ T V ¶ ¶¶¶ V T Put equation 10.6 in 10.5 1 ¶ ¶¶¶ U 1 ¶ ¶¶¶ U dS ==== ( ) dT ++++ [( ) ++++P]dV 10 .7 T ¶ ¶¶¶ T V T ¶ ¶¶¶ V T Also consider entropy Sas function of two independent variables T and V, i.e.
S(T,V), then the derivative of S is ¶ ¶¶¶ S ¶ ¶¶¶ S dS ==== ( ) dT ++++( ) dV 10.8 ¶ ¶¶¶ T V ¶ ¶¶¶ V T By comparing equation 10.7 with 10.8 (or equate 10.7 and 10.8), we obtain 101  PHY207 THERMODYNAMICS 1 ¶ ¶¶¶ U ¶ ¶¶¶ S ( ) ====( ) 10.9 T ¶ ¶¶¶ T V ¶ ¶¶¶ T V and 1 ¶ ¶¶¶ U ¶ ¶¶¶ S [( ) ++++P]==== ( ) 10.10 T ¶ ¶¶¶ V T ¶ ¶¶¶ V T If we differentiate equation 10.9 partially with respect to V at constant T and differentiate 10.10 partially with respect to T and constant V, equating the mixed second-order partial derivatives of S gives ¶ ¶¶¶ U ¶ ¶¶¶ P ( ) ====T( ) - --- P 10.11 ¶ ¶¶¶ V T ¶ ¶¶¶ T V ¶ ¶¶¶ P bbbb It can be shown that (check SEA1 in module 3, unit 4)( ) ==== , ¶ ¶¶¶ T V k therefore, equation 10.11 becomes ¶ ¶¶¶ U Tbbbb ( ) ==== - --- P 10.12 ¶ ¶¶¶ V T k Equations 10.11 and 10.12 show the dependence of the internal energy of a system on volume, at constant temperature and this can be calculated from the equation of state (i.e.
using equation 10.11), or from the values of β, κ, T and P (i.e.
using equation 10.12).
Recall from module 2, unit 2 under consequences of the first law of thermodynamics that ¶ ¶¶¶ U ¶ ¶¶¶ V C - --- C ====[( ) ++++ P]( ) (i.e.
equation 6.7) P V ¶ ¶¶¶ V T ¶ ¶¶¶ T P By making use of equation 10.11, we have ¶ ¶¶¶ P ¶ ¶¶¶ V bbbb 2TV C - --- C ====T( ) ( ) ==== 10.13 P V ¶ ¶¶¶ T V ¶ ¶¶¶ T P k Thus the difference (C - --- C ) can be calculated for any substance, P V from equation of state or from values of T, V, β and κ. SELF ASSESSMENT EXERCISE 1.
Derive equation 10.11 from equation 10.9 and 10.10 2.
Find C - --- C for a certain gas whose equation of P V state(P ++++b)V ==== nRT .
102 PHY207 THERMODYNAMICS ¶ ¶¶¶ U 3.
We know that ( ) ====C , put this and equation 10.11 in 10.6 ¶ ¶¶¶ T V V to obtain ¶ ¶¶¶ P dU ====C dT ++++[T( ) - --- P]dV 10.13 V ¶ ¶¶¶ T V 3.3 T and P Independent In terms of enthalpyH ====U ++++ PV , equation 10.4 can be rewritten as 1 dS ==== (dH- --- VdP) 10.14 T Check block 1 for how we arrived at 10.14 Consider the enthalpy H as a function of T and P, i.e.
H(T,P), then the derivative of H is ¶ ¶¶¶ H ¶ ¶¶¶ H dH ==== ( ) dT ++++( ) dT 10.15 ¶ ¶¶¶ T P ¶ ¶¶¶ P T Put equation 10.15 in 10.14, then 1¶ ¶¶¶ H 1 ¶ ¶¶¶ H dS ==== ( ) dT ++++ [( ) - --- V]dP 10.16 T ¶ ¶¶¶ T P T ¶ ¶¶¶ P T Also consider entropy S as function of two independent variables T and P, i.e.
S(T,P), then the derivative of S is ¶ ¶¶¶ S ¶ ¶¶¶ S dS ==== ( ) dT ++++( ) dP 10.17 ¶ ¶¶¶ T P ¶ ¶¶¶ P T By comparing equation 10.16 with 10.17, we obtain ¶ ¶¶¶ S 1¶ ¶¶¶ H ( ) ==== ( ) , 10.18 ¶ ¶¶¶ T P T ¶ ¶¶¶ T p and ¶ ¶¶¶ S 1 ¶ ¶¶¶ H ( ) ==== [( ) - --- V].
10.19 ¶ ¶¶¶ P T T ¶ ¶¶¶ P T If we differential equation 10.18 partially with respect to P at constant T and differentiate 10.19 partially with respect to T and constant P, equating the mixed second-order partial derivatives of S gives ¶ ¶¶¶ H ¶ ¶¶¶ V ( ) ====- --- T( ) ++++V 10.20 ¶ ¶¶¶ P T ¶ ¶¶¶ T P 103  PHY207 THERMODYNAMICS ¶ ¶¶¶ V From using equation 5.13, ( ) ====bbbbV , then ¶ ¶¶¶ T P ¶ ¶¶¶ H ( ) ====- ---bbbbVT ++++V 10.21 ¶ ¶¶¶ P T Equation 10.21 is similar to equation 10.12.
It shows the dependence of enthalpy on pressure, at constant temperature and this can be calculated from the equation of state (i.e.
from equation 10.20), or from the values of β, T and V (i.e.
from equation 10.21).
¶ ¶¶¶ H Also since we know that ( )P ==== CP , put this and equation 10.20 in ¶ ¶¶¶ T equation 10.15 to have ¶ ¶¶¶ V dH ====C dT- --- [T( ) - --- V]dP 10.22 P ¶ ¶¶¶ T P Block 1 Enthalpy H====U ++++ PV Derivative of H gives dH====dU ++++ PdV ++++VdP make dU subject of the expression dU====dH- --- PdV- --- VdP * 1 but dS==== (dU ++++ PdV) ** T put equation (*) in (**) gives 1 dS==== (dH- --- PdV- --- VdP ++++ PdV) T Then, 1 dS ==== (dH- --- VdP) T 3.4 P and V Independent Consider entropy S as a function of P and V, i.e.
S(P,V), derivative of S is ¶ ¶¶¶ S ¶ ¶¶¶ S dS====( ) dP++++( ) dV 10.23 ¶ ¶¶¶ P V ¶ ¶¶¶ V P Also consider internal energy U as a function of P and V, i.e.
U(P,V), the derivative of U is ¶ ¶¶¶ U ¶ ¶¶¶ U dU====( ) dP++++( ) dV 10.24 ¶ ¶¶¶ P V ¶ ¶¶¶ V P 104 PHY207 THERMODYNAMICS Put equation 10.23 in 10.5 1 ¶ ¶¶¶ U ¶ ¶¶¶ U dS==== (( ) dP++++( ) dV ++++PdV) T ¶ ¶¶¶ P V ¶ ¶¶¶ V P Rearrange to get 1 ¶ ¶¶¶ U 1¶ ¶¶¶ U P dS==== ( ) dP++++[ ( ) ++++ ]dV 10.25 T ¶ ¶¶¶ P V T ¶ ¶¶¶ V P T By comparing equation 10.23 with 10.25, we obtain ¶ ¶¶¶ S 1¶ ¶¶¶ U ( ) ==== ( ) 10.26 ¶ ¶¶¶ P V T ¶ ¶¶¶ P V and ¶ ¶¶¶ S 1¶ ¶¶¶ U P ( ) ==== ( ) ++++ 10.27 ¶ ¶¶¶ V P T ¶ ¶¶¶ V P T ¶ ¶¶¶ U ¶ ¶¶¶ U ¶ ¶¶¶ T ( ) can be written as ( ) ( ) (i.e.
chain rule of partial ¶ ¶¶¶ P V ¶ ¶¶¶ T V¶ ¶¶¶ P V derivatives) then equation 10.26 becomes ¶ ¶¶¶ S 1¶ ¶¶¶ U ¶ ¶¶¶ T ( ) ==== ( ) ( ) 10.28 ¶ ¶¶¶ P V T ¶ ¶¶¶ T V¶ ¶¶¶ P V But ¶ ¶¶¶ U ¶ ¶¶¶ T kkkk ( ) ====C ,and ( ) ==== 10.29 ¶ ¶¶¶ T V V ¶ ¶¶¶ P V bbbb Put equation 10.29 in 10.28 to give ¶ ¶¶¶ S C kkkk ( ) ==== V 10.30 ¶ ¶¶¶ P V T bbbb Equation 10.30 gives the change in entropy with respect to pressure at ¶ ¶¶¶ S constant volume ( ) in terms of measurable quantitiesC ,k ,b bbb , and ¶ ¶¶¶ P V V T. 4.0 CONCLUSION We have derived in this unit, some useful relations from the combined first and second laws of thermodynamics.
105  PHY207 THERMODYNAMICS 5.0 SUMMARY In this unit, you have learnt that: • the combined first and second laws of thermodynamics is TdS====dU ++++ PdV • the variation in enthalpy with respect to pressure at constant ¶ ¶¶¶ H temperature is ( ) ====- ---bbbbVT ++++V ¶ ¶¶¶ P T • the difference between the specific heat capacities from combine ¶ ¶¶¶ P ¶ ¶¶¶ V bbbb 2TV first and second law is C - --- C ====T( ) ( ) ==== P V ¶ ¶¶¶ T V ¶ ¶¶¶ T P k • the variation in entropy with pressure at constant volume is ¶ ¶¶¶ S C kkkk ( ) ==== V .
¶ ¶¶¶ P V T bbbb 6.0 TUTOR-MARKED ASSIGNMENT Derive equation 10.20 from equations 10.18 and 10.19.
7.0 REFERENCES/FURTHER READING Francis, W. Sears & Gerhard, L. Salinger (1975).
Thermodynamics, Kinetic Theory, and Statistical Thermodynamics (Third Edition).
Philippines: Addison-Wesley Publishing Company, Inc. Mark, W. Zemansky & Richard, H. Dittmann (1981).
Heat and Thermodynamics (Sixth Edition).
New York: McGraw-Hill Book Company.
Stroud, K.A.
(1996).
Further Engineering Mathematics (Third Edition).
Macmillan Press Limited.
Stuart, B. Palmer & Mircea, S. Rogalski (1996).
Advance University Physics.
SA: Gordon and Breach Science Publisher.
Rao, Y.V.C.
(2004).
An Introduction to Thermodynamics (Revised Edition).
India: University Press (India) Private Limited.
106 PHY207 THERMODYNAMICS UNIT 2 THERMODYNAMIC POTENTIALS CONTENTS 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objectives 3.0 Main Content 3.1 Thermodynamic Potentials 3.2 Internal Energy U 3.3 Enthalpy H 3.4 Helmholtz Free Energy A 3.5 Gibb’s Free Energy G 3.6 Differential Form of Thermodynamic Potential 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutor-Marked Assignment 7.0 References/Further Reading 1.0 INTRODUCTION Energy functions of thermodynamic systems, also known as thermodynamic potentials, are discussed in this unit.
They are useful in explaining many of the physical processes in thermodynamics 2.0 OBJECTIVES By the end of this unit, you should be able to: • name all the thermodynamics potentials • define each of the thermodynamic potentials • derive differential forms of the thermodynamic potentials • mention the process that each of these thermodynamic potentials can be used to describe.
3.0 MAIN CONTENT 3.1 Thermodynamic Potentials The four (4) thermodynamic potentials are; • internal energy U • enthalpy H • Helmholtz free energy A • Gibbs free energy G. 107  PHY207 THERMODYNAMICS Depending on the thermodynamic constraints on a system, it is always convenient to use a particular thermodynamic potential to describe a system.
For example, Helmholtz free energy A can be used to describe a system in which temperature and volume are held constant.
The equilibrium condition for this system isdA====0.
Gibbs free energy G can be used to describe equilibrium between phases (since the two phases share the same pressure and temperature).
3.2 Internal Energy U The internal energy U of a system is a state function i.e.
it depends on the state of a system.
The first law of thermodynamics (Module 2, unit 1) gives an insight into the internal energy of a system.
Change in internal energy U of a system D U, according to the first law of thermodynamics is D U ==== Q- --- W And the differential form is dU ==== dQ- --- dW 11.1 The work done on a system may comprise of an irreversible component dW (such as stirring with a paddle, or forcing an electric current I through a resistor) and some reversible componentsdW .
The R irreversible component of work is dissipated as heat and is identical to dQ++++dW adding heat to the system.
So we can write dS ==== I and this T givesdQ ====TdS- --- dW .
The reversible component of the work may I consist of work done in compressing the system (PdV ), but there may also be other kinds of work, such as the ones listed in section 3.1.1 in module 2, unit 1.
In general the expression for each of these forms of reversible work is of the formXdY , where X is an intensive state variable and Y is an extensive state variable.
All of these forms of non- dissipative work can collectively be called configuration work.
Therefore, the total work done on the system is of the form ∑∑∑∑ dW ==== dW - --- PdV ++++ XdY 11.2 I so, the first law of thermodynamics takes the form ∑∑∑∑ dU ==== dQ++++dW - --- PdV ++++ XdY 11.3 I 108 PHY207 THERMODYNAMICS Equation 11.3 is a sort of ‘complete form’ of the first law taking into consideration all possible forms of work.
Using equation 11.3, if a particular system is held at constant volume, then no PdV work of expansion or compression is done.
And if no other sort of work is done (either non-PdV reversible work or irreversible workdW ), then the I increase in internal energy of this system is just equal to the heat added to the system.
Therefore, internal energy U can be used to describe a system in which heat is transferred (either in or out) and / or work is done on or by the system.
3.2 Internal Energy U The internal energy U of a system is a state function i.e.
it depends on the state of a system.
The first law of thermodynamics (Module 2, unit 1) gives an insight into the internal energy of a system.
Change in internal energy U of a system D U, according to the first law of thermodynamics is D U ==== Q- --- W And the differential form is dU ==== dQ- --- dW 11.1 The work done on a system may comprise of an irreversible component dW (such as stirring with a paddle, or forcing an electric current I through a resistor) and some reversible componentsdW .
The R irreversible component of work is dissipated as heat and is identical to dQ++++dW adding heat to the system.
So we can write dS ==== I and this T gives dQ ====TdS- --- dW .
The reversible component of the work may I consist of work done in compressing the system (PdV ), but there may also be other kinds of work, such as the ones listed in section 3.1.1 in module 2, unit 1.
In general the expression for each of these forms of reversible work is of the formXdY , where X is an intensive state variable and Y is an extensive state variable.
All of these forms of non- dissipative work can collectively be called configuration work.
Therefore, the total work done on the system is of the form ∑∑∑∑ dW ==== dW - --- PdV ++++ XdY 11.2 I so, the first law of thermodynamics takes the form 109  PHY207 THERMODYNAMICS ∑∑∑∑ dU ==== dQ++++dW - --- PdV ++++ XdY 11.3 I Equation 11.3 is a sort of ‘complete form’ of the first law taking into consideration all possible forms of work.
Using equation 11.3, if a particular system is held at constant volume, then no PdV work of expansion or compression is done.
And if no other sort of work is done (either non-PdV reversible work or irreversible workdW ), then the I increase in internal energy of this system is just equal to the heat added to the system.
Therefore, internal energy U can be used to describe a system in which heat is transferred (either in or out) and / or work is done on or by the system.
3.4 Helmholtz Free Energy A The Helmholtz free energy A is defined as A====U- --- TS 11.7 Its differential form is dA==== dU- --- TdS- --- SdT 11.8 ∑∑∑∑ But dU ==== dQ++++dW - --- PdV ++++ XdY , so equation 11.8 becomes I ∑∑∑∑ dA====- --- SdT- --- PdV ++++ XdY 11.9 Equation 11.9 tells us that in an isothermal process (i.e.
when dT = 0), the increase in the Helmholtz function of a system is equal to all the reversible work ∑∑∑∑ -(--- PdV ++++ XdY ) done on the system.
On the other hand, if a machine does any reversible work at constant temperature, the Helmholtz function decreases, and the decrease in the Helmholtz function is equal (if temperature is constant) to the reversible work (of all types) done by the system.
110 PHY207 THERMODYNAMICS 3.5 Gibbs Free Energy G The Gibbs function is define as G====U- --- TS ++++ PV 11.10 It can also be defined as G ==== H- --- TS 11.11 and as G ==== A++++ PV 11.12 Its differential from equation 11.11 is dG ==== dH- --- TdS- --- SdT , 11.13 and from 11.12 is dG ==== dA++++ PdV ++++VdP 11.14 ∑∑∑∑ But from equation 11.6 (dH ====TdS ++++VdP ++++ XdY ) or from equation ∑∑∑∑ 11.9 (dA====- --- SdT- --- PdV ++++ XdY ) equation 11.13 or 11.14 becomes ∑∑∑∑ dG ====- --- SdT ++++VdP ++++ XdY 11.15 Equation 11.15 can be used to describe a system that undergoes constant temperature and constant pressure processes.
Example of a process of this kind is the phase change of a pure substance that usually takes place at constant temperature and pressure.
Hence, the Gibbs free function is very useful in describing a process that involves change of phase.
3.6 Differential Form of Thermodynamic Potential The differential forms of the thermodynamic potentials are: ∑∑∑∑ dU ==== dQ++++dW - --- PdV ++++ XdY 11.16 I ∑∑∑∑ dH ====TdS ++++VdP ++++ XdY 11.17 ∑∑∑∑ dA====- --- SdT- --- PdV ++++ XdY 11.18 ∑∑∑∑ dG ====- --- SdT ++++VdP ++++ XdY 11.19 111  PHY207 THERMODYNAMICS The more familiar forms of thermodynamic potentials are: dU====TdS- --- PdV 11.20 dH ====TdS++++VdP 11.21 dA====- --- SdT- --- PdV 11.22 dG====- --- SdT ++++VdP 11.23 Equations 11.20 to 11.23 are for condition under which only reversible work done on or by a system is PdV work of expansion or of compression.
SELF ASSESSMENT EXERCISE 1.
Define each of the four thermodynamic potentials.
2.
Derive the differential forms of the four thermodynamic potentials.
4.0 CONCLUSION Thermodynamics potentials are treated in the unit.
Emphasis was on their definition, their differential forms, and their usefulness.
Besides using these thermodynamic potentials in describing thermodynamic processes, useful relations can also be derived from each of these thermodynamic potentials.
This will be the focus of the next unit.
9.0 SUMMARY In this unit, you have learnt that: • there are four (4) thermodynamic potentials are namely; entropy U, enthalpy H, Helmholtz free energy A and Gibbs free energy G • their differential forms can be obtained from their definitions • depending on the constraints imposed on a system, it is always convenient to use a particular thermodynamic potential to describe a system.
7.0 REFERENCES/FURTHER READING Francis, W. Sears & Gerhard, L. Salinger (1975).
Thermodynamics, Kinetic Theory, and Statistical Thermodynamics (Third Edition).
Philippines: Addison-Wesley Publishing Company, Inc. Mark, W. Zemansky & Richard, H. Dittmann (1981).
Heat and Thermodynamics (Sixth Edition).
New York: McGraw-Hill Book Company.
112 PHY207 THERMODYNAMICS Stuart, B. Palmer & Mircea, S. Rogalski (1996).
Advance University Physics.
SA: Gordon and Breach Science Publisher.
Rao, Y.V.C.
(2004).
An Introduction to Thermodynamics (Revised Edition).
University Press (India) Private Limited.
113  PHY207 THERMODYNAMICS UNIT 3 THE MAXWELL RELATIONS OF THERMODYNAMICS CONTENTS 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objectives 3.0 Main Content 3.1 Definition 3.2 1st Relation 3.3 2nd Relation 3.4 3rd Relation 3.5 4th Relation 3.6 Maxwell Relations 3.7 Usefulness 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutor-Marked Assignment 7.0 References/Further Reading 1.0 INTRODUCTION Useful relations can be derived from each of the four thermodynamic potentials discussed in the last unit.
These relations are called Maxwell’s relations of thermodynamics.
This unit therefore focuses on derivation of Maxwell’s relations.
2.0 OBJECTIVES By the end of this unit, you should be able to: • derive each of the four Maxwell’s relations from the differential of the thermodynamics potentials • state the importance of these relations.
3.0 MAIN CONTENT 3.1 Definition The differential forms of the thermodynamic potentials are: dU ====TdS- --- PdV 12.1 dH ====TdS++++VdP 12.2 114 PHY207 THERMODYNAMICS dA====- --- SdT- --- PdV 12.3 dG====- --- SdT ++++VdP 12.4 The four Maxwell relations are derived from each of these four thermodynamic potentials.
3.2 1st Relation The differential form of internal energy U is dU ====TdS- --- PdV Differentiating this with respect to S while V is kept constant gives ¶ ¶¶¶ U ( ) ====T 12.5a ¶ ¶¶¶ S V and with respect to V while S is kept constant gives ¶ ¶¶¶ U ( )S ====- --- P 12.5b ¶ ¶¶¶ V Also differentiating 12.5a with respect to V at constant S and 12.5b with respect to S at constant V will give ¶ ¶¶¶ 2U ¶ ¶¶¶ T ==== ( ) 12.6a ¶ ¶¶¶ V¶ ¶¶¶ S ¶ ¶¶¶ V S and ¶ ¶¶¶ 2U ¶ ¶¶¶ P ====- --- ( ) 12.6b ¶ ¶¶¶ S¶ ¶¶¶ V ¶ ¶¶¶ S V The mixed second order derivatives of U, which implies that ¶ ¶¶¶ T ¶ ¶¶¶ P ( ) ====- --- ( ) 12.7 ¶ ¶¶¶ V S ¶ ¶¶¶ S V Equation 12.7 is one of the four Maxwell relations.
3.3 2nd Relation From differential form of Enthalpy H (i.e.
dH ====TdS++++VdP ) ¶ ¶¶¶ H ( ) ====T 12.8a ¶ ¶¶¶ S P and ¶ ¶¶¶ H ( ) ==== P 12.8b ¶ ¶¶¶ P S 115  PHY207 THERMODYNAMICS Second derivative gives ¶ ¶¶¶ 2H ¶ ¶¶¶ T ==== ( ) 12.9a ¶ ¶¶¶ P¶ ¶¶¶ S ¶ ¶¶¶ P S and ¶ ¶¶¶ 2H ¶ ¶¶¶ P ==== ( ) 12.9b ¶ ¶¶¶ S¶ ¶¶¶ P ¶ ¶¶¶ S p The mixed second order derivatives of H are equal, so ¶ ¶¶¶ T ¶ ¶¶¶ P ( ) ==== ( ) 12.10 ¶ ¶¶¶ P S ¶ ¶¶¶ S P Equation 12.10 is one of the four Maxwell’s relations.
3.4 3rd Relation From the differential of Helmholtz free energy A (i.e.
dA====- --- SdT- --- PdV ) ¶ ¶¶¶ A ( ) ====- --- S 12.11a ¶ ¶¶¶ T V and ¶ ¶¶¶ A ( ) ====- --- p 12.11b ¶ ¶¶¶ V T Second derivative gives ¶ ¶¶¶ 2A ¶ ¶¶¶ S ====- --- ( ) 12.12a ¶ ¶¶¶ V¶ ¶¶¶ T ¶ ¶¶¶ V T and ¶ ¶¶¶ 2A ¶ ¶¶¶ P ====- --- ( ) 12.12b ¶ ¶¶¶ T¶ ¶¶¶ V ¶ ¶¶¶ T V The mixed second derivatives of A in equation 12.12 are equal, therefore ¶ ¶¶¶ S ¶ ¶¶¶ P - --- ( ) ====- --- ( ) ¶ ¶¶¶ V T ¶ ¶¶¶ T V i.e.
¶ ¶¶¶ S ¶ ¶¶¶ P ( ) ==== ( ) 12.13 ¶ ¶¶¶ V T ¶ ¶¶¶ T V ¶ ¶¶¶ P ( ) in equation 12.13 can be obtained from equation of state.
This ¶ ¶¶¶ T V implies that the variation of entropy S with respect to volume V at 116 PHY207 THERMODYNAMICS constant temperature T for a system can be obtained from equation of state for the system.
3.5 4th Relation From differential of Gibb’s free energy G (i.e.
dG====- --- SdT ++++VdP ), partial derivative gives ¶ ¶¶¶ G ( ) ====- --- S 12.14a ¶ ¶¶¶ T P and ¶ ¶¶¶ G ( ) ====V 12.14b ¶ ¶¶¶ P T Differentiating 12.14a with respect to P at constant T, and 12.14b with respect to T at constant P give ¶ ¶¶¶ 2G ¶ ¶¶¶ S ====- --- ( ) , 12.15a ¶ ¶¶¶ P¶ ¶¶¶ T ¶ ¶¶¶ P T and ¶ ¶¶¶ 2G ¶ ¶¶¶ V ==== ( ) , 12.15b ¶ ¶¶¶ T¶ ¶¶¶ P ¶ ¶¶¶ T p respectively.
The mixed second derivatives of G in equation 12.15 are equal, therefore ¶ ¶¶¶ S ¶ ¶¶¶ V ( ) ====- --- ( ) 12.16 ¶ ¶¶¶ P T ¶ ¶¶¶ T P ¶ ¶¶¶ V ( ) in equation 12.16 can be obtained from equation of state.
¶ ¶¶¶ T P 3.6 Maxwell Relations The four (4) Maxwell Relations of thermodynamics are: ¶ ¶¶¶ T ¶ ¶¶¶ P ( ) ====- --- ( ) 12.17 ¶ ¶¶¶ V S ¶ ¶¶¶ S V ¶ ¶¶¶ T ¶ ¶¶¶ P ( ) ==== ( ) 12.18 ¶ ¶¶¶ P S ¶ ¶¶¶ S P ¶ ¶¶¶ S ¶ ¶¶¶ P ( ) ==== ( ) 12.19 ¶ ¶¶¶ V T ¶ ¶¶¶ T V ¶ ¶¶¶ S ¶ ¶¶¶ V ( ) ====- --- ( ) 12.20 ¶ ¶¶¶ P T ¶ ¶¶¶ T P 117  PHY207 THERMODYNAMICS 3.7 Usefulness These relations (i.e.
Maxwell relations) are useful in thermodynamics calculations.
For example, one can replace a derivative of entropy with a derivative of a simple thermodynamic variation such as temperature.
Equation 13 and 16 give the derivative of entropy in terms of temperature T, volume V and pressure P. ¶ ¶¶¶ S ¶ ¶¶¶ P ¶ ¶¶¶ S ¶ ¶¶¶ V ( ) ==== ( ) and ( ) ====- --- ( ) ¶ ¶¶¶ V T ¶ ¶¶¶ T V ¶ ¶¶¶ P T ¶ ¶¶¶ T P For an ideal gas, PV ==== nRT ¶ ¶¶¶ P nR P ( ) ==== ==== 12.21 ¶ ¶¶¶ T V V T and ¶ ¶¶¶ V nR V ( ) ==== ==== 12.22 ¶ ¶¶¶ T P P T For an ideal gas, using equations 12.21 and 12.22, equations 12.13 and 12.20 respectively become ¶ ¶¶¶ S P ( )T ==== 12.23 ¶ ¶¶¶ V T ¶ ¶¶¶ S V ( )T ====- --- 12.24 ¶ ¶¶¶ P T SELF ASSESSMENT EXERCISE 1.
Derive the four Maxwell equations.
¶ ¶¶¶ S P ¶ ¶¶¶ S V 2.
For an ideal gas, show that ( )T ==== and ( )T ====- --- .
¶ ¶¶¶ V T ¶ ¶¶¶ P T 4.0 CONCLUSION We have derived, in this unit, the four (4) Maxwell relations and we also mentioned the usefulness of these relations.
In the next unit, we will be using these relations in deriving the TdS equations.
9.0 SUMMARY In this unit, you have learnt that: • each of the four Maxwell’s relations is derived from each of the four thermodynamics potentials 118 PHY207 THERMODYNAMICS • Maxwell relations are useful in thermodynamics calculations e.g.
a derivative of entropy can be replace with a simple thermodynamic variation such as temperature.
10.0 TUTOR-MARKED ASSIGNMENT 1.
For the differential of x given as: dx ==== M(y,z)dy++++ N(y,z)dz (Equation 2.7) dxis exact when ¶ ¶¶¶ M ¶ ¶¶¶ N ( )y ==== ( )z (Equation 2.8) ¶ ¶¶¶ z ¶ ¶¶¶ y 2.
It is known that the differentials of the thermodynamic potentials are exact; hence derive the four Maxwell’s relations using equations 2.7 and 2.8.
7.0 REFERENCES/FURTHER READING Francis, W. Sears & Gerhard, L. Salinger (1975).
Thermodynamics, Kinetic Theory, and Statistical Thermodynamics (Third Edition).
Philippines: Addison-Wesley Publishing Company, Inc. Mark, W. Zemansky & Richard, H. Dittmann (1981).
Heat and Thermodynamics (Sixth Edition).
New York: McGraw-Hill Book Company.
Rao, Y.V.C.
(2004).
An Introduction to Thermodynamics (Revised Edition).
India: University Press (India) Private Limited.
119  PHY207 THERMODYNAMICS UNIT 4 TDS EQUATIONS CONTENTS 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objectives 3.0 Main Content 3.1 First TdS Equation 3.2 Second TdS 3.3 Third TdS 3.4 Expansion, Compression and TdS Equations 3.4.1 Compression 3.4.2 Expansion 3.5 The TdS equations in terms of k andb bbb 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutor-Marked Assignment 7.0 References/Further Reading 10.0 INTRODUCTION Another useful set of equations in thermodynamics is the TdS equations.
They, among other things, enable us to calculate the change in entropy during various reversible processes in terms of directly measurable quantities such as the coefficient of expansion and the bulk modulus.
11.0 OBJECTIVES By the end of this unit, you should be able to: • derive the three TdS equations • write change in entropy for different reversible processes in term of directly measurable quantities.
3.0 MAIN CONTENT 3.1 First TdS Equation Entropy (S) can be express in terms of any two of P, V, and T. Let us express entropy S as a function of V and T, i.e.
S(V,T).
The derivative of entropy S is ¶ ¶¶¶ S ¶ ¶¶¶ S dS ==== ( ) dV ++++( ) dT 13.1 ¶ ¶¶¶ V T ¶ ¶¶¶ T V 120 PHY207 THERMODYNAMICS Multiply equation 13.1 by T to obtain ¶ ¶¶¶ S ¶ ¶¶¶ S TdS ====T( ) dV ++++T( ) dT 13.2 ¶ ¶¶¶ V T ¶ ¶¶¶ T V ¶ ¶¶¶ S ¶ ¶¶¶ P From Maxwell’s relation (i.e.
12.19), ( ) ==== ( ) and also at ¶ ¶¶¶ V T ¶ ¶¶¶ T V ¶ ¶¶¶ S ¶ ¶¶¶ U constant volume T( ) ==== ( ) ====C , therefore 13.2 becomes ¶ ¶¶¶ T V ¶ ¶¶¶ T V V ¶ ¶¶¶ P TdS ====T( ) dV ++++C dT 13.3 ¶ ¶¶¶ T V V Equation 13.3 is the first TdS equation.
3.2 Second TdS Let us express entropy S in terms P and T i.e.
S(P,T), its derivative is ¶ ¶¶¶ S ¶ ¶¶¶ S dS ==== ( ) dP ++++( ) dT 13.4 ¶ ¶¶¶ P T ¶ ¶¶¶ T P Multiplying 13.4 by T gives ¶ ¶¶¶ S ¶ ¶¶¶ S TdS ====T( ) dP ++++T( ) dT 13.5 ¶ ¶¶¶ P T ¶ ¶¶¶ T P ¶ ¶¶¶ S ¶ ¶¶¶ V From Maxwell’s relation (equation 12.20), ( ) ====- --- ( ) , and also ¶ ¶¶¶ P T ¶ ¶¶¶ T P ¶ ¶¶¶ S ¶ ¶¶¶ H at constant pressure T( ) ==== ( ) ====C .
Thus 13.5 becomes ¶ ¶¶¶ T P ¶ ¶¶¶ T P P ¶ ¶¶¶ V TdS ====- --- T( ) dP ++++C dT 13.6 ¶ ¶¶¶ T P P Equation 13.6 is the second TdS equation 3.3 Third TdS Then the last option is to express entropy S as a function of P and V, i.e.
S(P,V), we have ¶ ¶¶¶ S ¶ ¶¶¶ S dS ==== ( ) dP ++++( ) dV 13.7 ¶ ¶¶¶ P V ¶ ¶¶¶ V P 121  PHY207 THERMODYNAMICS Multiplying 13.7 by T to obtain ¶ ¶¶¶ S ¶ ¶¶¶ S TdS ====T( ) dP ++++T( ) dV 13.8 ¶ ¶¶¶ P V ¶ ¶¶¶ V P In a constant volume process, it can be proved that ¶ ¶¶¶ S ¶ ¶¶¶ T T( ) ==== C ( ) .
¶ ¶¶¶ P V V¶ ¶¶¶ P V And also in a constant pressure process, it can be proved that ¶ ¶¶¶ S ¶ ¶¶¶ T T( ) ====C ( ) .
¶ ¶¶¶ V P P¶ ¶¶¶ V P Therefore 13.8 becomes ¶ ¶¶¶ T ¶ ¶¶¶ T TdS ====C ( ) dP ++++C ( ) dV 13.9 V ¶ ¶¶¶ P V P¶ ¶¶¶ V P Equation 13.9 is the third of the TdS equations.
Therefore the three Tds equations are ¶ ¶¶¶ P TdS ====T( ) dV ++++C dT 13.10 ¶ ¶¶¶ T V V TdS ====- --- T¶(¶¶¶ V) dP ++++C dT 13.11 ¶ ¶¶¶ T P P ¶ ¶¶¶ T ¶ ¶¶¶ T TdS ====C ( ) dP ++++C ( ) dV 13.12 V ¶ ¶¶¶ P V P¶ ¶¶¶ V P These equations enable one to calculate heat flow (TdS ) in a reversible process.
Also, change in entropy between two states of a system can be calculated from these equations provided that the equations of state are known.
This is because all the partial derivatives in these equations can be obtained from equation of state 3.4 Expansion, Compression and TdS Equations 3.4.1 Compression The way the volume of a material decreases with pressure at constant temperature is described by isothermal compressibility k 1 ¶ ¶¶¶ V k ====- --- ( ) 13.13 V ¶ ¶¶¶ P T 122 PHY207 THERMODYNAMICS Isothermal compressibility is different from another parameter called adiabatic compressibilityk .
ad 1 ¶ ¶¶¶ V k ====- --- ( ) 13.14 ad V ¶ ¶¶¶ P s 1 The reciprocal of k (i.e. )
is called isothermal bulk modulus or k isothermal incompressibility.
3.4.2 Expansion The way the volume of a material increases with temperature at constant pressure is described by coefficient of volume expansion or expansivity bbbb 1 ¶ ¶¶¶ V b bbb ==== ( ) 13.15 V ¶ ¶¶¶ T P The unit of expansivity is K-1 Using equations 13.13 and 13.15, one can show that ¶ ¶¶¶ P bbbb ¶ ¶¶¶ V ( ) ==== and ( ) ====bbbbV 13.16 ¶ ¶¶¶ T V k ¶ ¶¶¶ T P and the reciprocal of 13.16 gives ¶ ¶¶¶ T k ¶ ¶¶¶ T 1 ( ) ==== and ( ) ==== respectively 13.17 ¶ ¶¶¶ P V bbbb ¶ ¶¶¶ V P bbbbV SELF ASSESSMENT EXERCISE ¶ ¶¶¶ P bbbb 1.
Using equation 13.13 and 13.15, show that ( ) ==== ¶ ¶¶¶ T V k 2.
Determine the heat transferred during a reversible isothermal change in pressure.
3.
Calculate the temperature change of a substance which undergoes a reversible adiabatic change of pressure.
123  PHY207 THERMODYNAMICS 3.5 The TdS equations in terms of k andb bbb Replacing the partial derivatives with these, the three TdS equations become bbbb C dS ==== dV ++++ V dT 13.18 k T C dS ====- ---bbbbVdP ++++ P dT 13.19 T C k C dS ==== V dP ++++ P dV 13.20 Tbbbb TbbbbV Equations 13.18 to 13.20 give the change in entropy between two states in terms of P, V, T,k , bbbb and heat capacities as a function of temperature and pressure of specific volume.
The implication of these equations is that one do not even need equation of state to calculate the change in entropy.
8.0 CONCLUSION The three TdS equations are useful set of equation in thermodynamics.
They are used to calculate heat flow in any reversible process.
9.0 SUMMARY In this unit, you have learnt: • how to derive the three TdS equations • that these equations can be used to calculate heat flow (TdS ) in a reversible process.
10.0 TUTOR-MARKED ASSIGNMENT TVbbbb 2 Using the TdS equations 13.18 and 13.19 show thatCP- --- CV ==== .
kkkk 11.0 REFERENCES/FURTHER READING Adams, Steve & Halliday, Jonathan (2000).
Advanced Physics.UK: Oxford University Press.
Francis, W. Sears & Gerhard, L. Salinger (1975).
Thermodynamics, Kinetic Theory, and Statistical Thermodynamics (Third Edition).
Philippines: Addison-Wesley Publishing Company, Inc. 124 PHY207 THERMODYNAMICS Stuart, B. Palmer & Mircea, S. Rogalski (1996).
Advance University Physics.
SA: Gordon and Breach Science Publisher.
Rao, Y.V.C.
(2004).
An Introduction to Thermodynamics (Revised Edition).
India: University Press (India) Private Limited.
125  PHY207 THERMODYNAMICS MODULE 4 Unit 1 Phase Transitions Unit 2 Throttling Process and Free Expansion of a Gas Unit 3 Production of Low Temperature Unit 4 Phenomena at Low Temperature and the Third Law of Thermodynamics UNIT 1 PHASE TRANSITIONS CONTENTS 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objectives 3.0 Main Content 3.1 Phases of Matter 3.1.1 Phase Diagram 3.1.2 Co-exist Phases 3.2 Phase Transitions 3.2.1 Latent Heat, L, during Phase Transition 3.3 Types of Phase Transitions 3.3.1 First Order Phase Transition 3.3.2 Second Order Phase Transition 3.3.3 Lambda Phase Transition 3.4 Gibbs Function during Phase Transition 3.5 Usefulness of Clapeyron’s Equation 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutor-Marked Assignment 7.0 References/Further Reading 1.0 INTRODUCTION In module 1 unit 1, we discussed change of state and it was mentioned that change of phase or phase transition is a special case of change of state.
Phase transition is the transformation of a thermodynamic system from one phase of matter to another.
This unit is devoted to phase transition.
An important thing to note during phase change is that addition or withdrawer of heat to or from a substance does not result in change of temperature.
When matter changes from one phase to another, energy is involved.
126 PHY207 THERMODYNAMICS 2.0 OBJECTIVES By the end of this unit, you should be able to: • define phase transition • give conditions under which phase transition occurs • differentiate between phase transition and change of state • derive Clapeyron’s equation • explain the three types of phase transitions.
3.0 MAIN CONTENT 3.1 Phases of Matter Matter or substance can exist in three (3) familiar phases namely; solid phase, liquid phase, gaseous phase.
Matter of some substances can also exist in two (2) less familiar phases namely; super fluid phase, and plasma phase.
Solid Phase: Molecules are arranged in a closely packed form called crystal.
These molecules can only vibrate about their lattice point.
Liquid Phase: Molecules are close together and they take the shape of the container.
Molecules of liquid, within its volume, can move from place to place, rotate and vibrate.
Gaseous Phase: Molecules are widely separated and free to move around freely.
Super fluid: A supercritical (or critical) fluid is a liquid/gas under extreme pressure.
Plasma: Plasma is a gas that is composed of free-floating ions and free electrons.
3.1.1 Phase Diagram Figure 14.1 shows the phase diagram for water.
The three regions for the three phases are shown in the diagram.
The solid curves or lines represent boundary between two phases e.g.
fusion curve is the boundary between solid phase and liquid phase.
These lines are called equilibrium lines.
The implication of this is that under specific conditions of temperature and pressure, a substance can exist in equilibrium in more than one phase at the same time.
127  PHY207 THERMODYNAMICS Triple Point: This is the point where the three equilibrium lines meet as indicated in the phase diagram 14.1 below.
At the triple point, solid, liquid, and vapour phases of a pure substance coexist in equilibrium.
The triple point values for common materials are given in table 14.1.
NOTE: All substances have triple point except Helium.
Triple Point Temperature: this is the temperature at which solid, liquid, and vapour phases coexist in equilibrium.
Triple Point Pressure: This is the pressure at which solid, liquid, and vapour phases coexist in equilibrium.
Critical Point: This specifies the conditions of temperature and pressure beyond which it is no longer possible to distinguish a liquid from a gas.
The point is indicated in the phase diagram in figure 14.1 and the region beyond the critical point is known as fluid region.
The values of triple point and critical point temperature and pressure for some materials are given in table 14.1 Fig.
14.1: Phase Diagram for Water (After Cutnell and Johnson) 128 PHY207 THERMODYNAMICS Table 14.1: Triple Point and Critical Point Conditions for some Common Materials Triple Point Critical Point Substance Temperature Pressure Temperature Pressure (ºC) (Pa) (ºC) (Pa) Ammonia -77.8 6.05 × 103 132.4 11.30 × 106 Carbon -56.6 5.18 × 105 31.1 7.38 × 106 dioxide Hydrogen -259.3 7.04 × 103 -239.9 1.30 × 106 Nitrogen -210.0 1.25 × 104 -146.9 3.40 × 106 Oxygen -218.8 1.52 × 102 118.4 5.08 × 106 Sulfur 75.5 1.67 × 103 157.6 7.88 × 106 dioxide Water 0.01 6.10 × 102 374.3 22.10 × 106 Source: Physics by John D. Cutnell and Kenneth W. Johnson 3.1.2 Co-exist Phases This is when more than one phase of a substance (e.g.
liquid-solid) exist side-by-side in equilibrium at the same time.
For example, solid water and liquid water can coexist at 0 ºC along the process of fusion or melting.
The Gibbs energy (G) for two coexisting phases α and β of a pure substance are equal.
Gaaaa ====Gbbbb 14.1 Using the phase diagram 14.1 for water as example, coexistence of phases occurs only along the equilibrium lines.
3.2 Phase Transitions Phase transition occurs when matter changes from one of the phases of matter to another.
The process always involves withdrawal or addition of heat energy from or to the matter.
Using figure 14.1 as an illustration, phase transition occurs whenever any one of the curves in the phase diagram is crossed.
Phase transition for a pure substance occurs at constant temperature and pressure.
The implication of this statement is that, for a pure substance dT====dP====0 during a phase change.
However, the extensive thermodynamic coordinates or properties (e.g.
Volume) change abruptly as a result of a phase transition.
Internal energy (U), enthalpy (H), and entropy (S) may also change during a phase transition.
129  PHY207 THERMODYNAMICS Figure 14.2 shows the three most common phases of matter and the name given to each of the phase transitions.
Melting Vapourization Solid Fusion Liquid Condensation Gas Sublimation Fig.
14.2: Phase Transitions 3.2.1 Latent Heat, L, during Phase Transition Latent heat L is the amount of heat energy per mole that must be added or removed when a substance changes from one phase to another.
If the phase transition takes place reversibly, the heat transfer (i.e.
latent heat) per mole for transition from initial phase α to a final phase β is given by bbbb a aaa L====T(S - --- S ) 14.2 3.3 Types of Phase Transition The three types of phase transitions are: first order, second order and lambda phase transitions.
3.3.1 First Order Phase Transition The phase transitions that we are familiar with i.e.
sublimation, vaporization and fusion are called first order phase transition.
They are called first order because the first order derivatives of the Gibbs function are finite.
Therefore, for a first order phase transition: • there are changes in entropy and volume, and • the first-order derivatives of the Gibbs function change discontinuously.
The characteristics of the first order phase transition are shown in figure 14.3.
The specific heat capacity at constant pressure is infinite, this is ¶ ¶¶¶ S because temperature is constant during phase change (Cp ====T ).
¶ ¶¶¶ T P 130 PHY207 THERMODYNAMICS 3.3.2 Second Order Phase Transition This is a phase transition in which the second derivates of Gibbs are finite.
For order phase transition, • T, P, G, S, and V (also H, U, and F) remain unchanged • CP, β, and κ (i.e.
from second derivatives of G) are finite The only example of second order phase transition is the transition for the superconductor from superconducting to the normal state in zero magnetic fields.
3.3.3 Lambda phase transition For the lambda phase transition: • T, P, and G remain constant, • S and V (also U, H, and F) remain constant, and • CP, β, and κ are infinite The most interesting example of lambda transition is the transition from ordinary liquid helium to super fluid helium at a temperature and corresponding pressure known as a lambda point.
Figure 14.4 shows the variation of CP with temperature for each of the three phase transitions.
131  PHY207 THERMODYNAMICS Fig.
14.3: Characteristics of First Order Phase Transition (After Zemansky and Dittman) Fig.
14.4: The Three Types of Phase Transitions (After Zemansky and Dittman) 132 PHY207 THERMODYNAMICS 3.4 Gibbs Function during Phase Transition The Gibbs function G does not change during phase transition.
For coexisting phases, dG ====0 14.3 T,P i.e.
change in Gibbs at constant temperature and pressure is zero.
As mention earlier, two phases (e.g.
liquid-gas) can coexist in equilibrium.
For coexisting phases α and β of a pure substance a aaa bbbb a aaa bbbb G ====G ⇒⇒⇒⇒ dG ====dG 14.4 The Gibbs function G is given by equation 14.5 below.
For your reference check block 1 dG====- --- SdT++++VdP 14.5 Block 1 G====U- --- ST ++++PV Differentiating G gives dG====dU- --- SdT- --- TdS++++PdV ++++VdP but dU====TdS- --- PdV , then If equation 14.5 is put in equation 14.4, we obtain a aaa a aaa bbbb bbbb - --- S dT++++V dP====- --- S dT++++V dP 14.6 Rearranging (14.6) to obtain bbbb a aaa dP S - --- S ==== 14.7 bbbb a aaa dT V - --- V From equation 14.2 bbbb a aaa L S - --- S ==== 14.8 T 133  PHY207 THERMODYNAMICS Then, put equation 14.8 in equation 14.7 to obtain dp L ==== 14.9 bbbb a aaa dT T(V - --- V ) Equation 14.9 is known as the Clapeyron’s equation.
If solid phase is labeled 1, liquid 2, and gas or vapour phase 3, equation 14.9 can be written as follows: For solid – vapour phase transition, we have (dP)13==== L13 , 14.10 dT T(V3- --- V1) where L13 is the latent heat of sublimation.
And for solid - liquid phase transition, we have (dP)12==== L12 , 14.11 dT T(V2- --- V1) where L12 is the latent heat of fusion, SELF ASSESSMENT EXERCISE 1.
Explain the following: (a) Phase transition (b) Triple point (c) Triple point temperature (d) Critical point.
2.
Derive Clapeyron’s equation.
3.
The vapour pressure of a particular solid and a liquid of the same 6 4 material are given by lnP ==== 0.04- --- and lnP ==== 0.03- --- T T respectively, where P is given in atmospheres.
Find the temperature and pressure of the triple point of this material.
3.5 Usefulness of Clapeyron’s Equation Equation 14.9 can be integrated to obtain an expression for pressure as a function of temperature.
If the following assumptions holds i.e.
if the variation in latent heat can be negligible, and if one of the phases is a vapour, and if the vapour is assumed to be an ideal gas, and if the specific volume of the liquid or solid is neglected in comparison with that of the vapour, the integration can be readily carried out.
134 PHY207 THERMODYNAMICS (dP)23==== L23 14.12 dT T(RT P) ∫∫∫∫ dP ==== L23 ∫∫∫∫ dT 14.13 P R 2 T Then, lnP====- --- L23 ++++lnconstant 14.14 RT 4.0 CONCLUSION Matter can exist in three well-known phases i.e.
solid, liquid and gaseous phases.
Phase transition occurs when changes from one phase to another.
During the phase change, the heat added does not bring about a change in temperature.
This type of heat is called latent heat of transformation (L).
Gibbs free energy is a useful thermodynamic potential in describing phase transition.
5.0 SUMMARY In this unit you have leant that: • matter can exist in three main phases namely; solid, liquid and gas phases • two phases of matter can coexist in equilibrium • phase transition occurs when matter changes from one of the phases of matter to another • phase transition for a pure substance occurs at constant temperature and pressure • there are three types of phase transition namely; first order, second order and lambda phase transitions • the heat transfer (i.e.
latent heat) per mole for transition from bbbb a aaa initial phase α to a final phase β is L====T(S - --- S ) • the Clapeyron’s equation for the first order transition is dp L ==== .
bbbb a aaa dT T(V - --- V ) 6.0 TUTOR-MARKED ASSIGNMENT 1.
Name and describe the three types of phase transition.
2.
Differentiate between a change of state and phase transition.
135  PHY207 THERMODYNAMICS 7.0 REFERENCES/FURTHER READING Adams, Steve & Haliday, Jonathan (2000).
Advanced Physics.
UK: Oxford University Press.
Halliday, David; Resnick, Robert & Walker, Jeanrl (2001).
Fundamentals of Physics-Extended (Sixth edition).
New York: John Wiley and Sons, Inc. John, D. Cutnell & Kenneth, W. Johnson (1989).
Physics.
USA: John Wiley & Sons, Inc. Mark, W. Zemansky & Richard, H. Dittmann (1981).
Heat and Thermodynamics (Sixth Edition).
New York: McGraw-Hill Book Company.
Rao, Y.V.C.
(2004).
An Introduction to Thermodynamics (Revised Edition).
India: University Press (India) Private Limited.
136 PHY207 THERMODYNAMICS UNIT 2 THROTTLING PROCESS AND FREE EXPANSION OF A GAS CONTENTS 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objectives 3.0 Main Content 3.1 Throttling Process 3.1.1 Enthalpy during Throttling Process 3.2 Free Expansion of a Gas 3.2.1 Temperature Change during Free Expansion 3.2.2 Internal Energy U during Free Expansion 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutor-Marked Assignment 7.0 References/Further Reading 1.0 INTRODUCTION You were told in module 3, unit 2 that thermodynamic potentials are used to describe physical processes.
In this unit, we are going to use the enthalpy H to describe throttling process and the internal energy U to describes free expansion of a gas 2.0 OBJECTIVES By the end of this unit, you should be able to: • explain throttling process • show that the initial and final enthalpies during a throttling process are equal • explain free expansion of a gas • show that for free expansion of ideal gas at constant temperature, ¶ ¶¶¶ U ( ) ==== 0.
¶ ¶¶¶ P T 3.0 MAIN CONTENT 3.1 Throttling Process Throttling Process is an irreversible steady flow expansion process in which a perfect gas is expanded through an orifice of minute dimensions such as a narrow throat of a slightly opened valve.
During the process, the fluid passes through a narrow opening (a needle valve) from a region 137  PHY207 THERMODYNAMICS of constant high pressure to a region of constantly lower pressure adiabatically.
Throttling is also known as Joule-Kelvin expansion.
Porous wall Pi, Vi Pf , Vf (a) (b) Fig.
15.1: A Throttling Process Consider a cylinder that is thermally insulated and equipped with two non-conducting pistols on the opposite sides of a porous wall as shown in figure 15.1.
As indicated in figure 15.1 (a), the left hand side of the porous plug is filled with gas at Pi and Vi while the right hand side is empty.
Suppose the two pistons are moved simultaneously to the right in such a way that a constant pressure Pi is maintained on the right hand side of the wall while a constant lower pressure Pf is maintained on the right hand side.
After all the gas has seeped through the porous wall, the final equilibrium state of the system is shown in figure 15.1 (b).
This kind of process is known as throttling process.
A throttling process is an irreversible process.
This is because the gas passes through non-equilibrium states on its way from initial equilibrium state to its final equilibrium state.
As you know, non- equilibriums states cannot be described by thermodynamic coordinates i.e.
the non-equilibrium states between the initial and final equilibrium states during a throttling process cannot be described using thermodynamic coordinates.
But we can make an interesting conclusion from the initial and final equilibrium states.
3.1.1 Enthalpy during throttling process One of the most interesting properties of the enthalpy function (H ) is in connection with a throttling process.
The equation of the first law of thermodynamics is dQ====dU- --- W 15.1 138 PHY207 THERMODYNAMICS but throttling process occurs adiabatically, dQ====0 (adiabatic process) 15.2 Then, the first law of thermodynamics becomes dU ====W 15.3 and work Vf 0 W====- --- ∫∫∫∫P dV- --- ∫∫∫∫P dV 15.4 f i 0 Vi Since both pressures (Pi and Pf ) remain constant, equation 15.3 becomes W====- --- (P V - --- PV ) 15.5 f f i i Now, put equation 15.5 in 15.3 to obtain U f- --- Ui ==== PfVf- --- PiVi Rearranging gives U- --- PV ====U - --- P V 15.6 i i i f f f But enthalpy H ====U- --- PV , so 15.6 becomes H ==== H 15.7 i f In a throttling process, therefore, the initial and final enthalpies are equal.
High Low Pressure Pressure Pump Constant high Constant low pressure pressure Fig.
15.2: Apparatus for Performing a Continuous Throttling Process 139  PHY207 THERMODYNAMICS Throttling process is very useful in refrigeration.
A continuous throttling process can be achieved using the apparatus shown in figure 15.2.
SELF ASSESSMENT EXERCISE 1 1.
What is a throttling process.
2.
For a throttling process, show that initial enthalpy Hi is equal to final enthalpyH f .
3.2 Free Expansion of a Gas The concept of work done by or on a system has been treated in module 2, unit 1 under the first law of thermodynamics.
The work done by or on a gas in a cylinder with a moveable piston was derived to be dW ====- --- PdV 15.8 Equation 15.8 above is as a result of expansion or compression of a gas in a cylinder.
That is, in the case of expansion, the molecules move faster and push the piston (exerted a force on the piston) and move the piston through a distance.
Now consider, for example, a composite system consisting of a hydrostatic fluid in the compartments 1 and 2 with (P , V ) and (P , V ) 1 2 2 2 respectively as shown in figure 15.3 below.
Piston 1 Piston 2 P , V P , V 1 1 2 2 Partition Fig.
15.3: A Composite System Each compartment or both compartments can undergo an adiabatic work by interacting with the surroundings.
This may be done by moving one or both of the pistons in or out, either slowly (a quasi-static process) so that the work doneW ====- --- ∫∫∫∫PdV , with pressure P being equal to the equilibrium value (i.e.
for a quasi-static process the system is in equilibrium at every instant).
Also the piston can be moved very rapidly 140 PHY207 THERMODYNAMICS (a non-quasi-static process) so that the pressure at the face is less that the equilibrium value.
For these two examples, work is done on the piston due to expansion of the fluid.
However, if either or both of the pistons is or are pulled out at a faster rate than the velocity of the molecules of the fluid, the fluid will do no work on the piston at all.
This type of process is called a free expansion of a gas.
Another good example of this process is described below.
Suppose the system in figure 15.3 is thermally insulated and that compartment 1 contains a gas while the other compartment is empty.
If the partition is removed, the gas will undergo what is known as a free expansion in which no work is done and no heat is transferred.
From the first law of thermodynamics, since both Q and W are zero, it follows that the internal energy remains unchanged during a free expansion.
For free expansion of gas, work is zero (W ==== 0) and no heat is transfer (Q ==== 0).
The equation of the first law of thermodynamic reduces to dU ==== 0 15.9 3.2.1 Temperature Change during Free Expansion ¶ ¶¶¶ T The value of temperature change ( ) during free expansion process ¶ ¶¶¶ V U has engaged the attention of physicists for over 100 years.
Joule in 1843, ¶ ¶¶¶ T and many others attempted to measure either the quantity( ) , which ¶ ¶¶¶ V U may be called the Joule Coefficient, or related quantities that are all a measure of the effect of a free expansion-often called the Joule effect.
¶ ¶¶¶ T The results of their experiments showed that ( ) ==== 0 for ideal gas, ¶ ¶¶¶ V U but not for real gas (already discussed in module 2, unit 2).
3.2.2 Internal Energy U during Free Expansion The internal energy U of a gas, like any state function, is a function of any two of the coordinates P, V, and T. Now consider U as a function of T and V i.e.
U(T,V), then the derivative of U is ¶ ¶¶¶ U ¶ ¶¶¶ U dU ==== ( ) dT ++++( ) dV 15.10 ¶ ¶¶¶ T V ¶ ¶¶¶ V T If the temperature change is equal to zero (i.e.
dT ==== 0), and for free expansion (dU ==== 0), then equation 15.10 becomes 141  PHY207 THERMODYNAMICS ¶ ¶¶¶ U ( ) ==== 0 15.11 ¶ ¶¶¶ V T Equation (15.11) implies that U does not depend on V. Also consider U as a function of T and P i.e.
U(T,P)), the derivative of U is ¶ ¶¶¶ U ¶ ¶¶¶ U dU ==== ( ) dT ++++( ) dP 15.12 ¶ ¶¶¶ T P ¶ ¶¶¶ P T If the temperature change is equal to zero (i.e.
dT ==== 0) and for free expansion (dU ==== 0), then equation 15.12 becomes ¶ ¶¶¶ U ( ) ==== 0 15.13 ¶ ¶¶¶ P T Equation 15.13 implies that U does not depend on P. These (i.e.
equation 15.11 and 15.13) follows that if no temperature change takes place in a free expansion process, U is independent of V and P, and therefore U is a function of T only.
This result, of course, has been obtained in Module 2, unit 2, under Gay-Lussac-Joule experiment.
SELF ASSESSMENT EXERCISE 2 1.
Explain free expansion of gas.
2.
One mole of an ideal gas undergoes a throttling process from pressure of 4.052 x 105 Nm-2 to 1.013 x 105 Nm-2.
The initial temperature of the gas is 50 ˚C.
(a) How much work could have been done by the ideal gas has it undergone a reversible process to the same final state at constant temperature?
(b) How much does the entropy of the universe increase as a result of the throttling process?
(R=8.3 JK-1mol-1) 4.0 CONCLUSION Throttling process can be described using the enthalpy H of the system.
During a throttling process, the enthalpy H is constant.
This process is useful in refrigeration.
Free expansion of a gas can be described using the internal energy of the system.
142 PHY207 THERMODYNAMICS 5.0 SUMMARY In this unit, you have learnt that: • during the process, the fluid passes through a narrow opening (a needle valve) from a region of constant high pressure to a region of constantly lower pressure adiabatically • the enthalpy H can be used to describe a throttling process • for a throttling process, the initial enthalpy is equal to the final enthalpy (i.e.
H ==== H ) i f • throttling process is very useful in refrigeration • free expansion of a gas that occurs adiabatically, work is zero (W ==== 0) and no heat is transfer (Q ==== 0), hence from the first law dU ==== 0 • for free expansion process for an ideal gas, the internal energy U ¶ ¶¶¶ U is a function of temperature alone i.e.
( ) ==== 0.
¶ ¶¶¶ P T 6.0 TUTOR-MARKED ASSIGNMENT 1.
Explain what is meant by free expansion of a gas.
2.
1 mol of an ideal gas for which C ==== 25.12and C ==== 33.44J/mol V P K expands adiabatically from an initial state at 340 K and 500 Pa to a final state where it volume has doubled.
Find the final temperature of the gas, the work done, and the entropy change of the gas, for (a) a reversible expansion and (b) a free expansion of the gas into an evaporated space (Joule expansion).
(1 Pa = 1.013x105 Nm-2).
7.0 REFERENCES/FURTHER READING Francis, W. Sears & Gerhard, L. Salinger (1975).
Thermodynamics, Kinetic Theory, and Statistical Thermodynamics (Third Edition).
Philippines: Addison-Wesley Publishing Company, Inc. Halliday, David, Resnick, Robert & Walker, Jeanrl (2001).
Fundamentals of Physics-Extended (Sixth edition).
New York: John Wiley and Sons, Inc. John, D. Cutnell & Kenneth, W. Johnson (1989).
Physics.
USA: John Wiley & Sons, Inc. Mark, W. Zemansky & Richard, H. Dittmann (1981).
Heat and Thermodynamics (Sixth Edition).New York: McGraw-Hill Book Company.
143  PHY207 THERMODYNAMICS Stuart, B. Palmer & Mircea, S. Rogalski (1996).
Advance University Physics.
SA: Gordon and Breach Science Publisher.
Rao, Y.V.C.
(2004).
An Introduction to Thermodynamics (Revised Edition).
India: University Press (India) Private Limited.
144 PHY207 THERMODYNAMICS UNIT 3 PRODUCTION OF LOW TEMPERATURE CONTENTS 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objectives 3.0 Main Content 3.1 Cooling Process 3.1.1 Methods of Cooling 3.2 Cooling by Adiabatic Demagnetisation 3.3 Theory of Adiabatic Demagnetisation ¶ ¶¶¶ T 3.1.1 Adiabatic Decompression ( ) ¶ ¶¶¶ P S ¶ ¶¶¶ T 3.1.2 Adiabatic Demagnetisation ( ) ¶ ¶¶¶ B S 3.4 Entropy and Temperature 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutor-Marked Assignment 7.0 References/Further Reading 1.0 INTRODUCTION We discussed in module 2, unit 5, the device used in lowering the temperature of a body or system i.e.
refrigerator.
We will discuss in this unit, the cooling method that is being used to obtain extremely low temperature i.e.
cooling by adiabatic demagnetisation.
2.0 OBJECTIVES By the end of this unit, you should be able to: • discuss the process of cooling • mention different methods being used to achieve low temperature • discuss the process of cooling by adiabatic demagnetisation • derive the expression for change in temperature with respect to ¶ ¶¶¶ T field B at constant entropy i.e.
( ) .
¶ ¶¶¶ B S 3.0 MAIN CONTENT 3.1 Cooling Process Generally, two processes are involved in cooling a gas namely; isothermal process followed by adiabatic process.
For example, to cool a 145  PHY207 THERMODYNAMICS gas by adiabatic decompression, the gas is first compressed isothermally i.e.
at constant temperature.
This is done by compressing the gas in a vessel that is not insulated and wait long enough for the gas to lose any heat that is generated due to compression.
In this way, a constant temperature is maintained.
The heat that is generated can be explained in PV terms of the law ====constant.
Then, the vessel containing the gas is T insulated and the gas is allowed to expand adiabatically (i.e.
no heat transfer is allowed between the vessel and the surrounding).
This kind of expansion brings about reduction in temperature.
The expression for change in temperature with respect to pressure at constant ¶ ¶¶¶ T entropy( )S can be derived.
The process can be repeated until the ¶ ¶¶¶ P desired temperature is reached.
This method is called cooling by adiabatic decompression.
3.1.1 Methods of Cooling Some of the methods being used for low temperature cooling are: • laser cooling • evaporative cooling (e.g.
evaporation of 3He) • cooling by liquefaction • cooling by adiabatic demagnetisation The process of cooling by adiabatic demagnetisation has been used to obtain extremely low temperature.
Cooling by adiabatic demagnetisation is therefore discussed below.
3.2 Cooling by Adiabatic Demagnetisation Different methods have been employed to obtain very low temperature.
The method of adiabatic demagnetisation has been used to obtain extremely low temperature.
Figure16.1 shows the S-T diagram for adiabatic demagnetisation.
Magnetic field B is zero along the curve labeled B ==== 0 while magnetic field is B along the curve labeled B.
In process ab, a sample of paramagnetic salt (e.g.
cerium magnesium nitrate) already cooled to low temperature by other means (e.g.
by contact with a bath of liquid helium), is magnetized isothermally.
The sample is often suspended in an atmosphere of helium, which can conduct away any heat that is produced, and hence keeps the process isothermal.
Hence, process ab is isothermal magnetization.
Then, in process bc (i.e.
adiabatic demagnetisation), the paramagnetic salt is insulated (by pumping out the helium) and then demagnetized adiabatically.
This process of isothermal magnetization followed by an adiabatic demagnetisation can be repeated over and over again until the 146 PHY207 THERMODYNAMICS desired temperature is reached.
Temperature close to 0 K have been reached in this manner.
Note that one could actually reach a temperature of absolute zero if one did this an infinite number of time- but not for any fewer (statement of third law of thermodynamics).
Fig.
16.1: The Temperature Dependence of the Entropy of a Magnetic System 3.3 Theory of Adiabatic Demagnetisation Magnetic dipole moment P of a sample is the maximum torque it experiences in unit field B. Torque is given by tttt ==== P· ··· B.
The magnetization M of a specimen is defined by B ====mmmmH ====mmmm (H ++++ M).
o The magnetization is also equal to the magnetic moment per unit volume.
The differential form of work for a magnetic system is BdM (Module 1, unit 5, section 3.1.1).
dW ==== BdM 16.1 BdM is the work done per unit volume on an isotropic sample in increasing its magnetization from M to M ++++dM .
147  PHY207 THERMODYNAMICS If we add heat to a magnetisable sample, and do work per unit volume on it by putting it in a magnetic field B and thereby increase its magnetization by dM, then, provided there is no change in volume, the increase in its internal energy per unit volume is given by dU ====TdS ++++ BdM 16.2 In this magnetic context, we can define state functions H, A, and G per unit volume by H ====U- --- BM 16.3 A====U- --- TS 16.4 G ==== H- --- TS ==== A- --- BM 16.5 And the differential forms as, dH ====TdS- --- MdB 16.6 dA====- --- SdT ++++ BdM 16.7 dG ====- --- SdT- --- MdB 16.8 M is the dipole moment per unit volume, in NmT-1m-3, which is the same as the magnetization in Am-1 We can derive an expression for the lowering of the temperature in an ¶ ¶¶¶ T adiabatic decompression ( ) .
Also using the same argument, step- ¶ ¶¶¶ P S by-step, for the lowering of the temperature in an adiabatic ¶ ¶¶¶ T demagnetisation ( ) .
¶ ¶¶¶ B S ¶ ¶¶¶ T 3.3.1 Adiabatic Decompression ( ) ¶ ¶¶¶ P S Considering entropy as a function of temperature and pressure (i.e.
S(T,P)), ¶ ¶¶¶ S ¶ ¶¶¶ T ¶ ¶¶¶ P ( ) ( ) ( ) ====- --- 1 16.9 ¶ ¶¶¶ T P¶ ¶¶¶ P S¶ ¶¶¶ S T dQ In a reversible process dS ==== , and in an isobaric process, T dQ ====C dT P 148 PHY207 THERMODYNAMICS i.e.
TdS ====CPdT 16.10 From equation 16.10, partial derivative of S with respect to T at constant pressure gives ¶ ¶¶¶ S C ( ) ==== P 16.11 ¶ ¶¶¶ T P T Also from a Maxwell relation, ¶ ¶¶¶ S ¶ ¶¶¶ V ( ) ====- --- ( ) 16.12 ¶ ¶¶¶ P T ¶ ¶¶¶ T P From equation 16.9 ¶ ¶¶¶ T ¶ ¶¶¶ T ¶ ¶¶¶ S ( )S ====- --- ( )P( )T 16.13 ¶ ¶¶¶ P ¶ ¶¶¶ S ¶ ¶¶¶ P Put equations 16.11 and 16.12 in 16.13 to obtain ¶ ¶¶¶ T T ¶ ¶¶¶ V ( ) ==== ( ) 16.14 ¶ ¶¶¶ P S C ¶ ¶¶¶ T P P If the gas is an ideal gas, the equation of state is PV ==== nRT , so that ¶ ¶¶¶ V nR V ( ) ==== ==== 16.15 ¶ ¶¶¶ T P P T Put equation 16.15 in 16.14 ¶ ¶¶¶ T V ( ) ==== 16.15 ¶ ¶¶¶ P S C P ¶ ¶¶¶ T 3.3.2 Adiabatic Demagnetisation ( ) ¶ ¶¶¶ B S The same argument as above can be used for adiabatic demagnetisation ¶ ¶¶¶ T ( ) .
¶ ¶¶¶ B S We can consider the entropy as a function of temperature and magnetic field i.e.
S(T,B), we have ¶ ¶¶¶ S ¶ ¶¶¶ T ¶ ¶¶¶ B ( ) ( ) ( ) ====- --- 1 16.16 ¶ ¶¶¶ T B¶ ¶¶¶ B S¶ ¶¶¶ S T Then ¶ ¶¶¶ T ¶ ¶¶¶ T ¶ ¶¶¶ S ( ) ====- --- ( ) ( ) 16.17 S B T ¶ ¶¶¶ B ¶ ¶¶¶ S ¶ ¶¶¶ B 149  PHY207 THERMODYNAMICS dQ In a reversible processdS ==== , and in a constant magnetic field, T dQ ====C dT , C is the heat capacity per unit volume (i.e.
the heat B B required to raise the temperature of a unit volume by one degree) In a constant magnetic field ¶ ¶¶¶ S C ( ) ==== B 16.18 ¶ ¶¶¶ T B T ¶ ¶¶¶ S ¶ ¶¶¶ V Also from a Maxwell relation corresponding to ( ) ====- --- ( ) , that is ¶ ¶¶¶ P T ¶ ¶¶¶ T P ¶ ¶¶¶ S ¶ ¶¶¶ M ( ) ====- --- ( ) 16.19 ¶ ¶¶¶ B T ¶ ¶¶¶ T B Now for a paramagnetic material, the magnetization, for a given filed is proportional to B and it falls off inversely as the temperature (that’s the equation of state).
aB That is M ==== T Therefore, ¶ ¶¶¶ M aB M ( ) ====- --- ====- --- 16.20 ¶ ¶¶¶ T B T2 T Put 16.20 in 16.19 ¶ ¶¶¶ S M ( )T ==== 16.21 ¶ ¶¶¶ B T Now put equations 16.18 and 16.21 in 16.17, to obtain ¶ ¶¶¶ T M ( ) ==== 16.22 ¶ ¶¶¶ B S C B Equation 16.22 gives the cooling effect, i.e.
the variation of temperature with magnetic field at constant entropy, in terms of magnetization M and heat capacityC .
B The cooling effect is particularly effective at low temperature when C B is small.
3.4 Entropy and Temperature Cooling by adiabatic demagnetisation involves successive isothermal magnetizations followed by adiabatic demagnetisations, and this suggests that some insight into the process might be obtained by 150 PHY207 THERMODYNAMICS following it on an entropy-temperature (ST) diagram.
Using figure 16.1 ¶ ¶¶¶ T above, the cooling effect ( ) is shown in the process bc as well as ¶ ¶¶¶ B S other subsequent processes indicated by the horizontal lines linking the two curves.
A complete cooling is indicated in processes ab and bc, which can be repeated until the desired temperature is achieved.
SELF ASSESSMENT EXERCISE 1.
Give four methods of achieving low temperature and the minimum temperature attainable with each method.
2.
Describe the process of cooling by adiabatic decompression.
4.0 CONCLUSION We have discussed in this unit a method of cooling being used to achieving extremely low temperature i.e.
cooling by adiabatic demagnetisation.
The refrigerator that does this is called adiabatic demagnetisation refrigerator.
In the next unit, we are going to be looking at the phenomena at extremely low temperature, and then round up the course by stating the third law of thermodynamics i.e.
the un- attainability of absolute zero.
5.0 SUMMARY In this unit, you have learnt: • about the process of cooling • about methods being used for low temperature cooling • about processes and relevant equations involve in cooling by adiabatic demagnetisation • that the expression for change in temperature with respect to field ¶ ¶¶¶ T B at constant entropy i.e.
( ) .
¶ ¶¶¶ B S 6.0 TUTOR-MARKED ASSIGNMENT 1.
Write the differential form of thermodynamic potential for a magnetic system.
2.
Using an entropy-temperature (ST) diagram, describe the process of cooling by adiabatic demagnetisation.
151  PHY207 THERMODYNAMICS 7.0 REFERENCES/FURTHER READING Adams, Steve & Haliday, Jonathan (2000).
Advanced Physics.UK: Oxford University Press.
Francis, W. Sears & Gerhard, L. Salinger (1975).
Thermodynamics, Kinetic Theory, and Statistical Thermodynamics (Third Edition).
Addison-Wesley Publishing.
Halliday, David; Resnick, Robert & Walker, Jeanrl (2001).
Fundamentals of Physics-Extended (Sixth edition).New York: John Wiley and Sons, Inc. John, D. Cutnell & Kenneth, W. Johnson (1989).
Physics.USA: John Wiley & Sons, Inc. Jon, Ogborn (Editor) (2004).
Physics Now (IUPAP 39), International Commission on Physics Education.
Mark, W. Zemansky & Richard, H. Dittmann (1981).
Heat and Thermodynamics (Sixth Edition).
Philippines: McGraw-Hill Book Company.
Rao, Y.V.C.
(2004).
An Introduction to Thermodynamics (Revised Edition).
India: University Press (India) Private Limited.
152 PHY207 THERMODYNAMICS UNIT 4 PHENOMENA AT LOW TEMPERATURE AND THE THIRD LAW OF THERMODYNAMICS CONTENTS 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objectives 3.0 Main Content 3.1 Low Temperature Physics 3.1.1 Liquefaction of Gases 3.1.2 Maintenance of Low Temperature 3.1.3 Measurement of Low Temperature 3.2 Phenomena at Low Temperature 3.2.1 Superconductivity in Metals 3.2.2 Superfluidity 3.3 Application of Low Temperature Phenomena 3.3.1 Applications of Superconductivity 3.3.2 Applications of Superfluidity 3.4 Nernst Heat Theorem 3.5 Third Law of Thermodynamics 3.5.1 The Statement of the Third Law of Thermodynamics 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutor-Marked Assignment 7.0 References/Further Reading 1.0 INTRODUCTION Why do we need to cool material to extremely low temperature?
The reason is that the properties of metals, semiconductors, and alloys change dramatically at low temperature.
In the last unit, we discussed method of achieving low or extremely low temperature.
The focus of this unit will be on the behaviours of materials at low temperature and then we round up our discussion by stating the third law of thermodynamics.
2.0 OBJECTIVES By the end of this unit, you should be able to: • explain the meaning of low temperature physics • explain some phenomenon at low temperature • mention useful applications of low temperature phenomenon • state Nernst heat theorem • state third law of thermodynamics.
153  PHY207 THERMODYNAMICS 3.0 MAIN CONTENT 3.1 Low Temperature Physics Low temperature physics is a specialised area of physics that deals with the behaviour of materials at low or extremely low temperature.
Now, the big question is this.
How low is low?
Low temperature, in this context, is the temperature low enough to observe the phenomena such as superconductivity and super-fluidity.
Here, we are going to concentrate only on the meanings of these phenomena and their applications.
The theory and the detail description of these two phenomena are beyond the scope of this unit.
3.1.1 Liquefaction of Gases Liquefaction of gases is the process by which substances in their gaseous state are converted to the liquid state.
Liquefaction of gases can be achieved: • by compressing the gas at temperatures less than its critical temperature; • by making the gas do some kind of work against an external force, thereby causing the gas to lose energy and change to the liquid state; and • by making the gas do work against its own internal forces, this also causing it to lose energy and liquefy.
When gases are liquefied, they can then be stored and transported in much more compact form than in the gaseous state.
One kind of liquefied gas that we are familiar with is Liquefied Natural Gas (LNG).
In principle, any gas can be liquefied, so their compactness and ease of transportation has made them popular for a number of other applications.
Applications of Liquefaction Liquefied gases are used in the following application: • Fuel for rocket engines e.g.
liquefied oxygen and hydrogen; • For welding operation e.g.
liquid oxygen and acetylene; • Aqualung devices e.g.
combination of liquid oxygen and liquid nitrogen; • For research application (cryogenics) e.g.
liquid helium is widely used for the study of behaviour of matter at temperatures close to absolute zero.
• Liquid nitrogen for low temperature refrigeration.
154 PHY207 THERMODYNAMICS 3.1.2 Maintenance of Low Temperature The method on maintaining low temperature is by using liquefied gases as heat sink.
For example, some gases liquefy at quite low temperatures (e.g.
nitrogen liquefied at 77 K, hydrogen at 20 K, helium at 4.2 K).
If such gases are liquefied, the liquid can be used as bath to maintain experiment at these temperatures.
3.1.3 Measurement of Low Temperature Conventional thermometers may be used at quite low temperatures.
Table 17.1 gives the lowest temperature for some convectional thermometers.
Table 17.1: Lowest Temperature for some Conventional Thermometers Conventional Thermometer Lowest Temperature Platinum resistance thermometer about 20 K Indium resistance thermometer about 4 K Helium gas thermometer about 3 K Carbon resistors as thermometer From 4 K to 0.1 K 3.2 Phenomena at Low Temperature Two known phenomena at low temperature are superconductivity and superfluidity.
3.2.1 Superconductivity in Metals At a temperature low enough, most metals as well as many alloys and compounds enters a state at which their resistant to flow of current disappears (i.e.
they become a superconductor).
This state is called superconductivity in metals.
Most metals in the periodic table, many alloys and compounds show this behaviour.
The implication of superconductivity is that if a superconductor is a wire loop and a current is generated in that loop, then it flows for years with no significant decay.
3.2.2 Superfluidity At a temperature low enough, materials enter a state whereby they become fluid that flows with no viscosity.
Superfluidity can only be observed at much lower temperatures than the temperature at which superconductivity is observed.
For example, helium-4 does not display 155  PHY207 THERMODYNAMICS superfluid-behaviour until it reaches a temperature below 2 K. Note that materials that become solid at low temperatures cannot become superfluids.
When a material becomes a superfluid, the following will be observed: • Because superfluids have no internal viscosity, a vortex formed within a superfluid persists forever.
• A superfluid has zero thermodynamic entropy and infinite thermal conductivity, meaning that no temperature differential can exist between two superfluids or two parts of the same superfluid.
• A superfluid can also climb up and out of a container in a one- atom-thick layer if the container is not sealed.
• A conventional molecule embedded within a superfluid can move with full rotational freedom, behaving like a gas.
3.3 Application of Low Temperature Phenomena Applications of low temperature phenomena are listed below: 3.3.1 Applications of Superconductivity Superconductivity promises a whole lot of applications but the limitation to this is how to maintain this temperature because the whole of these applications are at room temperature in everyday world.
Most significant real application of low temperature physics is the super-conducting magnet.
This is being used for magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) and particle accelerators.
Other applications are in; • Supersensor, • Quantum computing, • Loss less power transmission line.
We know that energy loss on a 2 transmission line isI R. Imagining using super conduction as 2 transmission cable, meaning that R = 0 i.e.
I R = 0.
3.3.2 Applications of Superfluidity Superfluidity does not have a wide range of application as superconductivity.
The two areas of applications are in dilution refrigerators and spectroscopy.
156 PHY207 THERMODYNAMICS 3.4 Nernst Heat Theorem Third law of thermodynamics explains the behaviour of systems, which are in internal equilibrium, as the temperature approaches absolute zero (i.e.
0 K).
Consider a chemical reaction taking place in a container at constant pressure, and that the container makes a contact with a heat reservoir at a temperature T. If the temperature of the system increases as a result of the reaction (i.e.
if the reaction is exothermic) there will be a heat flow to the reservoir until the temperature of the system reduced to its original value T. Don’t forget that a heat bath or reservoir is so large that its temperature does not change appreciably when heat flow in or out of it.
For a process at constant pressure the heat gain or lost is an increase or decrease in enthalpy.
Then D H ==== H - --- H ====- --- Q 17.1 f i Minus sign in the right hand side of equation 17.1 indicates that heat flows out of the system.
The heat of reaction is usually given as D H .
D H is positive for an endothermic reaction and negative for exothermic reaction.
Change in the Gibbs function and change in enthalpy are related as ¶ ¶¶¶ (G - --- G ) f i G - --- G ====H - --- H ++++T( ) 17.2 f i f i ¶ ¶¶¶ T P written as ¶ ¶¶¶ (D G) D G ==== D H ++++T( )P 17.3 ¶ ¶¶¶ T This implies that change in enthalpy and change in Gibbs function are ¶ ¶¶¶ D G equal only when T( ) approaches zero.
Nernst proposed that, in ¶ ¶¶¶ T P the limit, as the temperature approaches zero, the changes in enthalpy and Gibbs function are equal.
Since ¶ ¶¶¶ D G ( ) ====- --- D S 17.4 ¶ ¶¶¶ T P So that lim (S1- --- S2) ==== 0 17.5 ﬁTﬁﬁﬁ o This implies that chemical reactions at a temperature of absolute zero take place with no change in entropy.
157  PHY207 THERMODYNAMICS Planck later extended this to suppose that, not only does D Gﬁ ﬁﬁﬁ D H, but that, as Tﬁ ﬁﬁﬁ 0, the enthalpy and the Gibbs function of the system approach each other asymptotically in such a manner that, in the limit, ¶ ¶¶¶ G as Tﬁ ﬁﬁﬁ 0, Gﬁ ﬁﬁﬁ H and ( )ﬁ ﬁﬁﬁ 0.
¶ ¶¶¶ T P i.e.
limS ====0 17.6 ﬁTﬁﬁﬁ 0 3.5 Third Law of Thermodynamics Nernst’s heat theorem and Planck’s extension of it, though derived from observing the behaviour of chemical reactions in solids and liquids, is now believed to apply quite generally to any process.
Equation 17.6 is known as the third law of thermodynamics.
3.5.1 The Statement of the Third Law of Thermodynamics The third of thermodynamics states that it is impossible to reduce the temperature of a material body to the absolute zero of temperature in a finite number of operations.
This is the third law of thermodynamics, and it is an inevitable consequence of Planck’s extension of Nernst’s heat theorem.
The third law is sometimes called the unattainability statement of the third law.
SELF ASSESSMENT EXERCISE 1.
What is low temperature physics?
2.
Name the two phenomena at low temperature and explain each of them.
3.
Derive equation 17.3 from the definitions of Enthalpy and Gibb’s free energy.
4.
State Nernst’s heat theorem.
4.0 CONCLUSION The quest by scientists to cool a body or a system to extremely low temperature (about 0 K) brought about discoveries, along the way, of two important phenomena of materials at extremely low temperature (i.e.
superconductivity and superfluidity).
These phenomena have a wide range of applications but the limitation is that these applications are relevant to our every day activity at room temperature.
The process of cooling a body by gradual withdrawal of heat becomes more and more difficult as the absolute temperature is approach.
This is the statement of the third law of thermodynamic i.e.
it is impossible to reduce the 158 PHY207 THERMODYNAMICS temperature of a material body to the absolute zero of temperature in a finite number of operations.
5.0 SUMMARY In this unit, you have learnt that: • the properties of materials change dramatically at low temperature • the phenomena at low temperature are superconductivity and superfluidity • these phenomena have a wide range of applications but there is limitation i.e.
the usage temperature of these applications • the statement of the third law of thermodynamics is that bodies or systems can be cooled to absolute temperature by infinite number of operations.
6.0 TUTOR-MARKED ASSIGNMENT 1.
Explain the limitation of the range of applications of superconductivity.
2.
Give five applications of low temperature phenomena.
7.0 REFERENCES/FURTHER READING Francis, W. Sears & Gerhard, L. Salinger (1975).
Thermodynamics, Kinetic Theory, and Statistical Thermodynamics (Third Edition).
Philippines: Addison-Wesley Publishing Company, Inc. Jon, Ogborn (Editor) (2004).
Physics Now (IUPAP 39), International Commission on Physics Education.
Mark, W. Zemansky & Richard, H. Dittmann (1981).
Heat and Thermodynamics (Sixth Edition).
New York: McGraw-Hill Book Company.
Stuart, B. Palmer & Mircea, S. Rogalski (1996).
Advance University Physics.
SA: Gordon and Breach Science Publisher.
Rao, Y.V.C.
(2004).
An Introduction to Thermodynamics (Revised Edition).
India: University Press (India) Private Limited.
159  PHY207 THERMODYNAMICS 160
