 NATIONAL OPEN UNIVERSITY OF NIGERIA SCHOOL OF MANAGEMENT SCIENCES COURSE CODE: BFN 409 COURSE TITLE: PROJECT EVALUATION  COURSE GUIDE BFN 409 (PROJECT EVALUATION) National Open University of Nigeria, Headquaters 14/16 Ahmadu Bello Way, Victoria Island Lagos Course Code: BFN 409 Course Title: Project Evaluation Course Writer: Kadiri Kayode I.
(National Open University of Nigeria) Olakunbi Lawal (National Open University of Nigeria) Eyanuku Julius P. (National Open University of Nigeria) Programme Leader: Dr. I.D.
Idrisu (National Open University of Nigeria) Course Coordinator: Olakunbi Lawal (National Open University of Nigeria)  COURSE GUIDE Introduction BFN 409: Project Evaluation is a semester course work of two credit units.
It will be available to all students in the School of Business and Human Resources Management.
The course consists of 4 modules involving the subject area of Project Evaluation.
The course guide tells you what the course is all about and the relevant materials that you require to make your study very successful.
Other vital information contained in this course guide deals with Assessment which consists of the Tutor- Market Assignments, and written examination.
The Course Contents The course contents consist of project evaluation from the project cycle to engineering evaluation, demand/market evaluation.
It also includes financial and economic analyses of projects.
Course Aims The aims of this course are to expose you to the knowledge of how to evaluate projects either as a project initiator or an evaluator.
It aims to sharpen your skills in the evaluation of either new projects or existing projects with a view to deciding whether they meet certain predetermined investment criteria.
Course Objectives At the end of this course you should be able to:  discuss the totality of project evaluation  prepare simple project plans/business plans  evaluate projects submitted to you for consideration  analyze the profit ratio and social profit of a project The Course Materials The main components of the course are: 1.
The Course Guide 2.
Study Units 3.
References/Further Readings 4.
Assignments Study Units There are 20 units in this course and they should be studied carefully  Module 1: Project Meaning Unit 1 Project meaning, relation with programme Unit 2 The Project Cycle Unit 3 Project Evaluations – An Introductory Format Unit 4 Factors Affecting Location of Projects Unit 5 Capacity and Production Planning Module 2: Project Planning and Analysis Unit 1 Manpower Planning and Evaluation Unit 2 Demand Analysis Unit 3 Supply Analysis Unit 4 Competition and Marketing Plans Unit 5 Project Cost Analysis Module 3: Project Income and Evaluation Unit 1 Projected Income Statement Unit 2 Projected Cash Flow Statements Unit 3 Projected Balance Sheets Unit 4 Project Evaluation Criteria Unit 5 Introduction to Economic Analyses Module 4 Risk and Cost Analysis Unit 1 The Evaluation Methods Unit 2 Concept of Risk in an Organisation Unit 3 Risk and Uncertainty Unit 4 Assessment of Social Profitability Unit 5 Cost Benefit Analysis Module 1 provides you with the necessary background knowledge you require for your study.
The remaining module 2 to 4 focus attention on the subject matter of project evaluation.
Each study unit will take at least two hours and it includes: The introduction, objectives, main content, exercise, conclusion, summary, references and the Tutor-Marked Assignments (TMAs).
You are required to study the materials, reflect on them and do the exercises.
Some of the exercises require that you visit some organisations and find out how they carry our project evaluation practice.
You should also read the textbooks and other recommended materials.
Assignments In each unit, you will find exercises which you are required to do.
The exercises will enable you to have a better understanding of what you have studied.
Assessment: As a student of the Open and Distance Learning (ODL) system, you are expected to access your learning ability by the extent of your understanding of the units and the entire course.
This assessment prepares you for the final examination.
The final examinations will come at the end of the course.
You are expected to write this examination whose score together with what you made in the TMAs will form the course grade.
Tutor-Marked Assignment In doing the Tutor-Marked Assignments, you are expected to apply what you have learnt in the contents of the study unit.
The TMAs are expected to be computer base for grading.
They constitute 30% of the total score.
Final Examination and Grading At the end of the course, you will write the final examination.
It will attract the remaining 70%.
This makes the final score to be 100%.
Summary The course BFN 409 – Project Evaluation will expose you to the knowledge and understanding of how to evaluate projects.
When you complete the course, you would have been armed with the necessary knowledge required to evaluate projects.
NATIONAL OPEN UNIVERSITY OF NIGERIA BFN 409 PROJECT EVALUATION National Open University of Nigeria, Headquaters 14/16 Ahmadu Bello Way, Victoria Island Lagos Course Code BFN 409 Course Title Project Evaluation Course Writer: Kadiri Kayode I.
(National Open University of Nigeria) Olakunbi Lawal (National Open University of Nigeria) Eyanuku Julius P. (National Open University of Nigeria) Programme Leader: Dr. I.D.
Idrisu (National Open University of Nigeria) Course Coordinator: Olakunbi Lawal (National Open University of Nigeria)  MODULE 1 PROJECT MEANING Unit 1 The Meaning of Project Unit 2 The Project Cycle Unit 3 Project Evaluation – An Introductory Format Unit 4 Factors Affecting the Location of Projects Unit 5 Capacity and Production Planning Unit 6 The Concept Of Engineering Evaluation MAIN COURSE CONTENTS 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objectives 3.0 Main Content 3.1 .1 Definition of Project 3.1.2 The characteristics of a Project 3.1.3 The Differences between Project and a Programme 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutor-Marked Assignment 7.0 References/Further Readings 1.0 INTRODUCTION Ordinarily, a project is an undertaking that requires commitment of human and material resources.
Projects require commitment and deployment of resources.
As a business manager of the future, you will encounter various projects in your work place or environment.
Most of the projects are likely to be private sector driven.
They may be manufacturing projects or they could be petrochemical or civil engineering projects.
Your key task, as a project evaluator, is to carefully consider each and every project brought to your attention and see how useful or valuable they are.
Our first task and which we will accomplish in this unit is to examine the concept of a project cycle.
This concept is very important as it gives us an overview of projects.
The knowledge so gained, will lead us throughout the duration of this course.
2.0 OBJECTIVES At the end of this unit, you should be able to: • explain the meaning of project • describe the various underlying characteristics of a project.
3.0 MAIN CONTENT 3.1.1 Definition of Project Project has been defined in various ways.
Some authorities see projects as mere activities while others see them as programmes of action.
Longman Dictionary of Contemporary English defines a project as “an important and carefully planned piece of work that is intended to build or produce something new, or to deal with a problem”.
From this simple definition, we can see that a project, apart from being Important, should be carefully planned so as to produce something.
Some of the things that a project seeks to produce may be tangible or intangible.
A motorcycle is a tangible product but conducting a census is not a tangible product.
Also, A project is a temporary endeavor undertaken to create a unique product, service, or result.
Like most organizational effort, the major goal of a project is to satisfy a customer’s need.
Beyond this fundamental similarity, the characteristics of a project help differentiate it from other endeavors of the organization.
3.1.2 Characteristics of a Project The major characteristic of a project are as follows; 1.
An established objective.
2.
A defined life span with a beginning and an end.
3.
Usually, the involvement of several departments and professionals.
4.
Typically, doing something that has never been done before.
5.
Specific time, cost, and performance requirements.
First, projects have a define objective – The following are examples of define objectives of projects • Construction of a 50-bed hospital at Ikeja by the Lagos State Government.
Or constructing a 12-story apartment complex by January 1 or releasing version 2.0 of a specific software package as quickly as possibly.
• Dualisation of the Benin-Lagos highway by the Federal Ministry of Works.
• Sinking of 10 water bore-holes at Ikorodu town by the local government council.
From whatever angle we see these projects, some of their features are that they will require the commitment and deployment of scare resources.
3.1.3 Differences between Project and Programme What a project is not; project should not be confused with everyday work.
A project is not routine, repetitive work!
Ordinary daily work typically requires doing the same or similar work over and over, while a project is done only once; a new product or service exists when the project is completed.
Programme versus project; in practice the term project and programme cause confusion.
They are often used synonymously.
A programme is a group of related projects designed to accomplish a common goal over an extended period of time.
Each project within a programme has a project manager.
The major differences lie in scale and time span.
Programme management is the process of managing a group of ongoing, inter- dependent, related projects in a coordinated way to achieve strategic objectives.
For example, a pharmaceutical organization could have a programme for curing cancer, different project are outlined to achieve the set programme.
SELF ASSESSMENT EXERCISE Discuss Differences between Project and Programme .
4.0 Conclusion This unit has treated the meaning of project, the characteristics, differences and it relation with programme.
This is an introductory aspect to the study of project evaluation.
Now that we have the basic foundation, we shall further our discussion with Project cycle as an introductory framework on project evaluation.
5.0 Summary In this unit we have discussed the meaning of project.
We have seen the characteristics of project, its relation to programme and their differences.
6.0 TUTOR-MARKED ASSIGNMENT 1.
Explain what you understand by the Characteristics of a Project.
2.
List and discuss the various objectives of a project.
UNIT 2 THE PROJECT CYCLE CONTENTS 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objectives 3.0 Main Content 3.1 The Project Cycle – Meaning and Stages 3.1.1 The Project Idea Stage 3.1.2 The Project Identification Stage 3.1.3 The Project Evaluation Stage 3.1.4 The Project Selection Stage 3.1.5 The Project Execution Stage 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutor-Marked Assignment 7.0 References/Further Readings 1.0 INTRODUCTION Ordinarily, a project is an undertaking that requires concentrated effort.
Projects require commitment and deployment of resources.
As a business manager of the future, you will encounter various projects in your work place or environment.
Most of the projects are likely to be private sector driven.
They may be manufacturing projects or they could be petrochemical or civil engineering projects.
Your key task, as a project evaluator, is to carefully consider each and every project brought to your attention and see how useful or valuable they are.
Our first task and which we will accomplish in this unit is to examine the concept of a project cycle.
This concept is very important as it gives us an overview of projects.
The knowledge so gained, will lead us throughout the duration of this course.
2.0 OBJECTIVES At the end of this unit, you should be able to: • explain a project cycle • describe the sequences in a project cycle.
3.0 MAIN CONTENT 3.1 The Project Cycle – Meaning and Stages A project cycle tries to describe the various stages that are involved, from the conception of a project idea to when the project is executed or actually takes off.
Understanding a project cycle is very important as it enables us to get the total picture of a project.
We will now examine the various stages of a project cycle.
Basically, projects consist of the projection of ideas and activities into new endeavours.
As earlier discussed, projects may be public sector projects in agriculture, defense or transportation.
A major railway link from Ibadan to Onitsha may constitute a major public sector project.
A new brewery springing up at Enugu is a typical example of a private sector initiative.
But whatever type of project that we are considering, we need to first understand what is usually known as the project cycle.
So before we go into the real subject of our discussion –Project Evaluation, we need to build a strong background.
This background is in the form of proper understanding of how a project is conceived.
It explains who conceives a project.
It also explains the flow of activities up to the execution of the project.
SELF ASSESSMENT EXERCISE 1 List the stages of a project cycle.
Customer Marketing Design Production Planning Purchasing Production Figure 2 A manufacturing project cycle 3.1.1 The Project Idea Stage The project idea stage is the first stage of a project cycle.
The idea about a project arises from a variety of sources within the internal environment or market place.
New project ideas could originate from within an organisation or from outside the organisation.
If the idea originates from within, it could be from a sales person who has encountered some success or problem with customers while performing his or her functions.
You will also realise that a new project idea could emanate from outside an organisation.
Coming from outside an organisation, it could be requests from existing customers asking for bigger or better products.
New project ideas may fall into any of the following categories.
• Proposal to add new products to existing lines: A company with existing product lines may decide to add new products to its existing lines.
• Proposal to expand capacity in existing lines: A company may have a proposal to expand capacity to enable it take advantage of enlarged market opportunities.
We need to stress that new project ideas may originate from any level in an organisation.
A factory cleaner within an organisation may come up with a new product idea.
Also an executive director in an organization may also generate a new project idea.
3.1.2 The Project Identification Stage After the project idea stage, the next stage is the project identification stage.
The project identification stage consolidates the idea stage.
Project ideas are not really useful unless they are clearly identified and put down in a systematic manner for further processing.
The idea to introduce a new product into the market may come from a company salesman who is very familiar with the market.
At the boardroom room level, the entire organisation has to see the project idea properly and clearly identify it as a possible area of business investment.
The totality of the new idea would be considered.
3.1.3 The Project Evaluation Stage When a project has been identified, the next step is to evaluate the project.
Project evaluation involves the estimation of the benefits and costs of a project.
Benefits and costs should be measured in terms of cash flows.
We have to emphasise at this point that the estimation of the cash flow of a project is a very difficult task.
It is difficult in the sense that the cash flow to be estimated is future cash flow.
For example in the year 2007, we will tried to estimate the cash flow for the year 2008.
In a corporate setup, the evaluation of projects should be carried out by a team of experts drawn from the various departments like production, marketing, accounts and administration.
The team of experts should be objective in their evaluation of projects.
Alternatively, the evaluation of a project may be contracted to a third party like consultants.
Contracting evaluation of projects to tends to eliminate bias.
3.1.4 The Project Selection Stage After the project evaluation stage, the next stage is the project selection stage.
Faced with an array of projects with different values and worth, there is need to select which projects to embarked upon.
There is no standard procedure for selecting projects as this will differ from benefit seen.
The important thing to note is that the project selection function is a top management responsibility which in most cases goes to Board of Directors of an organisation.
In selecting projects, management usually considers the financial outlays involved andmatches them with the financial capabilities of the firm.
For example, a firm that has only N10,000,000 (ten million naira only) be considering a new investment that involves a capital outlay of N40,000,000 (forty million naira only) except if it can source money externally e.g., from banks.
3.1.5 The Project Execution Stage The project execution stage is the final stage in the project cycle.
After a project has been selected, it moves on to the execution stage.
In most organisations, the responsibility for execution of projects is vested on a project management team raised by top management.
The function of the team is to ensure that the budget for the project is spent entirely on the project and that the project is completed on schedule.
In an ideal organisation, the project management team usually prepares a monthly budget consideration report on projects for top management consideration.
This is important for project monitoring and control.
SELF ASSESSMENT EXERCISE 2 Discuss three sources of new project ideas.
4.0 CONCLUSION This unit has treated the concept of the project cycle which is a stepping stone into our study of project evaluation.
Now that we have built the necessary background, we shall be discussing Project Analysis – an introductory frame work in the next unit.
5.0 SUMMARY In this unit we have discussed the concept of the project cycle.
We have seen that it starts from the project idea stage, goes to the identification stage, to the evaluation stage.
From the evaluation stage it moves to the selection stage and finally to the project execution stage.
6.0 TUTOR-MARKED ASSIGNMENT 1.
Explain what you understand by the term “project cycle”.
2.
List and discuss the various stages involved in a project cycle.
7.0 REFERENCES/FURTHER READINGS Leon Ikpe, (1999).
Project Analysis and Evaluation.
Lagos: Impressed Publishers.
UNIT 3 PROJECT EVALUATION – AN INTRODUCTORY FORMAT CONTENTS 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objective 3.0 Main Content 3.1 Project Evaluation – An Introductory Format 3.1.1 The Technical and Engineering Segment 3.1.2 The Management Segment 3.1.3 The Demand and Market Segment 3.1.4 The Financial Segment 3.1.5 The Economic Segment 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutor-Marked Assignment 7.0 References/Further Readings 1.0 INTRODUCTION In the first unit, we discussed the concept of the project cycle which is very crucial to our understanding of project evaluation.
In this unit, we will discuss project evaluation in a proper context.
In doing this, we shall build an introductory format which will assist us in our discussion.
Evaluation of a project involves a careful consideration of the totality of the project with a view to seeing how useful or valuable it is Evaluation enables us to attach proper financial value to a project and also allows us the liberty of comparing it with other projects.
You will note that an analysis is not done in a vacuum.
It is usually documented.
A problem usually encountered in project evaluation is how to arrange the work to make it readable or understandable.
A very simple format which we will adopt in the evaluation of projects is one that recognizes the various functional aspects or units of an organization.
2.0 OBJECTIVE At the end of this unit, you should be able to: • explain the format for project evaluation.
3.0 MAIN CONTENT 3.1 Project Evaluation – An Introductory Format The introductory format for the evaluation of projects is the arrangement of our work into carefully defined segments.
We will now discuss the various segments of project evaluation.
3.1.1 The Technical and Engineering Segment The technical and engineering segment of project evaluation tries to evaluate the total technical and engineering soundness of a project.
It also tries to relate the project to the environment in which it is located.
We will now proceed to draw up a checklist for the technical engineering segment of project evaluation.
3.1.2 The Management Segment After evaluating the technical and engineering segments of projects, the next segment we need to discuss is the management segment.
The management segment focuses attention on the management aspects of a project.
Projects only become successful if they are well managed.
We do not need to over-stress the importance of management.
Again, we need to evaluate the legal form of the organization that is evaluated and see if it can carry the project in question.
3.1.3 The Demand and Market Segment The next segment we shall consider is the demand and market segment.
This segment focuses attention on the demand for goods and services and relates it to the market.
An evaluation of the demand for goods and services is very important because demand translates to revenues.
Also, we need to evaluate supply situations in the market.
These two topics will be treated in detail later.
We will now examine a checklist for the demand and market segment.
SELF ASSESSMENT EXERCISE List and explain five items that you hope to find in the checklist of the management segment of a project evaluation.
3.1.4 The Financial Segment The financial segment of project evaluation focuses attention on the financial aspects of projects.
In discussing financial issues, we are considering all financial aspects of a project such as start- up costs, financial plans, renames and costs and income statements.
3.1.5 The Economic Segment The last segment we will consider is the economic segment.
The economic segment considers projects from the macroeconomic point of view.
Economic analysis tries to measure the benefits and costs of projects in terms of their value to society as a whole.
4.0 CONCLUSION What we have achieved in this unit is to develop a format for conducting the evaluation of projects.
5.0 SUMMARY We have discussed the format of project evaluation.
We did identify the following as segments of project evaluation.
• The technical and engineering segment • The management segment • The demand and market segment • The financial segment • The economic segment 6.0 TUTOR-MARKED ASSIGNMENT Discuss the key segments of project evaluation 7.0 REFERENCES/FURTHER READINGS Leon Ikpe (1999).
Project Analysis and Evaluation.
Lagos: Impressed Publishers.
UNIT 4 FACTORS AFFECTING THE LOCATION OF PROJECTS CONTENTS 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objective 3.0 Main Content 3.1 Factors Affecting the Location of Projects 3.1.1 Nearness to Markets 3.1.2 Nearness to Sources of Raw Materials 3.1.3 Nearness to Power Supply 3.1.4 Nearness to Water Supply 3.1.5 Availability of Good Road Networks 3.1.6 Availability of a Good Rail System 3.1.7 Nearness to Airports 3.1.8 Availability of Land 3.1.9 Political Considerations 3.1.10 Intervention Projects 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutor-Marked Assignment 7.0 References/Further Readings 1.0 INTRODUCTION In Unit 2 we discussed the format for the evaluation of projects.
In this unit, we shall discuss factors affecting the location of projects.
This is important because it enables us as analysts to have a proper knowledge of the key issues relating to project locations.
Understanding this unit will give you the advantage of knowing in advance what should be and what should not be when issues of project location are raised.
For example if a project is located in an area without any justification, the project analyst should be aware of this based on his or her previous knowledge of project location issues.
2.0 OBJECTIVE At the end of this unit, you should be able to: • explain the factors affecting the location of projects.
3.0 MAIN CONTENT 3.1 Factors Affecting the Location of Projects Whether in the private sector or the public sector, projects are located according to set guidelines.
In the private sector, project location is based purely on economic guidelines, usually put in place by the various organisations.
These guidelines regulate the ways and means by which projects are located.
In the public sector, projects may be located according to a different set of guidelines and they may not be driven by Profit motive.
It is the discussion of these factors affecting the location of projects that will now take our time.
3.1.1 Nearness to Markets A major factor affecting the location of projects is their nearness to markets.
Most businesses are established primarily for profit.
A business organisation will make profit if the goods or Produced are purchased by third parties.
It is the difference between revenues and costs that constitute profit.
You will easily and quickly realise that most populations that constitute markets are located mainly in the urban areas of Nigeria.
So we shall hold firmly to the fact that the nearness to markets is a major factor influencing the location of most projects in Nigeria.
Most of the entire population of Nigeria is located in such areas like Lagos, Onitsha, Port Harcourt, Kano, Ibadan, Abuja, etc.
Because of this, most businesses and government establishments are located near the critical markets that they wish to serve.
That is to say those businesses follow their markets.
Concentrations of people or critical markets are very important to corporate officials who design marketing plans.
If you take a good look at your environment, you will realise that a lot of companies are located within Lagos.
It is not by accident.
Rather it is by design.
Businesses are attracted to areas of core concentration of people who constitute vital markets.
3.1.2 Nearness to Sources of Raw Materials Nearness to sources of raw materials is another strong factor affecting the location of projects, especially manufacturing concerns.
Service based projects can locate without reference to any raw material source.
But manufacturing concerns cannot afford to gloss over the issue of raw materials.
For a manufacturing concern, the raw material source is very important because in most cases, raw materials may constitute over 80% of a product.
If a company decides to establish its factory very far away from its raw material source, it is going to end up spending a lot of money to transport raw materials from the source to its factory.
This will mean added costs and in the long run, the company may not be able to compete effectively in its chosen market.
If you sit back and think deeply, you will see patterns of industrial locations that tend to suggest that most industrial projects are located close to the sources of raw materials.
The Nigerian Coal Corporation Enugu is located in Enugu close to the source of coal.
Most cocoa processing firms are located in the western parts of Nigeria because cocoa is found in abundant quantities there.
In the eastern parts of the country, oil mills and vegetable oil plants litter the economic landscape simply because the oil palm grows wildly there and it is also the major raw material for palm oil manufacture and vegetable oil.
If you go up north, you will also realise that the tea producing company is located at the Mambilla Plateau because the plateau is very rich in tea cultivation.
3.1.3 Nearness to Power Supply Power supply is a very critical input in business, whether service based or manufacturing based.
In the case of service-based concerns like banks, electricity will be needed to power computers, servers and other equipment needed to provide service to customers.
In a manufacturing concern, electricity is everything.
Without electricity, a manufacturing concern is not likely to operate.
Electricity is needed to mix chemicals, to drive machinery and equipment and to start electric motors etc.
So in the choice of where to locate, every concerned establishment or business should properly address the issue of power supply.
Interruptions in power supply create production problems for industries; this also translates to inability to meet production schedules, and inability to meet production schedules leads to frequent customer complaints for failed deliveries.
Frequent failures to deliver goods on schedule may lead to loss of customers.
In our peculiar Nigerian situation, irregular power supply has taken its toll on the manufacturing sector and even service-based activities.
The result of this poor public power supply has led most organisations to operate their own plants but with the attendant high operating costs of both fuel and servicing of generating plants.
3.1.4 Nearness to Water Supply Water is very important in business especially in manufacturing industries.
Many manufacturing companies use a lot of water for manufacturing activities.
Soft drink manufacturers for example, use a lot of water in the production process.
In the agricultural sector, garri processing factories use a lot of water and they are attracted to areas where there is plentiful supply of water.
3.15 Availability of Good Road Networks Availability of good road networks is another major factor influencing the location of projects in the economic landscape.
Road networks are very important.
They are important for the movement of essential raw materials from raw material sources to factories and also for the movement of finished goods to the markets where they are needed.
Most investors in the economy are usually attracted to areas with good road networks.
Good road net works reduce the cost of transportation.
3.1.6 Availability of a Good Rail System Another important factor influencing the location of projects is the availability of a good rail system.
A good railway system ensures cheap transportation and evacuation of raw materials from their sources to factory locations and also the movement of finished goods to markets.
You may observe that the development of trading locations in Nigeria seemed to have followed the railway system.
The North – Eraaislwtearyn system runs through towns today which have become trading posts.
Aba, Umuahia, etc., all enjoy good trading activities because they are located along railway line routes.
3.1.7 Nearness to Airports Another identified factor affecting location of projects is nearness to airports.
A lot of businesses tend to be located close to Airports.
encourage quick movement of people to and from various locations.
If you take a good look at the country today, the towns that are served with air links tend to be enjoying faster economic growth and development.
Port Harcourt, Calabar, Enugu, etc., enjoy good air links which facilitate the movement of people.
3.1.8 Availability of Land In economic theory, there are four factors of production namely: land, labour, capital and the entrepreneur.
Each of these factors is very important.
However, Land appears to assume very important dimensions especially where large scale agricultural projects are involved.
Very large agricultural projects like oil palm plantations require vast areas of land before they can become profitable.
A cassava farm which will feed a garri processing plant needs to be very vast in terms of land space.
You may realise that invariably projects are attracted to areas where there is adequate land.
3.1.9 Political Considerations The location of most business projects is driven mainly by economic motives.
Private sector projects are mainly profit-driven and their location is based only on economic merits.
Also the public sector, since the era of economic reforms, has bought the idea of economic reforms and is now locating projects based on economic merit and viability.
However, not all projects are located based on sound economic judgment.
Political considerations occasionally play very important roles in deciding where a project will be located.
For example an oil refinery may be located very far away from crude oil sources.
The cost of transporting crude oil to the refinery may result in the refinery operating at a loss.
3.1.10 Intervention Projects Intervention projects are those projects which are conceived and located within specific areas to correct inequalities in distribution of resources.
In the emerging political dispensation, the issue of uneven development has been brought to the front line of discussions.
Complicating the discussions is the issue of resource control and the attendant political and social implications.
The Niger Delta region of Nigeria produces a major percentage of the oil revenues of Nigeria.
Recent thinking is that the region has Not received sufficient attention as a major oil producing region.
Currently, the federal government is focusing attention on the region and a lot of developmental projects are now springing up in the area.
SELF ASSESSMENT EXERCISE List and discuss four factors that have influenced the location Of industrial projects in your present environment.
4.0 CONCLUSION In this unit, we have discussed those factors which affect the location of projects in Nigeria.
The projects may be private or public sector projects.
The factors may be economic or in some cases be political.
5.0 SUMMARY In this unit, we have discussed those factors that affect the location of projects in Nigeria.
They range from market driven forces to political forces.
We have also discussed intervention projects which are a new feature in our economy.
6.0 TUTOR-MARKED ASSIGNMENT a.
Mention four factors that are likely to influence the location of projects in Nigeria.
b.
Discuss the four factors that you have mentioned.
7.0 REFERENCES/FURTHER READINGS Leon Ikpe (1999).
Project Analysis and Evaluation.
Lagos: Impressed Publishers.
UNIT 5 CAPACITY AND PRODUCTION PLANNING CONTENTS 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objectives 3.0 Main Content 3.1 Capacity and Production Planning 3.2 Concepts of Capacity 3.3 The Nature of the Production Plan 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutor-Marked Assignment 70.
References/Further Readings 1.0 INTRODUCTION In Unit 3, we discussed factors affecting location of projects.
There we examined such factors as nearness to critical markets, nearness to sources of power and other factors.
In this unit, we shall discuss capacity and production planning.
2.0 OBJECTIVES At the end of this unit, you should be able to: • explain capacity and production planning • describe the practical applications in industry.
3.0 MAIN CONTENT 3.1 Capacity and Production Planning Our interest in capacity and production planning is for two main reasons.
First, it could be that we are project initiators trying to draw up a business plan for a start-up project in which case we want to know well in advance what the capacities of our plants will be and the production plan.
Understanding capacity of a project assists us to design and construct such items like cash flow statements, etc.
On the other hand, we could be analysts on the other side of the fence.
In this case, we must have been presented with a business plan or a project plan and have been asked to evaluate the project.
So no matter on which side we are, we must understand capacity and production plans.
No firm undertakes to produce goods without production plans.
Production plans are linked to the firm’s demand for goods and services.
We shall now discuss “capacity” in relation to production plans.
The production plans are in relation to the manufacture of tangible goods.
3.2 Concepts of Capacity Ordinarily, capacity means “ability to do something”.
But in project terms, the capacity of a plant is a reference to the output of the plant or machine.
When discussing plant capacity, we should realise that there are three types of capacity namely: • Installed capacity • Attainable capacity • Actual capacity  Installed Capacity The installed capacity of a plant or machine is the maximum output in terms of tangible goods which the plant or machine is capable of producing at a given time.
The capacity is usually given by the manufacturers of the equipment.
We can therefore define installed capacity in terms of the following: • Number of goods produced per minute • Number of goods produced per hour • Number of goods produced per day • Number of goods produced per year In practice, we usually define installed capacity in terms of capacity.
The best way to visualise installed capacity is to consider a Mercedes Benz car that has a speedometer limit of 200km per hour.
In effect, 200km/hour is the maximum speed the car can attain according to the manufacturers.
This 200km per hour is the installed capacity of the car.
SELF ASSESSMENT EXERCISE 1 A plant can produce 2000 sachets of water per hour, all things being equal.
What is the installed capacity of the plant per annum?
Attainable Capacity We have just discussed the installed capacity of a plant or machine and described it as the maximum output that a plant or machine can achieve.
However in real life, no machine can work for 60 minutes in an hour, 24 hours a day and 365 days in a year without breaking down.
There must be production loss arising from servicing of the machines, changes in shift, repairs of machines, etc.
Because of these reasons, we now have a more realistic capacity which in the literature is known as the attainable capacity of a plant/machinery.
The attainable capacity captures the effect of plant servicing and or repairs on production output.
Let us go back to our Mercedes Benz car.
We said it has an installed capacity of 200km per hour.
Practically, we know that no person will like to drive a car at a speed of 200km per hour.
Everyone should be thinking of safety.
We could agree amongst ourselves that 100km per hour constitutes a safe speed.
In that line of thinking, we can now define 100km per hour as the attainable capacity of the car.
This is the speed at which a sane person can drive the car.
Actual Capacity Actual capacity refers to the real output that a plant can achieve given the market situation.
We should realise that the actual capacity of a plant depends on a lot of factors.
First is the issue of the market for the plant’s output of goods.
A plant should produce only what it can sell at a given time.
Again financial resources can limit the output of a plant because firms require finance to purchase raw materials and other inputs for production.
3.3 The Nature of the Production Plan The production plan shows exactly the proposed output of a plant or project under consideration.
In constructing the production plan, information on the plant capacity, shift arrangements, raw material sourcing, etc., are all used.
Below is the production plan of a vegetable oil refining plant that uses palm kernel oil as base raw material.
You are requested to properly study the production plan and make sure you understand it.
An Example of a Production Plan The Plant The plant under consideration is a modern vegetable oil refining plant using palm kernel oil (PKO) as base raw material.
The installed capacity of the plant is 50 metric tons per day of 24 hours.
Working on a shift of 10 hours, an output of 20.83 tons is possible while two (2) shifts of 10 hours each will yield daily output of 41.66 tons of refined vegetable oil.
Because of the need to accommodate plant repairs, servicing, public holidays, etc., the plant will be operated for 300 working days in a year.
Proposed capacity is based on 2 shifts of 10 hours each per day.
To ensure that there is uninterrupted supply of palm kernel oil to feed the plant, the project promoter already has in operation 26 Muar ban Lee Palm Kernel Oil (PKO) expellers with a total Installed capacity of 220 tons/day.
Table 6: Annual Capacity/Production Plan (Metric Tons) Year 1 Year 2 Year 3 Year 4 - 5 2007 2008 2009 2010-2011 Installed Capacity 18,250 18,250 18,250 18,250 Attainable Capacity 16,425 16,424 16,425 16,425 Proposed Capacity 12,498 12,498 12,498 12,498 Propped capacity is based on the following: Year 1 to 5: 2 shifts of 10 hours each per day and 300 workday/year.
Attainable capacity is 90% of installed capacity.
Installed capacity: Installed capacity is 50 tons per day x 365 days.
This translates to 18,250 tons per annum Production Activities STAGE ONE Palm Kernel Crushing Stage one of production involves the crushing of palm kernel to yield palm kernel oil (PKO).
The residues are palm kernel cake (PKC) and palm kernel sludge.
Palm kernel cake is sold to feed mills as a major ingredient for animal feed.
Palm kernel sludge is sold to soap manufacturers.
Refining Of Oil to Yield Edible Vegetable  Refining Of Oil to Yield Edible Vegetable S TAGE TWO Stage two of production involves the refining of the crude Palm Kernel Oil (PKO) to yield edible vegetable oil.
In refining of the oil, fatty acid is collected.
The fatty acid is sold to soap manufacturers.
Activity Flow Figure 3: Activity flow in a vegetable oil refining plant Machine and Equipment Required The vegetable oil refining plant consists of the following equipment broken down into various sections: 1.
Continuous oil pre-treatment section 2.
Continuous bleaching section 3.
Continuous physical refining and deodorising section 4.
Thermal oil heating unit 5.
Water cooling and recirculation system 6.
Steam generation and distribution system These machinery and equipment will be sourced from overseas.
However, in addition, the following items form part of the equipment required but they will be sourced locally: 1.
2 units crude oil tank 200 tons 2 1 unit refined oil tank 300 tons 3.
1 unit fatty acid tank 50 tons 4.
1 unit furnace oil tank.
Vegetable Oil Refining Process Description Pre Treatment The crude oil received in the crude oil tanks, if required, is given a hot water treatment and allowed to settle to remove settled impurities along with water.
The oil is then heated till drying and transferred to high shear mixer wherein the requisite quantity of phosphoric acid is dosed in to allow conversion of non hydra table phosphotides.
The acidulate mixture is then given a retention time for complete reaction of phosphoric acid in the reaction vessel.
Bleaching The heated oil (acid conditioned, degummed or neutralised) enters the inlet mixing tube of the vacuum bleacher.
Bleaching earth is proportioned by a valve dosing system that also desecrates the before it enters the vessel.
The earth is introduced under the oil spray in the mixing tube for improved mixing, so that earth does not enter the bleaching vacuum system.
The earth absorbs any residual gums soap as well as trace metals, colour bodies and other polar impurities.
The bleacher has multiple agitated compartments and operates under vacuum to ensure complete moisture and air removal.
The dried oil and earth mixture is discharged by the bleacher discharge pump to one of the filters where the spent earth is removed.
The filtered oil is collected in the bleached oil receiver.
The bleached oil pump sends the oil fiter via one of the alternating polish filters.
Filter Management The standard bleaching system is based on the use of two filters of which one is on line while the other is being cleaned and prepared for the next cycle.
When a filter has reached maximum capacity, as indicated by high feed pressure, it is taken offline for cleaning and replaced by the other filter.
The cleaning procedure begins by first pressurizing the filters with steam to expel residual oil into the Heel Tank and dry the spent filter cake.
The oil recovered from the filter cake is collected in the tank and can usually be recycled to the bleacher.
After drying, a bottom discharge valve on the filter is opened and the leaves pneumatically vibrated so that the spent cake is dislodged and discharged via a hopper.
The filter is then closed and prepared for the next batch.
Before going online again it can be pre-coated with filter aid and/or bleaching earth in order to seal the filter.
Raw Material Requirements The key raw material required for the refining of vegetable oil is palm kernel oil (PKO).
The rest are additives.
Table 7: Raw Material Requirement Annual Input-Output Analysis The annual input–output analysis seeks to determine the inflowOf manufacturing raw materials and their corresponding outflow of products.
It assumes 300 working days per annum.
It aggregates the daily input-output analysis.
4.0 CONCLUSION We have discussed capacity and production planning which are very important aspects of a project because they both relate the project to the market.
Capacity and production plans enable the firm to plan well in advance what to produce and in what quantity too.
5.0 SUMMARY We have discussed capacity and production planning and have established the link between them.
We also used an example of vegetable oil refining plant to explain the production plan.
6.0 TUTOR-MARKED ASSIGNMENT 1.
What do you understand by the installed capacity of a plant?
2.
How is it different from the attainable capacity?
7.0 REFERENCES/FURTHER READINGS Leon Ikpe (1999): Project Analysis and Evaluation.
Lagos: Impressed Publishers.
MODULE 2: Man Power Planning and Analysis Unit 1 Manpower Planning and Evaluation Unit 2 Demand Analysis Unit 3 Supply Analysis Unit 4 Competition and Marketing Plans Unit 5 Project Cost Analysis UNIT 1 MANPOWER PLANNING AND EVALUATION CONTENTS 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objectives 3.0 Main Content 3.1 Manpower Planning and Evaluation 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutor-Marked Assignment 7.0 References/Further Readings 1.0 INTRODUCTION In Unit 5, we discussed the concept of an engineering evaluation of a project.
Engineering evaluation of a project as we saw seeks to evaluate the engineering soundness of a project.
This is very crucial especially when the project will be ranked or compared with another project.
Every enterprise requires labour.
It is labour that coordinates the other factors of production like land and capital.
In terms of project evaluation, our concern is to look at the project and examine the human resources aspects.
In terms of manpower planning and evaluation, we need to examine the following: • Key employees • The key responsibilities • The qualifications • Hours of work • Training and development of the staff • Remuneration of the staff 2.0 OBJECTIVES At the end of this unit, you should be able to: • explain manpower planning and evaluation • discuss the practical applications in industry.
3.0 MAIN CONTENT 3.1 Manpower Planning and Evaluation In general terms organising manpower in an organisation is the process of assigning duties amongst personnel and coordinating efforts towards the attainment of the firm’s objectives.
But before organising, there must be a plan.
It is the plan that leads to the shaping of an organisation’s structure.
Conceptually, the project initiative in structuring the organisation should be concerned about two critical things.
• Job definitions in the project under consideration • Departmentalisation which follows job definitions.
In doing this, similar jobs are grouped together to form a department.
The most common way of organising a project is by function.
For example a manufacturing plant may be divided into three type’s namely: • Production • Marketing • Finance There are two uses of the manpower plan.
The first use is by the project initiator.
When the project initiator is structuring the project, the manpower plan definitely is a critical component.
The project initiator needs to know well in advance who the key employees will be.
The key employees will depend on the nature of the business in question.
If the business is, for example, soap manufacturing, then a lot of the production staff should be industrial or pure scientists plus other core support staff.
Apart from that, each employee should have their various responsibilities.
For example, in a soap plant, you will have production staff and also quality control staff.
They have difference responsibility.
And of course, the qualifications of the various staff including their years of experience should be properly documented and evaluated.
The second use of the manpower plan is that financial institutions like banks, before granting loans or overdraft for a project, usually insist on being convinced of the management skills that will be available or are actually available in the firm that seeks to borrow money.
They will look at the people concerned, their qualifications and match them with the jobs allocated to them.
Hours of work and the salary and wages of the entire work force are another critical input.
The salary and wages of those working on a project is actually expected to hover around the average for the industry.
In practical terms, the manpower of a project can be grouped into two namely: • Direct labour • Indirect labour When we talk about direct labour in a manufacturing project, e.g., a soap plant, we are talking about staff attached to the actual production of the soap.
The production manager, production supervisor and factory attendants are all direct labour.
Indirect labours on the other hand are those workers who do not work directly on the manufactured goods but indirectly.
They include accounting and admin staff, marketing staff and others.
We have an example of a manpower plan.
It contains the following: • Manpower requirements of the project broken down into direct and indirect labour • Remuneration of the staff SELF ASSESSMENT EXERCISE List and explain four departments that could be found in a big manufacturing firm.
Post Specifications Job Functions General manager Degree in sciences, To oversee the general engineering or management of the factory but with previous experience in a water packaging outfit Accounts/admin.
OND Accounting with at General administration and officer least 2 years post keeping of the books of qualification experience account.
Reports to the General Manager Marketing officer B.Sc or HND Marketing Reports to the general with previous experience in manager and is in charge of marketing of packaged water marketing of the company Products Sales clerk Senior Secondary School Reporting to the marketing Certificate or GCE officer, the sales clerk will be responsible for all clerical duties concerning sales Accounts clerk Senior Secondary School Reporting to Certificate or GCE Accounts/admin officer, the accounts clerk will be responsible for clerical accounting duties including receipt of cash.
Secretary OND secretarial studies with Reporting to the general at least 2 years experience in manager, the secretary will a busy organisation be in charge of all secretarial duties Drivers FSLC but with good Carriage and general knowledge of the distribution of the company environment products Security staff FSLC General security duties (b) Direct Labour  Post Specifications Job Functions Production manager HND water technology To oversee the with at least 2 years production function in experience post NYSC the water plant Shift supervisors OND in science with To supervise relevant experience production shifts Technicians City & Guild/Trade Maintenance of the Test mechanical and electrical components of the plant Laboratory technician OND Laboratory Reporting to the Science production manager, the laboratory technician will be in charge of quality control Factory Senior Secondary General factory duties attendants/machine School Certificate or including operation of operators GCE the water filing machine, pre-market packaging of the sachet water and loading.
(c) Summary of Manpower Requirements Including Outlays  No Required Annual Outlays (N) Indirect Labour No.
General manager 1 420,000 Accounts/admin officer 1 240,000 Marketing officer 1 240,000 Sales clerk 3 360,000 Accounts clerk 2 240,000 Secretary 1 180,000 Driver 3 288,000 Security staff 4 336,000 Sub-Total 16 2,304,000 Direct Labour Production manager 1 360,000 Technicians 2 288,000 Shift Supervisors 4 720,000 Laboratory technician 1 180,000 Factory attendants/machine 12 1,296,000 Operators Sub-Total 20 2,844,000 Grand Total 36 5,148,000 Staff Welfare 514,800 Total Salary, 5,662,800 Wages/Welfare 4.0 CONCLUSION This unit has treated manpower planning and evaluation which is a critical aspect of evaluation of projects.
The unit has focused attention on the manpower aspects of a project 5.0 SUMMARY In this unit, we have discussed manpower planning and evaluation.
We have seen how manpower planning involves the assigning of duties to personnel and have also tried to relate manpower to a firm’s objectives.
We also saw that departmentalisation is a critical aspect of a manpower plan.
Also we discussed the use of the manpower plan.
We saw that the manpower plan can be used by two different groups of people – the project initiator and the evaluator.
6.0 TUTOR-MARKED ASSIGNMENT Why is a manpower plan important in a start-up project?
7.0 REFERENCES/FURTHER READINGS Leon Ikpe (1999).
Project Analysis and Evaluation.
Lagos: Impressed Publishers.
UNIT 2 DEMAND ANALYSIS CONTENTS 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objectives 3.0 Main Content 3.1 The Demand Analysis – Analytical Framework 3.2 Analysis of a Population Data 3.3 Potential Customers 3.4 Evaluating the Size of the Market 3.5 Forecasting Future Demand 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutor-Marked Assignment 7.0 References/Further Readings 1.0 INTRODUCTION In Unit 1, we discussed manpower planning and evaluation.
Here we saw the fact that labour is one of the most important aspects of a project whether a start-up or an on-going one.
We also used an example to drive home our point.
In this unit, we shall discuss demand analysis.
Demand analysis is one first steps towards looking at a market.
Demand analysis is the starting point of our discussions concerning the project and the external environment which is the market.
A project is established for a purpose –to serve a market.
The demand analysis is the measurement and forecasting of demand for goods and services of a project.
It is like a peep into the future, which as you know, is unknown.
A project will survive if the products and services produced by the project are acceptable to the market.
Acceptability means that consumers are willing to pay for the goods or services.
Demand analysis is a tool used by the project initiator to analyse the total picture of the market that he/she wants to play in.
Likewise, providers of loanable funds like banks also conduct demand analysis to ensure that the projects they wish to sponsor financially have the chances to survive in the market.
So from whatever angle you look at it, demand analysis is important.
2.0 OBJECTIVES At the end of this unit, you should be able to: • explain what a demand analysis is • discuss how to conduct demand analysis.
3.0 MAIN CONTENT 3.1 The Demand Analysis – Analytical Framework To arrange our discussion in an orderly manner, we will try to build an analytical framework that we shall use to do demand analysis.
The frame work will guide us to take an architectural view of the subject matter.
In taking an architectural view, we shall be looking at the larger picture.
The analytical framework we shall adopt will follow the sequence below: • Get total population data and make projections.
• Study the details of the population.
• Define the good or service for which demand analysis is to be inducted.
• Define demand again to guide your direction.
• Look at factors affecting demand.
• Using both quantitative and qualitative techniques, generate conditional demand.
• Generate projections for demand using quantitative and qualitative methods.
3.2 Analysis of a Population Data We have seen that the starting point of our discussion of a proper demand analysis is to study the population.
But we should also understand that getting the total population figure is not the end of the job.
We should go further and analyse the population.
The purpose of the analysis is to understand certain characteristics of the population.
For example, a manufacturer of lipstick has nothing to do with the total population.
Rather what is important to the manufacturer is the total female population.
There are other aspects of the population that we consider important.
Age distribution of a population is one of such aspects.
The age distribution of a population is important because it breaks down the population into the various age brackets.
Perfect knowledge of the age distribution of a population enables a would- be investor have an idea of his total feasible market well in advance.
For example, a manufacturer of baby toys will not be interested in the total population of Nigeria.
What will interest the manufacturer is the total number of babies in the population.
We have stressed the importance of population data in the understanding of demand analysis.
We will go a step further to provide a checklist of further information that is required when we are analysing a population data.
3.3 Potential Customers A starting point for our discussion is to properly define who the potential customers of the business are or will be.
Customer definition is not an easy task as we shall soon see.
Sometimes confusion arises as to who is a customer because people also fail to distinguish customers from consumers.
The term consumer refers to the person or one who uses a product (or service) for his/her personal satisfaction or benefit.
The consumer is the one who changes the form of a product to alter its identity.
For example, a soap manufacturer will buy caustic soda and use it to manufacture soap.
He is the consumer of the raw material.
On the other hand, a customer may be a consumer or a dealer who buys a product and eventually resells the product.
Also even for a service, the business should clearly identify the types of consumers that they wish to serve.
For example, there may be many types of hotels because of the types of customers that need to be served namely: • hotels for students • hotels for travellers • hotels for high-class individuals 3.4 Evaluating the Size of the Market Apart from identifying who the potential customers of the small business are, there is the need for us to go ahead and evaluate the size of the market for our products or services.
The evaluation of the size of the market is very important because it gives us a picture of the total market size in terms of naira and kobo.
A standard analysis should state the market size of the product or service in question.
The size of the market is usually estimated by using both qualitative and quantitative methods.
To enable us approach our studies carefully, let us follow the following steps in our effort to evaluate market size: • Define demand • Examine factors affecting demand • Examine demand for intermediate and capital goods • Build market demand.
Defining Demand For us to be able to properly prepare demand analysis, we need to define demand and understand what we mean by demand.
For purposes of our study, we shall define demand for a product or service as the total quantity of goods or services that able customers in a defined area are willing to buy at set prices.
In effect therefore, demand refers to a set of quantities that customers are willing to buy at different in prices.
In the traditional economic setting, the demand curve is downward sloping (with a price and quantity axis).
It will also be very important for us at this particular time to define and distinguish between two types of demand – total market demand and project demand.
Total market demand refers to the total demand within a set geographical area like Nigeria.
For example we can make statement that the total demand for beer in Nigeria is 10 million bottles per annum.
The meaning of the statement is that in Nigeria, the total quantity of beer demanded is 10 million bottles at the current ruling prices.
But we also need to define another type of demand which we shall call project demand.
Project demand is a subset of the total market demand.
If a market for a product or service already exists, the project demand is the projects total market demand.
If a market is saturated with goods, new projects may face the difficulty of selling their products or services.
By and large, it is important to focus attention on a projects which tend to be fatal occur when analysts confuse market and project demand.
Factors Affecting Demand We have just defined demand which is very important in our study.
But we need to go a step further to examine the factors affecting demand in the market place.
It is going to help us build a good demand schedule.
In the traditional economic platform, one of the most important factors affecting demand is price.
If we assume a well behaved demand curve, then the higher the price of a product, the smaller the quantity that will be bought.
Also the lower the price, the greater the quantity that will be purchased.
This appears to be a rational behaviour especially when human beings are involved.
Another important factor affecting demand for a product or service is the income of the population.
Given a basket of income available to purchasers, it is logical to believe that the higher incomes of people, the more goods and services they are likely to purchase.
So we can say with a measure of confidence that a population with a higher income is more likely to purchase more goods and services population with a lower income.
Apart from income, population is another major factor affecting demand in any given setting.
It is certain that a large population demand more goods and services than a smaller population.
A major aspect of any population which we should not forget is the ethnic and religious structure of the population.
The ethnic structure of a population affects the type of goods and services that will be demanded.
For example, in the Nigerian setting, palm oil tends to sell much more in the Southern States than in the North because most Southerners tend to use palm oil in cooking.
But in the Northern States, groundnut oil seems to be more available and by implication the people use more of it for their cooking.
Also, religion is another aspect of any population that needs to be looked at while drawing up any demand schedule.
Again in the Nigerian setting, pork is not an acceptable diet for Muslims but most Christians eat pork.
These are the type of critical inputs you need when you are trying to build a demand schedule.
Prices of other goods also tend to affect demand.
For example, tea and sugar are said to complementary goods since they go hand in hand.
It is therefore logical to say that the price of tea at any given time will affect the demand for sugar.
In the same fashion, bread and butter also appear to be complementary goods.
Demand for Intermediate and Capital Goods When we largely discussed demand our general thinking appeared to be that the goods discussed ought to be consumer goods.
But that is not always true.
There are some goods which are generally known as intermediate and also capital goods.
It is important that we understand these two types of goods.
We shall go ahead to discuss intermediate goods as goods which are not purchased for immediate consumption but rather are used in the production of consumer goods.
For example flour is an intermediate good mostly used in the manufacture of bread.
Tyres also appear to be intermediate goods if purchased by a car manufacturers.
But a tyre is also a consumer product if purchased by Mr. Solomon for use in his car.
On the other hand, capital goods are those goods that are used for the manufacture of both intermediate and consumer goods.
A manufacturing plant is a capital good.
One thing we need to know about capital goods is that they last for very long periods because of their nature.
Building a Market Demand We have defined what demand for a product or service is generally.
Also we understand what a population is.
Let X = No.
of persons in a population Y = average number of a given product consumed by each person in that population per annum Then XY = Total market demand per annum for the product in question SELF ASSESSMENT EXERCISE There are 400,000 persons in a city called Ireoluwa.
Each person in the city drinks a bottle of water daily.
What is the annual demand for water in Ireoluwa.
3.5 Forecasting Future Demand Some of us will assume that building the demand schedule for a product is all that is required; but that is not true because the analyst should be able to forecast future demand for the product in question or the service as the case may be.
Forecasting future demand appears to be a difficult task because there is a lot of uncertainty attached to the forecast of a future event.
Ordinarily, the demand for many goods may be either stable, erratic or out rightly unpredictable.
Social change, structural adjustments, change of taste and technology all add up to forecasting a difficult task especially of demand.
Usually, there are two basic approaches that are available when trying to forecast demand namely: • Qualitative techniques • Quantitative techniques Qualitative Techniques Qualitative techniques are mainly desk methods which are based on reports obtained from various sources.
One of the sources could expert opinion obtained from a pool of experts in an industry experts usually are seen to be knowledgeable about a product or industry and therefore are in a position to forecast what the future demand for a product is likely to be.
Another way of obtaining information for use in forecasting demand is known as the sales force composite method.
With this method, salesmen in a particular industry can provide expert data on demand.
But in most cases, the data and the forecast that they provide differ significantly from that provided by a panel of experts.
The general belief is that since salesmen operate at the grassroots level, they are more knowledgeable about the demand for products and the accompanying forecast.
Quantitative Techniques The majority of the data generated are often unreliable, biased argued by a subjective state of mind of the people making the forecasts.
Also, we think they are clumsy data in the hands of the entrepreneur.
Quantitative techniques in forecasting, however, are less subjective and are more or less based on past data.
In the main they are mathematical in nature and tend to be more accurate.
One of the quantitative techniques used is the time series approach.
The time series approach generally has become very popular with analysts who are trying to forecast the demand for a good or service.
The general feeling is that time is a crucial explanatory variable that explains the future.
According to this thinking, past data can explain relationships between the demand of a commodity and time.
For example, we can display the relationship between demand and time in a graphical way.
4.0 CONCLUSION We have fully discussed the demand analysis.
We discussed the analytical framework for preparing a demand analysis.
We also discussed the analysis of a population data which we said is very crucial.
We defined demand and discussed the evaluation of market size and then went further to discuss the forecasting of demand.
5.0 SUMMARY Understanding demand analysis is our first practical step towards understanding the format of a market.
6.0 TUTOR-MARKED ASSIGNMENT Why do you think that the analysis of a population data is important when building a demand analysis?
7.0 REFERENCES/FURTHER READINGS Leon Ikpe (1999).
Project Analysis and Evaluation.
Lagos: Impressed Publishers.
UNIT 3 SUPPLY ANALYSIS CONTENTS 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objectives 3.0 Main Content 3.1 The Supply Equation 3.2 Analysing Supply Data 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutor-Marked Assignment 7.0 References/Further Readings 1.0 INTRODUCTION In Unit 2, we discussed demand analysis which basically looked at the market from the demand side.
In this unit, our task is to look at the market from the supply side.
Basically when an investor is contemplating an investment in the manufacture of goods for the market, he/she tries to evaluate the nature of the market for the proposed goods or services.
Understanding the nature of the market will involve understanding demand as well as supply.
Supply analysis in project analysis tries to focus attention on the supply side of the market.
The potential investor will like to know who the current suppliers of the goods or services are.
Because this will guide him/her in understanding what is known as the demand/supply gap.
Supply analysis tries to identify the supply of given goods or services.
It tries to identify who the suppliers are and their locations.
Generally, in measuring the supply of a good, the following should be taken into consideration: • The domestic supply of the good or service; • The foreign supply of the good or service.
(the imported quantity);and • The export of the good or service (export quantity).
2.0 OBJECTIVES At the end of this unit, you should be able to: • explain what a supply analysis is • discuss it in relation to project evaluation.
3.0 MAIN CONTENT 3.1 The Supply Equation Consider a firm called Fiyinfunoluwa Nigeria Limited that wishes to set up a liquid soap manufacturing plant in Nigeria.
The firm now wants to analyse the supply of liquid soap in Nigeria.
As we have said, there are three key items to consider.
Those three items are: • The domestic supply of the liquid soap; • The foreign supply of the liquid soap; • The export of the liquid soap in question.
Let A = the domestic supply of a good B = the foreign supply of a good C = the export of the good Then supply X = (A + B) – C. This is called the supply equation.
You will notice that C is the exported quantity and which will not be available for local consumption.
3.2 Analysing Supply Data We have agreed that the investor should evaluate the market in terms of determining the level of supply of the goods or service in the market.
But in practical terms, there is the urgent need to identify every supplier and the suppliers’ location.
This will assist in the preparation of a marketing plan.
Some analysts believe that getting information on the actual supply data is all that is important.
That is not true.
In practical terms, there is the need to find out the following facts about supply in an industry: • No.
of players or suppliers in an industry; • Their current installed capacities; • Their current actual operating capacities; • Anticipated expansion plans; • Critical labour costs in the industry; • Raw materials costs in the industry and the likely direction; and • Categorising the suppliers into their various categories – big, medium or small players.
SELF ASSESSMENT EXERCISE Explain the supply equation and its relevance.
4.0 CONCLUSION The supply analysis attempts to identify the components of the supply of given goods and services as well as the supplies and their locations.
5.0 SUMMARY The supply analysis seeks to analyse the supply of goods and services.
It enables the would-be- investor or analyst to have a clear picture of the supply in the market place.
Understanding supply is a must if we are to understand the nature of competition in industry.
6.0 TUTOR-MARKED ASSIGNMENT Discuss the three components of supply that make up the supply equation.
7.0 REFERENCES/FURTHER READINGS Leon Ikpe (1999).
Project Analysis and Evaluation.
Lagos: Impressed Publishers.
UNIT 4 COMPETITION AND MARKETING PLANS CONTENTS 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objectives 3.0 Main Body 3.1 Analytical Framework 3.2 The Nature of Competition 3.3 The Marketing Plan 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutor-Marked Assignment 7.0 References/Further Readings 1.0 INTRODUCTION We have discussed market demand when we were looking at market analysis.
We also discussed supply.
We now want to move ahead and see how both of them interplay in what is known as the market.
In this intellectual journey, we have put ourselves in the shoes of the would-be investor or analyst who wants to understand the nature of competition in the market.
Every firm takes market demand as given and no firm can single-handedly change demand which we said depends on a lot of factors.
Also, every firm takes supply to the market as given because no firm is able to control the supply to the market from other competitors.
It is because of this that we really need to understand the nature of competition in the market.
Every dynamic environment creates opportunities and problems for firms.
A company must be able to respond constructively to this market setting, analyse the opportunities and threats, and then formulate marketing plans to remain in the competition.
2.0 OBJECTIVES At the end of this unit, you should be able to: • explain the meaning of competition • discuss marketing plans and how they are designed.
3.0 MAIN CONTENT 3.1 Analytical Framework We know where we are coming from and we also know where we are going.
Our task is to discuss the competition and also the marketing plan.
To guide us so that we do not forget our direction, we shall have our proposal an outline – a type of framework that should guide us when evaluating competition and also the design of marketing plans.
Marketing plans are very crucial from the point of view of the project initiator as well as from the project evaluator.
3.2 The Nature of Competition In every industry, competition exists.
It is not a matter of sheer bad luck or coincidence.
Competition occurs because every firm in an industry wants to sell its products and also get market share to the detriment of other players.
In the market, the state of competition depends on five basic forces as shown in Figure 5 Therefore, any discussion on competition must take into consideration these five basic forces since they cannot be glossed over.
The first force exists within the industry where we see firms all jockeying for position.
Here, all firms unleash their strategies and fight each other.
In the end, some firms emerge as clear leaders, some emerge as followers, while others might close shop.
The second force is the threat of new entrants.
New entrants into an industry bring in new capacity.
But we should note that the threat of entry depends on the barriers present and also the reaction of existing players.
We should also not forget the forces arising from suppliers.
Strong suppliers can exert strong bargaining power on market participants to the extent of raising prices and influencing the price of goods generally.
Powerful buyer groups, when they exist in an industry, tend to influence prices since they more or less dictate the price at which they will buy.
Finally substitute goods or the threat of substitute goods also influence competition in an industry.
Substitute goods tend to limit the potentials of an industry.
For example sugar tends to limit the honey industry’s potentials for growth and expansion.
SELF ASSESSMENT EXERCISE In evaluating the outlook for an industry, list and discuss four items that you think are important.
Figure 5: Forces governing competition in an industry 3.3 The Marketing Plan The marketing plan addresses issues concerning the marketing of the products.
It tries to relate the firm to its external consumers and The market.
The marketing plan should answer the following questions: • What is the product or service?
• What are the uses of the product or service?
• What is the offered price?
• Where will the product be found?
• How will the product or service be advertised?
4.0 CONCLUSION In this unit, we have discussed competition and marketing plans.
We have also discussed the analytical framework for discussing competition.
Apart from these, we have provided a check list for marketing plan.
5.0 SUMMARY We have discussed competition and marketing plans.
We saw how competition and marketing plans relate to each other.
The framework for analysis presented discussed industry outlook and a company’s position in the industry.
60 TUTOR-MARKED ASSIGNMENT Discuss the five basic forces that govern competition in industry.
7.0 REFERENCES/FURTHER READINGS Leon Ikpe (1999).
Project Analysis and Evaluation.
Lagos: Impressed Publishers.
Michael E. Porter.
(1980).
Competitive Strategy: Techniques for Analyzing Industries and Competitors.
New York: Free Press.
UNIT 5 PROJECT COST ANALYSIS CONTENTS 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objectives 3.0 Main Body 3.1 Project Cost Analysis 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutor-Marked Assignment 7.0 References/Further Readings 1.0 INTRODUCTION In Unit 4, we discussed competition and marketing plans.
We saw how competition takes place in the market place.
We also discussed components of marketing plans as prepared by project initiators.
The marketing plan as we discussed is very important to both the project initiators and the evaluators.
In this unit, we shall discuss project cost analysis which is very important in this course.
2.0 OBJECTIVES At the end of this unit, you should be able to: • explain what project cost analysis is • discuss how the analysis can be prepared.
3.0 MAIN CONTENT 3.1 Project Cost Analysis Project cost analysis provides total frameworks for calculating or estimating the total cost of a project.
For example, a firm wants to set up a garri processing plant to enable it serve the food needs of a growing population.
How does the firm know the cost of the envisaged garri processing plant?
To guide our discussions, let us define project cost as all those costs that are incurred in the process of setting up a project.
The costs must be attached to the project.
And the list of the items must be exhaustive.
But we need to arrange the cost items in an orderly and consistent manner so that like items stay together.
To ease our discussions and to make them as easy as possible, we shall divide project cost items into the following sub-headings: • Cost of land • Cost of building • Cost of machinery and equipment • Cost of utilities • Cost of furniture and other fittings • Cost of vehicles • Pre-operational expenses • Working capital Although we have listed the cost sub-headings, we shall go ahead and prepare a small checklist that will guide us.
After the checklist, we will work through a practical demonstration using a vegetable oil refining plant as an example.
4.0 CONCLUSION Project cost analysis is an important aspect of our study of project evaluation.
Project cost analysis is important to both the project initiator and the financial analyst who may want to evaluate a project.
5.0 SUMMARY In this unit, we discussed project cost analysis.
In doing this we agreed that cost of land, buildings, machinery and equipment, utilities, furniture and fittings, etc., all form part of the total project cost.
We also used a check list to guide the preparation of the cost analysis.
Finally we used a worked example of a vegetable oil refining plant to throw more light on the project cost analysis.
6.0 TUTOR-MARKED ASSIGNMENT Why do you think that it is important to know the total cost of a project?
7.0 REFERENCES/FURTHER READINGS Leon Ikpe (1999).
Project Analysis and Evaluation.
Lagos: Impressed Publishers.
Wearne, S.H.
(1989).
Control of Engineering Projects.
London: Thomas Telford.
MODULE 3 Unit 1 The Projected Income Statement Unit 2 Projected Cash Flow Statements Unit 3 The Projected Balance Sheet Unit 4 Project Evaluation Criteria Unit 5 Introduction to Economic Analysis UNIT 1 PROJECTED INCOME STATEMENT CONTENTS 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objectives 3.0 Main Content 3.1 Projected Income State 3.2 The Structure in the Projected Income Statement 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutor-Marked Assignment 7.0 References/Further Readings 1.0 INTRODUCTION In Unit 5 of Module 2, we discussed project cost analysis.
We discussed how to cost a project, especially a start-up project.
We saw that fixed costs and working capital all add up to constitute the project cost.
In this unit, we shall discuss the projected income statement which is a very vital statement required for project analysis and evaluation.
The key basis for financial planning and project evaluation is financial information.
The financial information is required to record, compare and evaluate a firm’s earning power and ability.
In an already existing project, the financial information is already provided since it is a historical data.
The income statement or the profit and loss account is a summary of revenues, expenses and net profit of an enterprise for a period of time.
This serves as a measure of the firm’s profitability over the period.
For an on-going project or firm, when prepared, the income statement becomes a historical statement.
The projected income statement is a forecast of the revenues, expenses and the net profit of an enterprise or project.
2.0 OBJECTIVES At the end of this unit, you should be able to: • explain the meaning of projected income statement • discuss its application in project evaluation • prepare a projected income statement.
3.0 MAIN CONTENT 3.1 The Projected Income Statement The projected income statement is usually needed by a variety of people.
Some of the users of the projected income statement might have direct interest in the firm while others have indirect interest.
The owners or sponsors of a project have a direct interest in the projected income statement.
It is so because they are entrusting their investment to the firm.
They wish to know before hand what the revenues, expenses and net profit of the firm will be, and most importantly, their own expected dividends.
Another important group that is expected to have a direct interest in the projected income statement of a project is the management.
Usually when a project is conceived and a project plan is written, the plan will contain the projected income statement as conceived by the project sponsors or consultants.
Usually, the projected income statement is handed down to the project managers as a guide.
Also financial institutions are interested in a projected income statement.
Practically, when any firm approaches a financial institution for financial assistance, the firm is expected to prepare a business plan or a project feasibility study which contains, amongst other things, the projected income statement.
Financial institutions need to study the projected income statement to evaluate the revenues, expenses and profitability of the investment project.
When they do this, they will also test the cash flows of the project to see whether the proposed project can repay any loan granted together with the interest.
Other people that might be interested in the projected income statement are potential investors.
Potential investors need to examine the projected income statement to decide whether or not they will invest in a firm.
3.2 The Structure of the Projected Income Statement We have just explained what the projected income statement is.
It is a statement that shows projected revenues, projected expenses, and of course, net profit of a proposed investment, an expansion project or an existing project.
In the standard practice, there is an acceptable arrangement that should group like items together and this leads to building a projected income statement that is broken into revenues, expenses and the net profit.
• Revenues Ordinarily, revenues are the value of output of goods or services that an enterprise supplies to its customers.
Revenues, therefore, arise when a firm produces or manufactures goods which it sells to third parties for a fee.
Secondly, revenues can arise when a firm is engaged in the buying and selling of goods.
It purchases goods which it later resells at a profit or a loss as the case may be.
Thirdly, revenues can also arise through provision of services by a firm.
A hospital may specialise in surgery and provide surgical services to its customers for whom it collects relevant payments, which when added up, make up the revenues.
Finally, a firm can earn revenue by loaning its economic resources.
For example, a bank lends money to customers and earns interest income.
The interest earned is revenue.
In projecting for revenues in a project situation, care must be taken so that proper estimates or forecasts are made.
And this is made qualitative judgment plus quantitative judgment on the part of the project evaluator.
For example, if the project is a manufacturing facility that will produce goods for the market, the best option is to start with the known market price of the good to be produced.
For example, if the good in question is the type of bread that sells for N100 a loaf, then the project evaluator or initiator has to start from the known price of a loaf of bread and that is N100 a loaf.
If the number of loaves of bread to be produced per annum amount to 1,000,000 then the projected revenue of the project is N100,000,000.
Likewise, if a firm is engaged in the provision of services, the revenues likely to be earned can be easily estimated.
If for example a hospital is projecting revenues, it has to first estimate the likely number of patients that will use its facility and also the average fee it charges a patient.
The number of patients multiplied by the average fee per patient will give us the projected revenue of the health facility.
The projection for revenues can cover various periods.
In most organisations, revenue projections for project evaluation purposes stretch over a period of three years.
Some banks ask for five year revenue forecasts.
In the revenue projections care must be taken so as not to overstate the revenues or understate them.
• Expenses The cost of earning revenue is known as the expense.
Expenses are different from costs.
Cost is the outlay incurred to acquire some asset.
For example, when a car is purchased by a company for its business, the sum used to purchase the vehicle is the cost of the vehicle.
If the vehicle uses fuel for the firm’s operations, that constitutes an expense.
In projecting the expenses of a firm’s investment, a lot of factors are usually taken into consideration.
Firstly, we have to get proper estimates of the current cost profile of the various items.
For example, when projecting gas and oil expenses of a project, the proper starting point is to collect data on the current prices of gas and oil.
Revenue Projections From the proposed production plan, the following is the revenue profile for the project in year one (year 2007).
Table 30: Revenue Projection for a Vegetable Oil Refining Plant  Consumption of Utilities and Chemicals per Ton of Bleached and Refined Vegetable Oil Steam at 50 psig = 70kg Barometric water = 6 m3 Clean water in circulation = 7 m3 Fuel oil = 4 kg Bleaching earth = 15 kg Citric acid = 200 gms Phosphoric acid (for dosing) = 300 gm Vegetable Oil Packaging Expenses The refined vegetable oil will be sold in two ways: 1.
Direct to vegetable oil distributors who will purchase the vegetable oil in tanker loads.
In this case, the vegetable Oil tankers will come and load vegetable oil at the factory.
2.
The refined vegetable oil will be filled into plastic jerry cans of 9 litres and 18 litres capacity and also sold to the market.
The purpose of this is to ensure that the brand of vegetable oil will be in affordable units and prices to the market.
Table 31: Projected Manufacturing Account for a Vegetable Oil   SELF ASSESSMENT EXERCISE List and explain four expense items that can be found in a projected income statement.
4.0 CONCLUSION We have discussed the projected income statement.
We discussed the structure of the projected income statement, revenues, expenses and net profit concepts.
Finally we used as an example to demonstrate a projected income statement.
5.0 SUMMARY We have treated the projected income statement in this unit.
The projected income statement is one of the most important items in project evaluation from the project sponsor’s position or from the bank or analyst’s position.
6.0 TUTOR-MARKED ASSIGNMENT Discuss the likely users of a projected income statement.
7.0 REFERENCES/FURTHER READINGS Leon Ikpe (1999).
Project Analysis and Evaluation.
Lagos: Impressed Publishers.
UNIT 2 PROJECTED CASH FLOW STATEMENTS CONTENTS 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objectives 3.0 Main Content 3.1 Projected Cash Flow Statements – Meaning and uses 3.2 The Structure of the Projected Cash Flow Statement 3.2.1 Cash Inflows 3.2.2 Cash Outflows 3.3 Sensitivity Analysis 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutor-Marked Assignment 7.0 References/Further Readings 1.0 INTRODUCTION In Unit 1 we discussed the projected income statement.
There we discussed he concept of revenues and expenses and also net profit.
We also discussed the fact that the projected income statement is used by a variety of users like the project initiators, bankers and financial analysts.
In this unit, we shall discuss the projected cash flow statements.
2.0 OBJECTIVES At the end of this unit, you should be able to: • explain what a projected cash flow statement is • explain how it can be prepared • explain the usefulness.
3.0 MAIN CONTENT 3.1 Projected Cash Flow Statement – Meaning and Uses It is important to understand and analyse the projected cash flows of the firm.
We shall begin our discussion by defining a cash flow statement.
A cash flow statement is a statement that shows the actual receipt of cash (inflows) and the disbursement of cash (out flows) of a firm or project.
Having said that, we can now go ahead to define a projected cash flow statement.
A projected cash flow statement is a statement which shows the forecasts of actual receipts of cash (inflows) and the disbursement of cash (outflows) of a firm or project.
There are many users of information contained in projected cash flow statements.
The first user of the projected cash flow statement is the project sponsor or initiator.
The project sponsor or initiator is interested in knowing well in advance the future cash flows of the firm.
This is important because the future financing needs of the firm have to be known well in advance.
The project initiator needs to distinguish between credit sales and cash sales.
If the project initiator does not distinguish between credit sales and cash sales, then his/her project may suffer cash flow problems.
The initiator may not be able to estimate the amount of cash needs of the project as well as timing of the cash needs.
Similarly, providers of finance especially the lending banks are usually very interested in the projected cash flow statement.
They need to determine the firm’s ability to service debt.
The debt in question may be existing debts or future debts.
Ability to service debts is a function of future cash flows.
Projected cash flow statements assist us to evaluate a firm’s future performance and of course financial condition that enables the project evaluator answer the following questions.
• What is the nature of the firm’s projected cash flow statement?
• Will the projected cash flow be able to service the project’s debts (loan, overdraft + interest)?
• When will the project need financing and to what extent?
• How should the loan or overdraft or finance be structured?
• How stable are the cash flows?
3.2 The Structure of the Projected Cash Flow Statement The basic format of the projected cash flow statement is displayed in Table 33 is a projected cash flow statement of a company.
But it covers a period of only 3 months.
You can project a cash flow as long as you require but the basic principles should be followed.
If you examine Table 33 properly, you will realise that the projected cash flow statement is divided into two main sections, namely: 1.
The cash inflows 2.
The cash outflows (outgoings) We will now go ahead to break down the projected cash flow statement.
Table 34: A Three Month Projected Flow Statement Niger Limited Cash Inflows January  3.2.1 Cash Inflows We have seen that a projected cash flow statement is broken down into the inflows and the outflows (outgoings).
Let us now proceed to examine some of the key items contained in the projected cash flow statement.
The items will vary from capital to loan introduced and also cash sales.
We shall treat them individually.
• Capital Introduced Every firm or project should have a capital.
At the time a project conceived or is being expanded, the owners of the firm usually bring in what is known as capital.
In a limited liability company, the share holders usually contribute the capital of the firm.
In cash flow construction, capital is usually entered as an inflow.
The reason is clear.
When you introduce capital, you bring in cash.
• Loan Another item appearing in a projected cash flow statement is loan.
In some cases, a project is funded through loan from banks.
The loan will usually have the following features: 1.
The loan amount will be specific 2.
The loan has an interest rate attached to it.
3.
The loan will be repaid in agreed installments.
• Cash Sales The sales figure is the most important in a projected cash flow statement.
Projections for sales pose one of the most difficult challenges in cash flow projections.
We must quickly distinguish between total sales, credit sales and cash sales.
Total sales are the total value of goods or service sold to third parties.
Credit sales refer to sales for which payment is not made immediately.
The figure for credit sales is usually transferred to the debtors list.
Cash sales are the difference between total sales revenue and credit sales.
As far as we are concerned, the cash sale is the most important component of sales and it is the one that appears in the projected cash flow statement.
Credit sales are only reflected in the cash flow when they are converted to cash.
For example, if in January 2007, a company sells four cars at a credit of N10,000,000.
In the cash flow for January 2007, there will be no entry for cash sales.
But if in February 2007, the company receives a cash payment of N5,000,000, then that figure will appear in the inflows column for February 2007.
The basic rule is that only actual cash received is usually entered in the inflow column.
In actual practice, projecting for cash sales will involve exhaustive consideration of the following: • General economic outlook in the country • The industry outlook.
What is the demand situation like?
What is the supply situation?
• What is the structure of competition and how fierce is it?
• What will be the effect of competition on prices in the firm’s area of operation?
3.2.2 Cash Outflows Cash outflows or outgoings will include all expenses that use cash.
They will include items like: • Raw material expenses • Salary and wages • Stationery • Loan repayment • Interest charges • Selling expenses • Office admin expenses • Oil and gas expenses • Taxation • Rates and permits 3.3 Sensitivity Analysis Usually, when constructing a projected cash flow statement, the first set of projections is what we call normal estimates of cash flows.
Normal estimates of cash flows especially cash revenues are based on all things being equal; but all things cannot be equal.
A lot of things may happen.
In a market, supply can come from unexpected source and cause prices to fall.
Prices of raw materials may rise suddenly and all these tend to reduce our earlier revenue projections and jack up expenses.
Sensitivity analysis provides the tool for subjecting a project’s cash flow s to adverse market situations.
Sensitivity analysis seeks to adjust revenues for risk and also costs.
In conducting sensitivity analysis, we say that we are adjusting a project’s cash flows for risk.
If we conduct sensitivity analysis on a cash flow, we may do that by making one, two or three of the following assumptions: • Due to intense competition the project will not be able to make the earlier normal sales volume.
Cash revenues will drop.
• Due to excess supply, prices in the market will fall, that will reduce cash revenues.
• The prices of raw materials and other items will rise.
A close examination will reveal that the impact of any of the above will have the effect of reducing the cash revenues of a project.
We now state that if a normal projected cash flow statement is reconstructed to accommodate the fact that the market could be worse, we say that the reconstructed cash flow is now called a risk “adjusted cash flow statement.” The risk- adjusted cash flow is a pessimistic cash flow and should be admired by analysts.
Table 34 is a risk-adjusted income statement reconstructed from Table 33.The critical assumption is that Table 34 assumes that only 75% of cash sales of Niger limited will be realised.
Sensitivity analysis is a tool for subjecting cash flows to risk analysis.
The key objective of the sensitivity analysis is to forecast a worst-case scenario for a project.
Other ways of conducting a sensitivity analysis is to assume that expenses attached to a project will increase.
Table 35: A Three Month Risk-Adjusted Projected Cash Flow Statement Niger Limited  4.0 CONCLUSION MBA 840 PROJECT EVALUATION We have discussed projected cash flow statements.
We discussed the nature of cash flow statements and their users.
We also examined the structure of cash flow statements.
We used an example to show what a projected cash flow statement looks like.
We also constructed a risk adjusted cash flow statement.
5.0 SUMMARY In this unit we treated projected cash flow statements which we said constitutes a very vital document used in the evaluation of projects.
The cash flow gives us a picture of cash inflows and outflows together with timing.
6.0 TUTOR-MARKED ASSIGNMENT Why do you think that banks are interested in projected cash flow statement of projects?
7.0 REFERENCES/FURTHER READINGS Leon Ikpe (1999).
Project Analysis and Evaluation.
Lagos: Impressed Publishers.
UNIT 3 THE PROJECTED BALANCE SHEET CONTENTS 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objectives 3.0 Main Content 3.1 Meaning of a Balance Sheet 3.2 Components of a Balance Sheet 3.2.1 Assets 3.2.2 Liabilities 3.3 Construction of the Projected Balance Sheet 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutor-Marked Assignment 7.0 References/Further Readings 1.0 INTRODUCTION In Unit 2, we discussed the projected cash flow statement.
There, we discussed inflows and outflows (outgoings) of a firm or project.
We also discussed the structure of the projected cash flow statement and went a step further to provide an example of a projected cash flow statement.
In this unit, we shall discuss the projected balance sheet.
2.0 OBJECTIVES At the end of this unit, you should be able to: • explain the meaning of a projected balance sheet • explain the preparation of the projected balance sheet • prepare a projected balance sheet.
3.0 MAIN CONTENT 3.1 Meaning of a Balance Sheet Before we delve into the projected balance sheet proper, it is very important for us to first understand what a balance sheet is.
The balance sheet or the statement of financial position is one of the most important financial statements.
It shows the financial condition or better still, the statement of affairs of a firm or business.
We Will therefore, define a projected balance sheet as a forecast of a future balance sheet as at a future date.
3.2 Components of the Balance Sheet The balance sheet has two main sides namely: • Assets • Liabilities 3.2.1 Assets When we are talking of assets generally, we are talking about the valuable possessions owned by the firm, valued in monetary terms.
They will include land and buildings, stock of goods, raw materials, cash, vehicles and other valuables.
But generally we can classify assets under the following headings: • Current assets • Investments • Fixed assets Lets us now discuss each of them: Current Assets The current assets of a firm or business are those assets which are held in the form of cash or expected to be converted into cash in a period or within the accounting period of the firm.
In actual practice, the accounting period is usually of one-year duration.
The current assets of the firm will include the following: • Cash • Book debts (debtors).
• Prepaid expenses • Marketable securities.
• Stock Let us start with cash which is one of the most liquid current assets.
Cash will mean cash on hand or cash in the bank.
Another current asset which is important is book debts (debtors).
Book debts are sometimes called account receivables.
These are amounts due from debtors to whom goods have been sold or service rendered.
Some of the book debts may be realised by the firm.
If they are not realized they turn into what is called bad debts and may be written off later.
Prepaid expenses are also current assets.
They are expenses of future periods that are paid in advance.
An example of prepaid expenses is rent which may be payable in advance by a firm.
For example in January 2007, a firm may pay rent for its office for January 2007 to December, 2007.
If in April, 2007, the financial year of the firm ends, it will regard the portion of rent paid from May 2007 to December, 2007 as a prepaid expense which invariably is a current asset.
Stock (inventory) is another current asset and includes raw material, work in process and finished goods.
The raw materials and work in process are required for maintenance of the production function of the firm.
Finished goods usually will be already packed and kept ready for purchase by customers of the business.
Marketable securities are the firm’s short term investment in shares, bonds and other securities.
The securities are usually marketable and can be converted into cash in a very short time.
Investments Investments represent the firm’s investments in shares, debentures and bonds of either firms or the government.
By their nature, the investments are long term.
It is important to note that the investments yield income to the firm.
Fixed Assets Fixed assets are long-term assets held for periods longer than one year.
They are usually held for use in the firm’s business.
Fixed assets include land, buildings, machinery and equipment, vehicles, etc.
We have briefly seen what the assets are.
We shall now move over and discuss liabilities.
3.2.2 Liabilities When we talk of liabilities, we mean the debts that are payable by the firm or business to creditors.
They may represent various obligations due to various third parties arising from various business transactions.
Examples of liabilities include creditors, accounts payable, taxes payable, bonds, debentures, etc.
But generally, liabilities are divided into two broad groups namely: • Current liabilities and • Long-term liabilities We shall discuss each of the groups Current Liabilities Current Liabilities are those debts that are payable in a short period usually within a year.
One of the major current liabilities is the bank overdraft.
Most banks grant their customers overdraft which are repayable within a period of one year.
The other type of current liability includes provisions for taxes and dividends.
These are liabilities that will mature within one year.
Another type of liability is expenses payable.
The firm may expenses to public power supply organisation or have rents to be paid.
Long Term Liabilities Long-term liabilities are the obligations which are payable in a period of time greater than a year.
One of the long term liabilities of a firm is term loan.
The firm may borrow money from a bank that will be repayable over a period preceding one year.
Such a borrowing or loan is regarded as long-term liability.
Also, when a firm needs to raise a large sum of money, it debentures.
A debenture is an obligation on the part of a firm to pay interest and principal under the terms of the debenture.
However one of the most stable types of long term liability is owners’ equity.
Owner’s equity represents the owners’ interest in the firm.
In practical terms, the total assets of a firm less the liabilities realized on the interest.
The owners interest in the firm consist of • Paid up share capital and • Retained earnings (undistributed profits).
SELF ASSESSMENT EXERCISE Discuss the components of a balance sheet.
3.3 Construction of the Projected Balance Sheet In the earlier sections of this unit, we have discussed the balance sheet generally.
That was from a historical perspective.
We shall now discuss the construction of a projected balance sheet.
The following steps are recommended: • Start from the determination of sales revenue.
• Compute cost of goods sold (COGS) • Compute admin expenses, general and selling expenses.
• Bring forward sundry income and expenses and generate the projected income statement.
• Determine taxation, dividends and retained earnings.
• Project for assets.
• Project for liabilities.
Table 36: A Projected Balance Sheet  4.0 CONCLUSION We have discussed the projected balance sheet.
We first discussed assets generally and then went ahead to discuss liabilities.
We discussed the construction of the projected balance sheet and provided a checklist for the projection for both assets and liabilities.
5.0 SUMMARY We have treated the projected balance sheet.
The projected balance sheet as we discussed is a forecast of a future balance sheet as at a future date.
It will show what the assets will be and also what the liabilities will be.
It is a very important document in project evaluation.
6.0TUTOR-MARKED ASSIGNMENT 1. Who do you think are the users of the information in a projected balance sheet?
2.
Why do they need the information contained in it?
7.0 REFERENCES/FURTHER READINGS Leon Ikpe (1999).
Project Analysis and Evaluation.
Lagos: Impressed Publishers.
UNIT 4 PROJECT EVALUATION CRITERIA CONTENTS 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objectives 3.0 Main Content 3.1 Traditional Criteria of Project Evaluation 3.2 The Discounted Cash Flow (DCF) Method 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutor-Marked Assignment 7.0 References/Further Readings 1.0 INTRODUCTION Let us recall that the focus of this course is project evaluation.
From unit 1, we discussed the project cycle.
From there we moved on to discuss factors affecting location of projects.
We also discussed capacity and production planning, demand analysis, supply analysis, project cost analysis, projected income statements, cash flows and the balance sheet.
All these have set the stage for us to tie the discussions.
We now want to discuss a very crucial aspect of this course, which is the project evaluation criterion.
Project evaluation criteria seek to present the methods to be adopted to measure the value of an investment project.
The evaluation enables us to choose between two or more projects once the values are known.
Any project evaluation criterion to be adopted should posses the following characteristics: • It should provide a means to distinguish between acceptable and unacceptable projects.
• It should also be able to rank projects in order of their desirability.
• It should be a criterion that is applicable to any conceivable project.
• It should recognise that bigger cash flows are preferable to smaller ones.
• It should recognise that early cash flows or benefits are preferable to later cash flows or benefits.
Although there are a lot of project evaluation criteria in the literature, we shall discuss the most widely accepted criteria which are the traditional criteria and the discounted cash flow (DCF) criteria 2.0 OBJECTIVES At the end of this unit, you should be able to: • discuss project evaluation criteria • distinguish between the traditional criteria and the discounted cash flow relative to project evaluation.
3.0 MAIN CONTENT 3.1 Traditional Criteria of Project Evaluation In the traditional criteria, we shall discuss two methods, namely: the payback period and the accounting rate of return method.
The Payback Period The payback period is one of the most popular methods of project evaluation.
The payback period is defined as the number of years required to recover the original cash outlay invested in a project.
If the project yields constant annual cash inflows, the payback period can be computed by dividing cash outlay by the annual cash inflow.
So we say thus: Payback period Cash outlay (investment) = Annual Cash inflow Example A project requires a cash outlay of N200,000 and yields an annual cash inflow of N50,000 for a period of 10 years; calculate the payback period.
The payback period is N200, 000 = 4 years.
-------------- N50, 000 However, it is to be noted that in the case of unequal cash inflows, the payback period can be computed by adding up the cash inflows until the total is equal to the initial cash outlay.
The payback period is greatly admired by project evaluators because it is very simple to understand.
Another good virtue of the payback period is that it costs less than most of the other sophisticated methods.
However, despite its simplicity, the payback period may not be a desirable investment criterion.
In the first place, it fails to recognise the cash flows that come in after the payback period.
Again it fails to consider the pattern of cash inflows and that early cash inflows rather than later cash inflows.
Despite its weakness, the payback period is very popular analogy.
It tries to emphasizes early recovery of an investment.
This means that it gives an insight into the cash inflows of the project.
The Accounting Rate of Return (ARR) Method The accounting rate of return (ARR) is a method that uses accounting information to measure the profitability of an investment.
The accounting rate of return (ARR) is computed by dividing average income after taxes by the average investment.
ARR Average Income ------------------------ = Average Investment Example A project costs N100,000 and has a scrap value of N40,000.
The stream of income before depreciation and taxes are N40,000, N50,000, N60 , 000 for the first three years.
The tax rate is 50% and depreciation is on straight line basis.
Calculate the accounting rate of return for the project.
As an accept or reject criterion, the ARR method will accept all those projects whose ARR is greater than the minimum rate established by management.
If the ARR is lower than the minimum rate established by management, then the project should be rejected.
The ARR method is very simple to understand and use.
It can also be easily calculated using accounting information.
However, the ARR suffers from three main weaknesses.
First it uses accounting profits not cash flows in appraising projects.
Secondly ARR ignores the time value of money.
The profits occurring in different periods are valued equally.
Thirdly, it does not allow the fact that profit can be reinvested to earn more profits.
3.2 Discounted Cash Flow (DCF) Methods We have discussed two of the traditional methods used in the evaluation of projects.
One is the payback period while the other is the accounting rate of return (ARR).
Although two of them are simple to use and understand, they are not theoretically sound.
Both of them fail to consider the timing of cash flows.
Both fail to consider the time value of money.
Because of these limitations, we shall consider two superior investment criteria which fully recognise the timing of cash flows.
The two methods are the net present value (NPV) method and the internal rate of return (IRR) method.
These two methods are referred to as discounted cash flow (DCF) methods or the tme- adjusted methods.
The Net Present Value (NPV) Method This method correctly recognises the fact that cash flows arising different time periods differ in value and are comparable only when their equivalent- present values are found out.
The following steps are followed when computing the net present value (NPV).
1.
A discount rate is selected to discount the cash flows.
The correct discount rate should be the firm’s cost of capital which is the minimum rate of return expected by the investors to be earned by the firm.
2.
The present value of cash inflows and outflows are computed using cost of capital as the discounting rate.
3.
The net present value (NPV) is the present value of cash inflows less present value of cash outflows.
The acceptance rule using the NPV method is to accept a project if the NPV is positive, and to reject it if the NPV is negative.
If NPV is greater than zero, then the value of the firm is expected to increase.
It is also important for us to understand the interpretation of NPV.
The net present value may be interpreted to mean the immediate increase in the wealth of a firm if the investment proposal is accepted.
It is equal to an unrealised capital gain.
The net present value can also be interpreted to represent the amount the firm could raise at a required rate of return in addition to the initial cash outlay to distribute immediately to its shareholders and by the end of the project life to have paid off all the capital raised plus interest on it.
Example Calculate the net present value of a project which cost N500,000.
But generates cash inflows of N150,000, N300,000 and N400,000 over a three year period.
The required rate of return is 10%.
In terms of merit, the NPV method is very significant since it recognizes the time value of money.
It also is consistent with the objective of maximising the wealth of shareholders.
However, the NPV suffers from the following limitations.
Firstly, it is fairly difficult to use.
Secondly, in computing the NPV, it is assumed that the discount rate which usually is a firm’s cost of capital is known.
But as we know, the cost of capital is a fairly difficult concept to measure in real life.
Thirdly, NPV may not yield a consistent answer when the projects being compared involve different amounts of investment.
The Internal Rate of Return (IRR) Method The internal rate of return (IRR) can be defined as that rate which equates the present value of cash inflows with the present value of cash outflows of an investment.
Put in another way, the internal rate of return is the rate at which the NPV of an investment is zero.
It is called the internal rate because it depends solely on the outlay and the resulting cash inflows of the project and not any rate determined outside the investment.
Let C = Cash outlays of an investment A1 = Cash inflows received in (I+R).
year I discounted at the cost of capital R. A2 = cash inflows received in year 2 (I+R)2 discounted at the cost of Capital R. A3 = cash inflows received in year 3(I+R)3 discounted at the cost of Capital R. Write the basic equation  The value of R in the equation at which total cash outlays equal total cash inflows is called the internal rate of return (IRR).
Usually the value of R can be found out by trial and error.
Generally, if the calculated present value of the expected cash inflows is lower than the present value of cash outflows, a lower rate should be tried.
On the other hand, if the calculated present value of the expected cash inflows is higher than the present value of cash outflows, a higher rate should be tried.
Example A barbers’ shop costs N32,400 to establish and is expected to generate cash inflows of N16,000,N14,000 and N12,000 over its life of three years.
Calculate the internal rate of return.
The net present value is –N514 at 16% discount factor.
Let us try a lower rate like 14%  You will observe from the above calculations that when we tried 16% discount rate, the NPV was negative at –N514, when we tried 14%discount rate, the NPV became positive at N498.
Therefore, the internal rate of return we are looking for lies between 14% and 16%.
The basic accept-or-reject rule, using the IRR method, is to accept the project if its internal rate of return is higher than the firm’s required rate of return.
However, the project should be rejected if its internal rate of return is lower than the firms cost of capital.
It is important that we understand the interpretation of the internal rate of return (IRR).
The internal rate of return (IRR) represents the highest rate of interest a firm would be ready to pay on funds borrowed to finance the project without being financially worse-off, by repaying the loan principal plus accrued interest out of the cash inflows generated by the project.
We should also see the internal rate of return method as a very sound method.
As we said, it is a discounted cash flow method and also it considers the time value of money.
It is also compatible with the firm’s desire to maximise the owners’ wealth.
However the IRR method is fairly difficult to understand and it involves complex computations.
SELF ASSESSMENT EXERCISE Distinguish between the traditional project evaluation methods and the discounted cash.
Show criteria.
4.0 CONCLUSION We have discussed project evaluation criteria which we said constitute a very crucial topic in this course.
We discussed traditional criteria of project evaluation.
Here we mentioned the payback period and the accounting rate of return (ARR).
We also discussed discounted cash inflow criteria.
Here we mentioned the net present value (NPV) method and the Internal Rate of Return (IRR).
5.0 SUMMARY Project evaluation criteria provide us with the tools with which we can choose from various investment proposals using acceptable techniques.
The evaluation criteria guide the project initiator and assist him/her to choose among alternative projects.
Also banks use project evaluation criteria to decide whether or not to lend money for a project.
6.0 TUTOR-MARKED ASSIGNMENT Why are the discounted cash flow (DCF) techniques better and more acceptable than the traditional methods of project evaluation?
7.0 REFERENCES/FURTHER READINGS Leon Ikpe (1999).
Project Analysis and Evaluation.
Lagos: Impressed Publishers.
UNIT 5 INTRODUCTION TO ECONOMIC ANALYSIS CONTENTS 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objectives 3.0 Main Content 3.1 Financial Analysis and Economic Analysis- A Comparison 3.2 The Nature of Economic Analysis 3.3 Adjustments to Financial Analysis 3.4 Linkage Effects of a Project 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutor-Marked Assignment 7.0 References/Further Readings 1.0 INTRODUCTION Generally, in a project analysis situation, most analyses focus on the cash inflows and outflows of a project.
Critical expenses and incomes are usually compared to determine whether a project should be undertaken or not.
But expenses and revenues in most financial analyses are mainly the consideration of a private investor.
The implication of financial analysis is that it provides a micro view of a project and concentrates attention on things like accounting profits.
Economic analysis on the other hand considers projects from a macro point of view.
The type of questions asked in an economic analysis are: 1.
Will the project under consideration lead to the general well being of the community, the state and the nation?
2.
Will the project generate employment at various levels in the macro environment?
3.
Will the project lead to economic growth?
4.
What are the linkages that the project has, i.e., forward or backward linkages?
5.
Will the project generate more technical knowledge?
The questions that we have asked are not exhaustive but only go to demonstrate the type of questions that economic analyses seek to answer.
2.0 OBJECTIVES At the end of this unit, you should be able to: • explain the meaning of an economic analysis • distinguish between an economic analysis and a financial analysis.
3.0 MAIN CONTENT 3.1 Financial Analysis and Economic Analysis – a Comparison In general theory, a financial analysis tries to solve resource allocation problems.
It tries to use information from projects to determine whether projects should come on stream or not.
Economic analysis also tries to solve resource allocation problems in an economy.
In economic theory, resources are very scarce and it is part of any good analysis to allocate resources between competing projects.
For example, resource allocation problems can arise if a community is trying to decide whether to build a school or a hospital with limited scare resources.
Financial analysis equally tries to allocate resources but from a micro view point.
So, both financial and economic analyses solve resource allocation problems.
Financial analysis tries to concern itself with issues of both benefits and costs arising from a project.
In the financial analysis, the concern of the analysis is to evaluate the stream of costs attached to a project and deduct same from the stream of benefits.
If the stream of benefits is greater than the stream of costs, then project in question has a positive value and should be accepted, all things being equal.
However, if the stream of costs is greater than the stream of benefits, then the project in question has a negative value and should not be accepted, all things being equal.
Economic analysis also concerns itself with costs and benefits arising from a project.
If the stream of benefits is greater than the stream of costs, then the project in question has a positive value and should be accepted.
However, if the stream of costs is greater than the stream of benefits, then the project in question has a negative value and should not be accepted , all things being equal.
So we could say that financial analysis and economic analysis both concern themselves with costs and benefits arising from a project.
In the end, they provide answers to the question of whether a project should be acceptable or not.
In evaluating projects, both use discounting and compounding techniques to arrive at their answers.
However, there exist conceptual differences between financial analysis and economic analysis.
While financial analysis has a primary objective of establishing the viability and acceptability of a project from a financial view point, paying no attention to society, economic analysis has the objective of establishing the fact that a project is acceptable or not to the society as a whole.
So while financial analysis has a micro objective, economic analysis has a macro objective.
Finally, in reaching a decision as to whether or not to accept a project, financial analysis and economic analysis both try to establish a relationship between costs and benefits.
For example in financial analysis, costs and benefits arising from a project are usually defined in monetary variables such as profits.
But economic analysis goes really beyond the vague definitions of profit.
In Economic analysis, costs are defined in terms of opportunity costs or foregone costs to the society as a whole.
SELF ASSESSMENT EXERCISE 1 Compare and contrast financial analysis and economic analysis.
3.2 The Nature of Economic Analysis In economic analysis, the costs and benefits attached to a project are usually compared before a decision can be reached on whether or not to accept a project.
In the literature, there exist three discounted measures of project worth which we will now discuss: The Net Present Worth The net present worth is the difference between the present worth of benefits and the present worth of costs.
We can write thus: Net Present Worth = Present Worth Present Worth of benefits of costs Generally, according to the net present worth theory, a project is acceptable if the net present worth is positive.
If the net present worth is negative, the project will be rejected.
Benefit-Cost Ratio If you divide the present worth of benefits of a project by the present worth of its costs, then you have what is known as the benefit-cost ratio.
We can write thus: Benefit-Cost ratio = Present worth of benefits ------------------------------- Present worth of costs Generally, a project is acceptable if the benefit-cost ratio is greater than 1 (one).
If the benefit-cost ratio is exactly 1 (one), that project is a break even project.
The Internal Rate of Return (IRR) The internal rate of return is a discount rate where the present worth of benefits is equal to the present worth of costs.
Under the internal rate of return evaluation method, a project will be acceptable if its internal rate of return is higher than the firm’s required rate of return.
The starting point of economic analysis is the financial analysis of a project which should be properly concluded before embarking on an economic analysis.
Some adjustments will be made to the calculations to arrive at economic data.
First, it may be necessary to include or exclude some costs and benefits which may have been included or excluded from the financial analysis.
Secondly, some project inputs and outputs may have to be revalued if their shadow prices differ significantly from their market prices.
SELF ASSESSMENT EXERCISE 2 Discuss the nature of economic analysis with emphasis on the methods of evaluating the worth of a project.
3.3 Adjustments to Financial Analyses We have stated that the starting point of an economic analysis is a financial analysis, so if we have financial data on financial analysis, we need to make some adjustments to the financial analysis to arrive at economic analysis data.
We shall now consider some of the adjustments: Transfer Payments Transfer payments represent transfer of resources from one section of society to another.
They do not make any claim on the country’s resources and as such, their impact should be clearly distinguished and analysed in the economic analysis.
One of the first transfer payments we shall consider is interest.
Interest is a reward for capital.
For example, if a project is funded through a bank loan, the interest component is included in the profit and loss statement.
The interest charges in the profit and loss statement represent transfer payments from a project to the provider of funds.
What the project lost (interest) has become a gain to the provider of funds.
In effect, both figures are equal and cancel out without any net increase to society of funds.
Therefore in economic analysis, interest charges are excluded since they only represent transfer payments.
The second transfer payment we shall consider is tax.
When a project is profitable it is expected to pay taxes to the government at the ruling rate.
In computing the profit of a project taxes are deducted to arrive at net profit.
Taxes therefore appear as outgoing cash flows.
Taxes represent transfer payments from a project to government.
In the economic analysis of a project, taxes are excluded because from the point of view of the society, they are only a transfer of resources from one section of the economy to another.
The third transfer payment is subsidies.
In a traditional private sectors setting, it would be unheard of to talk of subsidies.
But in economic analysis, subsidies appear as important data.
Most public sector projects enjoy government subsidies to enable the poor gain access to certain services which ordinarily they cannot afford without government assistance.
Subsidies represent opportunity costs to a nation as a whole.
Therefore in estimating the true cost of a project in an economic analysis, subsidies should be included.
3.4 Linkage Effects of a Project Consider a simple case where a university is newly located in an environment.
Many investments will begin to spring up.
New housing developments will begin to spring up; canteens will begin to spring up; hair dressing salons, etc.
will begin to spring up to cater for the needs of the new university community.
Such constitute the linkage effects of a project.
Generally, there are two types of linkage effects which we shall briefly discuss: Forward Linkage Effects Forward linkage is the stimulus given to industries that use the products of a project.
A case in point is a flour manufacturing project.
Flour has so many uses.
If a flour mill is located in an environment, it will lead to the establishment of such projects as bakeries which will use the flour.
Backward Linkage Effects Backward linkage demonstrates the stimulus to industries that supply the inputs to a project.
For example, the establishment of a flour mill in an environment will lead to demand for wheat which is a major input for flour mill.
The flour mill will lead to investment in wheat cultivation.
Also, the establishment of a car assembly plant will lead to the establishment of tyre manufacturing plants that need to supply tyres to the car assembly plant.
Example of an Economic Analysis In the year 2006, the World Bank was considering the desirability or otherwise of assisting Nigeria set up an ethanol plant covering thousands of hectares in the Niger Delta area.
Under the scheme, young farmers will be allocated hectares of land for subsidized cassava cultivation.
Such inputs like fertilizers will be heavily subsidized while technical advice will be provided by the World Bank/ Nigerian agricultural experts.
4.0 CONCLUSION In this unit, we discussed the nature of economic analysis and compared it with the financial analysis of a project.
We discussed net present benefit cost ratio and the internal rate of return (IRR).
5.0 SUMMARY Introduction to economic analysis has provided us with the tools to conduct economic analyses, with financial analyses as a starting point.
Financial analysis is the private sector’s view of a project without considering a project’s impact on the society.
Economic analysis is a macro view of a project, taking into consideration the project’s impact on society.
6.0 TUTOR-MARKED ASSIGNMENT What do you see as the basic differences between the financial analysis of a project and the economic analysis of a project?
7.0 REFERENCES/FURTHER READINGS Leon Ikpe (1999).
Project Analysis and Evaluation.
Lagos: Impressed Publishers.
MODULE 4 RISK AND COST ANALYSIS Unit 1 The Evaluation Methods Unit 2 Concept of Risk in an Organisation Unit 3 Risk and Uncertainty Unit 4 Assessment of Social Profitability Unit 5 Cost Benefit Analysis UNIT 1 THE EVALUATION METHODS CONTENTS 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objectives 3.0 Main Content 3.1 Purpose of Evaluation 3.2 Types of Evaluation 7.0 References/Further Readings 2.0 OBJECTIVES At the end of this unit, you should be able to: • explain the meaning of Evaluation • analyse the purpose of evaluation and classify difference types of project evaluation.
3.0 Introduction The evaluation of on-going and completed projects is one of the basic responsibilities of the Planning and Development Division.
3.1 Purpose of Evaluation The final phase in the project cycle is project evaluation.
The analyst looks systematically at the elements of success and failure in the project experience to learn how to plan better for the future.
The basic objective of such a study is to ascertain the real worth of a project or programme as far as possible.
Broadly speaking, evaluation may be defined as "a process which attempts to determine as systematically and objectively as possible the relevance, effectiveness and impact of activities in the light of the objectives".
It is, thus, a critical analysis of the factual achievements/results of a project, programme or policy vis-a-vis the intended objectives, underlying assumptions, strategy and resource commitment.
In specific terms, it makes an attempt to assess objectively the following:- (a) the relevance and validity of the objectives and design of the project/programme in terms of broader issues of development policy, sector/sub-sector priorities and strategies as well as other problems of a wider nature; (b) the efficiency and adequacy of the pace of progress of the project/programme where the focus is mainly on managerial performance and productivity; (c) the effectiveness of the project/programme - a major part of an evaluation exercise-in realizing the intended objectives from a variety of angles; and (d) the identification of reasons for the satisfactory or unsatisfactory accomplishment of the results of the project/programme and to deduce critical issues and lessons which may be of relevance to other on-going and future projects/programmes of a similar nature.
3.1.3 Types of Evaluation Evaluation can be applied for different purposes as well as to a specific activity, project or programme.
It is not restricted to the completion stage only but involves periodic investigations at many stages.
The different types of project evaluations carried out are: (i) ex-ante evaluation, (ii) on-going evaluation and (iii) terminal evaluation/ex-post evaluation.
The ex-ante evaluation/pre- approval appraisal has already been discussed with methods and techniques in Chapter-5.
The on- going evaluation is carried out by the organization of its own to re-assess the projected feasibility of the PC-I content because of the time lag, while external evaluation is done by an agency other than the body involved in the implementation of a project.
On-going and post-completion evaluations are discussed below:- (a) On-going/Mid-term Evaluation The main purpose of an on-going/mid-project evaluation is to assist the project management to make appropriate adjustments in the changed circumstances or to rectify any shortcomings in the original design, so as to improve its efficiency and overall performance.
(b) Post-Completion Evaluation The purpose of an ex-post or post-hoc evaluation is to discover the actual, as opposed to the projected, results of implementing a project.
The aim of evaluation is primarily to compare the actual outcome of the project with the projections made at the appraisal stage.
The examination of different aspects of the project can provide important lessons derived from experience for the new projects.
The overall impact of the project will result in a number of effects which can be classified as costs and benefits, direct and indirect or tangible and intangible.
Ex-post evaluation takes place after the completion of the project and is often more in-depth as it focuses on the analysis of impact.
Besides, it is time-consuming, costly and calls for persons with special skills.
SELF ASSESSMENT EXERCISE 2 Discuss the nature of evaluation of a project.
4.0 CONCLUSION In this unit, we discussed the nature of economic analysis and compared it with the financial analysis of a project.
We discussed net present benefit cost ratio and the internal rate of return (IRR).
5.0 SUMMARY Introduction to meaning of evaluation, the purpose of evaluation and types of evaluation.
society.
6.0 TUTOR-MARKED ASSIGNMENT Write short note on midterm evaluation and post-completion evaluation?
7.0 REFERENCES/FURTHER READINGS Leon Ikpe (1999).
Project Analysis and Evaluation.
Lagos: Impressed Publishers.
UNIT 2 CONCEPT OF RISK IN AN ORGANIZATION CONTENTS 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objectives 3.0 Main Content 3.1 Meaning of Risk 3.2 Types of Risk 3.3 Relationship between Risk and the Objectives of an Organization 3.4 Organization’s Risk Exposure 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutor Marked Assignment 7.0 References/Further Readings 1.0 INTRODUCTION Risk is part of everyday life.
Consequently everyone has his own view as to what risk is all about, most especially based on his own personal experiences.
Risk could range from near accident misses to catastrophic events such as the terrorist attack of the World Trade Center in United States of America in September 11th 2001 or the Ikeja Bomb blast of January 2002.
In the same vein, different people have different level of tolerance of risk.
This is why the study of risk-either on individual or corporate level is very vital.
2.0 OBJECTIVES After studying this unit, you should be able to:  Explain the potential risk to mankind.
 Differentiate between speculative risk and operational risk.
 Describe the relevance of risk management within corporate strategies.
 Explain the regulatory and advisory pressures on management.
 Explain the fundamental steps in the process of risk management.
 Describe the role and position of the risk manager within an organization.
3.0 MAIN CONTENT 3.1 Meaning of Risk Risk has been described as a natural ingredient to any activity.
No venture, no success; this could be recorded as no risk, no success either for an individual or organization.
The question now is what do we mean by risks?
To answer this question, there is need for us to note that different authors have defined risk in various ways.
Williams Jr. and Heins (1985) had posited that, no one definition is “correct”.
That is, the definition could be likened to the story of the seven blind men’s description of the elephant – all of which are correct and at the same time incorrect.
The above might not be unconnected to the fact that risks exist whenever the future is unknown.
More so, that the adverse effects of risk had challenged the survival of mankind on planet earth ever since time immemorial.
In this regard, we will like to look at the different views of some of the reputable authorities on the subject, as stated below.
1.
“The term risk has a variety of meaning in business and everyday life.
At its most general level, risk is used to describe any situation where there is uncertainty about what outcome will occur.
Life is obviously very risky, even the short-term future is often highly uncertain.
In probability and statistics, financial management, and investment management, risk is often used in a more specific sense to indicate possible variability in outcomes around some expected value – Harrington, Nichaus (1999,p3) 2.
Risk will be looked at from the viewpoint of whether an incident is likely to occur.
It is also necessary to consider how often such an incident could happen and how damaging the incident would be if and when it occurred.
- David Kaye (2001, p1/2) 3.
RISK is the variation in the outcomes that could occur over a specified period in a given situation.
If only one outcome is possible, the variation and hence the risk is O.
If many outcomes are possible, the risk is not O.
The greater the variation, the greater the risk.
- Williams, Jr and Heins (1985, P6).
4.
Risk, defined as uncertainty as to loss poses a problem to individuals in nearly every walk of life.
Students, householders, business people, employees, travelers’ investors, and farmers all must face risk and develop ways to handle it.
If a cost or loss is certain to occur, it may be planned for in advance and treated as a definite, known expense.
It is when there is uncertainty about the occurrence of a loss that risk becomes important problem.
Greene and Triechman (1984, 3).The essence of the above descriptions is to assist us appreciate the importance of risk to our everyday existence.
These descriptions been summed up in nutshells in the definitions below: i Risk is variation in possible outcomes of an event based on chance.
– orfman’s Introduction to Risk Management &Insurance, 4th Edition.
ii Risk is uncertainty as to loss.– Greene & Trieschmann’s, Risk & Insurance, 7th Edition.
iii Risk equals uncertainty.
Risk has principally to do with the uncertainty of a loss.
– Mehr & Cammack’s Principle of Insurance 3rd Edition.
iv Risk may be defined as the possibility that loss will be greater than is normal, expected, or usual.
– Mehr & Hedges’s Risks Management Concept & Application.
At this point, it is important to note that there are those who enjoy and use risk as well as those that are risk averse – they avoid risks!
In between the two extremes that majority of people can be located.
3.2 Types of Risk For the purpose of this course, we look at risk from these two types.
That is, the speculative risk and operational risk.
Speculative Risk These are risks where the outcomes could either be a loss, no loss or profit.
For instance, if a company decides to invest its money in a project, the objective of using fund in the way is to make profit.
But in reality, the outcome could either be a loss, a break-even or a profit.
Risks with such tendencies are classified as speculative risks.
Examples of speculative risks are:  Decision as to invest in a new project, the timing of such an investment  Whether to enter a new market place or a new country (as in the developed countries’ emerging market concept of Asia, etc.)
 A car maker deciding to replace a current model, the timing and level of investment needed, etc.
Operational Risk These are risks that any organization faces in carrying out its daily activities.
This occurs when something unplanned and unpleasant hit the organization causing losses – either to men or materials – in the organization.
In an operational risk, the outcome is either a loss or no loss situation.
Some textbooks refer to this type of risk as Pure Risks.
As a result of the unexpected nature of this kind of risks, organizations can prepare for losses following the occurrence of such risks, through insurance, contingency planning and other funding mechanisms.
There is always the challenge to organization to recognize and manage the operational risks threatening their existence.
SELF ASSESSMENT EXERCISE 1 Differentiate between speculative risk and operational risk.
3.3 Relationship Between Risk and the Objectives of an Organization The objective of an organization is to maximize its profit.
This main objective has always been made difficult as a result of the impact of risk to the organization.
For instance, if an organization suffers from an industrial accident which, let say, makes it pay out the sum of N50 Million in form of various compensation to the victims of such losses.
You will note that this will affect the overall result of the organization at the end of its financial year.
Apart from the objective of profit maximization, a modern organization has alongside other objectives.
The objective of an organization may be informal while at times, they are formal and documented in form of strategic plan.
These objectives are shared with the organization’s ‘stakeholders’.
The ‘stakeholders’ have been defined by Kaye (2001) as people or organization, which could be affected by a risk incident occurring in the organization itself.
As, he sees risk as having the potential to “threaten the operations, assets and other responsibilities of an organization”.
The identified ‘stakeholders’ by Kaye (2001) are: 1.
Employees.
 Morale and pride.
This often reflects the degree of the employees’ interest in the success of an organization and has a direct link into the quality of work performed.
 A need for a job to sustain personal and family life and also selfesteem.
 A safe working environment 2.
Suppliers  Suppliers to the organization will depend on its survival to be able to deliver and receive payment for the goods or services contracted.
 Sometimes the loss of one or more large customers can destroy a supplier of goods and services.
 The organization, as supplier, can destroy customers who are further up the delivery chain.
3.
Customers and Other Recipients of Service  Most business customers are free to move to other organizations.
They will do so if they lose confidence in either delivery or quality.
 Other, non-commercial, service suppliers may find that their relationships with their existing recipients will become difficult and even fail should confidence be lost.
 Sales teams will find it increasingly difficult to find new customers.
 Failure to deliver the contracted services with sufficient quality can lead to litigation for damages well beyond the value of the item in dispute.
4.
Distributors  Distributors are in effect wholesale customers.
All the comments about customers therefore apply.
 Some distributors depend on few or even one source of supply (e.g.
a distributor of a new motor vehicles).
Failure of that one source of supply could damage that distributor on many different ways.
It can even cause it to fail if an adequate replacement supplier is not found soon enough.
5.
Regulators  There are various regulators who, in many different ways, will take a continuing interest in the origination.
 Failure to satisfy the statutory and other requirement of these regulators can result in them imposing fines, restricting business or closing down the business altogether.
 The losses therefore can range from financial, reputational damage and even closure.
6.
The Media  The media has many firms:  Local and international Newspapers  Television and Radio  Popular and Professional Magazines  Increasingly, the Internet.
 These can be regarded as wholesale distributors of the reputation of an organization and its officials.
 If a publication is negative about an organization much damage can be done.
This is so whether the story reflects the truth, only part of the truth, or even is factually incorrect.
 The impact therefore is of significance to all other stakeholders.
7.
Private Investors  Private, monetary, investors can range from family, partners, employees, associated companies and other investors in an organization often they can be exposed to devastating loss than stock market investors who have more opportunity to spread their investments, and therefore the risk across different companies and market.
 There are also ‘investors’ who have a non-monetary stake in the organization.
They stake their professional and personal reputations alongside that of the organization.
They too can suffer loss alongside any damage to the organization itself.
They can find it a very long and difficult process to rebuild this type of asset.
8.
Banking Industry  Banking and investor finance companies will maintain, throughout, an interest in the fortunes of those organizations to which they have provided money.
 If that money is perceived to be at greater risk due to an unexpected downturn in the strength of an organization, the cost of borrowing can increase significantly.
 If the financier believes there is sufficient cause for concern, the assets that are the security for that loan can be sold.
The lender can have that power under the terms of the loan or mortgage agreement.
Primarily the decision when to sell the mortgage assets will be based on the interests of the financier and not necessarily the longer-term interests of the organization and its other stakeholder.
9.
Quoted Shareholders  Quoted shareholders come to the organization through stock markets in various forms.
 Usually the investor has many choices beyond the subject organization and can switch funds away rapidly.
 Stock market sentiments however have many other influences (beyond the success of the individual quoted organization) and thus its behaviour becomes a risk in itself.
 Failing stock values can also increase the cost of borrowing capital.
If leaders perceive that the relationship between total borrowings and the value of the company is narrowing they can demand higher interest rates and security.
 Single points of influence can affect shares widely.
These influences include credit rating agencies such s Standard and Poor’s, and investment analysts employed by the bigger brokers and merchant bankers.
10.
The Environment  Increasingly, there is public and statutory interest in the quality of the environment.
 It is a very wide subject not only covering pollution of the physical environment.
Organizations may need to consider money laundering and insider dealing through to corporate manslaughter and other potential criminal acts.
And Others  Individual organizations may have their own, different stakeholder pressure.
One example would be a political organization with own dependencies to protect.
 Competitors too are a form of ‘stakeholders’.
If an organization is weakened by an unexpected damaging incident, there is usually a whole range of competitors who will see the incident as an opportunity for themselves.
SELF ASSESSMENT EXERCISE 2 Identify and explain organization’s stakeholders 3.4 Organization Risk Exposure The organization is exposed to risk, which could affect its people, its assets and / or other people as well as their assets.
People The people are usually exposed to the risks of injury, sickness or death depending on the nature of activities carried out in the organization.
For instance, for an employee of an asbestos manufacturing company, apart from the risk of injury, he or she could be exposed to asbestos related sickness such as lung cancer, etc.
The people exposed to organization’s risk are:  Employees  Visitors / Customers  Third parties Assets The assets of the organization are also exposed to the risk of damage.
Such assets are:  Balance Sheet assets – such as money, building, equipment, vehicles etc.
 Off balance sheet assets – such as intellectual assets  (Information and knowledge) reputation network of critical, suppliers, distribution system, customer base, etc.
Liabilities These are the legal liabilities, which the organization owes others as a result of wrongdoing.
It could be as a result of injury to third party property.
Risk Map The risk map describes how risks can be presented graphically.
This assists the organization to have a picture of its risk exposures.
An example of risk map is shown below.
SELF ASSESSMENT EXERCISE 3 Explain what you understand by the term speculative risk?
4.0 CONCLUSION In this unit you have learnt important issues that relate to risk in an organization and the different stakeholders in an organization.
5.0 SUMMARY We have dealt with the meaning of risk, types of risks, relationship between risk and the objectives of an organization, etc.
The unit that follows is a continuation of the analysis.
Therefore, in the next study unit, we shall treat risk and uncertainty.
6.0 TUTOR - MARKED ASSIGNMENT Identify six stakeholders to an organization and discuss their roles.
7.0 REFERENCES/FURTHER READINGS Chilellezi, Obinna (2006) Risk Management for Insurance Practice Lagos: Inter.
Training and Educational Services.
Kaye, David (2004) Risk Management London: Chartered Insurance Institute UNIT 3 RISK AND UNCERTAINTY CONTENTS 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objectives 3.0 Main Content 3.1 Risk and Uncertainty distinguished 3.2 Subjective versus Objective Risk 3.3 Subjective Risk and Attitude to Risk 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutor Marked Assignment 7.0 References/Further Readings 1.0 INTRODUCTION Risk and Uncertainty are critical aspects of our lives.
While some events of life involve losses, others may not.
Some of these losses might be common and somewhat predictable; many others are shocking, unexpected events.
Each involves risk or uncertainty.
While the basic element of risk has been discussed in this Unit 2, our focus is to provide a further insight into risk and uncertainty.
The discussion will additionally dwell on attitude to risk and uncertainty.
2.0 OBJECTIVES After you have completed this unit, you should be able to:  Explain the term uncertainty  Distinguish between risk and uncertainty  Differentiate between objective and subjective risks  Discuss the different attitudes to risk 3.0 MAIN CONTENT 3.1 Risk and Uncertainty Distinguished Even though no statistical treatment of risk is envisaged in this study, some basic facts from that approach seem necessary for proper understanding of the concepts under discussion.
Indeed, it is true that the future cannot be known precisely by man.
However, there are events or development of events that can be known up to a given point in time, past or present and which can be analyzed statistically in order to forecast what the future hold for the event(s).
Under condition of risk, a person or a decision maker is faced with a situation in which results of an action or decision are not totally known, but will probably fall within a possible range of outcomes.
Here there could be more than one possible outcomes resulting from the selection of an option.
The decision maker is assumed to know the probability of occurrence of each outcome.
The decision maker’s problem is to estimate, the mathematical probabilities of occurrence.
Basically, some errors of estimate, forecast or prediction are bound to occur, this error being termed risk, implying the error of being wrong- in one’s prediction.
Happily enough, statisticians have a way of determining such errors and measuring them.
Indeed, the decision maker can determine from past experience the objective probability and relative frequency of the occurrence of various outcomes.
Thus, measurements could be possible with the aid of past experience and record kept.
Examples of measurable events are births, vehicular traffic, death, population structure, schools and school attendance, number of buildings in a town, etc.
(Oluoma, 1999:10).
Under uncertainty condition, the decision maker has difficulty assigning probabilities to outcomes either because there is a lack of information or an absence of knowledge concerning what outcome can be expected.
In other words, there are either two main possible outcomes or too many known facts or both.
In this case, the decision maker cannot predict the outcome with any degree of confidence.
In fact since the possible outcomes of the event under consideration and/or their probabilities are unknown, it is difficult to measure or forecast accurately.
This situation is faced frequently by mangers when entirely new products or services are being introduced.
Other examples of non-measurable events are salvation in religion, state of mind, etc.
In addition, unlike risk, uncertainty is a subjective phenomenon.
The implication is that two or more individuals are unlikely to have identical views of the outcome of decisions taken under condition of uncertainty.
Consequently, it is very difficult to develop universally acceptable techniques for dealing with uncertainty.
In practice, a decision maker faced with uncertainty would attempt to generate a probability distribution of possible outcomes on the basis of his personal judgment of the situation.
For instance, any predication as to which of two teams, hitherto unknown, will win a match is bound to be subject.
People are bound to give their opinions according to their fancies of the team.
Risk concerns variations in possible outcomes in a situation.
Uncertainty is often used as a synonym for risk, although when so used it usually refers to objective (measurable or quantified) uncertainty.
Economists and Statisticians use this concept when they measure variation in occurrences.
On such measure of variation is called the standard deviation which helps predict expected variations from a norm.
Predictability of an expected probability actually occurring is increased as the number of events is increased as evident in the principle of large numbers.
(Bickelhaupt, 1974:5).
Still within the realm of uncertainty, there is a dividing line between objective and subjective uncertainty.
According to Bickelhaupt, subjective uncertainty which involves a feeling or state of mind as to expected results differs from the above concept of objective uncertainty.
Lack of knowledge as to the real facts, prejudices, unwarranted high hopes, or other factors can cause different predictions.
Therefore, different subjective risks occur, and these often deviate from the underlying objective risk.
This kind of uncertainty is not readily measurable and is not usually what is meant when the term risk is used.
In summary, risk is associated with measurability while uncertainty with non-measurability of the event(s) or the error(s) of forecast about future situation(s).
Measurability here should be addressed from two important angles:  Knowledge of the possible outcomes of an event and their probabilities of occurrence; and  Objectiveness of measurement SELF ASSESSMENT EXERCISE 1 State the differences between risk and uncertainty 3.2 Subjective Versus Objective Risk Trieschmann, Gustavson and Hoyt (2001: 5) draw a distinction between subjective and objective risks.
According to them, subjective risk refers to the mental state of an individual who experiences doubt or worry as to the outcome of a given event.
In addition to being subjective, a particular risk may also be either pure or speculative and either static or dynamic.
Subjective risk is essentially the psychological uncertainty that arises from an individual’s mental attitude of state of mind.
Objective risk differs from subjective risk primarily in the sense that it is more precisely observable and therefore measurable.
In general, objective risk is the probable variation of actual from expected experience.
This term is most often used in connection with pure static risks, although it can also be applied to the other types of uncertainties.
The concept of subjective risk is especially important because it provides a way to interpret the behaviour of individuals faced with seemingly identical situations yet arriving at different decision.
For example, one person may be ultra conservative and tend always to take the “safe way” out, even in cases that may seem quite risk – free to other decision makers.
Objective risk may actually be the same in two cases but may be viewed very differently by those examining this risk from their own perspectives.
Thus, it is not enough to know only the degree of objective risk; the attitude towards risk of the person who will act on the basis of this knowledge must also be known.
SELF ASSESSMENT EXERCISE 2 State the differences between subjective and objective risk.
3.3 Subjective Risk and Attitude to Risk Before going further into the intricate aspects of risk management it will be necessary to briefly highlight some basic features of risk and individual’s reaction to risks situations which are fundamental ingredients in decision taking toward effective handling of risks.
It should be noted that although a particular type of event may be of such a nature that in principle it ought to be possible to calculate both the probability and the potential variation in particular outcomes, often defects in the quality of the data available to risk managers prevent the calculation of reliable objective estimates of future loss probabilities.
Two common problems are:  insufficiently large samples (that is, the available details of past experience are based on only a small number of exposure units), and  changes in risk factors that cast doubts on the usefulness of past experience as a guide to the future.
In such circumstances there is no alternative but to draw on one’s experience and judgment to interpret loss trends to arrive at subjective probability estimates.
Such estimates may differ markedly from the underlying true probabilities, not least because the estimator’s judgment may be coloured by his own attitude to uncertainty.
When risk cannot be measured objectively with a high degree of accuracy, so that individual judgment and attitudes enter into the process, then subjective risk will be present.
Subjective risk has been defined as “the uncertainty of an event as seen or perceived by an individual”.
Attitude to risk could be approached from three angles: a) risk averter, b) risk optimist/risk seeker c) risk neutral To be risk averse implies that a person is willing to pay in excess of the expected return in exchange for some certainty about the future.
To pay an insurance premium, for example, is to forgo wealth in exchange for the insurer’s promise that covered losses will be paid.
Some people refer to this as an exchange of a certain loss (the premium) for an uncertain loss.
An important aspect of the exchange is that the premium is larger that the average or expected loss because insurer expenses and profit are included.
A person willing only to pay the average loss as a premium would be considered risk neutral.
Someone who accepts risk at less than the average loss, perhaps even paying to add risk such as through gambling is a risk seeker.
(Pritchett, schmit et al, 1996. p. 4, 7) One person may be very cautious and averse to taking chances, whereas another may be highly optimistic regarding uncertain outcomes: the former (risk averter) is likely to arrive at higher loss probability estimates than the latter (risk optimist).
Someone who is strongly averse to accepting even the smallest variation in outcomes from the expected may choose to insure, whereas a less risk adverse individual may be prepared to carry the risk himself.
In fact, attitude to risk influences not only subjective estimates of probability but also risk handling decisions.
What causes one person to be more risk averse than another?
This is a question best answered by psychologists, sociologists, or anthropologists.
However, it is safe to say that family and societal influences, genetics, and religious / philosophical beliefs all play an important role.
Somewhat less clear is the relationship between a Person’s risk aversion and his or her uncertainty; a problem that is influenced by the imprecise way the terms “aversion” and uncertainty” commonly are used.
In some respects, uncertainty could be affected by aversion.
For example, an individual might be so wary of risk in general that he/she would tend to discount his / her own judgment regarding a particular risk.
In that respect, her/his own level of uncertainty regarding a particular risk might be driven higher by her / his aversion to risk.
In other situations, it is possible to say that uncertainty influences aversion, in that a person consistently exposed to an environment of seemingly random and unpredictable events (say, a citizen of Sarajevo) might eventually develop a high level of aversion to risk.
(Williams, Smith and Young, 1995: 7) Some scholars have taken a different approach in relating to risk, risk aversion, and uncertainty to one another.
For instance, William and Heins (1989) discuss risk as consisting of objective and subjective components.
Objective risk refers to the measurable component of risk, while subjective risk reflects an individual reaction to (attitude towards) risk.
In this approach, uncertainty becomes an aspect of subjective risk.
Other views are possible and perhaps the best that can be said is that risk aversion and uncertainty are distinct concepts that are not fully independent of one another.
(Williams, Smith and Young, 1995: 7) SELF ASSESSMENT EXERCISE 3 Distinguish between a risk averter and a risk optimist.
4.0 CONCLUSION Risk and uncertainty are two concepts that occupy the center stage of human and business activities.
They can make or man the future of any entity.
What ever degree or level they assume at any circumstance and the response or attitude of the individual or business will determine the extent to which they can be taken to play negative or respectful role.
5.0 SUMMARY You have learnt in this unit that risk and uncertainty are central in measuring organizational performance.
We have equally discovered that attitude to risk is vital to determining the best part to take in resolving organizational problems.
It is thus, trite to assert that a conscious effort in handling organizational risks must start with a proper synergy of risk and uncertainty and the adaptability of organizations to such business dynamics.
In the next unit, we shall discuss the impact of risk and uncertainty 6.0 TUTOR - MARKED ASSIGNMENT Distinguish between risk and uncertainty.
7.0 REFERENCES/FURTHER READINGS Bickechaupt, David (1974).
General Insurance, 9th Ed, Richard D. Illinois, USA Oluoma, Remi O.
(1999).
Elements of Insurance, Impressed publishers, Ikeja, Lagos, Nigeria.
Pritchet, S.T; J.J Schmit, et al (1996): Risk Management and Insurance 7th edition, West Publishing Company, USA.
Trieschmann, J. S. Gustavson, S. G.; and Hoyt, R.E.
(2001).
Risk Management and Insurance, 11th Edition, South – Western College Publishing, USA.
Williams, C.A; Smith M.L.
and Young P.C.
(1995).
Risk Management and Insurance, 7th Ed, McGraw-Hill, Inc, New York Chartered Insurance Institute (1985): Risk Management, CII Tuition UNIT 4 COMPETITION AND MARKETING PLANS CONTENTS 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objectives 3.0 Main Content 3.1 Social Profitability 3.2 Margin and Ratio 3.3 Effects of Divergences 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutor-Marked Assignment 7.0 References/Further Readings 1.0 INTRODUCTION Every firm is most concerned with its profitability.
One of the most frequently used tools of financial ratio analysis is profitability ratios which are used to determine the company's bottom line and its return to its investors.
Profitability measures are important to company managers and owners alike.
If a small business has outside investors who have put their own money into the company, the primary owner certainly has to show profitability to those equity investors.
Profitability ratios show a company's overall efficiency and performance.
We can divide profitability ratios into two types: margins and returns.
Ratios that show margins represent the firm's ability to translate sales dollars into profits at various stages of measurement.
Ratios that show returns represent the firm's ability to measure the overall efficiency of the firm in generating returns for its shareholders.
.
2.0 OBJECTIVES At the end of this unit, you should be able to: • explain the meaning of profit • discuss social profitability plans and how they are designed.
3.0 MAIN CONTENT 3.1 Social Profitability The second row of the accounting matrix utilizes social prices, as indicated in Table 2.1.
These valuations measure comparative advantage or efficiency in the agricultural commodity system.
Efficient outcomes are achieved when an economy's resources are used in activities that create the highest levels of output and income.
Social profits, H, are an efficiency measure because outputs, E, and inputs, F + G, are valued in prices that reflect scarcity values or social opportunity costs.
Social profits, like the private analogue, are the difference between revenues and costs, all measured in social prices-H = (E - F - G).
For outputs (E) and inputs (F) that are traded internationally, the appropriate social valuations are given by world prices-cif import prices for goods or services that are imported or fob export prices for exportables.
World prices represent the government's choice to permit consumers and producers to import, export, or produce goods or services domestically; the social value of additional domestic output is thus the foreign exchange saved by reducing imports or earned by expanding exports (for each unit of production, the cif import or fob export price).
Because of global output fluctuations or distorting policies abroad, the appropriate world prices might not be those that prevail during the base year chosen for the study.
Instead, expected long-run values serve as social valuations for tradable outputs and inputs.
The services provided by domestic factors of production-labor, capital, and land-do not have world prices because the markets for these services are considered to be domestic.
The social valuation of each factor service is found by estimation of the net income forgone because the factor is not employed in its best alternative use.
This approach requires the commodity systems under analysis to be excluded from social factor price determination.
For example, if land is planted to wheat, it cannot grow barley during the identical crop season; the social opportunity cost of the land for the wheat system is thus the net income lost because the land cannot produce barley.
Similarly, the labor and capital used to produce wheat cannot simultaneously provide services elsewhere in agriculture or in other sectors of the economy.
Their social opportunity costs are measured by the net income given up because alternative activities are deprived of the labor and capital services applied to wheat production.
The practice of social valuation of domestic factors begins with a distinction between mobile and fixed factors of production.
Mobile factors, usually capital and labor, are factors that can move from agriculture to other sectors of the economy, such as industry, services, and energy.
For mobile factors, prices are determined by aggregate supply and demand forces.
Because alternative uses for these factors are available throughout the economy, the social values of capital and labor are determined at a national level, not solely within the agricultural sector.
Actual wage rates for labor and rates of return to capital investment are therefore affected by a host of policies, some of which may distort factor prices directly.
An enforced and binding minimum-wage law, for example, raises the market wage above what it would have been in the absence of policy and causes observed wages to be higher than the social opportunity cost of labor.
But indirect effects can also be important.
Distortions of output prices cause different activities to expand or contract, altering in turn the demand and prices of mobile domestic factors.
Fixed, or immobile, factors of production are the factors whose private or social opportunity costs are determined within a particular sector of the economy.
The value of agricultural land, for example, is usually determined only by the land's worth in growing alternative crops.
Because land is immobile, its value is not directly affected by events in the industrial and service sectors of the economy.
But the social opportunity cost of farmland is sometimes difficult to estimate.
Within any agroclimatic zone, complete specialization in the most profitable crop is rarely observed.
Instead, farmers prefer rotations or intercropping systems that reduce risks of income losses from price variability, yield losses, and pest and disease infestation.
Therefore, the social opportunity cost of the land is not accurately approximated by the net profitability’s of a single best alternative crop; instead, it is measured by some weighted average of the social profits accruing from the set of crops planted.
Because the correct weights and social profits associated with each crop in the set are generally not known, it is convenient in assessing farming activities to reinterpret crop profits as rents to land and other fixed factors (for example, management and the ability to bear risk) per hectare of land used.
This reinterpretation includes private (and social) returns to land as parts of D (and H).
Profitability per hectare is then interpreted as the ability of a farming activity to cover its long-run variable costs, in either private or social prices or as a return to fixed factors such as land, management skill, and water resources.
SELF ASSESSMENT EXERCISE In evaluating the outlook for profitability, list and discuss four items that you think are important.
3.2.0 Margin Ratios Gross Profit Margin The gross profit margin looks at cost of goods sold as a percentage of sales.
This ratio looks at how well a company controls the cost of its inventory and the manufacturing of its products and subsequently pass on the costs to its customers.
The larger the gross profit margin, the better for the company.
The calculation is: Gross Profit/Net Sales = ____%.
Both terms of the equation come from the company's income statement.
3.2.1 Operating Profit Margin Operating profit is also known as EBIT and is found on the company's income statement.
EBIT is earnings before interest and taxes.
The operating profit margin looks at EBIT as a percentage of sales.
The operating profit margin ratio is a measure of overall operating efficiency, incorporating all of the expenses of ordinary, daily business activity.
The calculation is: EBIT/Net Sales = _____%.
Both terms of the equation come from the company's income statement.
3.2.2 Net Profit Margin When doing a simple profitability ratio analysis, net profit margin is the most often margin ratio used.
The net profit margin shows how much of each sales dollar shows up as net income after all expenses are paid.
For example, if the net profit margin is 5%, that means that 5 cents of every dollar is profit.
The net profit margin measures profitability after consideration of all expenses including taxes, interest, and depreciation.
The calculation is: Net Income/Net Sales = _____%.
Both terms of the equation come from the income statement.
3.2.3 Cash Flow Margin The Cash Flow Margin ratio is an important ratio as it expresses the relationship between cash generated from operations and sales.
The company needs cash to pay dividends, suppliers, service debt, and invest in new capital assets, so cash is just as important as profit to a business firm.
The Cash Flow Margin ratio measures the ability of a firm to translate sales into cash.
The calculation is: Cash flow from operating cash flows/Net sales = _____%.
The numerator of the equation comes from the firm's Statement of Cash Flows.
The denominator comes from the Income Statement.
The larger the percentage, the better.
3.2.4 Returns Ratios Return on Assets (also called Return on Investment) The Return on Assets ratio is an important profitability ratio because it measures the efficiency with which the company is managing its investment in assets and using them to generate profit.
It measures the amount of profit earned relative to the firm's level of investment in total assets.
The return on assets ratio is related to the asset management category of financial ratios.
The calculation for the return on assets ratio is: Net Income/Total Assets = _____%.
Net Income is taken from the income statement and total assets is taken from the balance sheet.
The higher the percentage, the better, because that means the company is doing a good job using its assets to generate sales.
3.2.5 Return on Equity The Return on Equity ratio is perhaps the most important of all the financial ratios to investors in the company.
It measures the return on the money the investors have put into the company.
This is the ratio potential investors look at when deciding whether or not to invest in the company.
The calculation is: Net Income/Stockholder's Equity = _____%.
Net income comes from the income statement and stockholder's equity comes from the balance sheet.
In general, the higher the percentage, the better, with some exceptions, as it shows that the company is doing a good job using the investors' money.
3.2.6 Cash Return on Assets The cash return on assets ratio is generally used only in more advanced profitability ratio analysis.
It is used as a comparison to return on assets since it is a cash comparison to this ratio as return on assets is stated on an accrual basis.
Cash is required for future investments.
The calculation is: Cash flow from operating activities/Total Assets = _____%.
The numerator is taken from the Statement of Cash Flows and the denominator from the balance sheet.
The higher the percentage, the better.
3.2.7 Comparative Data Financial ratio analysis is only a good method of financial analysis if there is comparative data available.
The ratios should be compared to both historical data for the company and industry data.
3.3 Effects of Divergences The second identity of the accounting matrix concerns the differences between private and social valuations of revenues, costs, and profits.
For each entry in the matrix-measured vertically-any divergence between the observed private (actual market) price and the estimated social (efficiency) price must be explained by the effects of policy or by the existence of market failures.
This critical relationship follows directly from the definition of social prices.
Social prices correct for the effects of distorting policies-policies that lead to an inefficient use of resources.
These policies often are introduced because decision-makers are willing to accept some inefficiencies (and thus lower total income) in order to further nonefficiency objectives, such as the redistribution of income or the improvement of domestic food security.
In this circumstance, assessing the tradeoffs between efficiency and nonefficiency objectives becomes a central part of policy analysis.
But not all policies distort the allocation of resources.
Some policies are enacted expressly to improve efficiency by Table 2.2: Expanded Policy Analysis Matrix Revenues Costs Profits Tradable Inputs Domestic Factors Private Prices A B C D Social Prices E F G G Diverges and efficient policy I J K L Effects of market failures M N O P Effects of distorting policy Q R S T Effects of efficient policy U V W X Table Notes: Private profits, D, equal A minus B minus C. Social profits, H, equal E minus F minus G. 30utput transfers, 1, equal A minus E; they also equal M plus Q plus U. lnput transfers, J, equal B minus F; they also equal N plus R plus V. Factor transfers, K, equal C minus G; they also equal O plus S plus W. Net transfers, L, equal D minus H; they also equal I minus J minus K; and they equal P plus T plus X.
4.0 CONCLUSION In this unit, we have discussed profitability plans.
We have also discussed the social profitability and the effects of divergences.
Apart from these, we have provided a check list for profitability ratio plan.
5.0 SUMMARY We have discussed profitability plans and social profitability.
We saw how profit ratio relate to each other.
The framework for analysis presented discussed social profitability of an organisation’s position in the industry.
60 TUTOR-MARKED ASSIGNMENTS 1.
Discuss the five basic profit ratio.
2.
Use matrix policy to analyse organization cost, revenue and profits.
7.0 REFERENCES/FURTHER READINGS Hill, T. & R. Westbrook (1997).
"SWOT Analysis: It’s Time for a Product Recall".
Long Range Planning 30 (1): 46–52.. Michael E. Porter.
(1980).
Competitive Strategy: Techniques for Analyzing Industries and Competitors.
New York: Free Press.
UNIT 5 COST BENEFIT ANALYSIS CONTENT 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objectives 3.0 Main Content 3.1 Principles of CBA 3.2 Challenges of CBA 3.3 Benefits of CBA 3.4 Decision Criteria for Project 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutor-Marked Assignment 7.0 References/Further Reading 1.0 INTRODUCTION COST BENEFIT ANALYSIS Cost-Benefit Analysis (CBA) estimates and totals up the equivalent money value of the benefits and costs to the community of projects to establish whether they are worthwhile.
Cost-Benefit Analysis (CBA) estimates and totals up the equivalent money value of the benefits and costs to the community of projects to establish whether they are worthwhile.
These projects may be dams and highways or can be training programs and health care systems.
The idea of this economic accounting originated with Jules Dupuit, a French engineer whose 1848 article is still worth reading.
The British economist, Alfred Marshall, formulated some of the formal concepts that are at the foundation of CBA.
But the practical development of CBA came as a result of the impetus provided by the Federal Navigation Act of 1936.
This act required that the U.S.
Corps of Engineers carry out projects for the improvement of the waterway system when the total benefits of a project to whomsoever they accrue exceed the costs of that project.
Thus, the Corps of Engineers had created systematic methods for measuring such benefits and costs.
The engineers of the Corps did this without much, if any, assistance from the economics profession.
It wasn't until about twenty years later in the 1950's that economists tried to provide a rigorous, consistent set of methods for measuring benefits and costs and deciding whether a project is worthwhile.
Some technical issues of CBA have not been wholly resolved even now but the fundamental presented in the following are well established.
2.0 OBJECTIVES At the end of this unit, you should be able to: project analysis.
3.0 MAIN CONTENT 3.1 Principles of Cost Benefit Analysis One of the problems of CBA is that the computation of many components of benefits and costs is intuitively obvious but that there are others for which intuition fails to suggest methods of measurement.
Therefore some basic principles are needed as a guide.
There Must Be a Common Unit of Measurement In order to reach a conclusion as to the desirability of a project all aspects of the project, positive and negative, must be expressed in terms of a common unit; i.e., there must be a "bottom line."
The most convenient common unit is money.
This means that all benefits and costs of a project should be measured in terms of their equivalent money value.
A program may provide benefits which are not directly expressed in terms of dollars but there is some amount of money the recipients of the benefits would consider just as good as the project's benefits.
For example, a project may provide for the elderly in an area a free monthly visit to a doctor.
The value of that benefit to an elderly recipient is the minimum amount of money that that recipient would take instead of the medical care.
This could be less than the market value of the medical care provided.
It is assumed that more esoteric benefits such as from preserving open space or historic sites have a finite equivalent money value to the public.
Not only do the benefits and costs of a project have to be expressed in terms of equivalent money value, but they have to be expressed in terms of dollars of a particular time.
This is not just due to the differences in the value of dollars at different times because of inflation.
A dollar available five years from now is not as good as a dollar available now.
This is because a dollar available now can be invested and earn interest for five years and would be worth more than a dollar in five years.
If the interest rate is r then a dollar invested for t years will grow to be (1+r)t. Therefore the amount of money that would have to be deposited now so that it would grow to be one dollar t years in the future is (1+r)-t. This called the discounted value or present value of a dollar available t years in the future.
When the dollar value of benefits at some time in the future is multiplied by the discounted value of one dollar at that time in the future the result is discounted present value of that benefit of the project.
The same thing applies to costs.
The net benefit of the projects is just the sum of the present value of the benefits less the present value of the costs.
CBA Valuations Should Represent Consumers or Producers Valuations As Revealed by Their Actual Behavior The valuation of benefits and costs should reflect preferences revealed by choices which have been made.
For example, improvements in transportation frequently involve saving time.
The question is how to measure the money value of that time saved.
The value should not be merely what transportation planners think time should be worth or even what people say their time is worth.
The value of time should be that which the public reveals their time is worth through choices involving tradeoffs between time and money.
If people have a choice of parking close to their destination for a fee of 50 cents or parking farther away and spending 5 minutes more walking and they always choose to spend the money and save the time and effort then they have revealed that their time is more valuable to them than 10 cents per minute.
If they were indifferent between the two choices they would have revealed that the value of their time to them was exactly 10 cents per minute.
3.2 Challenges of CBA The most challenging part of CBA is finding past choices which reveal the tradeoffs and equivalencies in preferences.
For example, the valuation of the benefit of cleaner air could be established by finding how much less people paid for housing in more polluted areas which otherwise was identical in characteristics and location to housing in less polluted areas.
Generally the value of cleaner air to people as revealed by the hard market choices seems to be less than their rhetorical valuation of clean air.
3.3 Benefits of CBA Benefits Are Usually Measured by Market Choices When consumers make purchases at market prices they reveal that the things they buy are at least as beneficial to them as the money they relinquish.
Consumers will increase their consumption of any commodity up to the point where the benefit of an additional unit (marginal benefit) is equal to the marginal cost to them of that unit, the market price.
Therefore for any consumer buying some of a commodity, the marginal benefit is equal to the market price.
The marginal benefit will decline with the amount consumed just as the market price has to decline to get consumers to consume a greater quantity of the commodity.
The relationship between the market price and the quantity consumed is called the demand schedule.
Thus the demand schedule provides the information about marginal benefit that is needed to place a money value on an increase in consumption.
Some Measurements of Benefits Require the Valuation of Human Life It is sometimes necessary in CBA to evaluate the benefit of saving human lives.
There is considerable antipathy in the general public to the idea of placing a dollar value on human life.
Economists recognize that it is impossible to fund every project which promises to save a human life and that some rational basis is needed to select which projects are approved and which are turned down.
The controversy is defused when it is recognized that the benefit of such projects is in reducing the risk of death.
There are many cases in which people voluntarily accept increased risks in return for higher pay, such as in the oil fields or mining, or for time savings in higher speed in automobile travel.
These choices can be used to estimate the personal cost people place on increased risk and thus the value to them of reduced risk.
This computation is equivalent to placing an economic value on the expected number of lives saved.
The Analysis of a Project Should Involve a With Versus Without Comparison The impact of a project is the difference between what the situation in the study area would be with and without the project.
This that when a project is being evaluated the analysis must estimate not only what the situation would be with the project but also what it would be without the project.
For example, in determining the impact of a fixed guideway rapid transit system such as the Bay Area Rapid Transit (BART) in the San Francisco Bay Area the number of rides that would have been taken on an expansion of the bus system should be deducted from the rides provided by BART and likewise the additional costs of such an expanded bus system would be deducted from the costs of BART.
In other words, the alternative to the project must be explicitly specified and considered in the evaluation of the project.
Note that the with-and-without comparison is not the same as a before-and-after comparison.
Another example shows the importance of considering the impacts of a project and a with-and- without comparison.
Suppose an irrigation project proposes to increase cotton production in Arizona.
If the United States Department of Agriculture limits the cotton production in the U.S. by a system of quotas then expanded cotton production in Arizona might be offset by a reduction in the cotton production quota for Mississippi.
Thus the impact of the project on cotton production in the U.S. might be zero rather than being the amount of cotton produced by the project.
Cost Benefit Analysis Involves a Particular Study Area The impacts of a project are defined for a particular study area, be it a city, region, state, nation or the world.
In the above example concerning cotton the impact of the project might be zero for the nation but still be a positive amount for Arizona.
The nature of the study area is usually specified by the organization sponsoring the analysis.
Many effects of a project may "net out" over one study area but not over a smaller one.
The specification of the study area may be arbitrary but it may significantly affect the conclusions of the analysis.
Double Counting of Benefits or Costs Must be Avoided Sometimes an impact of a project can be measured in two or more ways.
For example, when an improved highway reduces travel time and the risk of injury the value of property in areas served by the highway will be enhanced.
The increase in property values due to the project is a very good way, at least in principle, to measure the benefits of a project.
But if the increased property values are included then it is unnecessary to include the value of the time and lives saved by the improvement in the highway.
The property value went up because of the benefits of the time saving and the reduced risks.
To include both the increase in property values and the time saving and risk reduction would involve double counting.
Decision Criteria for Projects If the discounted present value of the benefits exceeds the discounted present value of the costs then the project is worthwhile.
This is equivalent to the condition that the net benefit must be positive.
Another equivalent condition is that the ratio of the present value of the benefits to the present value of the costs must be greater than one.
If there are more than one mutually exclusive project that have positive net present value then there has to be further analysis.
From the set of mutually exclusive projects the one that should be selected is the one with the highest net present value.
If the funds required for carrying out all of the projects with positive net present value are less than the funds available this means the discount rate used in computing the present values is too low and does not reflect the true cost of capital.
The present values must be recomputed using a higher discount rate.
It may take some trial and error to find a discount rate such that the funds required for the projects with a positive net present value is no more than the funds available.
Sometimes as an alternative to this procedure people try to select the best projects on the basis of some measure of goodness such as the internal rate of return or the benefit/cost ratio.
This is not valid for several reasons.
Introduction of Project Decision Criteria’s NPV, IRR, PV etc.
SELF-ASSESSMENT EXERCISE 1) What are the challenges of CBA 2) Discuss the principles of CBA 4.0 CONCLUSION A cost benefit analysis is done to determine how well, or how poorly, a planned action will turn out.
Although a cost benefit analysis can be used for almost anything, it is most commonly done on financial questions.
Since the cost benefit analysis relies on the addition of positive factors and the subtraction of negative ones to determine a net result, it is also known as running the numbers.
5.0 SUMMARY This unit focuses on CBA with core objectives on the usage of CBA in project analysis.
Further explanation based on challenges and benefits of CBA with criteria for project selection.
The impacts of a project are defined for a particular study area was considered .A cost benefit analysis is done to determine how well, or how poorly, a planned action will turn out.
Although a cost benefit analysis can be used for almost anything, it is most commonly done on financial questions.
6.0 TUTOR-MARKED ASSIGNMENT Review the articles that surround CBA.
7.0 REFERENCES/FURTHER READING "Albert Humphrey The "Father" of TAM".
TAM UK.Retrieved 2012-06-03.
See for instance: Mehta, S. (2000) Marketing Strategy
