 BHM 767 COURSE GUIDE BHM 767: COMPARATIVE LOCAL GOVERNMENT ADMINISTRATION COURSE GUIDE NATIONAL OPEN UNIVERSITY OF NIGERIA NOUN 2 BHM 767 COURSE GUIDE COURSE OUTLINE MODULES UNITS TOPICS CONCEPUTUAL ANALYSIS: MEANING OF UNIT 1 LOCAL GOVERNMENT AND DECENTALIZATION UNIT 2 JUSTICICATION OF LOCAL GOVERNMENT THE EFFICIENCY THEORY OF LOCAL UNIT 3 GOVERNMENT THE DEMOCRACTIC THEORY OF LOCAL UNIT 4 GOVERNMENT THE ACOUNTABILITY THEORY OF LOCAL UNIT 5 GOVERNMENT IMPERATIVES AND HISTORY OF UNIT 6 COMPARATIVE PUBLIC AND LOCAL GOVERNMENT ADMINISTRATION NATURE, UNTILITY AND PROBLEMS OF UNIT 7 COMPARATIVE PUBLIC AND LOCAL GOVERNMENT ADMINSTRATION STRATEGIES OF COMPARING: UNIT 8 DIFFERENCES AND SIMILARITIES APPROCAHES.
STRATEGIES OF COMPANY: UNIT 9 EXPERIMENTAL APPROACH EVOLUTION OF NIGERIA LOCAL UNIT10 GOVERNMENT SYSTEM STRUCTURE OF LOCAL GOVERNMENT IN UNIT 11 NIGERIA FUNCTIONS OF NIGERIA LOCAL UNIT 12 GOVERNMENTS FINANCING LOCAL GOVERNMENT IN UNIT 13 NIGERIA INTERNAL SOURCESOF REVENUE FINANCING LOCAL GOVERNMENT IN UNIT 14 NIGERIA EXTERNAL SOURCES OF REVENUE PROBLEMS OF LOCAL GOVERNMENT IN UNIT 15 NIGERIA THE 1976 LOCAL GOVERNEMENT UNIT 16 REFORMS IN NIGERIA THE POST – 1976 LOCAL GOVERNEMENT UNIT 17 REFORMS IN NIGERIA UNIT 18 LOCAL GOVERNMENT IN THE UNITED NOUN 3 BHM 767 COURSE GUIDE STATE OF AMERICA: PHILOSOPHICAL BACKGROUND.
LOCAL GOVERNMENT STRUCTURE IN UNIT19 THE UNITED STATE OF AMERICA.
FUNCTIONS OF LOCAL GOVERNMENT IN UNIT 20 THE UNITED STATE OF AMERICA FINANCING LOCAL GOVERNMENTS IN UNIT 21 THE UNITED STATE OF AMERICA LOCAL GOVERNEMENT IN BRITIAN: UNIT 22 HISTORICAL BACKGROUND STRUCTURE OF LOCAL GOVERNMENT IN UNIT 23 BRITAIN FUNCTIONS OF LOCAL GOVERNMENT IN UNIT 24 BRITAIN FINANCING LOCAL GOVERNMENTS IN UNIT 25 BRITAIN LOCAL GOVERNMENT IN FRANCE: UNIT 26 HISTORICAL DEVELOPMENT.
STRUCTURE OF LOCAL GOVERNMENT IN UNIT 27 FRANCE FUNCTIONS OF LOCA GOVERNMNET IN UNIT 28 FRANCE FINANCING LOCAL GOVERNMENT IN UNIT 29 FRANCE LOCAL GOVERNMENT REFORMS IN UNIT 30 FRANCE NOUN 4 BHM 767 COURSE GUIDE COURSE GUIDE CONTENTS INTRODUCTION WHAT YOU WILL LEARN IN THIS COUSRE COURSE AIMS COURSE OBJECTIVES WORKING THROUGH THIS COURSE COURSE MATERIALS STUDY UNITS SET TEXTBOOKS ASSIGNMENT FILE PRESENTATION SCHEDULE ASSESSMENT TUTOR – MARKED ASSIGNMENTS FINAL EXAMINATION AND GRADING COURSE MARKING SCHEME COURSE OVERVIEW HOW TO GET THE MOST FROM THIS COURSE, TUTORS AND TUTORIALS.
SUMMARY NOUN 5 BHM 767 COURSE GUIDE INTRODUCTION BHM 767: COMPARATIVE LOCAL GOVERNMENT ADMINISTRATION is a 3 – credit pcooustr s–e g r addeusaitgen deidp l o mtoa enable students acquire comparative knowledge of local government administration across countries with divergent cultural, ideological and political influence on their public services.
The course is compulsory for the post – graduate diploma in local government programme, and it is expected that students taking the course will already have some basic knowledge of course in lgoocvael rn ment.
WHAT YOU WILL LEARN IN THIS COURSE The overall goal of BHME 767 – Comparative Local Government is to expose students to the various cultural, political and administrative milieus in which local government administrators operate and consequently impact on administrative styles and outcomes at the grassroots level of governance.
During this course, you will learn about the different strategies for COMPARATIVE LOCAL GOVERNMENT ADMINISTRATION study.
The structure, functions, source of finance, problems and reforms of local government in Nigeria, Britain, France and the United State of America aerxea m ined.
COURSE AIMS This course aims to: 1.
Familiarize you with the basic methods for comparing local government systems in different countries.
2.
Explain the justification for comparing systems.
3.
Explain and make you appreciate the relevance of local government administration and therefore its purpose and justification in a nadatmioinni’sst r ative set up.
4.
Describe and explains the key peculiarities, structure, functions and problems of local governments across political systems.
COURSE OBJECTIVES By the end of this course, you should be able to: NOUN 6 BHM 767 COURSE GUIDE 1.
Appreciate the contemporary trend in administrative decentralization to be able to serve citizens better 2.
Explain the imperatives for COMPARATIVE LOCAL GOVERNMENT ADMINISTRATION.
3.
Discuss the nature, usefulness of COMPARATIVE LOCAL GOVERNMENT ADMINISTRATION study.
4.
Explain the various tools of comparative study.
5.
Describe the structure, funding functions and problems of local government in some selected countries.
WORKING THROUGH THIS COURSE To successfully complete this course, you are required to read all the study units, read texts identified under further reading and other materials may be provided.
You will also be required to do self assessment exercise, while some other assignments will be submitted for assessment.
You will find below the major unit components of the course.
COURSE MATERIALS 1. course Guide 2. study units 3.
Textbooks 4.
Assignment file 5.
Presentation schedule STUDY UNITS There are thirty units in BHM 767.
The units are; UNIT 1: C onceptual Analysis.
UNIT 2: Justification and purpose of Local Government.
UNIT 3: the Efficiency Theory of local Government.
UNIT 4: The Democracy Theory of Local Government.
NOUN 7 BHM 767 COURSE GUIDE UNIT 5: The Accountability Theory of Local Government.
UNIT 6: Imperatives and History of comparative public and local Government administration.
UNIT 7: Nature, utility and problems of comparative public and local Government administration.
UNIT 8: Strategies of comparing – Differences and similarities approaches.
UNIT 9: Strategies of comparing – experimental approaches UNIT 10: Evolution of Nigeria Local government system.
UNIT 11: Structure of Local Government in Nigeria.
UNIT 12: Functions of Nigerian Local Governments.
UNIT 13: Financing Local Government in Nigeria – Internal sources of Revenue UNIT 14: Financing Local Government in Nigeria – External sources of Revenue.
UNIT 15: Problems of Local Government in Nigeria.
UNIT 16: The 1976 Local Government Reforms in Nigeria.
UNIT 17: The post – 1976 Local Government Reforms UNIT 18: Local Government in United State of America Philosophical Background.
UNIT 19: Local Government structure in the United States UNIT 20: Functions of Local Governments in the Unites States.
UNIT 21: Financing Local Government in the United States.
UNIT 22: Local Government in Britain Historical Background.
UNIT 23: Structure of Local Government in Britain UNIT 24: Functions of Local Government in Britain NOUN 8 BHM 767 COURSE GUIDE UNIT 25: Financing Local Government in Britain UNIT 26: Local Government in France: Historical Development.
UNIT 27: Structure of Local Government in France.
UNIT 28: Functions of Local Government in France UNIT 29: Financing Local Government in France UNIT 30: Structure Local Government in France.
The first unit provides the conceptual background for the study.
Unit tewxaom ines the need; justification and purposes of local government generally.
Units 3, 4 and 5 provide the theoretical explanations for the desirability of local governments.
Units 6, 7, 8 and 9 examine the imperative analysis as a field of study.
Units 10, 11, 12, 13, 14, 15, 16 and 17 focus mainly on the various aspects of local government system in Nigeria.
Similarly, units 18, 19, 20 and 21 analyze the key characteristics of local government administration in the United States.
The next four units (22, 23, 24 and 25) concern themselves with lgoocvael rn ment administrative practice in Britain, while the French local government system is analyzed in the last five units.
Completing all the required exercise and activities in each unit will enhance your understanding of the course materials and you must evaluate your progress through them.
You will also be assisted in achieving the learning objective of each unit of the course by promptly and adequately attending to the tutor – marked assignments.
(TMAS).
SET TEXBOOKS.
Ajayi kunle (edy 2000) Theory and practice of Local Government, Ado – Ekiti, university of Ado – Ekiti.
Agagu, A.
A.
(2001) Comparative Political and Administrative Studies, Ado – Ekiti, university of Ado Ekiti.
Dunley, p etal (Eds, 1990) Development in British politics 3, London, Macmillan Gboyega, A.
(1987) Political values and Local Government in Nigeria, Lagos, Matthouse press.
NOUN 9 BHM 767 COURSE GUIDE Wright, V (1979) the Government and politics of France, London, Hutchinson & co.
ASSIGNMENT FILE You will find the assignment questions of each tutor – marked assignment (TMA) in the folder labeled “Assignment File” you will find the detail of the work you must submit to your tutor in the file.
The marks you obtain in those assignments will form part of your final mark for this course.
You are advised to observe the deadline for the submission of each assignment.
PRESENTATION SCHEDULE The presentation schedule provides a progress calendar which gives you information on dates for the completion of your tutor – marked assignments how much time you should spend on each study unit, period for revision and tutorial dates.
COURSE ASSESSMENT The formed assessment for this course consists of two aspects.
One, the tutor – market assignments, two, the final examination.
And techniques learnt during the course will assist you in tackling the assignments.
The tutor – marked assignment carry 50% of your total course work.
TUTOR – MARKED ASSIGNMENT (TMS) There are four tutors – market assignments in this course.
You are required to complete all and submit to your tutor for evaluation and grading.
Easascighn ment carries 12.5% of the course total marks.
Assignment questions for the course are contained in the assignment file.
You will be able to complete your assignment from the information in your unit materials, set textbooks and other recommended sources.
Ensure that your assignments reach your tutor on or before the set deadlines given in the presentation schedule and assignment file.
Extensions will not be granted after the due date unless there are exceptional situations.
FINAL EXAMINATION AND GRADING The final examination level has a weight value of 50% of total course mark.
The examination which will be for duration of three hours will consist of questions in all areas of the course.
NOUN 10 BHM 767 COURSE GUIDE COURSE MARKING SCHEME The course marking is analyzed as shown in Table 1 below.
TABLE 1 COURSE MARKING SCHEME ASSESSMENT MARKS Assignments 40% Final Examination 60% Total 100% COURSE OVERVIEW The table below shows the number of weeks you should expend to complete the unit and required assignments.
Table 2 COURSE ORGANIZER ASSESMEN T ACTIVITY MODULE UNIT TITLE OF WORK WEEKS (END OF ACTIVITY UNIT COURSE GUIDE 1 1 1 Conceptual Analysis 1 2 Justification and purpose of Local Government.
3 The Efficiency Theory of 1 Local Government 4 The Democr acy Theory of 1 Local Government 2 5 The Accountability Theory 1 Assignment 1 of Local Government 6 Imperative and History of 1 Comparative Public and Local Government Administration.
7 Nature, Utility and 1 Problems of comparative public and local Government Administration.
8 Strategies of comparing – 1 differences and similarities NOUN 11 BHM 767 COURSE GUIDE approaches 3 9 Strategies of comparing – 1 Assignment 2 Experimental approaches 10 Evolution of Nigeria Local 1 Government system.
11 Structure of Local 1 government in Nigeria 12 Functions of Nigeria Local 1 Government 13 Financing Local Government in Nigeria – Internal sources of Revenue 14 Financing Local 1 Government in Nigeria- External sources of Revenue 15 Problems of Local governments in Nigeria.
16 The 1976 of local Government Reforms in 1 Nigeria 4 17 The post – 1976 Local Assignment 3 Government Reforms in 1 Nigeria 18 Local Government in United State of America.
1 Philosophical background.
19 Local Government structure in the united States 1 20 Functions of Local governments in the United 1 states 5 21 Financing Local Assignment 4 Government in the United 1 States 22 Local Government in Britain: Historical 1 background 23 Structure of Local 1 Government in Britain NOUN 12 BHM 767 COURSE GUIDE 24 Functions of Local Government in Britain 1 6 25 Financing Local Assignment 5 government in Britain 1 26 Local government in France: Historical 1 Development 27 Structure of Local Government in France 1 28 Functions of Local Government in France 1 29 Financing Local Governments in France 1 7 30 Local Government Reforms Assignment 6 in France 1 Revision 1 Total 32 HOW TO GET THE MOST FROM THIS COURSE Distance learning is unlike the normal university system.
In distance learning, the university lecture is replaced by study units.
Distance learning affords you to read and work through specially prepared study materials at your own pace, time and place that suit you best.
You read the study material on your own rather than listening to a lecturer.
Your study also provides in – class exercises aanssdi g nments just as lecturers might give take – home or in – class assignment to regulate university students.
Each of the study units follows a uniform format.
The first item is tihnetr o duction of the subject matter of the unit and how a particular unit fits into the rest of units and five courses as a whole.
This is followed by a set of learning objectives which concern what you should be able to do by the time you have completed these objectives to guide your study.
It is important that after completing a unit, you must go back and check whether you have achieved the course objectives.
NOUN 13 BHM 767 COURSE GUIDE Self – tests are found in the units, and answers are given at the ends of each unit working through the test will assist you in achieving the unit objectives and prepare you for the assignments and the final examination.
When you need assistance do not hesitate to call and ask your facilitator to provide it.
1.
Read this course guide thoroughly 2.
Organize a study schedule, and note the time you are expected to spend on each unit and how the assignment relate to the units.
3.
Do everything you can to adhere to your study schedule.
If you have difficulties with your schedule, please let your facilitators know immediately.
4.
Take unit 1 and read the introduction and objectives for the unit.
5.
The unit “overview” will provide you the required information for a unit.
6.
Work your assignments and submit on or before due dates.
You will, before due date learn a lot by doing the assignment carefully and timely.
7. Review the objectives for each study unit to conform that you have achieved them.
Review the study material or consult your tutor if you have problem with the objectives.
8.
Proceed to the next unit only if you are sure you have achieved a unit’s objective.
Place yourself on schedule.
9.
Do not wait for your tutor to return your submitted assignment to her before you start working on the next unit.
In your next unit you need to keep to your schedule.
10.
After completing the last unit review the work and prepare yourself for the examination always ensure that you have achieved the unit objectives as stated at the beginning of each unit and the course object enumerated in the Course guide.
TUTORS AND TUTORIALS NOUN 14 BHM 767 COURSE GUIDE There are tutorials provided in support of this course.
The dates, time and venue will be worked out and you will be notified you.
The tutorials will provide you a face to face physical contacts with you tutor.
Do you hesitate to contact you tutor by all possible, available means if you need help regarding any part of the study units; assigned readings difficulty with the self – tests or exercises, a question or problem with an assignments; tutors comments on an assignments or with the grading of an assignment.
SUMMARY BHM 767 intends to familiarize you with the common feature and variations in local government administration across countries.
By the end of this course, you will be equipped with the basic knowledge on how to compare administrative systems.
You will also be able to answer these kinds oqfu e s tions.
1.
What does local government mean?
2.
What is the basis of comparative local government administration?
3.
How can we compare local government administrative systems?
4.
What are the peculiar characteristics of local government administration in some countries?
5.
Why is local government relevant in public administration?
The above are just some of the questions you can answer after the end of the course.
We wish you an interesting study and success in the course.
NOUN 15 BHM 767 COURSE GUIDE BHM 767: COMPARATIVE LOCAL GOVERNMENT ADMINISTRATION COURSE DEVELOPMENT Course Developer Dr. Kunle Ajayi Department of Political Science University of Ado-Ekiti Ado-Ekiti Unit Writer Department of Political Science University of Ado-Ekiti Ado-Ekiti Programme Leader Dr. O.J.
ONWE Course Coordinator MARATHA U.NKOM NATIONAL OPEN UNIVERSITY OF NIGERIA NOUN 16 BHM 767 COURSE GUIDE Unit 1 CONCEPTUAL ANALYSIS Table of contents 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objective 3.1 Conceptual Analysis 3.1.1 Decentralization 3.1.2 Local Government 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutor – marked assignments 7.0 Further Reading and other Resources 1.0 Introduction This is unit 1 of BHM 767 C omparative Local Government.
The unit familiarizes you with two key concepts that are important to our discussions in the course.
The definitions/ interpretations of the two words are analyzed in such a way that your understanding of discussions will be facilitated and enhanced.
Consequently, the conceptual analysis will focus mainly on the clarifications of decentralization and local government.
2.0 Objectives By the end of this unit, you should be able to; 1.
Explain the concept of decentralization which is an essential term in the study and understanding of local government.
2.
Describe the concept of local government as a different level of government.
NOUN 17 BHM 767 COURSE GUIDE 3.
Appreciate local government as a grassroot level of governance that is closest to the rural people.
4.
Recall the definitions of decentralization and local governments.
3.0 Main Content 3.1 Conceptual Analysis 3.1.1 Definition of decentralization.
You will recall that each national capitals.
For instance, national capitals of Nigeria, Britain, Ghana, France and Russia are respectively Abuja, London, Accra, Paris and Moscow.
Other lower level capitals may exist in a state depending on the political arrangement adopted by the country.
In a Federal State, in addition to national Capital, we also have regional or state capitals.
For Instance, in Nigeria in addition to Abuja, thirty – six (36) other State capitals exist.
National Diversities usually inform the need for adopting a Federal arrangement.
The largeness of a country in terms of geographical spread may further call for a lower level of government so as to make the work of government easier and make service delivery faster.
Modern governments therefore decentralize authority and power to lower levels in order to facilitate efficiency and administrative convenience.
Decentralization, according to Osaghae (1990: 84) means a system of dispersal of power from a central government to other units or agencies of government.
This implies that governmental power and authority are not concentrated but rather shared between the existing levels of government.
Decentralization of power lessons the burden of responsiblilies on the higher levels of government.
It is not everything that happens that respective higher levels of government may bother themselves with.
3.1.2 Local Government As you have just learnt, decentralization is about dispersal of power to other levels of authority.
Local government is a form of decentralization of power to the lowest level of government.
NOUN 18 BHM 767 COURSE GUIDE Local government is therefore defined by the United Nations documentary on public administr ation as a political sub – division of a nation or state which is constituted by law and has substantial control of local affairs, including the power to impose taxes or to enact prescribed purpose ( Ajayi 200:1 ).
The 1976 Local Government Reforms Guidelines also defined local government as “government at local level exercised through representative council established by law to exercise specific powers within defined areas”.
Very clear from these interpretations is the acknowledgement that local government is a government at the local level, established by law to perform specific functions within defined areas or jurisdiction.
The definitions also reveal that local government is a lower tier of government depending on the political arrangement in place.
For instance therefore, in a federal system, local government is the third – tier level of government while in a unitary, non – Federal States ,gloovcaelr n ment t takes the place of second – tier level of government.
Local government is also regarded as grassroot government” for, it is the closest to the rural people, and in most cases, it is the most known level of government to the rural areas where most citizens live, particularly in the developing world where rural dwellers account for about 70% of the national population.
Exercise1.1 1.
What is meant by the concept of decentralization?
2.
What is local government?
3.
Why is local government described as grassroot government?
4.0 Conclusion In this foundation unit, the conceptual interpretations of decentralization have been examined.
Decentralization is seen as a way of making government easier by dispersing power and authority to lower level centres, agencies or government.
Local government is seen as a form of decentralization.
It is a grassroot government established by law to perform specific functions.
The essence of decentralization and establishment of local government is to bring NOUN 19 BHM 767 COURSE GUIDE government to the door – step of citizens and more importantly to promote and enhance service delivery efficiency of government.
5.0 Summary In this unit, you have learnt that decentralization is about decongesting the central or upper levels of government of some burdens by dispersing power and authority to lower level governments, agencies and other units.
You also learnt that local government is a form of decentralization, ag ra ssroot government established by law to perform certain functions.
It is referred to as grassroot government because it is the closest to the rural people and the most known level of government in most countries of the world.
The essence of decentralization and local government is to provide administrative convenience for upper levels of government.
6.0 Tutor – Marked Assignment 1) Clarify the concepts of decentralization and local government.
2) In what ways is local government regarded as grassroot government?
7.0 Further Readings and other Resources.
Ajayi, Kunle (2000) (ed) Theory and practice of local Government, Ado – Ekiti, University of Ado – Ekiti.
Gboyega, A (1987) Political Values and Local Government in Nigeria, Lagos, and Malthouse press.
Osaghae, E.E.
(1990)” A Reassessment of federalism as a degree oDfe c e ntralization” Public: the Journal of Federalism, 20, winter.
NOUN 20 BHM 767 COURSE GUIDE Unit 1 Unit 1 Unit 2 Unit JUSTIFICATION FOR LOCAL GOVERNMENTS.
Table of contents 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objective 3.1 Justification for local 3.1.1 justification 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutor – marked assignments 7.0 Further Reading and other Resources 1.0 Introduction This is unit 2 of BHM 767 .the unit deals with the reasons why lgoocvael rn ment has become an attractive level of administration in most countries of the world.
Contemporary states see it as ideal to provide for the welfare and happiness of their citizens through efficient provision of services.
Grassroot local government as a grassroot government has the potentials to be more efficient because of the smallness of the geographical area and population they cover.
Besides the need for efficient service delivery, there are other reasons which make the existence of local government justified.
2.0 Objectives By the end of this unit, you should be able to: 1.
Recall the definitions of local government.
2.
Describe decentralization in relation to local government 3.
Explain reasons for the desirability of local governments.
NOUN 21 BHM 767 COURSE GUIDE 4.
Explain the inter – connecting role of local government between the grassroot people and the upper tiers of government.
5.
Appreciate the developmental role of local governments at the grassroot level.
3.0 Main Content 3.
1 Justification for local Governments 3.1.1 Justification Let us recall some of what you learnt in unit 1 of this course.
In the unit, you learnt of the concepts of local government and decentralization.
Decentralization was described as a system of dispersing power and authority from a central government to other units or agencies of government.
You learnt that the implication of decentralization of power is that power rather than being concentrated on a single focus of administration, it is shared among other lower level units of government.
You also learnt that local government is a form of decentralization which can be defined as apolitical sub – division of a state as approved by law and for specific functions.
It is a government at the grassroot level of a government exercised through representative council established by law to perform specific responsibilities in defined areas.
Decentralization and local government have their purpose in promoting administrative efficiency.
There are some other globally acknowledged reason why local government has become an attractive administrative system.
I.
The need for decentralization.
The first justification for local government is the need for decentralization for reasons of largeness of many countries in terms of geographicall area and equally large population.
NOUN 22 BHM 767 COURSE GUIDE For instance, let us take Nigeria as our unit of analysis.
Nigeria as a ver y large country geographically and demographically, it would have been very difficult for government to effectively rule directly from Abuja, the Federal Capital.
Therefore there is the need for decentralization for the purpose of administrative efficiency and effectiveness so to be able to satisfy the basic needs of the people.
Government realized this fact and consequently divided the country into 774 local governments.
State governors have started creating more local governments in the states, though not approved by the federal government II.
Trends in contemporary administrative practice.
Decentralization of political and administrative power has been the vogue throughout the world which has resulted into the creation of local government, this global trend of which Nigeria has become a part is made possible because of the contemporary governance in the modern system.
New problems are emerging for government attention everyday, the population is growing, new diseases such as AIDS is in the increase, there are inter ethnic national wars, problems of huger and internally displaced people to mention a few have all pre – occupied government and subsequently brought up the need for administrative decentralization.
III.
Grassroot accelerated development.
Nigeria leaders also realized that local government as the closest government to Nigerians, it will easily know the problems of its people because of their closeness, small population andgeographically united area to cope with, that local government will respond quickly to their development aspirations than the other higher levels ogfo v e rnment, that is, state and Federal governments.
IV.
Bridging communication Gap You should recall that we said that Abuja is too far away to people at the remote areas of Nigeria.
The president and the governors do not know many of these areas.
A gap of communication therefore exists between the grassroot people and the two higher levels of NOUN 23 BHM 767 COURSE GUIDE government.
Therefore, local governments serve to bridge the communication gap that exists between the two chairman and councilors.
Therefore acts as the link in terms of knowing the problems of the people by government on one hand, and what government is doing about the plight of the people on the other hand.
V. Training of future leaders.
Local government is seen as a training school for future national leaders.
It is the belief that entering into political leadership right from the local level either as chairman or councilor will confer tnheec e ssary leadership training that will enable them to lead at the state regional level and from that level to the federal level.
Passing through from local to state would have conferred the necessary leadership qualities and training for a higher task at the federal level.
You will recall that many of our relatives or friends are now either chairmen of local governments or councilors of their wards in their respective local governments.
These political office holders at the grassroot are indirectly being groomed for higher future political calling.
Local government and development (Ajayi, 2000; 1-7) Exercise 2.1 a.
Examine the concepts of decentralization and local government?
b.
Account for the reasons why local government has become attractive as an administrative system to most countries of the world?
c. In what ways can local government be regarded as a political training school?
4.0 Conclusion The acceptance and practice of local government as lower level of government in most state of the world is a reflection of the utility of the administrative system in some ways.
Local government is first seen as a means of decentralization of power to lower levels in order to eenffsiucrieen cy in social service delivery especially for the rural people.
NOUN 24 BHM 767 COURSE GUIDE The rural people most often are not aware of the existence of the higher levels of government, and on the other hand, the higher levels of government are ignorant of the needs and problems of the rural people.
The lgoocvael rn ment therefore acts as the connecting bridge between the higher level governments and the rural people.
It bridges the communication between the two ends.
Local governments, in modern times, have transcended beyond a mere administrative centre.
More importantly, they are now regarded as political schools for the training of future political leaders who will eventually take up the mantle olefa d ership.
Local government offers the necessary training and provides the initial knowledge and experience for such tasks.
5.0 Summary You learnt in this unit that local government has become an eanddmuirniinsgtr a tive system as it provides the need for decentralization of power to lower levels id order to provide for administrative efficiency.
You also learnt that developments in contemporary states involving increasing complexities of governance arising from new problems emerging everyday for government attention including both man – made and natural disasters, out break of diseases such as AIDS and population explosion.
These problems are more often than not very difficult for the central authority alone to handle without involving lower levels of government and external assistance.
Therefore, it becomes very imperative for higher levels of government to decentralize power.
You also learnt that local government is an engine of facilitating accelerated grassroot, rural development.
The remoteness of the rural areas is a disadvantage to the rural dwellers that on many occasions are forgotten by the scheme of development by the central authorities.
The local government is to correct the developmental negligence of the rural people by the central authorities The local government is primarily empowered to engineer development at the rural area.
This is made possible because of the smallness of the lgoocvael rn ment areas.
6.0 Tutor – Marked Assignments 1) Justify the place of local government as an engine of development in the rural areas.
NOUN 25 BHM 767 COURSE GUIDE 2) Account for the reasons why local government system has become attractive to modern states.
7.0 Further Readings and Other Resources.
Adewale, A ed (1990) issues on the practice of Local Government in Nigeria, Ikeja comfort press.
Ajayi, kunle (2000)” justification and theories of Local Government” in kunle Ajayi (ed) Theory and Theory of Local Government, Ado – Ekiti, University of Ado – Ekiti.
Gboyega, A (1987) Political values and Local Government in Nigeria, Lagos, and Malthouse press.
Kolawole, Dipo (ed) (1997) Readings in Political Science, Ibadan Dekaal.
NOUN 26 BHM 767 COURSE GUIDE Unit 3 EFFICIENCY THEORY OF LOCAL GOVERNMENT Table of contents 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objective 3.1 Efficiency Theory of Local Government 3.1.1 Efficiency Theory 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutor – marked assignments 7.0 Further Reading and other Resources 1.0 Introduction The last unit, unit 2, provides the justification for the existence and adoption of local government system in most state of the world.
Unit 3 theoretically provides further explanatory opinions and assumptions for the relevance of local government in the administrative arrangement of a state.
Three basic theories will be examined in three successive units (units 3, 4 and 5).
The theories are the efficiency democracy and accountability theories of local government.
This unit will first treat the efficiency theory.
2.0 Objectives By the end of this unit, you should be able to: 1) Enumerate by way of recalling the justifications for local government existence.
2) Explain the basic values of Local government.
3) Describe the efficiency service theory of local government NOUN 27 BHM 767 COURSE GUIDE 4) Explain the factors that made efficiency service deliver y possible at the local level.
3.0 Main Contents 3.1 Efficiency theory of Local Government 3.1.1 Efficiency theory In unit 2, you learnt the varied explanations why local government has become accepted to most states of the world.
As you will recall, some of these justifications are one, for the purpose of decentralization in order to promote administrative convenience.
Decentralization is thought necessary because many states are very large in area and in ter ms of populations.
It therefore becomes very difficult taod m inister all parts of the nation concerned from the national capital.
Decentralization through local governments made possible the creations of small units and centers of governmental power that can cater for equally smaller number of the population.
Two, you also learnt that the burden of governance in the modern day world grows everyday.
Both man – made and natural disasters affect nation’s everyday.
This therefore demands that the central government should only concern itself with national issues while minor and local issues should be left to the small units of government.
Three, you were also told that local government t serves to bridge tchoem munication gap between the rural, grassroot people and the other higher levels of government.
In most cases, the local people are not aware of the existence of the higher levels of government, and likewise, the higher tiers of government are too pre – occupied with national issues and therefore, may not have sufficient time to pay adequate attention to local issues.
The local government becomes a tool to bridge the communication gap between the two.
The efficient services or efficiency theory of local government provides more insights into the value of local government as a grassroot government.
NOUN 28 BHM 767 COURSE GUIDE The efficient services theorists believe that the local government occupies the best position for the efficient performances of certain functions.
This is made possible because of the nearness of the council of the people, and tshmea l lness of the population.
Firstly, decisions on policy issues are easily and quickly arrived at since the targets of decisions can be quickly reached, consulted and responses (feedback) from them known quickly.
The closeness of the local government similarly make possible in depth knowledge of the nature of the problems of the people possible ainnvda r iably the appropriate solutions to the problems.
Adequate understandings of the people’s problems and the resultant solutions are easier to know because a large percentage of the locality are indigenes who know the local government area inside – out and have adequate knowledge of the peculiarities of the area.
Exercise 3.1 1.
Highlight and discuss briefly four basic justifications for local government?
2.
Discuss the claim that local government is in the best position to provide efficient services?
4.0 Conclusion The smallness of local government area coupled with an equally small population avails local governments.
The advantage of small scale production of services which therefore means dealing with a snmumalbl e r of clients, small number of problems and prompt and efficient and effective remedies to the problems.
It is based on this very perspective that local government are to handle local problems.
Whereas, higher levels of government with larger population and geographical area require more time and financial, personnel and materials resources to handle problems with their respective areas.
5.0 Summary In this unit, you learnt the efficient services theory which believes that local government is best placed to engage in efficient service delivery NOUN 29 BHM 767 COURSE GUIDE to the local people because of its narrow geographical area and small population and limited level of resources required to perform.
You also learnt that as a result of the limited operational scope of local government, they enjoy the merit of small – scale production with little capital and labour.
7.0 Tutor – Marked Assignments 1) Identify and discuss the basic propositions of the efficiency theory of local Government.
2) Account for the submission that local government is best positioned to serve the people more efficiently than other tiers of government.
7.0 Further readings and other resources.
Ajayi, Kunle (2000) “justification and Theories of Local Government” in kunle Ajayi (ed) Theor y and Practice of Local Government, Ado – Ekiti, University of Ado – Ekiti.
Gboyega, A (1987) political Values and Local Government in NLaiggeorsi,a a, n d Malthouse press.
Laski, H. J (1982) A Ground of politics, London, Allen& Unwin.
NOUN 30 BHM 767 COURSE GUIDE Unit 4 DEMOCRACY THEORY OF LOCAL GOVERNMENT.
Table of contents 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objective 3.1 Democracy Theory of local government 3.1.1 Democracy theory 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutor – marked assignments 7.0 Further Reading and other Resources 1.0 Introduction This unit presents another theoretical view of local government.
The last unit presents the view of efficient services theorists on local government.
According to them, local government occupies the best positions to provide efficient services to the people of the local area.
The reasons being that local government operates on the basis of small scale due to the small population being served coupled with the smallness of land area.
Because it renders limited services, only small resources are therefore required to perform its functions.
The local government is also in a vantage position to know the nature of the problems confronting the people and invariably in a better position to know the appropriate solutions better than the higher levels of government.
The democracy theory of local government perceived the system from another perspective.
2.0 Objectives By the end of this unit, you should be able to do the following: 1.
Recall the cardinal opinions of efficiency school of local government.
NOUN 31 BHM 767 COURSE GUIDE 2.
Explain the relevance of local government in the growth and development of democracy in any state.
3.
Appreciate the place of local government in political education.
4.
Evaluate the political training capacity of local government 3.0 Main Contents 3.1 Democracy Theory of Local Government 3.1.1 Democracy theory.
There is the need to refresh your memory on what you learnt in the last unit concerning the efficiency theory of local government.
According to the local governments occupy the best place in providing efficient theory services to the people because of tshmea l lness of the geographical area and population coupled with limited resources required.
It is also averred that because the local government officials closer to the people, they have the advantage to appreciate the nature of the problems of the locality and consequently provide the most suited solutions.
The democracy theory of local government focuses on the democratic benefits derivable from the practice of local government system.
The theory believes that local government serves as a training ground for political leaders.
It observes that most national politicians use local government as a lever for acquiring political training and leadership qualities by first contesting as councilors at the local government level (Ajayi 2000:6).
After spending some years at the local government level and having secured the necessary experience at that level, these local politicians can then contest politics at higher levels of the state and federal governments.
It is based on this opportunity provided that Lord James Bryce remarks that local government is the best school of democracy and the NOUN 32 BHM 767 COURSE GUIDE best guarantee for its success is the practice of local self –g o v ernment.
The concept of self – government at the local level simply implies that it is the local people themselves that govern themselves.
This is made possible because the indigenes of the local government area constitute more than 70% of the workforce in the local government.
All the political offices in the council such as the chairman, vice – chairman, secretary to the local government, supervisory councilors, house leaders, councilors and other positions are occupied by the indigenes of the area.
Even, the workforce mainly consists of the indigenes of the area.
Local government is also seen as one of the institutions which provide political education.
This involves the political education of the citizens by the local administrative institutions as the chief instrument.
The political role of local governments gives many people who lack either the opportunity or resources for national politics to participate in grassroot politics.
Exercise 4.1 1.
In what ways can local government be regarded as political training school?
2.
Discuss the assertion that local government is the best platform for self – government?
4.0 Conclusion The democracy school of local government has projected the institutions as avenue for political “apprenticeship” for future politicians and national leaders.
This is so as it allows local politicians to undergo the necessary training and acquire to the basic political and government experience to be able to cope with higher national callings that is necessary in governance and larger politics.
5.0 Summary You have learnt in this unit that local government has served as a kind of democratic, political school for people at the grassroot to enable NOUN 33 BHM 767 COURSE GUIDE them acquire the needed experience for higher political responsibilities.
You also learnt that the concept of self - government is bdeesmt o nstrated at the local government level.
This implies that the political and administrative management of the local government is being shouldered by the indigenes of the locality who constitute the bulk of the workforce of the local government.
6.0 Tutor –Marked Assignments 1) Discuss the assertion that “local government is the best guarantee for the success of self – government”.
2) In what way s is local government regarded as a place of “apprenticeship” for local politicians?
7.0 Further Readings and other Resources Ajayi, kunle (2000) Theory and Practice of local Government, Ado – Ekiti, University of Ado – Ekiti.
Gboyega, Alex (1987) political Values and Local Government in Nigeria, Lagos, and Malthouse press.
NOUN 34 BHM 767 COURSE GUIDE Unit 5 ACCOUNTABILITY THEORY OF LOCAL GOVERNMENTS.
Table of contents 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objective 3.1 Accountability Theory of Local Government.
3.1.1 Accountability Theory 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutor – marked assignments 7.0 Further Reading and other Resources 1.0 Introduction This unit concludes discussions on the theories of local government.
Unit 2 and 4 respectively treated efficient services and Democracy theories.
In this unit, you will learn about accountability theory.
The demand for accountability is germane to good governance.
Those who control and manage public resource must be made accountable, while political office holders must be held responsible for their promises and manifestoes to the electorate.
The concept of accountability and the demand for it permeate every level of government including the local government.
2.0 Objectives By the end of this unit, you should be able to: 1.
Explain the basic tenets of efficiency and democracy theories of locaglo vernment as a way of recalling what you learnt in previous units.
2.
Explain the concept of accountability and what it constitutes.
NOUN 35 BHM 767 COURSE GUIDE 3.
Identify and discuss the basic assumptions of accountability theory as it applies to local governments.
4.
Appreciate the important role of accountability in governance.
3.0 Main Content 3.1 Accountability Theory of Local Government 3.1.1 Accountability Theory.
It is important to recall what you learnt in unit 4 which dealt with tdheem ocracy theory of local government.
Democracy theory espouse that local government is a training school for politicians an future political leaders because it provides the primary avenue for knowing or learning about the intrigues of politics and complexity of governance.
Local government is also perceived by the theor y as the best parameter for gauging and guaranteeing the success of the practice of self – government.
This submission is informed by the fact that majority of the workforce in the local government is made up of the sons and daughters of the lgoocvael rn ment area.
You also learnt, according to the theory, that local government provides political education for the citizens and thereby affording people at grassroot to be politically enlightened.
Accountability and control theory of local government views the institution from another perspective.
According to these theorists, political participation of the citizens in their local affairs through election, they elect trheepirre s e ntatives into the local councils.
The electorate elect whoever they trust and competent to shoulder the burden of responsibility of the council.
The electorate elect the chairman, councilors, legislators and vice – chairman, from the locality as you learnt in unit 4.
The local election allows the electorate to choose between competing claims and contestants.
It is through choosing their representatives by themselves that the people can make the representatives accountable by the way they perform their duties efficiently to the local people, and cater for the collective welfare of the people rather than engaging in corrupt practices (Ajayi, 2000: 7).
NOUN 36 BHM 767 COURSE GUIDE The implication of the local electorate role of choosing their representatives directly is that when they are chosen by the people that they can be made accountable to the people.
A major advantage of this practice again is that whatever maybe the success or failure of the locality they are in the best position to decide whether the political officials will be re – elected again or rejected at the polls.
Consequently, the function of electing the council officials, and the duty of watching and checking them lie with the citizens who are the electorate in the locality.
Exercise 5.1 1.
Evaluate the major contributions of accountability and control theory to the understanding of local government system.
4.0 Conclusion You learnt in this unit of the basic propositions of accountability theory of local government.
It is the belief of the theor y that local government provides the primary opportunity and best avenue to make politicians right from the grassroot accountable for political deeds in office.
That the local electorate has the power to choose whoever they like to govern them based on the parties programmes (Manifesto) are promises made during electron campaigns.
The elected officials are held responsible for the advertised programmes and promises during the campaigns.
Since the representatives are answerable to the people through the polls, the future of their political career lies with the people, and therefore, they (the representatives) will strive to perform while in office to the best of their ability with emphasized consciousness on their credibility and political image which will determine whether they will be re – elected or not.
Participation of the local people in the local administration therefore teaches them the art of weighing and choosing between competing claims and the choice as a just one.
5.0 Summary You have learnt in this unit the basic contributions of accountability and control theory to the understanding and relevance of local ginosvtietruntmioenns ta s a grassroot government.
NOUN 37 BHM 767 COURSE GUIDE Specifically, you learnt that the local people participate directly in the choice of their representatives in the local council.
They elect the political officials whom they can trust to fulfill their election promises and perform efficiently.
You also learnt that once the representatives are chosen by the people themselves they can be made them accountable to the people.
You learnt further that the political future of the local politicians serving in the councils are determined by the people who will determine whether to return the representatives to power or not based on their success or failure in office.
The people are therefore the watchdog of political officials at the grassroot.
5.0 Tutor – Marked Assignments 1) Discuss in details the basic propositions of the accountability and control theory of local government.
2) Examine the roles played by the local electorate to make council political officials responsible 7.0 Further Readings and other Resources.
Ajayi, kunle (2000) Theory and Practice of local Government, Ado – Ekiti, University of Ado – Ekiti.
Gboyega, Alex (1987) political Values and Local Government in Nigeria, Lagos, and Malthouse press.
NOUN 38 BHM 767 COURSE GUIDE Unit 6 IMPERATIVES AND HISTORY OF COMPARATIVES PUBLIC AND LOCAL GOVERNMENT ADMINSTRATION Table of contents 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objective 3.1 Imperatives for Comparative study 3.1.
1 Everyday experiences 3.1.2 Requirement for science of Politics, public and local government administrations.
3.1.3Understanding administrative Behaviour.
3.2 Historical Development 3.2.1 Development before WWII 3.2.2 Development from end of WWII 3.2.3 Development in contemporary times.
4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutor – marked assignments 7.0 Further Reading and other Resources a.
Introduction In this unit we shall mainly focus on why it is necessary to embark on a comparative study of public and local government administration in different settings.
You will learn the evolution of comparative public and local government administration as a discipline.
A cross – national comparisons of political systems is as old as history having had its root in Europe through the works of Aristotle in 4 B. C. You will learn in this unit the different phases of the growth and development of the study.
NOUN 39 BHM 767 COURSE GUIDE 2.0 Objectives By the end of this unit, you should be able to: 1) Explain why comparative public and local government administration has become an indispensable discipline.
2) Explain how Comparative public and local government administration emerged through the historical eras.
3) Analyse the nature of comparative public and local government administration 4) Identify and explain the fundamental motives why students study comparative public and local government administration.
5) Evaluate reasons for different administrative behaviour in various settings.
3.0 Main Content 3.1 Imperatives for Comparative study.
3.1.1 Everyday experiences You go out everyday either to your school or work place, market, church, mosque, travel to other cities, tourist centre or to other countries to find out that we are meeting people with familiar looks.
We also find out that in our daily contacts, we evaluate some people as beautiful or ugly, good or bad, hostile or friendly, tall or short, fat or thin.
We also compare non – human objects.
Some houses are just simply beautiful and attractive, while others are adjudged as unfascinating and unhabitable.
While you do all these, we are directly or indirectly engaging in comparative analysis.
To compare, identify similarities and differences by us are part of the in – built nature of man.
Comparison is therefore, a daily affair in our contacts and observation with people and objects.
NOUN 40 BHM 767 COURSE GUIDE 3.1.2 Requirement for science of politics, public and local government administration.
Local government administration is a subset of a country’s public administration public administration is a special science or management discipline which relies on scientific approach in its findings.
It is about understanding all variables/ phenomena in administrative setting.
To make its findings valid, it relies on observations for factual data.
Similar variables are grouped together, while variations are noted.
Feit et al (1978) note in their introduction that the more variations displayed by examples, the more likely it is that many cases will have to be studied before reliable generations will be possible.
Thus, to make a valid explanatory generalization on any issue, we need to compare assembled facts (data).
It is therefore a key requirement of science to gather information (data) and examples compare them, and based on these make accurate explanatory generalizations which are later built into, theories.
Observations makes comparison possible, the later in turn makes scientific generalization and theory building possible.
3.1.2 Understanding administrative behaviour.
You knowledge of comparative public and local government administration will enable you to appreciate the behavioral attitudes in different milieu.
Public and local government administration across countries address differently, exhibit various degrees of efficiency, earn different salaries, project differences in conformity with administrative law, perceive accountability and abuse of office (corruption ) from different perspectives, and so on.
All these are a function of varied factors.
Administrative practices are therefore similar in some countries which share some commonalities of factors.
Comparative public and local government administration provides the methodology and tool for understanding and comprehending whatever similarities and differences in the different political systems NOUN 41 BHM 767 COURSE GUIDE Exercise 1) In terms of methodology approach, compare public and local government administration with other disciplines in the social or management science.
2) Discuss the requirement of scientific study; 3.2 Historical development before WWII Comparative study of public and local government administration in its rudimentary form evolved at about the 4.B.C.through the works of Aristotle.
Aristotle was a western political theorist.
How did Aristotle start this?
In his curiosity to know what happens in other lands, government systems, regarding their laws, governmental systems and regime types.
He wanted to find out perceivable similarities and differences.
In doing this, Aristotle assembled about 130 different national constitutions and carefully studied them.
His findings produced two major eonudtcuorminegs namely: One, he was able to evaluate some government as good or bad.
Two, he categorized political systems into different classifications as shown in figure 1 below: Figure 1.
Aristotle classificatoin scheme No of person I n whose interest power is exercised who rules All (Collective ) Themselves monarchy (sectional) Tyranny Aristocracy polity kinship Oligarchy Democracy or mob rule Source: Robert, D (1984; 64) Modern political Analysis Englewood cliffs, prentice hall.
The foundation laid by Aristotle later became the basis for contemporar y comparative study in politics, public and local government administration.
NOUN 42 BHM 767 COURSE GUIDE The development of comparative public and local government administration in its contemporary form is traceable to the periods between 1895 and 1920 when comparative research efforts gained momentum.
Max Weber, a German sociologist played significant roles in further advancing its status as roles in further advancing its status as a discipline.
Robert Fried (1920; 318 – 344) acknowledges Weber’s contributions when he opined that “lifted comparative political an administrative studies from a level of analysis to a height of sophistication, and with breath of scope seldom attained since”.
More European scholars during the 1930s carried out various other comparative studies.
3.2.2 Development from end of WWII.
At the end of world war (WW) II, the centre of comparative study of political public and local government administration shifted from its traditional European base to the United States.
Interest in comparative study became high; a development fuelled by the American political science Association (APSA) and the society for public administration (SPA), Several scholars in these associations demonstrated aggressive research efforts towards building a universal comparative theory of public and local government administration.
Another impetus for the growing interest by scholars in comparative studies was the technical assistance programmes of the United States, United Nations and private foundations to countries after the war.
Consequently, American students and teachers of public and local government administration and professional.
found themselves in foreign countries.
This exposure therefore stimulated interest in making comparison between American and Western and non – Western political systems and practices (Dwight Waldo, 1984: 4 – 18).
The post – war period also coincided with the behavourial science movement in Europe and particularly in America.
The movement was characterized by scientific methodology in making enquires.
Scientific enquiry became a norm in many disciplines, and without being an exception, it was attended to the study of administration.
With emphasis on observation and in other techniques for data collection for hypothesis testing and generalizations.
NOUN 43 BHM 767 COURSE GUIDE 3.2.3 Development in Contemporary times.
The impact of behavioural sciences continued to be felt in the field of comparative administration beyond the post – war era.
The Comparative Administrative Group (CAG) was formed in the 1960s.
The group committed all available resources towards building a university accepted theory of public and local government administration through comparative study and analysis; toward this end, scholar’s developed various theories for the understanding of different societies.
Fred Riggs, for instance, developed the theory prismatic society” based on his study of public administration in non – winesstitteurtnio n s were legal – rational, in form but traditional in fact (Riggs, 1964) Scholarly interest in comparative studies not only continued in during the 1960s but it also spread beyond Europe American sphere to the Middle East, Asia, Africa and Latin America.
Between 1965 and 1975, publications on comparative public and local government administration flourished as reflected in a number of books written basically on comparative public and local government administration and article on the topic published in journal and monographs and conference proceedings.
The scientific basis of the study continues to be consolidated and intensified efforts in its competition with the Natural and physical science regarding the scientific methodology approach.
The control era of globalization regarding the ease in information gathering through super information technology has facilitated easier comparative research as data on across – national administrative practice can be sourced on the interest and websit4es.
Global system of mobile phones equally eased the problem of oral research interviews across the globe.
Comparative research is no, therefore, equipped with advanced methodological tools than ever before.
NOUN 44 BHM 767 COURSE GUIDE Exercise 1.
Examine the contributions of Aristotle, American government and other agencies to the development of contemporary public and local government administration.
2.
Highlight the fundamental requirements for science of politics, public and local government administration.
4.0 Conclusions In this unit, the basis for studying comparative public and local government administration was examined as comparisons is part of our daily life.
As you move along, you compare in your mind the people, objects, houses, animals and musical songs we come across and or we have business with.
Implying that, comparison is as old as man.
5.0 Summary In this unit you learnt the imperatives and historical background of comparative publics and local government administration.
You learnt that comparison is as old as man because in our daily life we do compare things, people and institutions.
You also learnt about the science of politics, public and local government administration which bordens on the application of science methodology to the study of comparative administration.
That the essence of science of comparative public and local government administration is to build theories of comparative public and local government administration that are universally acceptable and verifiable.
You also learnt that enhancing you capability for understanding administrative behaviour is a key motive of comparative public and local government administration studies.
You also learned that historically, comparative public and local government administration emerged in Europe through the works of Aristotle in 4.B.C.
it was later that more European scholar joined in carrying out vcoarmiopuasr a tive studied.
NOUN 45 BHM 767 COURSE GUIDE 6.0 Tutor – Marked Assignments (TMAs) 1) Explain reasons why you think the study of comparative public and local government administration is desirable 2) Examine the basic contributions of Aristotle and American institutions to the growth and development of comparative administration.
7.0 Further Reading and Resources Agagu, A.
A.
(2001) Comparative political and administration studies, Ado – Ekiti, Department of political science, UNAD.
Feit, E et al (1978) Government and leaders an approach to comparative politics, Houghton, Mifflin Company Finer, S. E (1971) Comparative Government, London, and the penguin.
Press.
Fried, R. C (1902)” Comparative public Administration: the search for theories” in N.B.
Lynn and A. Wildarsky (eds) public Administration.
The state of the discipline, New Jersey, Chatham House publishers.
Riggs, F.W (1964) Administration in developing countries; the theory of Prismatic society, Boston, Mifflin.
Robert, D (1984) Modern political Analysis Engle wood cliffs, prentice – hall.
Waldo, W (1980) “the study of public Administration” in R. J. Stillman (ed) public Administration: concepts and case, London Mifflin.
NOUN 46 BHM 767 COURSE GUIDE Unit 7 NATURE, UTILITY AND PROBLEMS OF COMPARATIVES LOCAL GOVERNMENT.
Table of contents 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objective 3.1 Nature , utility and problems of local government 3.1.
1 Nature 3.1.2 Utility 3.1.3 Problems 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutor – marked assignments 7.0 Further Reading and other Resources 1.0 Introduction.
In the last unit you learnt the basis for studying comparative lgoocvael rn ment and its historical background.
You specifically, learnt that making comparisons between objects and people is as old as man.
This is because our everyday activities are full of making comparison either directly or indirectly.
However, you learnt that the initial most systematic attempt at comparing system was made by Aristotle.
His achievements invariably became the foundation for contemporary studies in COMPARATIVE LOCAL GOVERNMENT ADMINISTRATION.
You also learnt that after WWII, the focus of development attention ocof m parative studies shifted from Europe to the United States where the government, the United Nations and private institutions sponsored varied technical assistance programmes which enabled local administration, lecturers of local government administration and professionals to travel to foreign Countries.
NOUN 47 BHM 767 COURSE GUIDE This exposure stipulated great interest in comparative study resources on American, European and Non – Western political systems.
In this unit, you will learn the nature, utility and problems of comparative local government as a discipline.
The nature of comparative government administration reflects its major concerns as a field of study, while utility is concerned with its values.
Like other discipline, comparative study of local government has its own peculiar problems.
2.0 Objectives By the end of this study, you should be able to; 1) Explain the subject matter of COMPARATIVE LOCAL GOVERNMENT ADMINISTRATION.
2) Describe the values of the study 3) Appreciate the major constraints facing comparative studies researches.
4) Evaluate why administrators behave the way they do.
5) Explain the major problems confronting researchers of cross –national administrative studies.
3.1 Nature, Utility and problems.
3.1.1 Nature of COMPARATIVE LOCAL GOVERNMENT ADMINISTRATION.
The nature of COMPARATIVE LOCAL GOVERNMENT ADMINISTRATION reflects iftise lmd a joofr s tcuodnyc.
ern as a The primary goal of the discipline is in line with the scientific demand which is “to build and test propositions about administration, an assumption that is universally shared within the public administration fraternity” (singelman, 1976; 621 – 25).
It is committed to verifiable generalized statement about local government across political systems and different environments.
It is believed by scholars of comparatives local government studies that public officials, the entire political process will perform better if local NOUN 48 BHM 767 COURSE GUIDE government and its practice can be rooted in developed theoretical aenmdp i rical foundations.
Sigelman believes that local government which reflect theorizing and empirical research as its core activities devices its adherents (and practitioners) any legitimate claim to political influence.
Essentially, therefore, comparative local government’s major interest is building theories from the study of local government practice in different political settings so as to generate in different political settings so as to generate a universal theory of local government that can be applied to varied cultures and political environments.
3.1.2.
Utility of COMPARATIVE LOCAL GOVERNMENT ADMINISTRATION.
COMPARATIVE LOCAL GOVERNMENT ADMINISTRATION has two major venaluumese rwathei cahs w e Follows: I.
It affords us as scholars, analyst and practitioner greater understanding of local government across national boundaries.
Observed difference in practice and scope can be situated within varied identifiable factors including ecology which encompasses ver y many other factors such as the type of political system, culture, economy level of education and other variables.
These factors will also determine the level of efficiency of practitioners.
Thus the local government system can be evaluated as efficient or inefficient depending on the prevailing internal factors.
II.
Understanding administrative behaviour of bureaucrats and political officials is another enduring legacy of comparative administrative study.
Bureaucrat or administrators of each country have their peculiar characters and behaviour different fro others in another country.
Therefore, among the tasks of COMPARATIVE LOCAL GOVERNMENT AadDmMinIiNstIrSatTivReA bTeIhOavNio ius rt hweh ich cover different political settings.
Generally, knowledge of comparative local government administration saves scholars and practitioners .some embarrassment and surprise when having the advantage to operate beyond their immediate political and cultural environment.
NOUN 49 BHM 767 COURSE GUIDE 3.1.3 Problems As a field study, COMPARATIVE LOCAL GOVERNMENT ADMINISTRATION svcahriooluarss a reli mcoitnaftrioonntse d wainthd challenges.
First, is the problem of openness ocof u n tries.
Some countries are open, while others are closed with varied degrees.
Freedom in terms of accessibility to crucial data is greater in the liberal developed western countries.
Data on issue, even including to a large extent on security and defence, are readily made available to comparative researches.
But one cannot say the same about closed societies such as China and the former socialist states.
Search for comparative data could be translated to espionage, stealing of cultural property, spying and sabotage.
These are all criminal offences with heavy punishment.
Therefore, concluding comparative research in these political systems is a high risk.
Further compounding the problem of data gathering is issue of differences in the level of information dissemination.
Some countries such as the western world enjoy advanced information technology including modern telephone communication system and satellite , radio and television facilities, and marine and orbit information technology.
These array of technological inventions afford data collection about other countries without leaving one’s shores.
The third world does not enjoy these kind of facilities as they lack the technological know – how for developing them.
While data collection through internet and website exploration has become a tradition in America, Europe and Australia.
It is yet to take proper shape in academic researches in Africa, Latin America and Asia because of lack of basic infrastructures such as regular provision of electricity.
Regime types also condition accessibility to information and data.
Some Countries are democratic, while others are dictatorships including military rule.
Democratic regimes afford researches ample freedom to conduct the investigations and collect data including through interviews and examination of documents such as parliamentary proceedings, cabinet papers and so on.
But dictatorship regimes foreclose such opportunities, and researchers can even be passed as spies, saboteurs and opposition agents.
Cstoudmipesa raarteiv teh e refore made difficult in such environments.
NOUN 50 BHM 767 COURSE GUIDE Introduction of behavioural, scientific approach to the study of administrative behaviour is also faulted.
It is believed people including political and bureaucratic officials are unpredictable and therefore not readily subjected to scientific assessment compared to non – living things and lower animals.
The non – predictability of political leaders had on many occasions led to frequent changes in administrative systems and styles.
For instance, iNni g eria, the Babangida administration changed from permanent secretary to director - general in 1998, while the situation was reversed by the Abacha regime in 1997.
Some other administrative changes have been effected by incumbent Obasanjo regime.
Therefore, behavioural instability of leaders, coupled with actual political instability is a major problem to comparative studies in local government administration.
Exercise In what ways is the administrative behaviour of local government administration in your country different from those of another named country?
4.0 Conclusions You have learnt that your daily experiences have always involved comparing people and objects.
Comparative local government administration as a scientific discipline makes it possible for you to explain abdemhaivniiosturra toifv ea d ministrators across national borders.
Its methodological orientation becomes more emphasized since the end of WWII and its progressive development has not waned since then.
You learnt also that comparative study of local government administration go beyond any one national border has its own limitations embedded in human factors and variations in level of political stability.
5.0 Summary This unit has explained to you why it is necessary to study comparative local government administration.
You were told that it made possible understanding of administrative behaviour in different political and cultural setting.
NOUN 51 BHM 767 COURSE GUIDE You also learnt about the historical development of the field right from the time of Aristotle to this present age of globalization.
You also learnt about the nature, utility and problems of comparative local government administration, provides theories that can be universally applied in the analysis of local government administration of countries.
The unpredictability of human beings coupled with variations in the degrees of openness and technological development of countries pose the mseorisot u s problem to comparative studies of local government.
6.0 Tutor Marked Assignments Question a) Assuming, a German scholar is in Nigeria for comparative research investigations on the countr y’s local government administration, enumerate and discus the basic problems that confront the German in the research endeavor.
You assignment should not be more than 10 A4 typed double spaced pages.
7.0 Further Readings and other Resources Agagu, A.
A.
(2001) Comparative political and administration studies, Ado – Ekiti, Department of political science.
Feit, E .et al (1978) Government and leaders: An approach to comparative politics, Houghton, Mifflin Company.
Finer, S. E (1971) Comparative Government, London, and the penguin.
Press.
Fried, R. C (1902)” Comparative public Administration: the search for theories” in N.B.
Lynn and A. Wildarsky (eds) public Administration.
The state of the discipline, New Jersey, Chatham House publishers.
Riggs, F.W (1964) Administration in developing countries; the theory of Prismatic society, Boston, Mifflin.
Robert, D (1984) Modern political Analysis Engle wood cliffs, prentice – NOUN 52 BHM 767 COURSE GUIDE Hall.
Waldo, W (1980) “The study of public Administration” in R. J. Stillman (ed) public Administration: concepts and cases, London ,Mifflin.
NOUN 53 BHM 767 COURSE GUIDE Unit 8 DIFFERNCES AND SIMILARTIES OF STRATEGIES OF COMPARATIVES LOCAL GOVERNMENT ADMINSTRATION Table of contents 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objective 3.1 Difference and similarities Strategies 3.1.1.
Difference Approach 3.1.2 Similarities Approach 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutor – marked Assignment 7.0 Further Reading and other Resources.
1.0 Introduction Strategies of comparative public and local government administrative deals with the various methods for making comparative analysis.
You will learn the differences, similarities, experimental, statistical and case study methods of comparative public and local government administration in general.
However, this unit will specifically address the differences and similarities strategies of comparative public and local government administration.
2.0 Objectives By the end of this unit, you should be able to: 1.
Explain the basic approaches for making comparison.
2.
Identify differences between a seemingly similar people, objects and institutions.
NOUN 54 BHM 767 COURSE GUIDE 3.
Describe similarities between likely different people, object and institutions.
4.
Recall the basic explanations of the two strategies learnt.
3.0 Main Content 3.
1 Differences and similarities strategies 3.1.1 The differences approach In your everyday contacts with people, objects, institutions and practices, you tend to believe that the only identifiable attribute between or among them is that they all look differently.
The only perceivable difference between the two women is that one is fat and the other is thin.
The house is beautiful, the other one is not.
The differences approach proffers a contrary opinion.
First, it acknowledge the fact that there may be differences between the people, objects ainnsdt it utions, but at the same time, there are similarities between the compared people, objects or particles no mater how few or non – prominent.
For instance, the administrative behaviour of public and local government administration in the Western World may be significantly different in forms of belief about corruption and abuse of office, but the basic bureaucratic principles regarding hierarchical structure and which rules regulations are common and shared between the two.
Japanese workers are noted for their exceptional industry and efficiency contrary to Nigeria workers.
On the other hand, the political officials of both political systems are corrupt with varying degrees.
It is therefore the contribution of the approach that no two things or people are totally different without some elements of similarity.
3.1.2 The Similarities Approach it is often claimed that there are identical twins, that twin people that look” exactly alike” this is to the extent that many people, including their parents on some occasions.
NOUN 55 BHM 767 COURSE GUIDE To compound the problems of observers, friends and relations, the identical twins most of the time dress and talk the same way.
These are irnedaleietide s .
However, despite the constraint in differently similar people and things, the similarity approach enables us to know that there are some differences in ver y similar cases, no matter how small or few, a small dot on the ear of one of the identical twins is enough to give him away.
One may be a fraction of an inch taller than the other.
In terms of behavioral attitude, one may be polite than the other.
Two cars of the same brand definitely have differences which could be in terms of colour, chasis number or year of manufacture.
United state of America and Nigeria are both practicing democratic administration, but the American democracy is older than that of Nigeria.
You should note that in all cases therefore, there are no totally similar people, things, system or practice.
In a way thing, people, system and countries also have their differences.
Exercise 1) Look very well around you and identify two people or objects that are contradictorily different.
Highlight ten ways in which they look similar.
2) Ghana and Nigeria are both developing African countries with emerging democracies, highlight ten attributes that make them look unsimilar.
4.0 Conclusion This unit has treated two methodologies of analysis in comparative public and local government administration.
Each discipline has its own way of doing things, ways of analysis, ways of research enquires.
The two strategies you learnt here are unique in that you might probably in the past like most other observers think that similar things are so similar or look alike in all respects.
Or, think that all things or people who look very unsimilar or different do not have common denominations at all.
You have learnt in this unit that this is not the case.
NOUN 56 BHM 767 COURSE GUIDE 5.0 Summary You have learnt in this unit two major approaches in the practice of making comparison in comparative public and local government administration.
You learnt that the differences approach concerns identifying points osifm i larities in two seemingly different objects, people, countries or practices.
The approach believes that whatever may be the differences, there is a little similarity.
The similarity approach has s direct opposite thinking with the difference approach.
It believes that differences exist between people, objects, particles and countries despite the fact they seemingly look similar.
That through, the difference(s) may be so insignificant, yet the little difference, really makes the difference.
6.0 Tutor – Marked Assignments 1.
Identify and discuss the major attributes of differences and similarities in approaches in comparative public and local government administration.
2.
Ghana and Nigeria are both developing countries in Africa with emerging democr acies highlight ten attributes that make them look unsimilar.
7.0 Further Reading and other Resources.
Akindele, S.T.
et al (1996) the subject matter of political science, Ibadan, college press.
Kolawole, Dipo (ed 1997) Readings in political science, Ibadan, Dekaal.
Sharkansky, I (1975) public Administrative: policy – making in Government agencies, 3rd edition, Chicago, Rand Mc Nally College publishing company.
NOUN 57 BHM 767 COURSE GUIDE Unit 9 EXPERIMENTAL, STATISTICAL AND CASE STUDY STRATEGIES OF COMPARATIVES LOCAL GOVERNMENT Table of contents 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objective 3.1 Experimental Approach 3.1.1 Experimental and C ontrol groups 3.2 The Statistical Approach 3.2.1 partial correlation of variables the case study Approach 3.3 3.3.1 Stereotypes 3.3.2 Categories 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutor – marked Assignment 7.0 Further Reading and other Resources.
1.0 Introduction In the last unit, you learnt about differences and similarities approaches in the study of local government.
You should recall the major facts rose in the two approaches.
You learnt that the differences approach concerns itself with identifying some similarities between the objects, people, particles, systems and countries that we are comparing.
The method makes us believe that no matter the degree of differences between what we may be comparing that there are ssoimmiela r ities also between them no matter how like or insignificant.
You also learnt that the second approach, that is the similarities approach operate based on the same principles of the differences method.
It submits that no matter the level of similarities between the objects, people, institutions practices and countries that we may be comparing that they are not totally similar and therefore, that there are some differences between them no matter how little.
NOUN 58 BHM 767 COURSE GUIDE In this unit, you will learn further about the other methods utilized in local government studies such as the experimental approach.
Each of them has its own uniqueness.
2.0 Objectives By the end of this unit you should be able to do the following activities: 1) Recall the basic facts about differences and similarities approaches.
2) Explain the basic principles of experimental approach 3) Explain the concept of control group and experimental group.
4) Analyse how case study approach works 5) Describe how statistical tools can be used for comparative analysis.
3.1 The Experimental Approach.
3.1.1 Experimental and control groups You have learnt about experiments before the goal of the experimental approach is to make a verifiable comparison of cases based on scientific explanations.
In doing this, two equivalent groups are provided one group is labeled experimental group while the other is the control group.
A stimulus, which we may also call independent variables, is introduced to the experimental group, while it is derived from the control group.
Therefore, the two groups are kept on observations to evaluate the effects of the stimulus.
A concrete example of this situation is testing the effect of alcohol on the two groups.
Some of your friends do take alcoholic drink such as beer.
It is therefore easy for us to predict the out come of alcohol on the experimental group to which it was introduced.
Drunkenness is the effect experienced by the experimental group provided no other variables was introduced.
NOUN 59 BHM 767 COURSE GUIDE The control group does not experience drunkenness because it was not introduced to the alcohol stimulus.
Comparative explanations can be made on the two groups based on the scientific experiment on them.
You need to know that experimental comparative approach has limitations bordering on what you learnt in unit 2 that human beings are not predictable for their emotional and ethical attributes.
Exercise 1.
Design an experiment on your own which should involve an experiment on your own which should involve an experimental group and a control group.
Introduce a stimulus to the experimental group only and later measure its effects.
Compare the relationship between the two groups thereafter.
3.2 The Statistical approach 3.2.1 Partial Correlation of variables You have just learnt that experimental approach aims at scientific explanation.
The statistical approach has a similar aim, though their processes are not the same.
The difference in their processes concerns the manipulation of empirically observed data in the statistical method but which is not possible ienx p erimental method so as to identify controlled relationship among the variables Partial correlation is used to deal with the problem of controlling tvhaer ia bles.
For example, as Agagu (2001:21) cited, if you want to look into the relationship between political participation and level of education attained, you should control for the influence of age because younger generations have received more education than older generations.
You can achieve this by dividing your sample into a number of different age groups and looking at the correlation (relationship) between participation and education within each age bracket.
In essence, statistical approach is about identifying relationship between variables (education and political participation), pointing out how and to what degree one has brought impact or influence on the other, thereby, group basis for comparison.
NOUN 60 BHM 767 COURSE GUIDE You should note that statistical approach seems to be an approximation of experimental method as they both share the logical attributes of science, but this should not be taken to mean that they are equivalent to each either.
This is because, statistical approach lacks the control aspect of emxeptehroidm.
ental Exercise 1.
Appraise the essential distinctions between experimental method and statistical approach of local government.
3.3 The case study approach 3.3.1 Stereotypes This is more common in the western world where particular crimes aarrero g ated to say Nigerians, Lebanese or Asians because of past cinavseoslv ing one of the nationals.
The case study approach, in essence is about focusing on a single, specific case at a time.
The value of this one –case study is that it gives aompppolert u nity for a thorough consideration of all attributes of the case at hand.
And on the basis of the findings, general propositions that can eventually lead to theory - building can be made 3.3.2 Categories You learnt in unit as 3.1.1 that the focus of the case study method is on one case at a time so to generate proposition that can be applied to a larger group.
You should note the various categories of case study approach.
There are the descriptive, a theoretical and hypothesis generating case studies.
Let us explain them one after the other.
1 .Descriptive case study Descriptive case study essentially describes the basic attributes of a particular case.
It doe not aim at providing explanations for an action, but just to describe the actions exhibited by the case.
It has the advantage of providing large volumes of data that are useful for theory building arising from generalizations.
NOUN 61 BHM 767 COURSE GUIDE A theoretical Case study A theoretical case study has its goal in providing an extensive analysis of the areas of interest in the case being studies rather than trying to build theories.
It throws more light on the case by examining it in all it ramifications.
A theoretical case study, according to Lizphart (1971), it is a study in applied science since it does not aim to contribute to empir ical gcoenneseraqluizeanttiloyn ist v alue in terms of theory – building is nil.
Hypothesis generating case study.
This case study is motivated by a desire to formulate general propositions that may lead to theory – building.
It begins with some basic but assumptions meant to be tested by gathering basic data.
This case study is a direct contradistinction to a theoretical case study.
As you have learnt, a theoretical case study is motivated by the need to formulate a general theoretical construct.
Exercise 3.3 1.
Distinguish between a theoretical and descriptive case study.
2.
Describe a case of stereotyping that you have personally experienced.
4.0 Conclusion In this unit, you will have been introduced to the various a(mppertohaocdhse) sw hich you can use to compare political and administrative systems and behaviour.
Some of these methods aim at generalizations that lead to theory- building, while others are motivated by mere descriptions of the attributes of the cases rather than providing generalizations for theory – building.
You should employ some of these methods on your own in your daily attempts at distinguishing people, things and issues.
NOUN 62 BHM 767 COURSE GUIDE 5.0 Summary What you have learnt in this unit is the numerous methods you can use to compare administrative system, practice and behaviour.
You learnt five methods altogether.
The differences methods identify similarities in cases, while the similarity methods identify differences.
The experimental and control group for its comparative explanations based on introduction and measurement of a stimulus in one group (experimental).
Statistical approach uses partial correlation to gauge the relationship the relationship between variable such education and political participation.
The case study method concentrates on the examination of the attributes of only one case which is seen as sufficient enough to make generalizations.
6.0 Tutor – marked Assignment (TMA) 1) The case study methods of local government studied gives room for stereotyping, describing in details the various categories of this method.
2) Identify and discuss the major elements of experimental approach.
Your assignment must not be more than 10 typed pages of A4 double spaced.
7.0 Further Reading and other Resources.
Akindele, S.T.
et al (1996) the subject matter of political science, Ibadan, college press.
Kolawole, Dipo (ed 1997) Readings in political science, Ibadan, Dekaal.
Sharkansky, I (1975) public Administrative: policy – making in Government agencies, 3rd edition, Chicago, Rand Mc Naily College publishing company.
NOUN 63 BHM 767 COURSE GUIDE Unit 10 EVOLUTION OF NIGERIAN LOCAL GOVERNMENT SYSTEM Table of contents 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objectives 3.1 Evolution of Nigeria Local Government System 3.1.1 Evolution of Nigeria Local Government System 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutor – marked Assignment 7.0 Further Reading and other Resources.
1.0 Introduction Unit 9 has concluded discussions on the general background to the study of COMPARATIVE LOCAL GOVERNMENT ADMINISTRATION.
The rest of the units is.pee.
cuinfiictsa l ly1 0e x–a 3m0i nwei ltlh e practice of local government administration in some selected countries.
Unit 10 takes Nigeria as the first among the selected countries to bdeis c ussed.
Local government administration in Nigeria as a political entity did not exist.
What existed were various ethnic political entities with their own traditional political arrangements and administration.
The British colonial authority which had control over Nigeria introduced the British model of local administration gradually and in phases until Nigeria had a full fledged local government system.
2.0 Objectives By the end of this study, you should be able to do the following activities: 1) Explain how local government institution evolved in Nigeria as a British colonial creation.
2) Describe the system of indirect rule.
NOUN 64 BHM 767 COURSE GUIDE 3) Appreciate why the British colonial government introduced indirect rule in Nigeria.
4) Describe how indirect rule operated.
5) Identify and discuss the different phases in the evolution of local government in Nigeria.
3.0 Main Content 3.1 Evolution of Nigeria Local Government system.
You will recall that in the previous units, you will were told that local government forms part of the general public administrative system of state.
States employed local government administration for the purpose of decentralizing power, authority and governmental functions to some lower level governments and agencies so as to speed up delivery services efficiency.
It is realized that no single level of government can perform all the functions of government without carrying too much burdens particularly in an era when complexity and responsibilities are increasing everyday.
The British colonial authorities brought contemporary local government administration to Nigeria.
However, before colonial contact, the different ethnic groups in pre –N i gerian communities had their respective political systems.
The Yoruba political administration revolved around the “town” and the “oba” (king) and his council of chiefs.
The Hausa – Fulani had the “emir” at the centre of administration while the Igbo, practiced age – group administration with the elders and young people playing prominent political roles.
These earlier traditional political practices were condemned by the British colonial masters and the system was labeled primitive.
Effectively, the rudimentary form of local government administration by the British started shortly before 1900AD.
The administrative system started with the establishment of Native authorities which was a system of indirect rule administered through the traditional rulers.
It was called indirect rule because the colonial masters were NOUN 65 BHM 767 COURSE GUIDE ruling through the traditional rulers who were more visible to the people rather than the Europeans.
The British colonial masters adopted indirect rule system because of so many problems which constructed direct rulership.
These problems include: a) Language barrier b) Shortage of funds c) Shortage of British personnel to directly man all administrative posts.
Traditional rulership were already in place in the Yoruba and Hausa – Fulani parts of the country where the “Oba” and “ Emir” respectively had some degrees of administrative control over their people.
Therefore, the system recorded degrees of success in the two areas but failed woefully, in the east because in most communities in the East, there was absence of a constituted traditional authority that could be identified in one person, implying lack of centralized authority gap, the colonial masters appointed warrant chiefs for the purpose of local administration in the area.
The people rejected the warrant chiefs as they lacked legitimacy in their traditional law and customs.
Moreso, the warrant chiefs abused their position by engaging in corrupt practices, and they severely taxed the people and thereby instigated the Aba women Riot of 1929 against the British colonial government.
The riot led to the over – hauling of the warrant chiefs.
Problem coupled with other difficulties indirect rule faced in general, the system of indirect rule faced in general, the system of indirect rile was re – organized between 1930 and 1940 leading to the establishment of chiefs – in – council and chiefs – and – council in place of sole Nature authorities (orewa and Adewumi, 1983; xi).
In both cases, traditional rulers despite being uneducated made up tchoem position of the two councils.
In chiefs – in – council, the traditional ruler shared authority with the council, while in chiefs – and – council, tthraed i tional rulers assumed the chairmanship of the council.
Later, non – traditional rulers were made members of the native authorities in the east and west.
With the new development in these areas of the country, the Native authorities gradually became a training ground for future political leaders.
NOUN 66 BHM 767 COURSE GUIDE Though an innovation on the part of the colonial masters but as a result of unrelenting agitations by educated anti – colonial agitators who condemned the system, natue authority system collapsed.
With the continued agitation and criticism by the nationalist coupled with the problems associated with the native authority system, the colonial administrators had to introduce some reforms between 1950 and 1955.
The period invariably marked the rise of modern local authorities in Nigeria.
Reforms were brought to the system through the Local Government Ordinance of 1950.
It introduced elected councils with a three – tier structure based on the British pattern.
The structures were the countries, districts and local councils.
It also put an end to tlheaed ership control, by the District officers over the councils.
Apart from national reforms to the system that cut across the country, the respective regime governments also introduced some reforms thereby leading to different paces of development system in trheeg io ns.
For instance, reforms in the Western region did not start until 1952 when it promulgated the Local Government Law of 1952.
Whereas, it was in 1955 that such development started in the east with tehnea c tment of the local Government Law of 1955 to replace the 1950 ordinance.
Both the eastern and western authorities with three years tenure.
75% of members of the councils were elected and hauadto n omy over many responsibilities.
At independence in 1960 through 1966 before the military took over power, the pace of development of the local government system continued in the east and west.
Both regimes enacted respectively the Local Government Law of 1960 which spelt out distinct structures for the system.
As for the Northern region, the Nature authority Law No 4 of 1954 existed until the military took over power in 1966.
The existing structure under the law was retained until then.
It was not until when the Murtala /Obasanjo regime established the local government reforms of 1976 that a uniform, one – tier system of local Government came into practice throughout Nigeria.
Exercise 10.1 NOUN 67 BHM 767 COURSE GUIDE 1.
Discuss the assertion that local government system in Nigeria is a British creation.
2.
Examine in details the rationale behind the adoption of indirect rule system in Nigeria by the British colonial administrators.
3.
Identify and discuss the phases of the local government in Nigeria till 1976.
4.
0 Conclusion The rise of modern local government system in Nigeria today is traceable to the British colonial administrators who indirect rule system to displace the various traditional system of governance.
Indirect rule system made use of traditional rulers in the North and west but in the absence of such positions in the absence of such positions in the east, appointed warrant chiefs for the people.
While indirect system rmeecoasrudreeds of success in the North and west, it failed in the east.
Nevertheless, the system became the foundation of many local administrative particles such as chiefs – and – council.
Which were labeled as Native authority system.
Gradually, modern local systems started emerging at different times in the regions by introducing various reforms and bringing in educated Nigerians to the system.
Also, democratic practices were introduced, whereby councilors and chairman were elected and the council were accorded a measure of autonomy in revenue generation and award of contracts.
5.0 Summary.
You learnt in this unit that before colonial contact, the respective ethnic groups in colonial Nigeria and their own traditional administr ative system based on individual customs and traditions.
However, at the about the advent of European contact, such political and administrative practices were labelled traditional and un – modern you also learnt that effective British colonial administration in Nigeria started at about 1890 but due to varied factors, the colonial administrators would not impose direct administration but instead established a system of indirect rule NOUN 68 BHM 767 COURSE GUIDE whereby traditional rulers were used as front and to deceive the colonial native as if their rulers were the ones ruling.
Indirect rule became imperative for reasons of barrier language between the colonist and the colonized people, shortage of British administrative personnel, shortage of funds to pay salaries, transport and dalilsotuwrabnacnecse f or the British.
Consequently indirect rule under a system of native authorities became the starting point of contemporary local government system in Nigeria.
6.0 Tutor – Marked Assignments 1) Discuss the submission that” Local government as it is today in Nigeria is a colonial legacy” 2) Examine in details the factors that necessitated the adoption of indirect rule by the British colonial administrators in their quest for local administration.
7.0 Further Readings and other Resources.
Adewale A (ed, 1990) issues on the practice of Local Government in Nigeria, Ikeja, comfort press.
Adeyeye, m. (1990) “A survey of Local Government Administration in Nigeria, 1900 – 1986’ in A, Adewale (ed) ibid Ajayi, Kunle (2000) (ed) theory and practice of local Government, Ado – Ekiti, UNAD Akpan, N.U (1967) Epithaph to indirect Rule; A discourse on Local Government in Nigeria, London, Frank Cass Orewa, C.O and J.
B. Adewumi (1983) Local Government in Nigeria: the changing scenes, Benin – city, Ethiope.
Unit 11 NOUN 69 BHM 767 COURSE GUIDE STRUCTURE OF LOCAL GOVERNMENT IN NIGERIA Table of contents 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objective 3.1 Structure of Local Government in Nigeria 3.1.1 Structure of Local Government 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutor – marked Assignment 7.0 Further Reading and other Resources.
1.0 Introduction Each administrative system has its own structure likewise the local government system, the structure of which may var y from one political system to another.
The structure of local government system in Nigeria has its root in tchoel o nial administration from which the system as a whole emerged and consequently the description of the system as a colonial legacy.
This unit examines the structure of local system in Nigeria which can be apthy described as relatively stable over the years despite / the vagaries of democratic politics and regimes.
2.0 objectives By the end of this unit, you should be able to carry out the faocltliovwitiiensg: 5.
Recall the colonial foundation of Nigeria’s local government system 6.
Describe the organization / administrative structure of local, governments in Nigeria.
7.
Explain the structure and changes experienced by the system over time.
NOUN 70 BHM 767 COURSE GUIDE 3.0 Main Content 3.1 Structure of Local Government in Nigeria.
3.1.1 Structure of Local government.
It is important for us to recall what we learnt about how modern lgoocvael rn ment system evolved in Nigeria.
You learnt that before ccoolnotnaciat l pre – colonial peoples of various ethnic groups system of administration.
The peoples based their political and administrative system on traditional rulership and the age – grade institution as the case may be.
However, when British colonial administrators came they labeled the hitherto political arrangement as traditional and primitive and therefore must be discarded.
They imposed British style lack administr ation but due to constraints such as language barrier and of funds and British personnel, they could not afford direct administration and instead relied on traditional rulers through a system of indirect rule under a native authorities arrangement.
They ruled indirectly through the traditional rulers in the North and West.
They created warrant chiefs in the east as the people lacked the tradition of traditional rulership.
The traditional rulers remained prominent in the Native authorities until the educated Nigeria agitated for reforms leading to the establishment of local councils with elected councilors and some measures of autonomy, thus paving way for modern local government system since the 1930s through to 1960 when Nigeria had independence.
Between 1960 and 1976, varied structural designs for local government were in practice in the respective regions.
This implies that there was no uniform local government structure.
Since 1976 however, when a national local government reforms was introduced, local government in Nigeria virtually have a common administrative structure.
The reforms established a multi – purpose, single tier local government system thereby bringing uniformity to the system hitherto characterized by unwieldy administr ative system later the twelve existing state, before the 19 states structure in 1976 ( kunle Ajayi 200:70).
The reforms also set the lower and upper population limits to qualify alo c ality for a local government council.
A local government area should not NOUN 71 BHM 767 COURSE GUIDE have a population less than 150, 000 and may not be more than 800,000 for easy accessibility to the citizens for effective performance.
The reform also made provision for an elected chairman and four supervisor y councilors who constitute the executive cabinet of the locality which later having specific portfolio, for instance, supervisory councilor for Education.
The chairman and the entire councilors in the council constitute the executive and General purposes committee of the council which is responsible for the budget and financial management of the council.
Below these political appointees are the civil servants of the local government including top officials such as the secretary, treasurer, works director, Medical director and the other employees.
Successive regimes utilized the 1976 structure until 1991 when the legislative arm was introduced to local government administration by the Babangida regime.
The regime in addition increased the number of existing local government from 301 (since `976) to 543 in 1989 and again to 589 in 1991 when more council were created as at today, there are 776 local councils..
Though, it is pertinent for you to note that between 1984 and May 1999 which were periods of military regimes, the administrative structure of local government was intermittently marked by elected councils and sole administrator ship/ caretaker committee systems.
The return to democratic practice on May 29, 1999 affords the country the use of the 1999 constitution which has provisions for the local government system.
Section 7 of the constitution provides for a democratically elected council.
The constitution empowers the States to determine the political and administrative structure of local government in the state.
The respective Houses of Assembly in the states enacted Local Government Laws provided for Executive and Legislative arms of government for local government.
The Executive is headed by the chairman and assisted by a vice – chairman.
There is a political secretary and four supervisory councilors with portfolios.
The legislative arm has its own leader (speaker), clerk, major a military leaders and other House officials.
The legislative arm make bye – laws for NOUN 72 BHM 767 COURSE GUIDE the council area.
Thus, the 1999 introduced presidential structure to the local government system in Nigeria.
Exercise 1.
Identify and discuss the structure of local; government in Nigeria before and after the 1976 Local Government Reforms.
4.0 Conclusion The structure of local government in Nigeria before 1976 was based on the preferred choice of the regional government as there was no nuantiifoonrmal it y.
Different models including the managerial system, French model and sole administrationship and care taker committes system were used.
The 1976 Local government reforms corrected variations in the structure of local government nation – wide by introducing a uniform structure based on 301 local governments with the same one – tier, multipurpose administrative structure.
The system remaineds till 1999 when the constitution under a democratic dispensation introduced an elected local government system with a presidential structure having executive and legislative arms in each local government and political officials elected from the local government area.
5.0 Summary In this unit, you have learnt that the structure of local governments in Nigeria before 1976 varied and depended on the way in the respective regional governments wanted it.
This implies that the there was no national local government structure and consequently there was no national uniformity.
You also learnt that a national standard in terms of local gstorvuecrtunrme e n tw as first introduced in 1976 through the Local Government Reforms of that year by the Murtala/Obasnajo military regime.
The reforms among other things identified local Government as a multipurpose, third – tier level of government nation – wide.
Administratively, it puts an elected chairman as the head of the administration and to be assisted by four supervisory councilors with portfolios.
NOUN 73 BHM 767 COURSE GUIDE Subsequently, other structural innovation where also introduced by succeeding regimes.
For instance, the Babangida administration introduced Presidentialism to the system.
6.0 Tutor – Marked Assignment 1.
The 1976 Local Government Reforms were meant to correct the structural defects in the Nigerian local government system, identif y and discuss the structure innovations introduced to correct these deffects.
2.
Examine the structural constitution structural reforms that have been in practice since the return to democratic rule on 29, May 1999.
7.0 Further readings and other resources.
Ajayi Kunle (2000) “Trends in local Government in Nigeria, 1900 – 1999 “in kunle Ajayi (ed) Theory and practice of local Government, Ado – Ekiti, University of Ado – Ekiti.
Mawhood, P. (ed) Local Government in the World”Experience of Decentralization in tropical Africa, South Africa, African institute of South Africa.
Oyediran, O (1996) “Local Government as a third – tier of Government in Nigeria: the 1976 Local Government Reforms and After” in J.I.
Elaigwu and R.A. Akindele (ed) foundation of Nigerian Federation, 1960 – 1995, Abuja, National Council on inter – Government Relations.
Unit 12 NOUN 74 BHM 767 COURSE GUIDE NIGERIA: LOCAL GOVERNMENT FUNCTIONS Table of contents 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objective 3.1 Nigeria: Local Government functions 3.1.1 Structure of Local Government 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutor – marked Assignment 7.0 Further Reading and other Resources.
1.0 Introduction In this unit, you will learn about the functions of local government in Nigeria.
Local government is constitutionally empowered to perform certain responsibilities.
These responsibilities are basically primary functions which upper level of governments are not expected to bother about.
Besides being primary functions, they are also limited in scope as services rendered are on a smaller scale in correspondence with the smallness of population being served and the resources at their disposal.
2.0 Objectives By the end of this unit, you should be able to perform the following activities: 1.
Explain the basic functions of local government in Nigeria.
2.
Appreciate the factors that limit the scope of functions that the local governments perform.
3.
Describe the varied nature of works that local governments can perform.
4.
Explain the correlation between resource availability and performance.
3.0 Main Content NOUN 75 BHM 767 COURSE GUIDE 3.1 Nigeria: functions of local Government.
3.1.1 Functions As a way of recalling what you learnt in unit 11, we discussed the structure of local government in Nigeria.
You learnt that before the 1976 Local Government reforms that there was no common structure for local government.
Each region and later states had different structure for the different local governments.
However, the reforms of 1976 introduced a uniform local gstorvuecrtunrme eanctr o ss the country.
Local government became third – tier level of government with the states and the federal government being the second and first – tiers respectively.
The reform created 301 local governments with the chairman at the helms of affairs assisted by four supervisory councilors with responsibilities.
The administrative/ service cadre of the local government was headed by a secretary.
Local government as a grassroot level of administration as you learnt earlier is to bring development and good government to the people.
Specifically, local government is created in Nigeria to perform varied functions.
The fourth schedule of the 1999 constitution contains these functions which include: 1) The consideration and the making of recommendation to a state commission on economic planning or any similar issues bordering on the economic development of the states particularly so far as the areas of authority of the council and area is affected.
2) Collection of rates, radio and television licenses.
3) Establishment and maintenance of cemeteries, burial grounds and homes for the destitute or infirm.
4) Licensing of bicycles, trucks, canoes, wheel barrow and carts.
5) Establishment, maintenance and regulations of slaughter houses, slaughter slabs, market, motor parks and public convenience.
NOUN 76 BHM 767 COURSE GUIDE 6) Construction and maintenance of roads, street, street lightings, drains and public highways, parks, gardens and open spaces.
7) Naming of streets and roads and numbering of houses.
8) Provision and maintenance of public conveniences, sewage and refuse disposal.
9) Registration of births, deaths and marriages.
10) Assessment of private houses for the purpose of levying rate in order to pay tenement rate .
11) Control and regulation of out – door advertising and hoarding.
12) Control and regulation of movement and keeping of pets of all descriptions.
13) Licensing, regulation and control of the sale of liquor.
14) The provision and maintenance of primary, adult and vocational edifies.
15) The development of agriculture and natural resources other than the exploitation of minerals.
16) The provision and maintenance of health services.
The functions of local government are not exhaustive as the law provides that local governments have power to perform such other functions as may be conferred on the local government councils by the House of Assembly of the State.
Exercise 1.
Discuss the basic functions of local government in Nigeria as a way of justifying their relevance in the Nigeria administrative system.
4.0 Conclusion The importance of local government in Nigeria cannot be uconndseirdmeirninegd the many functions they perform as reflected in the nation’s NOUN 77 BHM 767 COURSE GUIDE constitution.
They perform functions that are primary in nature considering the smallness of population dealt with and the scope of resources at their disposal.
For these considerations, they therefore need to undergo small – spcraoldeu c tion of services.
Nevertheless, there are some local government that are considered rich, even richer than some state government.
Many local governments in Lagos State are individually richer than some States like Ekiti and Kogi States, yet the principle of Ultra vires, which implies that “such action is beyond the power”of an establishment, does not allow such rich local governments to perform functions which are not within their constitution but for which they have sufficient financial resource to carry out, for instance, establishing a University.
The law only permits local governments to “establish and maintain primary, adult and vocational education and not tertiary institutions.
5.0 Summary In this unit, you learnt that local government as a grassroot government is established to perform functions that encourage development of the area.
Towards this end, you learnt that the constitution empowers them to perform among other functions, collection of taxes and issuing of license; establishment and maintenance of road, streets, drains and public highways; establishment and maintenance of cemeteries, burial grounds and homes for the destitute; provision and maintenance of public conveniences, sewage and refuse disposals; and provisions and maintenance of health and medical services such as dispensaries and maternity centers.
You also learned that because of legal limitations, that there a few very rich local government which could perform some other functions but constructed by the principle of ultra vires.
6.0 Tutor – marked Assignment NOUN 78 BHM 767 COURSE GUIDE 1) Identify and discuss in details the constitutional functions of local government.
2) Examine the basic limitations on the scope of constitutional responsibilities of local government in Nigeria.
7.0 Further reading and other Resources.
Ajayi, Kunle (2000) “Trends in local Government in Nigeria, 1900 – 1999 “in kunle Ajayi (ed) Theory and practice of local Government, Ado – Ekiti, University of Ado – Ekiti.
Gboyega, Alex (1987), Poltical values and local Government in Nigeria, Lagos, Malthouse press.
Ola, R.F.
(1984) Local Administration in Nigeria, London, Kegan Paul International.
Unit 13 NOUN 79 BHM 767 COURSE GUIDE NIGERIA: INTERNAL SOURCES OF REVENUE TO LOCAL GOVERNEMENTS Table of contents 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objective 3.1 Nigeria: Internal sources of Local Government in Nigeria 3.1.1 Internal sources of Revenue 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutor – marked Assignment 7.0 Further Reading and other Resources.
1.0 Introduction You learnt in unit 12 about the functions of local government In Nigeria.
Local governments are constitutionally saddled with some primar y responsibilities which are ordinarily tailored towards meeting the problems, of the grassroot people.
However, like any other organization with goals, finance is very essential to perform efficiently and satisfactorily.
While it is true that local governments in Nigeria has a right of share in the federation account like the state and federal governments, but financial resources from this source are not enough to carry out every activity of the local government.
It therefore becomes imperative to embark on self – efforts by looking inwards as a way of generating supplementary revenue.
In this unit therefore, you will learn about the various internal sources that local government can generate revenue.
2.0 Revenue By the end of this unit, you should be able to: NOUN 80 BHM 767 COURSE GUIDE 1.
Explain the importance of finance to local government administration 2.
Identify the various ways that a local government can generate revenue internally as well as external sources.
3.
Explain the constitutionally authorized ways of generating revenue internally by local government.
4.
Describe other permissible but non – constitutionally listed avenues of generating revenue internally.
3.
1.1 Internal sources You learnt in the previous units that local government has become aantt ra ctive arrangement for modern states so as to decentralize administrative power and consequently make governments serve the citizenry better.
Other reasons adduced for its existence include promoting grassroot development, and drawing government nearer to the people.
The equally serves as a platform for training future political leaders, as well as bridging the gap between higher levels of government.
You also learnt of its constitutional functions in unit 12 which include providing basic and primary social amenities such as primary smcahrokoelts,, h ealth centers, recreation centers and other functions.
To be able to perform its numerous functions, local governments snuefefidc i ent money.
Money is considered as the fuel of organization without which it will not be able to function well.
Similarly, without afudnedqiunagte l o cal governments will fail in their responsibilities.
The enabling law of local government makes way for the various avenues local government can get funds.
The avenues are categorized as: a. Internally generated revenue (IGR) b. Externall sources of finance(EGR).
a. Internally Generated revenue (IGR).
NOUN 81 BHM 767 COURSE GUIDE I.
Taxes: Local governments are empowered to impose taxes on all employed adults in the area.
Usually, a fixed poll tax is paid by all working adults.
Revenues from taxes are supposed to be high but this is not so because of high rate of evasion.
II.
Rates: The constitutiona of (1999) empowered councils to collect kinds of rate which include: 1.
License fees and fines General license fees are charged on bicycles, radio, carts and trucks.
2.
Regulation of food and drinks.
Councils collect rates on food premises and beer selling shops either as on – and – or off license.
3.
Fees from statutory registration of birth, death and marriage.
4.
Social Charges Many of us used to observe on Saturdays that some roads are closed for social engagements.
Such roads are closed with the permission of the councils but after paying some fees to council’s coffers.
5.
Repairs/ Rentage services.
Some local government renders some repair services to people after paying some amount.
For instance, the works department can embark on the repair of private vehicles for some fees, chairs, tables and generations can be rendered out for some fees.
6.
Commercial Undertakings Some can decide to invest in certain sectors of the economy.
For instance, some councils have floated business centers which generated profits for the councils, while others embark on commercial transportation.
Some build commercial housing units and students hotels on campuses of some tertiary institutions.
7.
Commercial farming.
NOUN 82 BHM 767 COURSE GUIDE Some local governments engage commercial farming by growing food crops and rearing animals and poultry for sale.
So many other internal avenues are open to local governments to generate revenue but their ability to do this depends on their degree of preparedness to utilize opportunities.
Exercise I.
Examine how local councils are financed II.
Identify and discuss the major sources of internal revenue to local government.
4.0 Conclusion The constitution guarantees avenues for generating finance for local government Finance for local government which include internal sources.
By implication therefore, the constitution acknowledges that without money, local governments will not be able to perform their official responsibilities.
Many ways are open to local governments to generate money internally.
Besides, those avenues listed by the constitution, local governments can also embark on commercial ventures that would yield them reasonable profit.
5.0 Summary In this unit, you have learnt about the various internal means of generating revenue by local governments.
Specifically you learnt that local government can earn revenue through assessment and collection of taxes and risastuesin, g of licenses, collection of fines, social charges, embarking on commercial ventures including business centres, and commercial transportation and housing.
They can also invest in commercial farming.
6.0 Tutor – Marked Assignments.
a.
Identify and discuss the statutory avenues for local governments to generate revenue internally.
b.
Highlight and discuss the non – statutory internal strategies through which local government can improve their revenue standing.
NOUN 83 BHM 767 COURSE GUIDE 7.0 Further Reading and other Resources.
Agagu, A.A. (2000) “Local Government finance” in kunle Ajayi (ed) Theory and practice of Local Government, Ado-Ekiti, University of Ado – Ekiti.
Ajayi, Kunle (2000) “Local Government financial Resources and prospects for internally Generated Revenues” in Kunle Ajayi (ed) Ibid.
Fabamise, M.O.
(2000) “Budgetary System in Local Government” in Kunle Ajayi (ed) ibid Unit 14 NOUN 84 BHM 767 COURSE GUIDE NIGERIA: EXTERNAL SOURCES OF REVENUE TO LOCAL GOVERNEMENTS Table of contents 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objective 3.1 Nigeria: External sources of Revenue in Local Governments in Nigeria 3.1.1 External sources of Revenue 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutor – marked Assignment 7.0 Further Reading and other Resources.
1.0 Introduction Unit 13 discussed some of the ways local government can generate revenue internally in order for it to be able to perform its duties to the citizenry of the local government area.
It is found out that only little amount of revenue is usually generated internally because of the fact that the grassroot people are often poor and many do not have gainful employment.
Even the little being charged on taxation cannot be paid by the people, and consequently, they often flee into the bush time tax collectors are around.
Therefore, it is a high incidence of tax evasion in the rural areas.
To make many of the local governments viable, there is therefore the need to source additional revenue externally as a means of supplementar y revenue from internal sources.
Besides self – efforts in this direction there are constitutional provisions which guarantee local governments.
Some share of the federated account which invariable becomes the major and most reliable source of finance to local governments.
2.0 Objectives NOUN 85 BHM 767 COURSE GUIDE By the end of this study, you should be able to: 1) Justify the need for ample revenue for local governments.
2) Recall some internal sources of revenue to local government 3) Explain the statutory external means of revenue generation to local government 4) Identify and discuss the no – statutory sources of external revenues to local governments.
3.0 Main contents 3.1 Nigeria: External Sources of revenue to local government.
3.1.1 External Sources of Revenues You will recall in unit 13 that you learnt about the various ways that local governments can generate revenue internally.
Specifically, you were told that local government can earn some income from: collection of taxes, rates and some social charge.
They can aglesnoe r ate money from business centres, commercial housing and hostel accommodation, rentage of chairs, tables, canopy generator to the public, and others.
However, it is found out that local government generates little income from the internal source and therefore, for them to be financially viable and be able to perform effectively, they have to look outwards for supplementary revenue.
Local government therefore generate additional revenue from the external sources.
1) Statutory Allocations These are revenues accruable to local government as matter of constitutional rights, that, it is their entitlement by right.
There are two basic sources of statutory allocations: NOUN 86 BHM 767 COURSE GUIDE a.
Allocations from the federation Account: By law, councils are entitled to a certain percentage of the increased federation account.
In 1976, the percentage was 100%, while it was to 15% in 1991, and 20% in 1992.
There have been pressures on the federal government to increases percentage again to 25%.
The presidency and the National assembly is working on a new formular.
b. Allocation from Sate governments IGR account.
The local government also, is entitled to 10% of all IGR by each state.
However, very many state governments are defaulters as far as this legal provision is concerned, as they have not been remitting such percentage to the local governments.
2) Grants – in – aid.
Local governments are entitled to grants from state and federal governments to carry out specific programmes.
For instance, Governor Audu of Kogi State gave our #1,000,000 each to newly created local governments in the state as take – off grants.
3) External non – official sources a.
Loan credits from banks and other financial institutions.
Local government takes loans from banks with some interests and collaterals.
b.
Dividends and profit from private companies and profit from bank deposits.
Many local governments buy shares in companies, while profits are yielded on bank deposits.
Dividends are paid to local governments based on the number of share possessed in the company.
Exercise 1) Differentiate between internally generated revenue and externally generated revenue 2) Identify and discuss the major sources of revenue accruable from sate and federal governments to local governments.
NOUN 87 BHM 767 COURSE GUIDE 3) Explain why taxes have remained poor sources of revenue to local government.
4.0 Conclusion Statutory allocations from the federation account have over the years become the major source of revenue to local governments and consequently how much local government will get from the account often depends on ivtos lu me which in turn depends on the price of oil in the international market.
The higher the price of oil, the higher also the amount of allocation accruing to local governments and vice – versa.
Statutory allocation from state governments has become a thing of the past in many states as they too are struggling under the weight of financial crunch - aid is not a common phenomenon from either the federal government or states.
However, besides inadequacies of income of internal and external sources, a major problem of local governments is official corruption which has given much room for privatization of public funds by a few privileged top political and civil service officials in the local government.
5.0 Summary You have in this unit known the various sources of externally generated revenue to local governments.
You learnt that local governments do generate supplementary income from statutory allocations from federal and state governments.
That incomes from these sources are statutory allocation from the federated account constitutes the source of the largest income to most local government, while many states default in their financial obligations to the local governments.
Credit loans and dividends accruable from share holdings in limited liability companies generate income.
Finally, you learnt that official corruption often constitutes source of leakages to the purse of local government thereby contributing to the fuinnvainacbiialli ty .
6.0 Tutor – Marked Assignments NOUN 88 BHM 767 COURSE GUIDE a) Differentiate between Internally Generated Revenue (IGR) and Externally Generated Revenue (EGR) to local governments.
b) Identify and discuss in details the major sources of externally Generated Revenue to local government in Nigeria.
7.0 Further Reading and other sources.
Agagu, A.A.(2000)”Local government Finance” in Kunle Ajayi (ed) theory and practice of Local Government, Ado – Ekiti, university of Ado – Ekiti, University of Ado – Ekiti.
Ajayi, Kunle (2000) “Local Government financial Resources and p Prospects for internally Generated Revenues” in Kunle Ajayi (ed) Ibid.
Fabamise, M.O.
(2000) “Budgetary System in Local Government” in Kunle Ajayi (ed) ibid Gboyega, A.
(1987) Poltical Values and Local government in Nigeria, Lagos, Malthouse.
Unit 15 NOUN 89 BHM 767 COURSE GUIDE PROBLEMS OF LOCAL GOVERNMENTS IN NIGERIA Table of contents 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objective 3.1 Nigeria: External sources of Local Government in Nigeria 3.1.1 External sources of Revenue 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutor – marked Assignment 7.0 Further Reading and other Resources.
1.0 Introduction units 13 and 14 her dealt with how local governments in Nigeria generate revenue for executing their programmes, it is imperative to know tihnaatd e quate funding has posed serious problems to virtually all local governments in the country thereby hindering efficient performance.
It is however found out that shortage of financial resources is not the only problem of local governments as there are other major problems confronting the system.
In this unit, you will therefore learn some of the efficient service delivery of local governments in Nigeria.
2.0 Objectives By the end of this study, you should be able to perform the faocltliovwitiiensg: 1) Recall some of the major sources of revenue to local governments.
2) Appreciate why local governments in many states have not been performing creditably 3) Identify and explain the basic problems facing local governments.
NOUN 90 BHM 767 COURSE GUIDE 4) Describe the human constraints effecting local governments.
5) Explain the problems of expertise and logistics be - devilling the local government.
3.0 Main Content 3.1 Problems of local Governments in Nigeria 3.1.1 Problems of Local Governments.
The two last units dealt with the revenue opportunities available to local governments in Nigeria.
In the units, you learnt that internal and external sources are the two major areas from which local government can collect revenue.
Internally, we were told that local government generate money from taxes, rates, investments, fines and social charges, while share from the federal account, and states internally generated revenue, credit loans from banks and dividends from share – holdings in liability companies form part of tehxet e rnally generated revenue sources.
Local government, like any other human organization, or public institution have their own peculiar problems.
Some of these problems remained consistent, while some others have been partially resolved by successive regimes.
These problems include: Structural instability Excessive politicking over tenure Lack of adequate funding Poor staffing Poor staff welfare Encroachment on local government functions by state Lack of relevant equipment and, NOUN 91 BHM 767 COURSE GUIDE Official corruption 1.
Structural instability: A permanent administrative structure has not been evolved at the lgoocvael rn ment level.
A problem which started in the colonial period athnrdo u gh the years of independence.
Before 1976, the various regions up till 1967 and thereafter the twelve states in the country had different administrative structures for local government in their areas.
While some had multi – tiers local government system, others had either a two – tier or one – tier system with each tier performing different functions or overlapping of functions.
Efficient performance by the council became very impossible, while co –ordination was difficult.
The structural problem became more pronounced as the nation was not sure at a point about which model to use, whether British, the cabinet system or presidential system.
Presently, being under democratic rule, the presidential system is being used for the first time at the local government level, though, a care tcaokmerm it tee system has been completed for adoption on 29, May 2002 as local government election cannot hold until the end of August 2002 to usher in a new set of elected officials.
2.
Excessive politicking over tenure Of elected officials at the local government level has generated cmonantryo v ersies in recent times.
At the inauguration of democratic rule on 29 May, 2002, no one was sure as to the exact tenure of local councils.
The State House of assembly has the constitutional responsibility to determine the tenure of the councils in each state.
Different tenures were fixed for the councils.
Some states legislated two year s, while others three years.
The National Assembly later became part of the confusion bleyg i slating four in the 2001 Electoral Act which the Supreme Court later declared illegal as it was the pre – occupation of state Assemblies to fix, the tenure.
Despite the Supreme Court’s declaration, election to local government officers was been postponedtill August instead of May 2002.
3.
Shortage of funds NOUN 92 BHM 767 COURSE GUIDE Cutting across all the local governments is lack of enough fpirnoasnecceu t e t o d evelopmental and welfare programmes for the people of tlhoec a lities.
Statutory shares from the federated account are either not released on time or fictitious local governments now receive what is called “zero – allocation”, that is, zero (nil) amount of money from the account.
4.
Poor Staff Welfare Staff welfare at the local government level is ver y poor.
Even remuneration is discriminatory.
Civil servants at the federal level earn more pay than the local government employees.
Besides low pay, salaries are owed up to eleven months .
Staff promotions as at when due are not the case.
Combines with non – payment of salaries and lack of promotion have demoralizing effects on local government employee and consequently affects staff morale and efficiency.
5.
Poor staffing It is no deviation of the fact that many people do not want to work with local government because of poor conditions of service and owing of areas of salaries by the councils.
Qualified medical Doctors, Engineers, Nurses and other professionals often despise working at the local government level.
Therefore, critical jobs and services that ought to be performed by these professional are taken left unattended to.
6.
Lack of critical equipment.
Most local government cannot afford the purchase of modern equipment to facilitate the efficient performance of their services to the public.
For instance several of them cannot afford tractors, graders and other specialize work tools because of being too expensive.
The maintenance of existing ones is often difficult because of lack of funds.
The most glaring effect of this problem is the lack of rural roads in many parts of Nigeria.
7.
Official Corruption NOUN 93 BHM 767 COURSE GUIDE Official corruption at the local level has become a hall mark of administr ation at the level.
The councils’ scare resources are embezzled and mismanaged.
White elephant projects that have no direct bearing with the promotion of rural people’s standard of life are always awarded to contractors.
Council’ financial resources are cornered into private pockets through fictitious contract and payments for jobs nor performed or of which actual value has been inflated.
At the end, fewer funds are left for productive purposes.
Exercise 1.
Enumerate and discuss some of the basic problems of local governments in the country.
2.
In what way is corruption perpetrated at the local government level?
4.0 Conclusion The non – performance of most local governments in Nigeria tend to erode the purpose of their creation as a tool for rural/ community development .most communities suffer lack of feeder roads, pipe – borne water aenledc t ricity as local governments have no capable base and expertise tpor o vide these duties efficiently.
It therefore seems that local government area is fast losing value.
Abencda u se of this non – performance, the higher tiers of government are fast encroaching on the activities of local governments, for instance, the provision and maintenance of primary schools are now being carried out by the federal government which finances the state primary education Board.
(SPEB).
5.0 Summary In this unit, you have learnt about some of the problems uefnfdiceiremnitn pienrgf o rmance of local governments.
Among the identified problems are structural instability, inadequate funding, poor staff welfare, poor staffing, excessive politicking and corruption.
All these hinder the relevance apnedrf o rmance of local governments 6.0 Tutor Marked Assignments NOUN 94 BHM 767 COURSE GUIDE 1.
Identify and discuss with relevant examples the major problems hindering effective performance by local government.
7.0 Further Readings and other Resources.
Ajayi, Kunle (2000) “Local Government financial Resources and p Prospects for internally Generated Revenues” in Kunle Ajayi (ed) Ibid.
Gboyega, A.
(1987) Poltical Values and Local government in Nigeria, Lagos, Malthouse.
Kolawole, Dipo (ed) (1998) Issues in Nigeria Government and Politics Ibadan, Dekaal Unit 16 THE 1976 LOCAL GOVERNMENTS REFORMS NOUN 95 BHM 767 COURSE GUIDE Table of contents 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objective 3.1 The 1976 local Government Reforms 3.1.1 Local Government Reforms 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutor – marked Assignment 7.0 Further Reading and other Resources.
1.0 Introduction In unit 15, some of the problems confronting local governments in Nigeria were examined.
In this unit, we shall discuss some of the measure pfourtw ard by government to correct the ills and defects in the system.
The unit will specifically focus on the 1976 reforms which were attempts by the Murtala/ Obasanjo regime to correct the unwieldiness in the lgoocvael rn ment system since independence in all States particularly regarding the structure and functions of local government in the country.
The reforms took far – reaching steps in resolving the numerous problems associated with the system at the time.
2.0 Objectives By the end of this unit, you should be able to do the following activities: 1.
Highlight and discuss the major problems confronting local government in Nigeria.
2.
Identify and explain the basic provisions of the 1976 Local Government reforms.
3.
Explain the concept of reforms 4.
Explain the rational behind reforms.
3.0 Main Content NOUN 96 BHM 767 COURSE GUIDE 3.1 The 1976 Local Government Reforms 3.1.1 1976 Local Government Reforms.
In unit 15, you learnt about the main problems confronting local government in Nigeria and which have invariably affected their performance.
Some of the identified problems include: structural instability, poor staff welfare, poor staffing.
Inadequate funding, lack of relevant equipment and excessive politicking.
Attempts by successive regimes to correct these problems often necessitates reforms.
Reforms are about change.
Transforming something old to become new.
Rejuvenation of structure, procedure and general ways of doing tRheinfogrsm.
s also bring to the fore the idea of no condition is permanent.
Nothing is permanent except change.
The guidelines for Local Government reforms of 1976 contain the following provisions: I.
Local Government as third – tier of Government.
Local government officially became the third level of governmental authority, the first being the federal government, while the second are the states, II.
Multi – purpose, one – tier structure.
The reforms abolished the unwieldy structures existing across the states.
All local governments now have one uniform single layer structure capable of performing various functions.
III.
Size and number of local governments.
The population size of each local government was pegged at a minimum of 150,000 and a maximum of 800,000 people .the motive behind this close – ended population size was to ensure that the local governments are financially viable since poll tax form significant source of their internally generated income payable by adults, and charges on property and business in the area.
NOUN 97 BHM 767 COURSE GUIDE The amount of income accruable to each local government is therefore a function of the population size of the council area.
Based on the population criterion 301 local government were created in the country.
IV.
Elected Local Government Councils .
The reforms provided that 75% of members of the councils are to be elected directly or indirectly, while the remaining 25% are to be nominated by the governors of each state.
V. Cabinet system of government.
The reforms established at the local government level the cabinet system is made up of an elected full – time chairman and four supervisor y councilors who are appointed from the rank of other councillors.
The supervisory councillors serve in a full time capacity and they aarsesi g ned specific responsibilities over a departmental or group of departments.
They perform the role of ministers or commissioners in ministries at federal or state levels respectively.
They do not however have executive powers individually.
The chairman, the four supervisory councillors and other councillors constitute the finance and general purpose committee of the local government which is responsible for general policies formulation and enactment of bye – laws for the council area.
VI.
Staff welfare Each sate is empowered by the reforms to set up a local government service board to perform personnel management functions including and recruitment, appointment, training and re – training promotion discipline and welfare of staff.
VII.
Funding The reforms identified inadequate financing of local government as a serious problem undermining efficient performance of local government s over the years.
The reforms therefore provided that 10% of share from the federated NOUN 98 BHM 767 COURSE GUIDE account be allowed to all local governments in the country, and in addition, it made available to all local governments the sum of #100 million as fresh take – off grant.
VIII.
Traditional council.
A traditional council was approved for each council in which is composed of traditional tile – holders and representatives of the local council.
The traditional council is charged to formulate general proposals as advice to local council, enhance collection of taxes in the area, and control ochf ie ftaincy matters.
IX.
Police committees The reforms empowered the creation of a police committee in each council area to enforce local government laws, and to maintain law and order.
It is important for you to know that the 1976 reforms remain the most comprehensive in the history of local government development, and it was the first time the problems of local governments will arouse attention and a concern for a national approach in resolving the problems of local government in the country.
Exercise 1.
Examine the concept of reforms 2.
Discuss the major problems of local government in Nigeria 3. identify and discuss the major provisions of the 1976 Local Government reforms in Nigeria 4.0 Conclusion The 1976 local government reforms by the Murtala/Obasanjo administration were instigated by the earlier practice across regions and state wsuhbijcehc te d the local government system to variegated administr ative models and structural patterns.
The regime came out with a comprehensive nation wide local government reforms in correcting the lack of uniformity in structure and administrative practice.
The reforms increased the responsibilities of local authorities by a process of decentralization that ensures that appropriate divisions of functions NOUN 99 BHM 767 COURSE GUIDE exist between state and local government, and that local authorities thereby play a significant role in the development process (Ajayi, 2000:94).
5.0 Summary.
in this unit, you learnt that the 1976 local government reforms were instituted by the murtala/Obasanjo regime which showed deep concern for the lack of uniformity in the administrative models and structural patterns in lgoocvael rn ments until 1976.
This defect coupled with other problems associated in the local government systems in the country prompted the regime to institute the reforms which turned out to be the most comprehensive in annals of local gadomveirnnimstreantti o n in Nigeria.
You learnt that the provisions of the reforms include recognition of local government as third – tier, multi – purpose and a one – tier structure of government in the country.
It also provided for elected councils with cabinet system of government.
You also learned that it provided for adequate funding of local governments by making available to them 10% of the federated Account, and with a take – off grant of #100 million for all 301 local governments established in the country by the reforms.
6.0 Tutor – Marked Assignments.
a.
Explain the concept of reforms.
b.
Highlight and discuss the main provision of the 1976 Local Government reforms in Nigeria.
7.0 Further Readings and other Resources.
Ajayi, Kunle (2000) “Local Government financial Resources and p Prospects for internally Generated Revenues” in Kunle Ajayi (ed) Ibid.
Gboyega, Alex.
(1987) Poltical Values and Local government in Nigeria, Lagos, Malthouse press.
Kolawole, Dipo (ed) (1998) Issues in Nigeria Government and Politics Ibadan, Dekaal NOUN 100 BHM 767 COURSE GUIDE Unit 17 THE POST – 1976 LOCAL GOVERNMENTS REFORMS IN NIGERIA NOUN 101 BHM 767 COURSE GUIDE Table of contents 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objective 3.1 The post – 1976 Local Government Reforms in Nigeria 3.1.1 post – 1976 Local Government Reforms 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutor – marked Assignment 7.0 Further Reading and other Resources.
1.0 Introduction The last unit specifically examined the provisions of the 1976 LGoocvaelr n ment reforms which were regenerated as the first of its kind in the country because of its nation – wide and comprehensive scope.
It addressed virtually every problem area in local government administration in Nigeria since independence and which had consequently undermined local government efficiency over the years.
The 1976 reforms served as foundation for successive regimes to build upon in the quest for better local government system in the country.
Unit 17 concerns itself with addressing some of the other reforms that have been instituted by various regimes.
2.0 Objectives By the end of this unit, you should be able to do the following; 1) Recall the concept of, and rationale for reform.
2) Recall the main provision of the 1976 Local Government reforms.
3) Explain reforms by some selected post – reform regimes.
4) Explain the constitutional innovations introduced to local government administration since May 1999 3.0 Main contents NOUN 102 BHM 767 COURSE GUIDE 3.1The post – 1976 Local Government reforms in Nigeria 3.1.1 Post – 1976 Reforms.
Let us try and recall what we learnt in unit 16.
You learn that reform is about change, making something old to become new.
It is a way of correcting identified problems in a system.
The Murtala/Obasanjo administration acknowledged the numerous problems confronting local government until 1976 and thereby set up a committee to look into the problems and recommend solutions.
The committee carried out the 1976 Local government reforms which make local government a third – tier government with a multi – purpose, one – tier structure.
It provides for demographic criterion for creating local governments and on which basis 301local government were created nation – wide.
It also provided for adequate funding of local governments by giving local government 10% of the federated account and #100 million as take – off grant.
All other regimes since after the Murtala/Obasanjo have introduced one reforms or other to the local government as away of promoting its efficiency.
However, we shall concern ourselves with the 1988 local greofvoerrmnsm e n tb y the Babangida administration which is also seen as vreevryo lu tionary in nature and very comprehensive in scope.
The regime set up an 11 – man committee headed by Professor Dotun Phillips to recommend appropriate changes in the civil services of the three level of government in the country.
To this effect, the committee came up with the following local government reforms: I.
The chairman of the local government as chief executive and Accounting officer of the council.
This implies that the chairman is therefore leader of the council who has overall control over arells o urces including men, material and money.
This is done with a view to resolving the hitherto frequent friction and rivalry between the chairman and secretary in the administration of the council.
NOUN 103 BHM 767 COURSE GUIDE II.
Council secretary as apolitical appointee whose tenure corresponding end s with the administration that appoints him.
The secretar y therefore ceased to be a career position.
III.
Establishment of operational departments in each local government.
It provides for a minimum of four and a maximum of eight operational departments including: personnel; planning, research and statistics; finance and surplus; works, and others.
IV.
Professionalization of Local Government services Local government civil service employees are required to spend all their career life in one particular department which they were posted on at assumption of duty based on qualification and area of specialization of employee is done so as to promote efficiency.
V. Establishment of an Audit Alarm committee to alert the necessary quarters when there are clear indications of intentions to misappropriate and embezzle council funds.
It is a preventive arrangement to check fraud by council officials.
VI.
Junior staff management committee.
The reform provided for a junior staff management committee for officers on GL 01 – 05; and also established a senior staff management committee for officers on GL 06 – 16.
The committee performs personnel management functions such as promotion, discipline and confirmation of staff.
Besides inaugurating, the 1988 reforms, the Babangida administration also in 1991 came out with further reforms in the local government administration.
First, the constitutional responsibilities of local government were increased by empowering them through Decree No 3 of 1991 to perform the functions of developing and maintaining primary education and primary health infrastructure, and the payment of salaries and allowances, pensions and gratuities of primary school teaching and non – teaching staff and the entire primar y health care staff in each local government are.
These responsibilities were hitherto performed by states.
Second, the regime increased the share of statutory allocations from the federal account from 100% to 15% so as to alleviate the financial burden arising from the new responsibility given the councils.
NOUN 104 BHM 767 COURSE GUIDE It is sufficed to say that these new provisions remained in practice till date, the new democratic dispensation since May 29, 1999 merely consolidated the provisions.
The 1999 constitution introduced to the system elected councils with a legislature.
The local governments have both the executive and legislative arms of government like the federal and state government.
Only the judicial arm is missing at the local government level.
Exercise a.
Examine in details the basic provision of the 1988 local Government reforms.
b.
What are the innovations brought by the 1999 constitution to local government administration in Nigeria since May 29, 1999?
4.0 Conclusion The 1988 local government reforms by the Babangida administration is a milestone in the local government practice in Nigeria.
Like the 1976 reforms, it introduced some radical changes to the system such as making tchhea i rman a truly effective leader of the council administration by making it to become the chief executive and accounting officer of the council, thereby ending the age – long rivalry between the chairman and secretary of the council over control of resources.
This arrangement remains an enduring structure of local government which successive regimes and the 199 constitution affirmed.
5.0 Summary In this unit, you learnt that the 1988 reforms, like the 1976 reforms provided another radical approach to local government administration in Nigeria.
Specifically learnt that the reforms made the chairman of local government the chief executive and accounting officer of the council’s administration that is with the implication that all resources of the local government are under the effective control of the chairman, correspondence are to be addressed to him rather than the secretary of the council.
You also learnt that the secretary to the council has ceased to be a career position as it has been politicized.
This is to the effect that whoever is NOUN 105 BHM 767 COURSE GUIDE appointed as secretar y automatically vacates the office at the end of the administration that appoints him or her.
The local government’s service had also become professionalized as local government employees remain in a department through their career.
Other innovations include the creation of an audit alarm committee, junior staff management committee and senior staff management committees.
You finally learnt that the successive regimes and the 1999 constitution sustained the arrangements under the 1988 reforms.
However, 1999 constitution brought into practice at the local government level, the enactment of bye –laws by the legislative arm of the local government.
6.0 Tutor – Marked Assignments 1.
Examine the basic features of the 1988 local Government reforms in Nigeria.
7.0 Further Readings and other Resources.
Ajayi, Kunle (2000) “Local Government financial Resources and Prospects for internally Generated Revenues” in Kunle Ajayi (ed) Ibid.
Agagu, A.A. (1998)”the Expanding roles and relevance of local Government in Nigeria” in Dipo Kolawole (ed) issues in Nigerian Government and Politics, Ibadan, Dekaal Unit 18 LOCAL GOVERNMENT IN THE UNITED STATES: HISTORICAL BACKGROUND NOUN 106 BHM 767 COURSE GUIDE Table of contents 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objective 3.1 Local Government in the united state of America : Philosophical Background 3.1.1 Philosophical Background Conclusion 4.0 Summary 5.0 Tutor – marked Assignment 6.0 Further Reading and other Resources.
1.0 Introduction This unit 18 of BHM 767 – COMPARATIVE LOCAL GOVERNMENT AdiDscMusIsNioInSsT oRnA lTocIOalN g.o Tvehren umneint ts tsayrstste m in the United State of America.
The entire discussions will identify the peculiarities, of local government practice in the country.
This unit specifically discusses the philosophy which underlines the emergence of local government as a level of government in America.
2.0 Objectives By the end of this unit, you should be able to carry out the faocltliovwitiiensg: 1) Describe the place of local government in the administrative set up of America.
2) Explain the views of American founding father in relations to local governments.
3) Explain the imperatives for the formation of local governments as a tier of government 4) Appreciate the need for local administration as arising from complexities of the contemporary American world.
3.0 Main Content NOUN 107 BHM 767 COURSE GUIDE 3.1 Local Government in the United States: Philosophical Background 3.1.1 Philosophical Background.
The American state has its own peculiarities as far as the practice of local government is concerned.
Diversity that is a unique characteristic of America is also reflected in her local administrative system.
Local government system in the United States has assumed what political analysis refers to as the “political heritage of the grassroots”.
Though the founding fathers of America never thought of local governments in their debates, but today, the elaborate structure of federation that the founders created has been taken on new dimensions of complexity.
This is to the extent that in addition to the fifty states, there are thousands of other subs – units of the state government performing various functions (freedman, 1983: 283).
Approximately, there are 81,000 local governments with almost 13 million employees (ibid) Local governments presently and even more diversely in their administrative systems than do state governments.
This view is reflected in the number of local units of government which include countries numbering about 3,200; 19,000 municipalities; 17, 000 towns and townships; 15,000 school districts; and, about 26,000 special districts.
These numerous local units of government also in part, reflect the diversity of their economic and social characteristics, and the diversity of their legal responsibilities (Sharkansky, 1975: 134).
As you heard earlier, local governments were not part of the original idea of the American founding fathers adoption local administration was a mere response to certain developments which in a way generally led to the growth of administrative units in the twentieth century.
New administrative units and agencies have been created in response to one, increases in population which as a consequence led to new demands of public services.
With more than 200million population, there were bound to be varied demands on the central and state governments especially as related to housing, jobs, environment control and management, water supply, smog and public transportation.
NOUN 108 BHM 767 COURSE GUIDE The issue of economic development is also another factor that prompted the creation of local units of government.
Ample economic potential abound in the localities which needed tapping and development in the quest by national and state governments to develop the Nation.
Grassroot units of government which are closer to the people were thought to be best instrument for economic development right from that level.
Since there are local expertise for the harnessing of available resources in each local area.
Another important consideration were certain traumas that have generated wide – spread dependence on government services.
Such traumas includes national disasters and economic down – turns that require the attention and co- operation of all levels of government particularly units of governance closest to the people where such traumas occur.
Varied specialized functions are provided by local units of government during these occurrences that the higher tiers of government can only be regarded to provide only support service.
There are peculiar specialized services within the capacity of each local government which often make the each local government have the capacity to resolve them.
In a similar manner, domestic law and order are better managed by local units of government since they concern themselves with a smaller population and an equally smaller territory to manage.
The smallness in terms of population and geographical area gives the local units a greater leverage to perform efficiently better than upper levels of government.
Finally therefore, the sense in creating local units of government acnodn se quently allowing for their growth over the years, is to make government serve the American people better.
Exercise a) Account for the adoption of local administration in America despite its not being part of the decisions of the founding father.
b) Compare the numerical statistics of local governments in America and Nigeria.
Justif y why the figures skewed in favour of one of the two countries.
NOUN 109 BHM 767 COURSE GUIDE 4.0 Conclusion Local administrative system has become part of the enduring character of Americans government and politics.
It is a necessity created for administrative convenience since it has not been part of the considerations and decisions of the founding fathers.
The increasing growth in the numbers of local units of administration since the twentieth centur y is a demonstration of its relevance, importance and acceptance by the people and the upper levels of government.
The upper levels of government are relieved of saddling themselves with all problems emanating from the political system and the people.
Therefore, the need for administrative decentralization for better performance and efficiency is at the root of creation of local units of government in the united states.
5.0 Summary in this unit, you learnt that local government system is a cdoenvteelomppmoreanrty i n the American system as the founding fathers did not make it part of their decisions during the federal debate by the original thirteen states in the 1787 Philadelphia submit.
You also learnt that the adoption of local government later in America was as result of the need to cope with increasing population, economic growth, national disasters and increased socio – economical demands by the population.
Administrative convenience and the urge to serve the America people better are therefore major philosophical under- pinings for the adoption of local government in America.
6.0 Tutor – Marked Assignments I.
Justify the adoption and continued growth of local government system in the United States of America.
7.0 Further Reading and other Resources.
Freedman, l (1983) Power & politics in America, Monterey, California, NOUN 110 BHM 767 COURSE GUIDE Brooks/Cole Publishing Company.
Redford, E.S.
et al (1965) politics and Government in the United States, New York, Harcourt, Brace & Wood, Inc. Sharkansky, I (1975) public Administration; policy – making in Government agencies, 3rd edition, Chicago, Rand McNally College publishing company Unit 19 LOCAL GOVERNMENT STRUTURE IN THE UNITED STATES Table of contents NOUN 111 BHM 767 COURSE GUIDE 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objective 3.1 Local Government structure in the United States 3.1.1 Local Government Structure Conclusion 4.0 Summary 5.0 Tutor – marked Assignment 6.0 Further Reading and other Resources.
1.0 Introduction In this last unit, you learnt about factors that made local units of government ver y relevant in the administration of the United State.
This unit (e1x9a)m in es the structure of local governments in America.
It also has its uniqueness in this regard as there is no uniform, national structure that is comparable to that of Nigeria.
Each State determines the scope of its own local administr ation, therefore, there is no national structure imposed by law.
2.0 Objectives By the end of this unit, you should be able to carry out the feoxlelorcwisiensg: 1) Recall the major factors of that level of government in America.
2) Explain the various categories of local administration in America.
3) Describe the structure of local governmental units in the United States.
4) Explain the characteristics of local government in America.
3.0 main Contents 3.1 Local Government Structure in the United States 3.1.1 Local government Structure In the last unit, you learnt about the factors that make local government system an attractive option for American leaders despite the fact that the founding fathers did not make it a federal agenda in 1787.
NOUN 112 BHM 767 COURSE GUIDE You also learnt that a number and acceptance of the number system was inevitable.
Among these factors are the need to satisfy the growing people which increasingly has made governance complex as more and more citizens were demanding for jobs, housing, public transportation, water supply, fire service and environmental control.
The desire for economic development also became paramount with tahcek n owledgement by leaders the need to actively in pursue economic development.
Above all, is the need for administrative convenience, and administrative decentralization for the purpose of efficiency.
The structure and characteristics of local governments vary widely even than state governments.
By law, the states are the key units, endowed with all governmental powers not vested specifically in the national government by the constitution, or reserved to the people.
The other jurisdictions are subdivision or creation the state.
The subdivisions by states include countries, cities, boroughs, villages, special districts, and public authorities.
The counties usually include less densely populated area than the cities.
They are usually run by elected boards of commissioners or supervisors, and there are a number of other elective offices such as sheriff, county prosecutor or district attorney, and county coroner.
The cities are local units which cater for city settlements with about 500,000 (a half million) people or more population.
The cities have a mayor and a city council, usually elected independently from each other (Freedman, 1983; 285).
However the relative strength of mayor and council varies enormously.
In some cities especially in the West, departments of city government may be headed by commissions, whose members called commissioners are appointed by the mayor and ratified by the council but who may have a good deal of independence fro both.
These commissions deal with special fields such as airport services.
Almost half of the middle – sized cities have adopted a council- manager form of government, in which the elected council hires a professional city manager to run the city government subject to general policy direction by the council NOUN 113 BHM 767 COURSE GUIDE (ibid);The smallest units of American government and local administration are towns, townships, and villages.
Cutting across various units of local government are the special districts, set up to deal with problems or services that reach across gboovuenrdnamrieens taanl d they need a tax base broader than a single government unit (ibid).
In most cases, they provide a single governmental service (Redford, 1965:835).in some cases the boards running these special districts are directly elected, as it is true of most school boards.
In other cases, where the problems are particularly complex, as with rapid transit or smog control, the members are usually appointed by the elected leaders of the communities participating in the special district (Freedman, op at: 285).
Exercise 1.
The diversity in the American political and cultural life is reflected in her local government structure and characteristics.
Discuss 2.
Identify and discuss the basic categories and characteristics of local government system in the United States.
4.0 Conclusion Local government units in America occupy the next layer of governments after the federal and state governments.
Despite the many units of local governance, many municipalities have dispensed with the doctrine of the separation of powers and have installed new forms of government which give prominence to the executive, most notably the city manager and the strong - mayor organizations.
Most of them have also got rid of the 19th and early 20th centuries political “machines” Local governmental leaders are now more active and independent than before (Redford, op at, 839).
5.0 Summary In this unit, you learnt about the structure and characteristics of lgoocvael rn ment units in America.
You also learnt that besides the federal and state governments, there are numerous local governing units with different nature and character.
The units NOUN 114 BHM 767 COURSE GUIDE of local administration include counties.
Cities, towns, boroughs, villages and special districts with different administrative and leadership structures Mayors, council – mangers and commissioners play prominent roles in the conduct of local affairs in the conduct of local affairs in the municipalities, counties, cities and some special disricts.
Each of local units is covered by different legal instruments which specify their areas of jurisdiction.
6.0 Tutor – Marked Assignments Identify the different units of the American local government system and discuss their operational structural characteristics.
7.0 Further Readings and other Resources.
Freedman, l (1983) Power & politics in America, Monterey, California, Brooks/Cole Publishing Company.
Redford, E.S.
et al (1965) politics and Government in the United States, New York, Harcourt, Brace & Wood, Inc. Sharkansky, I (1975) public Administration; policy – making in Government agencies, 3rd edition, Chicago, Rand McNally College publishing company Unit 20 FUNCTIONS OF LOCAL GOVERNMENTS IN THE UNITED STATES OF AMERICA NOUN 115 BHM 767 COURSE GUIDE Table of contents 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objective 3.1 Function of local government in the United State of America.
3.1.1.
Functions of Local Government 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutor – marked Assignment 7.0 Further Reading and other Resources.
1.0 Introduction This unit concerns itself with the functions of local governments in America.
You learnt in the last unit that America’s local government system reflects the pattern of diversity in the country.
Specifically in terms of its structure and characteristics.
The functions of local governments are no less diversified as the structure and characteristics.
a.
Objectives By the end of this unit, you should be able to do the following: 1) Recall the structure and characteristics of local governments in America.
2) Identify the various local units of administration 3) Explain the functions of the local units.
4) Explain the factors that distinguish the structure and functions of local subsystems from the state and National governments in America, and from sub – national systems in other countries.
3.0 Main Contents 3.1 Functions of Local Government in the United States.
3.1.1 Functions of Local Governments NOUN 116 BHM 767 COURSE GUIDE It is important for you to recall what you learnt in the last unit about the structure of local governments in America.
You learnt that there are diversities in the local government practice iAnm erica’s cultural and political life.
Unlike what obtains in Nigeria where there is only one – tier local government structure, America has 9 multi –tier local government system which includes the counties, cities, towns, villages, boroughs, and special districts.
Each categor y is saddled with dfuifnfcetrieonnts .
Four specific differences distinguish the functions of local subsystems from the state and federal governments in America, and from sub nsyastitoenmasl s i n other countries.
According to Redford et al (1965):836- 839), these differences include: I.
The scope of their authority and activity.
The means the activities with which the systems are principally concerned and which their decisions govern and direct varies.
The proper concern of lgoocvael rn ment in America was for a long time held to be providing a necessary “bundles of services” for organized community life including law enforcement, education, and certain public utilities which for some reasons private enterprises cannot provide.
II.
The participants who seek to influence that authority and direct that activity.
The local units has its specified elective offices to be filled – mayors, aldermen, commissioners, coroner, e.t.c.
the character of local decision encourages new group, organizations, and individuals to become active in politics – sheriffs associations and groups of local merchants, etc which result in a different cast of characters.
III.
The special objectives which these participant have.
Local politics has less favour than what obtains at the national level.
Local administrators are more particularistic with political groups focusing more on the work of special agencies or advocating specialized pieces of legislation, instead of being concerned with advancing a general and comprehensive platform.
Much attention is to honesty, competence and efficiency.
IV.
The “roles” which the participation assume.
The “rules” under which the political game is played, and the “instrument” used to settle conflicts and achieve compromise.
At the local level, many municipalities have dispensed with the doctrine of separation of powers and have installed new forms of government NOUN 117 BHM 767 COURSE GUIDE which give prominence to the executive most notably the city –m a nager and the strong – mayor organizations.
In general, local governments in America perform the following functions; a. provision of water supply b. fire protection c. smog control d. public transportation e. provision of housing f. Soil and water conservation activities g. Maintenance of law and order and domestic security.
h. Providing services in special field such as airports services i.
Economic development constructions j.
Assisting in carrying out state and federal projects/programmes k. Traffic control l. Provision of recreational facilities such as parks, gardens etc.
m. Environmental control and management Exercise 1) Enumerate and explain the factors that guide the functions of local governments in America.
2) Highlight and discuss the major functions of local governments in America.
4.0 Conclusion NOUN 118 BHM 767 COURSE GUIDE Local units government in America no doubt plays prominent roles in the development of the various local communities.
Besides, the traditional function of providing water supply and refuse disposal facilities.
Lgoovcearl n ments also provide special devices such as fire control, smog control, domestic security, most local government units have accomplished some levels of competence and efficiency.
The local units have also become centres of praticising democr acy as most of their political office – holders are duly elected through the ballot system.
5.0 Summary In this unit, you have learnt the four major factors that distinguish tfhuen c tions of local units of government from state and federal governments, and from other countries sub – systems.
These factors border on the scope of their activities, the participants that influence government decisions, the special objectives of participations and the role participants play in decisions – making and conflict management.
You learnt that local governments specifically performs such functions as fire control, water supply, providing public transportation, traffic control, smog and environmental control, maintenance of law and order, providing specialized airport.
Labour and police services, etc.
Local governments, over the years, have been able to assume some degree of competency, efficiency and accountability in performing their duties.
6.0 Tutor – Marked Assignments 1) Enumerate and discuss in details the basic functions performed buy local government in the United States.
7.0 Further Readings and other Resources.
Freedman, l (1983) Power & politics in America, Monterey, California, Brooks/Cole Publishing Company.
Redford, E.S.
et al (1965) politics and Government in the United States, New York, Harcourt, Brace & Wood, Inc. Sharkansky, I (1975) public Administration; policy – making in Government agencies, 3rd edition, Chicago, Rand McNally College publishing company NOUN 119 BHM 767 COURSE GUIDE Unit 21 FINANCING LOCAL GOVERNMENT IN THE UNITED STATES Table of contents NOUN 120 BHM 767 COURSE GUIDE 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objective 3.1 Local Government structure in the United States 3.1.1 Local Government Structure Conclusion 4.0 Summary 5.0 Tutor – marked Assignment 6.0 Further Reading and other Resources.
7.0 1.0 Introduction Finance is said to be the fuel of all organizations with laudable objectives.
Without adequate financial resources, no organization can achieve its aims and propgrammes.
This unit examines the sources of revenue to local government in America.
The functions of local governments in the states as discussed in unit 20, may not be achievable without adequate funding of the local units.
The unit will identify and discus the various legal sources of funding, available to the local units of governments.
2.0 Objectives By the end of this unit, you should be able to do the following activities: 1.
Recall some of the functions of local government in America.
2.
Appreciate the importance of finance in organsational management and goals achievement.
3.
Enumerate the major internal sources of finance to local units.
4.
Explain the external sources of funding available to local governments 3.0 Main Contents 3.1 Financing Local Government 3.1.1 Financing Local Governments.
NOUN 121 BHM 767 COURSE GUIDE In the last unit, you learnt of the various responsibilities to be performed in America.
We were specifically told that they perform the function s of providing water supply, fire protection, public transportation, housing, recreational facilities and special services in some fields.
They also engage in environmental control, soil and water conservation, and maintenance of law and order among other functions.
A lot of capital is required to be able to perform these functions efficiently.
Constitutionally therefore, local governments are empowered to generate revenue from the following sources: I. Intergovernmental revenue.
This is revenue from federal and state governments accruable to local governments.
This is also referred to as intergovernmental finance.
State and the federal government are made mandator y/ compulsory to pay certain percentage of their own revenues to local governments.
II.
Revenue from other sources otherwise called internally generated revenue (TGR).these sources include: a.
General revenue b.
Taxes.
Taxes are collected on various items including: 1) Property tax.
Local governments depend largely on property tax.
As much as 70% of local government tax revenue come from property tax, while the balance of 3000 are from other tax sources.
2) Individual income tax.
Income derivable from the tax charges on working / employed adults.
This is usually assessed on proportional basis and collected on pay as you earn basis.
3) Corporate income tax.
Taxes in company profits.
4) Sales and gross receipts by sales companies, super – markets.
Restaurants and others.
5) Motor vehicle and other operators’ licenses.
6) Miscellaneous general revenue charges.
7) Utility revenues.
NOUN 122 BHM 767 COURSE GUIDE 8) Liquor store revenue 9) Insurance trust revenue.
Many local governments find the property tax to be an overly lean source of revenue.
Reason being that owners of tangible personal propery such as furniture, automobiles, office equipment, and all other tangible property except real estate generally escape the tax through failure by local officials to assess their property.
The same is true of holders of in - tangible property such as stocks, bonds, and other securities where the tax is a general property tax, i.e.
at the same rate on all types of property as it is most generally is the result is that the tax yield is largely limited to what can be imposed on real property and on business inventories.
Besides, there is resistance against increasing tax rate from those who these types of property i.e.
the real estate interest, home owners, and business enterprises with real property and large inventories (Redford, 1965: 757 – 761).
The financial problems of local governments are further aggravated bliym i tations by the constitution, statues and charters on the amount of tax that can be levied.
Tax levies can only be reviewed upward if the rpeolretvioannst o f the laws are amended.
Exercise 1) Account for the various sources of revenue to local governments in the United States.
2) What are the basic limitations on adequate revenue generation by local units of governments in America?
4.0 Conclusion Despite the revenue sources available to local governments the prospect of being unable to deliver the services for which they are responsible because their list of revenue sources has become vulnerable.
As indicated earlier, the major difficulties were resistance to local property taxes and the condition of the economy.
NOUN 123 BHM 767 COURSE GUIDE The property tax has been the target of three kinds of criticism.
One it is seen as “regressive “- it tends to cost low m- and middle – income people a higher proportion of their incomes than upper income people.
Two, it causes inequality not only between individual but also between localities.
For example, school systems which are funded a in large part by property taxes so high that many people, especially the elderly have been forced to sell their homes, (Freedman, 1983: 292).
These developments have at various times caused divindling income to local governments.
5.0 Summary In this unit, you have learnt the sources of income to local governments.
You were told that local governments derive income from many sources including subventions from the federal and state governments, general revenue sources, taxes of all.
Categories, licenses, insurance trust funds, utility reviewers and liquor store revenue.
You also learntthat locals government face fiscal, squeeze due to a number of factors which include increasing resistance by people to pay property tax, lack of assessment of property for the purpose of taxation by local officials, evaluation of the property tax system as regressive by citizens tlheaedreinbgy t o people selling their property.
Statutory constraints are also identified as a major problem as constitutional provisions do not review upward of the various taxes, this is only possible if the relevant portions of the laws are amended in favour of local authorities.
6.0 Tutor – Marked assignments 1) Highlight and discuss in details / the major sources of , andl i mitations to, revenue generation to local governments in the United States.
7.0 Further Readings and other Resources.
Freedman, l (1983) Power & politics in America, Monterey, California, Brooks/Cole Publishing Company.
Redford, E.S.
et al (1965) politics and Government in the United States, New York, Harcourt, Brace & Wood, Inc. NOUN 124 BHM 767 COURSE GUIDE Sharkansky, I (1975) public Administration; policy – making in Government agencies, 3rd edition, Chicago, Rand McNally College publishing company Weissberg, R. (1980) Understanding American Government, New York, Holt,Rine Hart and Winston.
Unit 22 LOCAL GOVERNMENT IN BRITAIN: HISTORIAL BACKGROUND NOUN 125 BHM 767 COURSE GUIDE Table of contents 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objective 3.1 Local Government in Britain: Historical Background 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutor – marked Assignment 7.0 Further Reading and other Resources.
1.0 Introduction Units 22, 23 24, and 25 are local government systems in Britain.
Unit 22 flags off the discussions by examining the historical background of local government administration in Britain.
Britain has an enduring and state local government which she invariably introduced to her colonial territories.
Incidentally, contemporary local government system in Nigeria had its origin in Britain.
This unit will explore the historical antecedents of the British local government administrative practice.
2.0 Objectives By the end of this unit, you should be able to do the following: 1) Appreciate theunder – pinings of the British local government system.
2) Describe the historical antecedents to the adoption of local administration in Britain.
3) Explain the imperatives for local administration in the British political system.
3.0 Main Contents 3.1 Local Government in Britain: historical background 3.1.1 Historical Background.
Local government system as a sustained administrative practice today in Britain owes its origin to the nineteenth century.
Its emergence was seen by NOUN 126 BHM 767 COURSE GUIDE two English citizens Webb and Webb as a gradual suppression of feudal institutions based on tenants and of the new mutual ties of cchoarprtoerraetdio n and guides of craftsman and merchants, all alike holding allegiance to the king.
Local government emerged as anew species of authority arising directly out of the needs of this or that section of the community; such as the need for land drainage, town servers, highways, street lighting and poling, for the better relief of destitution and the suppression of vagrancy (Agagu, 2000:76).
However, in actual fact, the history of local government in England itsra c eable to the Saxon times.
The early forms of local governments system in Britain indeed started as parishes and boroughs but were unable to cope with the acute problems that came up as by – products of the industrial revolution.
The system witnessed a fundamental charge with the enactment of the poor law amendment Act of 183 and the Municipal co - operations Act of 1935.
It was not until these laws were enacted that modern local government began to emerge (ibid).
Despite these two laws, it was noted that the development of local institution was still erratic and complicated.
This was in the sense that the power given to the elected councils under the municipal corporation were severely limited and in addition to this constraint, special adhoc authorities were created to cater for special social problems.
Between the 19th and 29th centuries, many other reforms were instituted which included the 1929 local government Act which abolished the guardians of the poor and transferring such duty to county councils and county boroughs councils .the 1933 local government Act codified in the constitution the powers of the six types of local authority existing outside London.
The 1935 Municipal corporation Act reformed the local government system as practiced in the boroughs, and coupled with the expansion of services (ibid; 77) Over the years, local government administration in Britain, has acquired stability and durability.
Exercise 1) Account for the historical development of local government as an institution of governance 6.0 Tutor – Marked Assignments.
NOUN 127 BHM 767 COURSE GUIDE a) Examine the nature and characteristics of administrative practice before the advent of local government system in Britain.
b) Account for the historical and development constitutional development of local government institution in Britain.
7.0 Further Reading and other Resources.
Agagu, A.A. (2000) “Local Government finance” in kunle Ajayi (ed) Theory and practice of Local Government, Ado-Ekiti, University of Ado – Ekiti.
Dunleavy, p. et.
al (1990) Developments in Britain Politics, 3, London, Macmillan.
Gray, A & W.I.
Jenkins (1985) Administrative politics in Britain government, Brighton, Sussex, wheat sheaf books.
Unit 23 BRITAIN: LOCAL GOVERNMENT STRUCTURE Table of contents NOUN 128 BHM 767 COURSE GUIDE 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objective 3.1 Britain: Local Government in structure 3.1.1Local Government structure Conclusion 4.0 Summary 5.0 Tutor – marked Assignment 6.0 Further Reading and other Resources.
1.0 Introduction This unit is about the structure of local government in Britain.
You will find out that the structure is quite different from what obtains in Nigeria, British ex – colonial territory and which invariably inherited the local government system from Britain.
This unit therefore affords some comparisons not only with Nigeria, but also with what obtains in the United States of America which was dealt with in unit 19 and of this course.
2.0 Objectives At the end of this course, you should be able to do the following: 1) Recall how Britain came about the local government system as an administrative system and as an administrative practice.
2) Compare the structure of local government in Nigerian and the united States with that of Britain 3.0 Main Contents 3.1 Britain: Local Government Structure 3.1.1 Local Government structure NOUN 129 BHM 767 COURSE GUIDE You will recall that in unit 22, we examined how Britain came about local government system which has administrative legacy of the Britain people.
You learnt that the system is a product of consutitional and statutory reforms coupled with the demands of a modern industrialized society.
You learnt earlier that local government is a third – tier level of government in Nigeria.
This means that there are three levels of governments.
Tsthruec t ure of local government in Britain does not follow this pattern.
You will recall that Britain is a unitary government with a cgeonvterranl m ent.
Local government is just a sub – set of the British central government rather than an autonomous level of government like what obtains in Nigeria.
Despite local governments sub – position in the British gsyosvteermn,m yeonuta slh ould note that it is also the nearest government authority to the British citizens like it is also in Nigeria.
The structure of local government in Nigeria takes a unifor m sminugltliep u rpose form.
But in Britain, the local structure takes the form of two – tier structural system.
That is.
A situation whereby local governments are further divided into smaller administrative units.
The 1974 structural reforms provided for new counties, six metropolitan counties are greater London.
Each is respectively restructured into country districts, metropolitan districts and London boroughs.
This is the structure in Wales and England.
County boroughs were eliminated from both in 1974 leaving only the London boroughs.
These authorities were again classified as upper – tier and lower – tier authorities.
The upper – tier authorities being new counties, metropolitan counties greater London, while county districts metropolitan districts and London boroughs are categories as lower – tier authorities.
The greater London council was abolished in 1986 and the inner London education authority in 1900, a development which led to a complex split of tasks with thirty – two (32) London boroughs having individual responsibility for education, housing, social services, local planning, leisure and environmental health (Donleavy et al, (1990: 128).
Exercise NOUN 130 BHM 767 COURSE GUIDE 1) Examine the structural, pattern of local system in Britain of local system in Britain.
2) How is the structure of local governments in Britain different from that of either Nigeria or the United State?
4.0 Conclusion Local government structure in Britain has witnessed some degree of instability.
Britain is yet to evolve a permanent pattern as it cwointnsetasns tl y r emarkable changes.
The system a complex structural network in recent times compared to the formless structure during the feudal era.
The 1974 local government reforms brought about a new local government which in a way was a by – product of the local government Act of 1972, thereby bringing into practice the outcome of about fifteen years of review of the local government system in Britain.
5.0 Summary In this unit, you learnt that despite the legacy of modern local government institution bequeathed to Nigeria by Britain as her colonial master, both have different local government structures.
You also learnt that over the years, local government structure in Britain has been subjected to changes.
Local government structure is a product of the 1974 local greofvoerrmnsm wenhti c h was heralded by the 1972 local government Act.
The reforms created a two – tier system for England and Wales, while the boroughs were eliminated.
It also established six conurbations or districts with enhanced powers than others.
6.0 Tutor – Marked Assignments 1) Present a structural outlay of modern local government in Britain.
7.0 Further Reading and other Resources.
NOUN 131 BHM 767 COURSE GUIDE Agagu, A.A. (2000) “Local Government finance” in kunle Ajayi (ed) Theory and practice of Local Government, Ado-Ekiti, University of Ado – Ekiti.
Bourn, J.
(1979) Management in Central and Local Government, London, Pitman publishing Co. Gray, A & W.I.
Jenkins (1985) Administrative politics in Britain Government, Brighton, Sussex, wheat sheaf books.
Jackson, W, E, (1951) Local Government in England and Wales, London, Penguin B ooks.
Unit 24 BRITAIN: LOCAL GOVERNMENT FUNCTIONS NOUN 132 BHM 767 COURSE GUIDE Table of contents 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objective 3.1 Britain: Local Government Functions 3.1.1 Functions 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutor – marked Assignment 7.0 Further Reading and other Resources.
1.0 Introduction This unit discusses the functions of local governments in Britain.
In the last unit, the structure of local government was examined.
The different authorities perform an array of functions.
But despite the existence odfif f e rent tiers with the accomplished sub – divisions, their functions are non – lapping and even has its specific jurisdictional divisions of duties.
The beauty of the whole arrangement is that the overall goal of the local authorities is to serve the people better through provision of efficient services.
2.0 Objectives By the end of this unit, you should be able to do the following 6.
Recall the structure of local government in Britain.
7.
Appreciate the functions of each sub – divisions of the local government system in Britain.
8.
Appreciate that apart from collective official functions, that local government in B ritain perform personal functions directly for individuals.
9.
Explain the various functions performed by the British local government institutions.
3.1.1 Functions You learnt in the last unit the structure of local councils, the system was unstable until 1974 when some structural changes were made thereby bringing out a new structural outlook NOUN 133 BHM 767 COURSE GUIDE You also learnt that though the periods of conservative party with Thatcher a prime minister, the prestige and stature of local authorities diminished for the party believed more in the centralization of authority than the local powers.
The regime felt short of doing away completely with the local authorities probability because of the realization of its importance in national and local development.
And more so, for the various functions being performed in Britain.
Local government system in Britain government performs the two categories of functions which are; a.
Obligatory functions, and b.
Permissible functions, however, Harvey (1994; 219) provides a more detailed categorization of the British councils functions five groups namely: protection, regulation.
And control; personal functions, environmental functions; and lastly trading.
The details of those functions area; 1.
Protection – achieved through the police who maintain law and order, hazard and safety management.
2.
Regulation and control.
Local authorities are legally empowered to license vehicle, amusement centres.
Such as cinema houses and inspection of food and drugs.
3.
Personal functions relate to providing direct social services to individuals such services as day care for children and the aged.
4.
Environmental functions.
It is the duty of councils to clean the e nvironment of all types of waste and making sure there are no land, air space and water that are contaminated.
5.
Trading which involves provision of services on commercial basis to generate internal revenue.
In addition, the upper- tier councils have responsibilities to provide housing local planning, environmental health and leisure services.
They also have responsibilities for strategic planning, transport, fire, education and social services (ibid: 128).
You should note that the duties of the local authorities vary from level to level.
For instance, the 32 London boroughs have individual responsibilities for education, housing, social services, local planning and environmental services.
The fire and civil protection services, strategic planning, waste NOUN 134 BHM 767 COURSE GUIDE disposal, grants to voluntary organization.
The functions of the metropolitan counties and districts were different, the metropolitans, were abolished in 1986,metropolitan districts share joint responsibility for services such as transport, fire and civil defence, strategic planning, waste disposal and grants to voluntar y organizations.
Finally, parish councils were available to perform the function of merely providing parish halls, buses, planning fields, footpaths and allotments (Agagu, A.A. 200:81 – 82) these above mentioned functions of lgoocvael rn ments and authorities do not capture the totality of all activities local authorities perform.
For instance, the Manchester city councils A – Z Guide, a kind of information booklet about the council, listed as much of 700 activity items of the services it performs.
Exercise 1.
Explain the changes brought to the local government system to the local government t system in England and Wales by the 1934 2.
Examine the scope of social service deliver y by local councils in Britain.
4.0 Conclusion The relevance of local authorities in Britain is believed to be strongly tied up with the provision of the needs of the people and invariably the state.
Besides providing the basic needs of the citizenry, local authorities, like what obtains in Nigeria, have the task in Britain of providing useful pieces of advices on economic development to the central government.
The local authorities are distinct in some area in that they perform the function of keeping domestic security through the use of local police.
They also perform personal services directly to individuals including children care and care for the aged.
5.0 Summary In this unit, you have learnt that local governments in Britain performs multi – purpose functions.
Each sub – divisions of the local government system performs different functions.
NOUN 135 BHM 767 COURSE GUIDE You also learnt that the functions performed by the local units can bcaet e gorized into two – obligatory functions, and permissible functions.
Two jurisdictional areas can be further analyzed into five major categories of functions; environmental functions; and trading on a commercial scale for income generation.
You were also told that the upper – level local authorities provide housing, leisure and other services for the people of the locality.
6.0 Tutor – Marked Assignments 1.
Highlight and discuss in details the basic functions of local government in Britain.
7.0 Further Reading and other Resources.
Agagu, A.A. (20000 “Local government in Britain “in Kunle Ajayi (ed) Theory and practice of Local Government, Ado - Ekiti, University of Ado – Ekiti.
Bourn, J.
(1979) Management in central and Local Government, London, pitman publishing co. Dunleavy, p et at (1990) Developments in Britain politics 3, London, Macmillan.
Jackson, W.E.
(1951) Local Government in England and Wales, London, Penguin books.
Unit 25 BRITAIN: FINANCING LOCAL GOVERNMENTS NOUN 136 BHM 767 COURSE GUIDE Table of contents 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objective 3.1 Britain: Financing Local Governments 3.1.1 Why the of funding 3.1.2 Internal sources 3.1.3 External sources 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutor – marked Assignment 7.0 Further Reading and other Resources.
1.0 Introduction In the last unit, you learnt the structure and functions of local governments in Britain.
You should recall that you learnt that Britain introduced modern local authority system to Nigeria as part of her colonial legacies.
However, you learnt that despite this fact, the structures of local government in Nigeria practices one – tier multipurpose system, while Britain adopts a two – tier multipurpose system.
This implies that Britain has a two layer system namely the upper – tier and the lower – tiers some structural reforms took place in 19074, 1986 and 1990.
The functions of local government authorities vary from the upper – tier to the lower – tier.
In totally, they perform the following functions; I.
Maintenance of law and order II.
Hazards management III.
Fire services IV.
Transport service, housing and local planning V. Strategic planning VI.
Leisure services VII.
Licensing of lorries VIII.
Control of foods and drugs NOUN 137 BHM 767 COURSE GUIDE IX.
Educational services X.
Care for the aged XI.
Child care XII.
Environmental control and maintenance This unit concerns its – self with how local councils are financed in Britain in order to be able to perform their duties.
2.0 Objectives By the end of this unit, you should be able to do the following activities: 1.
Recall the structure of local government in Britain 2.
Describe the structure of local government in Britain 3.
Analyse and compare the structure of local governments in Nigeria and Britain.
4.
Explain the importance of funding to local government in Britain.
5.
Analyse the various internal sources of revenue to Britain local councils 6.
Analyse and explain the sources of external financing of British local councils.
7.
Analysis and compare sources of revenue to local governments in Britain and Nigeria.
3.0 Main Content 3.1 Financing local governments 3.1.1 Role of funding 3.1.2 Internal sources NOUN 138 BHM 767 COURSE GUIDE 3.1.3 External sources You should recall your thinking when you were considering taking part in this programme.
First in your mind, probably, was how to get the hamugoeu n t required considering your lean purse and poor pay.
Then ywoeuig hed your choices whether to participate in the programme or to use your little savings since five years being planned for a small car, your first of choice, like your friend who are riding big, flashy cars.
Suddenly, you opted to enroll for this programme to the surprise and anger of your wife who has been dreaming of a car for the family, probably in another one year.
Her hope was dashed.
This small narration demonstrates the role of finance in our daily activities, hopes, expectations, and achievements.
Finance is the fuel, not only to organizations, but also to ignodvievrindmuaelns,t s and countries.
It is like petrol to a vehicle, without it the vehicle will not perform.
Finance dictates the extent an individual can go in any society in his level of education, dressing, respect, achievement and others.
So also, a company, group or organizations in general including all level of government cannot realize their set goals unless there is an ample financial resource to set about those goals.
The functions and responsibilities governments grow every day.
So also, their level of financial requirements.
Responsible and responsive governments will go to any length to source for funds.
Increased revenues could be due to increase/improved self – efforts 9internal funding) or source for fund externally by borrowing from creditors in order to supplement ienftfeorrntsa.l On the whole, the success or failure of any organizations or government depends among other things, on the amount of money at its disposal.
3.1.2 Internal source.
You should recall the various sources of funding available to local governments in Nigeria.
You learnt that the Nigerian constitution empowers local governments to raise revenues internally through taxes, rates, levies and licenses, on bicycles, radio, television and trucks.
NOUN 139 BHM 767 COURSE GUIDE You also learnt that councils can engage in certain investment to make money such as engaging in commercial transportation, rentage of canopies, chairs, tables and generating plants.
Britain local governments need finance like any other organizations ogro v e rnment to prosecute their numerous programmes and render social services.
You should recall that you learnt that local governments in Britain perform such functions as providing housing, transportation, leisure and parks, maintenance of law and order, fire service, maintenances of tehnev i ronment and waste disposal among others.
These functions can only be effectively performed if there is sufficient level of funding.
British local authorities are financed from four major sources nsearmviecleys- r e venues, rate fees, grants and loans.
These sources will be grouped into two cardinal categories – internal sources and external sources Internally, local authorities are empowered by British statutes to collect: a.
Rate levies on certain items which include tenement and categories of markets.
b.
They charged fees on services they render such as from transportation, fire service, child care and care for the old.
c. Investment on capital projects such as housing on which they collect rents.
d. Licensing fees.
they are responsible for licensing vehicles and also collect radio and television license fees.
e. Miscellaneous.
There are other sources which usually come up depending on the initiatives and ideas of each local council.
But over the years, the scope of internal sources of revenue widened.
3.1.3 External sources The British government knows fully well that considering the enormous Services local councils perform that revenue realized from internal sources will need to be supplemented in order to enable then carry out programmes that will enhance the living standard of the people.
NOUN 140 BHM 767 COURSE GUIDE The statutes therefore permit the central government to give grants – in – aid to local authorities for executing specific projects you, should know that, grants – in – aid may be directly given to the recipient but spent for the recipient on the specific project by donor.
And if given to recipient directly, the donor has a controlling power on the project the money is being spent on.
The law also allows councils, to take external loans from the form of putting up collateral to guarantee repayment.
Such loans yield interest for the banks or other sources.
Loans are usually used to finance major capital projects such as housing and provision of parks.
Exercise 1) Evaluate the place of finance in organizational life.
2) Highlight and discuss the various avenues of internal funding available to a British local council.
3) Compare the external sources of funding available to British and Nigerian local councils.
4.0 Conclusion This unit discussed the role of finance to all organizations and local councils in Britain.
Local governments need sufficient fund to be able to render services and execute their policy programmes for the people.
Statutorily, local councils are empowered to accrue revenues through internal and external sources.
Internally, local councils collect revenues from: a) Rate charges.
b) Services charges on transportation, fire services, child care,and care for the aged.
c) Returns from investments d) Miscellaneous sources Externally too, grants – in -aids from higher authorities; taking of credit loans to supplement internal revenues.
NOUN 141 BHM 767 COURSE GUIDE 5.0 Summary You learnt in this unit that local councils in Britain are statutorily empowered to generate revenues from internal and external sources.
You learnt tvhaer io us source of internal income which includes charging rate on properties, fees from licensing of vehicles, service charges and returns from investment in business.
Externally, you learnt that, councils can be given grants – in – aid for specific projects which may be directly supervised by the central government.
They can raise credit for capital projects with the implication that some percentage interests have to be paid.
6.0 Tutor – Marked Assignments a) Identify and explain the various heads under which local councils in Britain can generate revenue internally.
b) Examine and discuss, fully external revenue sources available to British local government.
7.0 Further Reading and other sources Agagu, A.A. (20000 “Local government in Britain “in Kunle Ajayi (ed) Theory and practice of Local Government, Ado - Ekiti, University of Ado – Ekiti.
Ajayi, kunle (ed 2000) Theory and practice of local government, Ado – Ekiti dept.
of political science.
UNAD Nigeria Dunleavy, p et at (1990) Developments in Britain politics 3, London, Macmillan.
Gray, A &W.I.
Jenkins (1986) Administrative politics in British Government Brighton, Sussex, Wheat sheaf Books Jackson, W.E.
(1951) Local Government in England and Wales, London, Penguin books NOUN 142 BHM 767 COURSE GUIDE Unit 26 NOUN 143 BHM 767 COURSE GUIDE LOCAL GOVERNMENTS IN FRANCE: HISTORICAL DEVELOPMENT Table of contents 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objective 3.1 Local Governments in France: Historical background 3.1.1 Historical Background 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summar y 6.0 Tutor – marked Assignment 7.0 Further Reading and other Resources.
1.0 Introduction Units 26, 27, 28, 29, and 30 of this course are devoted to local government system in France.
Previously, local government institution in Nigeria, united state and Britain has been examined.
Unit 26 is concerned with the historical background of local governments in France.
The units traces how the system grew to become an eanddmuirniinsgtr a tive system in France.
Local government system in its entirety has its own historical and practical uniqueness which makes it in remarkable when compared to those of other systems.
2.0 Objectives By the end of this unit, you should be able to carry out the faocltliovwitiiensg; 1.
Appreciate the need for the institution of local government in France 2.
Explain the historical dynamics surrounding local government growth and development in France.
3.
Identify the factors that contributed to the adoption of local government administrative practice in France.
3.0 Main contents NOUN 144 BHM 767 COURSE GUIDE 3.1 Local government in France: historical background.
3.1.1 Historical background France is a highly centralized political system.
Economically, intellectually and culturally France is dominated by.
The Jacobins who fashioned the first republic and of their attitudes imposed centralization as the means ostfr e n gthening the regime against internal opponents, but also against external enemies Napoleon perfected this and the future regimes consolidated, the centralizing work of the Jacobins.
Despite the centrality of political and governmental authority, France is a country of great geographical and cultural diversity and was created by bringing together distinct peoples.
A diversity that ordinarily would have prompted a federal system of government, but without doing so.
Centralization was also the instinctive reaction of governments to successive wars, invasion and occupation when national boundaries were violated at different times between 1814 – 15,, 1870 - , 1914 – 18 and 1940 – 5 (Wright, 1979; 1998 2000.cenralizing tendencies were accentuated during the twentieth century.
Despite the excessive centralization and unitarism of France, the imperatives for local administrative system were strong from the on – set.
The need for local government dates back from a period when France was almost entirely rural and when sound economic expectations were even non- existent.
French leaders acknowledges the impossibility by the central government to administer the entire country from Paris considering the great diversity both in terms of peoples, culture and geographical spread, local authorities were therefore considered a great need for administrative efficiency and effectiveness.
The population explosion and the rapid industrialization and urbanization of the country which in turn led to growing demands for better social services and minimum standard throughout the country (ibid, 207).
Initially, existing local government structures suffered some weaknesses but these were constantly being corrected to suit modern demands.
For instance, in the 1950s and 1960s, economic planners found the existing departments as too small to be viable, while the vast majority of small communes were found clearly incapable to meet the demands placed on them(ibid 208).
NOUN 145 BHM 767 COURSE GUIDE In 1977 also, the peyrefitte report revealed that the town of vitry in the Paris region, which has a population of 100,000 and an alarming crime rate, had no police station.
The report was thus identifying loopholes in the laodcmali n istrative system of France.
However, France has improved the local authority system over the years.
This is to the extent that France with 36, 383 communes, has more units of local government than the rest of her common market (EEC) partners put together (ibid).
Constantly, reforms are introduced to the local government institutions by successive regimes.
Exercise 1.
Account for the centralization of government authority in France.
2.
Discuss the emergence of local government system in France.
4.0 Conclusion The over – centralization tendencies have not precluded the emergence of local authorities afterall.
The need for this has been identified as tihmep e ratives of administrative convenience and yearnings of an increasing population with the attendant social problems, particularly during the age of industrial Revolution.
Though, the earlier forms of local government administrative system were noted for structural weaknesses, however the system persists to the extent that France has been adjudged as having the highest number of local governments in Europe.
5.0 Summary In this unit, you have learnt that France is a highly diverse country in terms of peoples, culture and geographical spread.
You also learnt that France is a centralized, unitary country with all political, intellectual, social and cultural activities concentrated at the capital, pairs.
You also learnt that despite the excessive centralization of France certain factors had compelled the need to adopt local administrative system.
These factors included a growing population, problems created by the industrial revolution, and the growing demands and expectations of citizens from government.
NOUN 146 BHM 767 COURSE GUIDE You further learnt that local institutions in France experienced very weak structure thereby leading to many inadequacies in terms of performance, and which have over the years instigated regular reforms.
6.0 Tutor – Marked Assignments 1.
Account for the emergence of local government system and its excessively centralized system.
7.0 Further Reading and other sources Ajayi, kunle (ed 2000) Theory and practice of local government, Ado – Ekiti dept.
of political science.
UNAD Nigeria.
Bourn, j.
(1979) Management in central and local government, London, pitman publishing co. Wright, Vincent (1979) the Government and Politics of France, London, Hutchinson.
Unit 27 STRUCTURE OF LOCAL GOVERNMENTS IN FRANCE Table of contents NOUN 147 BHM 767 COURSE GUIDE 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objective 3.1 Structure of Local Governments in France 3.1.1 structure of local government Conclusion 4.0 Summary 5.0 Tutor – marked Assignment 6.0 Further Reading and other Resources.
1.0 Introduction Unit 26, which introduced discussions on the French local gsyosvteermn,m geanvte insight into the structure of local government in france during the emerging years of the institution.
You were informed that the system suffered weak structures until reforms started being introduced.
This unit (27) shall examine in some details the contemporary structure of local government in France.
2.0 Objectives By the end of this unit, you should be able to: 1) Identify the structural weaknesses associated with the early forms of local government in France.
2) Explain the structure of contemporary local government in France.
3) Appreciate the complexities in the structure of the local government institution.
4) Describe the various levels of local governance in France.
3.0 Main Contents.
3.1 structure of Local governments in France 3.1.1 Structure of Local governments.
NOUN 148 BHM 767 COURSE GUIDE You were told in unit 26 that local government institution is as old as rural France.
It was made known to you that despite the excessive centralization and concentration of power in France, political leaders appreciated the need for local governments because of rising population; increased industrialization and the attendant urbanization; people’s agitation for better services and better standard of living.
You were told that weak structures were among the constraints that militated against efficient performance by the early local government practice.
The contemporary local government in France is organized at three levels – regime, departmental and communal.
In the metropolitan France alone, there are 22 regimes, 96 departments (divided into 320 arrondissements and 3530 cartons) and 36,383communes.
The regions were created by the fifth republic by De Gaulle administration while department was created in 1970.
The communes date from 1789(Wright, 1979:201) Decision – making takes place at all the three levels, and the local decision – makers belong essentially to four categories of institution: 11.
The representative assemblies 12.
The prefectoral administration.
13.
The provincial field services of the Paris ministries 14.
The professional associations and the local pressure groups At all three levels may be found representative assemblies.
At the regional level there are two indirectly elected assemblies, the regional council and the economic and social committee, whose powers were defined by the 1972 Act.
At the departmental council, whose basic powers have remained largely unaltered since the 1884 Act.
At the level of communes is the town council whose main powers date from the two Acts of 1871 and 1884 (ibid) 201) The 22 regions are essentially organs from the concerted action of tchoen s tituent departments with the task of contributing to regional development through studies, proposals or financial participation state public investment projects.
In each of the 96 departments, there is a departmental council (Gceonnesreaill ) composed of members of who each represents a canton.
Members NOUN 149 BHM 767 COURSE GUIDE range from 17 to 1009 and they elected by universal suffrage, with elections taking place every three years (ibid, 202).
There is a local council in each commune with 9 to 109 members elected every six years.
The local council is the deliberative organ of the commune and has the task to exercise its competence in area which is not specifically forbidden by law France has about 475,000 local councillors who elect the 36,000 mayors.
The mayors who remain in office for at least six years are more important and influential than their British counterparts.
They perform two mfuanicnt io ns.
One, they represents the state in the commune.
Two, tphreoym u lgate and ensure the implementation of laws, regulations, circulars and instructions emanating from Paris (ibid).
He is also the official registrar of births, deaths and marriages.
Attempts at promoting collaborations or co –operation among the communes have taken or provided six structural forms: i.
Single – purpose syndicates which involve a voluntary grouping of communes for only one specific and defined purpose.
There are over10, 000 such syndicates.
ii.
Multi – purpose syndicates.
The 1959 ordinance allows.
Communes to cooperate on voluntary basis to carry out any tasks specified by themselves.
There were 1738 multi – purpose syndicate grouping 16, 940 communes in 1977. iii.
Districts are the heirs to the urban districts created in 1959 and also designed to induce co- operation between communes in the same conurbation.
There are 148 districts which perform housing and fire - fighting services.
iv.
Urban communities.
Created in 1966 by law for the four urban communities of Lyons, like Strasbourg and Bordeaux which involved the grouping of 199 communes v. New towns.
Government created nine new towns in 1972 in the rapidly developing Paris region, leading to the disappearance of 64 communes.
vi.
The merging (fusion)of communes has been encouraged by a series of measures taken during the fifth Republic.
Between 1959 and 1970,746 communes merged into 350.
The number increased to 779 NOUN 150 BHM 767 COURSE GUIDE in 1975 involving the disappearance of 1130 communes (ibid, 201 – 209).
Exercise 1.
Identify the three levels of local government organization in France.
2.
Enumerate the levels of which decision – making takes place in French local government system.
3.
Discuss the six structural levels that the French authorities have desired to foster local collaboration and co operation.
4.0 Conclusion The French local government system has presented a unique structure of design different from that of Nigeria, Britain and the United states.
Locality in the French administrative system means decentralizing decision – making and implementation right from within the regional level of government to the rural arrangement.
That each administrative level has local councils.
This pattern is a lot more unique than their political seyxsatmeminse d in Nigeria, USA, and Britain.
In addition to the local council arrangement existing in each administrative level ie regional, department and communes, there are local field services provided by each ministry having its representatives in the provinces.
For instance, the ministry of defence is represented by a general in edaecpha rt ment, and the ministry of education by a rector (ibid, 205).
5.0 Summary In this unit you have learnt about the structure of local government in France.
You learnt that France has a unique pattern of local governance different from the earlier case studies examined.
Specifically, you were told that each administrative level within France’s unitary system has a local government arrangement.
Decision – making takes place at all three levels and that the decision – makers belong essentially to the four categories of institution namely: the representative assemblies; the perfectoral administration; the provincial field services and the local pressure groups.
NOUN 151 BHM 767 COURSE GUIDE You also learnt that besides the above structure, the local government system presented other structural, arrangements which include; single – purpose syndicate, multi – purpose syndicate, districts urban communities, new towns, and the merging of communes.
6.0 Tutor – Marked Assignments 1.
The French structural pattern for local governments gives room for collaboration and /or co – operation.
Identify and discuss the six major levels for this collaborative/co – operative administrative practice.
7.0 Further Reading and other sources Ajayi, kunle (1998) ‘the modified presidential system of the French model and The future of politics in Nigeria” in Dipo Kolawole and N. O Mimiko (eds) political democratization and economic deregulation Under the Abacha administration, 1993 -1998, Ado – Ekiti dept.
of political science.
UNAD Nigeria.
Brian, C (1953) Introduction to French Local Government, London Wright, Vincent (1979) the Government and Politics of France, London, Hutchinson.
Unit 28 FUNCTIONS OF LOCAL GOVERNMENTS IN FRANCE NOUN 152 BHM 767 COURSE GUIDE Table of contents 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objective 3.1 Structure of Local Governments in France 3.1.1 structure of local government 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutor – marked Assignment 7.0 Further Reading and other Resources.
1.0 Introduction This unit examines the responsibilities of local governments in France.
The functions of local government are a varied as the number of local government levels existing in the country.
It may not be entirely possible to discuss the functions level by level, but we shall give the aggregate of the functions performed by all levels by listing them out.
2.0 Objectives By the end of this unit, you should be able to do the following; 1) Recall the unique structure of local governments in France.
2) Appreciate the importance of local units of governance in France.
3) Explain the varied functions of local governments.
4) Describe the obligatory responsibilities of grassroot units of government.
3.0 Main contents 3.1 Functions of local governments in France 3.1.1 Functions.
NOUN 153 BHM 767 COURSE GUIDE Let us recall what you learnt in unit 27.
You were told that the structure of local government can be identified at three different levels namely; the rdeegpiaorntms, e nts, and.
Communes.
Each of these levels presents a different structural pattern.
Decision – making local units in each of the three belong to four categories of institution which are the representative assemblies, the prefectoral administration, the provincial field services of the Paris ministries, and tphreo f essional associations and the local pressure groups.
You also learnt that collaboration or co – operation among the communes takes six structural forms which are the single – purpose syndicates, multi – purpose syndicates, districts, urban communes, new towns, and the merging (fusion) of communes.
Each of the structural levels of local governments perform specific functions.
The functions performed vary from level to level.
However, only the aggregate of all the functions will be presented to you.
These functions include: I.
To implement the duties assigned to it by the state.
II.
The mayor, as the case may be, promulgates and ensures the implementation of laws, regulations, circulars and instructions emanating from Paris.
III.
The mayor also registers births, deaths and marriages.
IV.
The mayor is responsible for drawing up the electoral list and compiling the official statistics such as census figures for the state.
V. The mayor is responsible for the order, safety, security and sanitation of the commune.
He ensures that the norms that govern communal behaviour are not transgressed.
VI.
District local units provide fire – fighting services.
VII.
District local units engage in housing services.
VIII.
Urban community authorities construct and equip primary and secondary schools.
NOUN 154 BHM 767 COURSE GUIDE IX.
Urban community authorities also provide rubbish disposal facilities and services.
X.
They provide and maintain cemeteries.
XI.
They provide public transportation.
XII.
They engage in town planning and public works.
XIII.
Any other functions that are not prohibited by law, and that may be assigned to the local units by the state from time to time.
Exercise 1.
Highlight the pattern of local government structure in France 2.
Enumerate and discuss the major functions performed by local administrative units in France.
4.0 Conclusion The functions of local governments cannot be completely listed out, unlike what obtains in Nigeria where we can point to a particular section of the constitution (fourth schedule) that listed out the functions of all lgoocvael rn ments in the country, each level of local administration either complementary or supplementary functions to the other.
There is an emerging fact however, that the functions of local units of administration continue to grow as a result of population explosion, rapid industrialization and urbanization of France with the corresponding growing demands for more social services.
5.0 Summary In this unit, you have learnt about the functions of local governments in France.
You specifically learnt that the functions of local units of administration are not the same as they vary according to the level of units.
That is, the functions of local units at regional, departmental and communes are different from each other.
However, a cumulative highlight of the functions of all local levels include promulgation and ensuring the implementation of laws, regulations, circulars and instructions from the state in Paris, registration of deaths, births and marriages, drawing up the electoral list and other statistical records such as census, construction and equipment of primary and secondary schools,.
Fire – NOUN 155 BHM 767 COURSE GUIDE fighting, providing housing, transportation service, province environmental sanitation services, and ensuring the other and security of the locality.
The state can also allocate other functions to the local units.
6.0 Tutor – Marked Assignments.
1.
Enumerate and discuss ten major functions carried out by the various units of local administration in France.
7.0 Further Reading and other sources Ajayi, kunle (1998) ‘The modified presidential system French model and the future of politics in Nigeria” in Dipo Kolawole and N. O Mimiko (eds) political democratization and economic deregulation under the Abacha administration, 1993 -1998, Ado – Ekiti ept.
of political science.
UNAD Nigeria.
Ajayi, kunle (ed 2000) Theory and practice of local government, Ado – Ekiti dept.
of political science.
UNAD Nigeria.
Brian, C (1953) Introduction to French Local Government, London Howard, M. (1977).
The prefect in French public Administration, London Wright, Vincent (1979) the Government and Politics of France, London, Hutchinson.
Unit 29 NOUN 156 BHM 767 COURSE GUIDE FINANCING OF LOCAL GOVERNMENTS IN FRANCE Table of contents 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objectives 3.1 Financing Local Governments in France 3.1.1 Financing local governments 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutor – marked Assignment 7.0 Further Reading and other Resources.
1.0 Introduction In unit 28, the varied functions of local governments in France weneurme e rated.
The constitutional duties of local governments can only be performed adequately and efficiently if they are properly funded.
This unit (29) therefore examines the various sources from which revenues accrue to local governments in France.
2.0 Objectives By the end unit of this unit, you should be able to do the following activities.
1) Explain the functions of local administrative units in France.
2) Appreciate the importance of adequate funding to organizations both public and private.
3) Identify and discuss the major sources of revenue to local governments.
4) Describe the nature of financial relationship between the local authorities and central governments in France.
3.0 Main Contents 3.1 Financing local government in France.
3.1. Financing local governments.
NOUN 157 BHM 767 COURSE GUIDE The level of financial demand by any public or private organizations is often determined by the volume of its functions.
You will recall some of tfhuen c tions of French local governments include the following: I.
Maintenance of law and order II.
The security and safety of the area III.
Construction and equipment of primary and secondary schools IV.
Provision and maintenance of cemetery V. Provision of fire – fighting services VI.
Registration of deaths, births and marriages etc.
The efficient performance of these functions, in part, depends on the degree of finance enjoyed by the local governments.
The two sources of revenue are available to local authorities namely; internal and external sources.
1) Internal sources.
These are the independent sources of revenue to local governments.
The most visible of these levies per head.
This is limited by law to 35 Frances pinehr a b itant.
This produces a very negligible proportion of the authorities’ revenue because many of the regions are small and poor (Wright, 1979:211).
Generally, the independent resources of the regions and communes are so poor and totally inadequate, and increasingly therefore, the communes have had to turn to the state for loans.
2) External sources.
States grants loans.
are the two major sources of external revenue to laouctahlo r ities in France.
6.
Grants.
NOUN 158 BHM 767 COURSE GUIDE The state gives grants for capital investment projects or programmes, often available through specialized public agencies such as the caisse d’aide à l’equipment des collectivités locales (CAECL).
7.
Long – term loans.
Local authorities have opportunity to take long – term loans, four – fifths of which are filtered through bodies such as the caisse des depots ecto n signations and the crédit foncier.
8.
Transfers of items of expenditure.
The state may subsidize expenditures of local authorities.
This is done by reducing the expenditure of the local authorities by transferring to the general state budgets items previously on local budgets ( ibid,211 – 212) To obtain a loan, a local authority must submit its project to officials of the Ministr y of finance and the TGP, their representatives in the province, who may modify, slow down or even reject it.
The state provides, through loans or subsidies, about 70% of the finance for local capital investment projects and for about 60% of the current operating costs.
Exercise 1.
Discuss the source(s) of internally generated revenue to local authorities in France.
2.
Enlist and explain the major external sources of funding available to local authorities in France.
4.0 Conclusion Local authorities in France have their authority circumscribed by their lack of sound financial base.
Their financial dependence on Paris is almost complete as every revenue is earned from internal self efforts.
Paris restricts their freedom by constant flurry of circulars and by its manipulation of its financial powers by insisting that certain technical norms or financial stipulations be met before the grant of a subsidy or get a loan the state controls.
Either directly or indirectly, the state controls an estimated four – fifths of all investment projects (ibid, 2120.
NOUN 159 BHM 767 COURSE GUIDE 5.0 Summary In this unit on financing local authorities in France, you learnt that two main sources of revenue are available to local governments namely; internal and external sources.
Internally earned revenue represents a very small percentage, while local authorities relied on the central authority for more than 780% of trheeviern u e. The state availed the authorities revenue through loans, subsidies and grants to finance principally capital projects.
You learnt that because of the neat complete dependence on the state for financial support, local authority have lost their authority as they are subject to regular control and manipulations.
6.0 Tutor – Marked Assignments 1.
Enumerate and discuss in details the major sources of financing locaalu thorities in France.
7.0 Further Reading and other sources Ajayi, kunle (1998) ‘The modified presidential system French model and the future of politics in Nigeria” in Dipo Kolawole and N. O Mimiko (eds) political democratization and economic deregulation under the Abacha administration, 1993 -1998, Ado – Ekiti dept.
of political science.
UNAD Nigeria.
Ajayi, kunle (ed 2000) Theory and practice of local government, Ado – Ekiti dept.
of political science.
UNAD Nigeria.
Brian, C (1953) Introduction to French Local Government, London Howard, M. (1977).
The prefect in French public Administration, London Wright, Vincent (1979) the Government and Politics of France, London, Hutchinson Unit 30 NOUN 160 BHM 767 COURSE GUIDE STRUCTURE OF LOCAL GOVERNMENTS IN FRANCE Table of contents 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objectives 3.1 Local Governments Reforms in France 3.1.1 Local governments Reforms Conclusion 4.0 Summary 5.0 Tutor – marked Assignment 6.0 Further Reading and other Resources.
7.0 1.0 Introduction This is the final unit in the BHM 767 course and the concluding one in our discussions about the local government system in France.
The unit examines some of the problems confronting local authorities in France and the varied reforms instituted to correct some of the authorities in the system.
2.0 Objectives By the end of this unit, you should be able to do the following; 1) Recollect the sources of revenue available to local authorities in France.
2) Identify and describe some of the problems militating against efficient performance of local authorities in France.
3) Appreciate the need for reforms in administrative systems.
4) Discuss some of the reforms instituted by the central governments to improve local authority system in France.
3.0 Main Contents 3.1 Local Governments Reforms in France NOUN 161 BHM 767 COURSE GUIDE 3.1.1 Local Governments Reforms.
In this unit 16 and 17, we discussed local government reforms in Nigeria.
You learnT in the two units that reform is about engineering a change of form in a thing or bringing up new processes and procedures in the way things are done.
Administrative reform is about improving the workings of an administrative institution in such a way that it will promote its efficienCY.
It also concerns correcting identified problems or weaknesses observable in bureaucracies.
You leant about the sources of financing local governments in France which we identified as including both external and internal sources.
You also learnt that local authorities depend almost completely on funding from official external, state sources which has invariably created the problem of lack of autonomy and state control and manipulation by the central governments for the local authorities.
Besides these problems imposed by financial limitations, local authorities in France suffer from some other problems.
A major problem of the institution is the archaic nature of the pstrreuscetnutr e s which renders local governments ineffective.
The local authorities rely virtually on structures which date from a period when France was almost entirely rural.
The authorities were therefore not been able to cope with the challenges of contemporary France, especially at a time of growing industrialization and urbanization.
The October reform on local governments envisaged the creation of more urban communities (rural areas) which would have jurisdiction over the main tasks of planning.
Transport, housing, education and health.
The first phase of the changes brought by the 1976 reforms was completed by 1985.
And as part of structural reforms being introduced, syndicate systems were introduced.
There are single and multi– purpose syndicates.
The single – purpose syndicate is a voluntary grouping by communes to facilitate co – operation in carrying out only one specific and defined purpose.
There are over 10,000 such syndicate (ordinance) communes have baleleonw e d to co –operate on a voluntary basis to carry out any number of tasks which they themselves specify.
By mid 1977, there were1738 multiple – purpose syndicates grouping 16940 communes.
NOUN 162 BHM 767 COURSE GUIDE Districts also created by the 1959 ordinance to induce co –operation between communes in the same conurbation.
The law of December 1966 created the four urban communities of Strasbourg, Lyons, Lillie and Bordeaux with additional five created later.
They engaged in the rendering of a range of services including fire – fighting, housing, rubbish disposal etc.
new towns emerged in 1972 when government created nine in the Paris region.
Lastly, the merging communes came up under the fifth Republic between 1959 and 1970 only 746 communes merged into 350.
But the 1971 Act speeded up the process with 300 more communes merged and by 1975 a total of 779 merges had taken place9ibid, 208 - 209).
Exercise 1. justify the need for administrative reforms 2.
Enumerate some of the problems that confront local authorities in France 3.
Discuss some of the local government reforms that have taken place in France.
4.0 Conclusion Reform effort in France have been to improve the performance of local authorities, particularly in meeting the increasing demands of citizens for better quality of life and more social services particularly at a tiinmcree a s ionfg population, industrialization and urbanization.
However, the local authorities deserve more fundamental policythan tehxei st ing ones.
This is more particularly in the area of funding.
To be able to carry out intensive capital projects for the local areas, they should bade e quately financed, while the source of three internally generated revenue is to be improved upon so as to generate sufficient income so as to make them enjoy some measures of autonomy and independence.
5.0 Summary NOUN 163 BHM 767 COURSE GUIDE In this unit, you have learnt about the problems of local authorities in France.
A major problem identified is that of poor funding.
Another is structural defects.
You were told that the local authorities lacked financial autonomy acnodn se quently they are really completely dependent on the central government for everything they want to do and therefore opened them up for manipulations and unnecessary control and regulations.
You also learnt that the local authorities suffer from structural defects as they still operate structures designed during rural France.
This therefore hampered their efficient performance.
As a way of correcting these anomalies, you learnt that various reforms were put by central government particularly in the area of structures.
All the reforms carried out between 1959 and 12975 through ordinances and Acts were all concerned with structural changes.
However, the major problem of lack of financial autonomy is yet to bade d ressed by the state, and therefore, the local authorities remain, existing at the mercy of the central government 6.0 Tutor – Marked Assignments a.
Identify and discuss the major problems confronting local authorities in France.
b.
Discuss the major reforms that had been instituted by government to correct some of the anomalies in the local government system.
7.0 Further Reading and other sources Brian, C (1953) Introduction to French Local Government, London Howard, M. (1977).
The prefect in French public Administration, London Wright, Vincent (1979) the Government and Politics of France, London, Hutchinson NOUN 164
