 NATIONAL OPEN UNIVERSITY OF NIGERIA SCHOOL OF BUSINESS AND HUMAN RESOURCE MANAGEMENT COURSE CODE: BHM768 COURSE TITLE: POLICY IMPLEMENTATION AND EVALUATION BHM768 POLICY IMPLEMENTATION & EVALUATION COURSE GUIDE BHM768 POLICY IMPLEMENTATION AND EVALUATION Course Team Martha Oruku (Developer/Writer) - NOUN David Kayode Oyedepo (Editor) - NOUN Dr. O. J. Onwe (Programme Leader) - NOUN Martha Oruku (Coordinator) - NOUN BHM768 POLICY IMPLEMENTATION & EVALUATION NATIONAL OPEN UNIVERSITY OF NIGERIA National Open University of Nigeria Headquarters 14/16 Ahmadu Bello Way Victoria Island Lagos Abuja Office No.
5 Dar es Salaam Street Off Aminu Kano Crescent Wuse II, Abuja Nigeria e- mail: centralinfo&nou.edu.ng URL: www.nou.edu.ng Published By: National Open University of Nigeria First Printed 2010 ISBN: 978-058-835-3 All Rights Reserved BHM768 POLICY IMPLEMENTATION & EVALUATION CONTENTS PAGE Introduction …………………………………………….
1 What You Will Learn in this Course…………………… 1 Study Units……………………………………………… 4 Introduction BHM768: Policy Implementation and Evaluation, is a semester course of two credit unit.
The course will take about 10-12 weeks to cover.
It is a course designed for Post–graduate Diploma Students in Public Administration.
Specifically, the course is developed to meet the needs of students who have graduated in any of the science disciplines and who desire to go into administration as a career.
It will also meet the academy taste of experienced Administrators who desire a DCeiprtliofmicaa te in Public Administration either for promotion, conversion or inter cadre-transfer in the public service.
The course consists of 16 units, which involves public policy acos n c eap t , various approaches to public, policy formulation, policy process, the actors in policy-making process, and policy implementation and evaluation.
Other topics discussed in this course are policy styles, the role of interest groups and political parties in the policy process and some contemporary public policies.
This is intended to enable tshtued ent position the theoretical foundation with practical examples of major current policies like the National Youth Service Corps [NYSC], National Poverty Eradication Programme [NAPEP], and the Universal Basic Education [UBE] programmes.
This, it is hoped, will aid towards a proper understanding of policy formulation, implementation and evaluation.
Public Administration as a discipline is a living subject.
As a result, public administrators and others who want to make it a career will find it easy to study and comprehend this course.
There is therefore ncoom pulsory pre-requisite for this course although a prior knowledge of Public Administration or any of the social sciences will be an added advantage.
What You Will Learn in this Course The overall aim of BHM 768: Policy Implementation and Evaluation, is to acquaint you with a proper understanding of individual behaviours BHM768 POLICY IMPLEMENTATION & EVALUATION that makes up a society.
Therefore, a study of the interaction of these individuals in society is the beginning of the study of public policy.
To bring home the various views of authors, we have summarised their characterisation of public policy as being directed towards solving certain problems in the society.
Our concern as administrators would be to formulate relevant decisions or policies, implement them and above all evaluate them to achieve the desired results.
It should be noted, however, that in an attempt to solve a social problem, other unforeseen problems are bound to come up.
To understand and address these problems, many approaches have been identified.
The System approach, for instance, is of the view that the political system is made up different sub-systems of economic, social cultural and educational units.
It is therefore a combination of these sub- systems that keep the entire system going.
Any dislocation in one subsystem has a linkage effect on the other subsystems.
On the other hand, we identified some key formal institutions that are relevant to public policy.
These include the Executive, Legislative and Judicial bodies.
The Elite theory recognises the role of class analysis.
In most cases, ‘public demand’ as we are often made to believe, is usually the interest of a few individuals who are often in the minority.
Finally, the Group theory focuses attention on population sample to properly understand the larger society.
However, that select group is regarded as rational and self-interested.
Other areas touched in this course include the policy process.
The process begins with the identification of a given problem and the proper identification of probable solutions.
A policy could thereafter be formulated.
Policy analysis entails the setting of goals, listing of probable solutions and adopting the best option that has the best chance of success.
But because of financial constraints, only a few policies are usually stated for consideration.
This is otherwise known as Policy Agenda.
Other factors that influence policy choice includes: the mass media, pressure groups, political party manifesto and other international conditionalties.
Furthermore, policy actors need to be identified to enhance a proper understanding of the policy process.
They include political executives, bureaucrats or legislators and other interest groups.
However, it has been observed that the bane of most developing countries is that of policy implementation.
Most of our developmental efforts are most often bogged down by misappropriation/misapplication of funds, lack of continuity of good policies as a result of political instability and other administrative bottlenecks.
BHM768 POLICY IMPLEMENTATION & EVALUATION Any worthwhile venture should undergo the process of evaluation.
Governmental action is not an exception.
Policy evaluation is therefore intended to locate mistakes, remedy errors where necessary and avoid adverse consequences between the initial objectives of a policy and the outcome of the policy.
Unfortunately again, lack of relevant facilities for evaluating policy outcomes and lack of needed information by policy analysts, particularly in developing countries, is a major drawback for accurate policy evaluation on one hand and the quality of pfoorlmicuyl a tion as a whole on the other.
To enable you properly understand policy styles in-depth, we hatatveem p ted a periodisation of certain policy styles in Nigeria.
For example, the era preceding the Nigeria Civil War witnessed the adoption of bargaining in the Aburi Accord Policy (1966-1970) by the Yakubu Gowon regime.
The creation of states that followed shortly was meant to pacify when all options of dialogue failed.
However, there can be no one best policy style.
The Situation approach is recommended as a policy style.
Similar to the above is the explanation on theories of decision-making under unit eight of the course.
While rational comprehensive mreoqdueirle s a logical and systematic reasoning to arrive at a cdreecdisibiolen , the increment model is rather conservative in nature.
Ibne tw een these two extremes, is the mixed scanning model, which is less concerned with how a similar problem was previously solved.
Rather, it is interested in a more creative search for alternatives.
In the discussion on pressure groups, we have attempted to define them as associations whose interaction is to secure favourable decisions for themselves.
However, they do employ various tactics to press home their demands.
These include: persuasion, lobbying, offering bribes and making persistent representations until their demands are met.
Briefly put, pressure groups often transform into political parties through which policies could be formulated using their party manifesto.
Finally, it is my candid view that having taken you through the whole theoretical gamut of policy formulation, implementation and evaluation, it is only appropriate to avail you of some relevant but current policies of government.
This, it is hoped, would translate into a better understanding of the basis of policy formulation.
You can also see how policies undergo the process of evaluation.
Unit ten of the course discusses at length three Federal Government Policies: the Universal Basic Education (UBE), National Youth Service BHM768 POLICY IMPLEMENTATION & EVALUATION Corps Scheme (NYSC) and the National Poverty Eradication Programme (NAPEP).
All these policies have been formulated to solve some National problems at their inception.
However, the implementation of some of these policies brought about more structural problems, which invariably necessitated refocusing, to accomplish the objectives of its founding father.
The processes that these policies went through are in practical terms, the thrust of policy formulation, implementation and evaluation as contained in this course.
Study Units There are sixteen study units in this course as follows: Module 1 Unit 1 The Concept of Public Policy Unit 2 Approaches to the Study of Public Policy Unit 3 The Public Policy Making Process Unit 4 Functionaries in the Policy Making Process Unit 5 Policy Implementation Module 2 Unit 1 Policy Evaluation Unit 2 Public Policy and Decision Making Unit 3 Theories and Models of Decision Making Unit 4 Interest Groups and Political Parties in the Policy Making Process Unit 5 Government Policies and Local Government Administration in Nigeria Module 3 Unit 1 Policy Planning and Design Unit 2 Public Policy Process Unit 3 Policies of Evaluation Unit 4 Evaluation Research Unit 5 Policy Evaluation Techniques Unit 6 Programme Evaluation: A Practical Approach BHM768 POLICY IMPLEMENTATION & EVALUATION BHM768 POLICY IMPLEMENTATION & EVALUATION Course Code BHM768 Course Title Policy Implementation & Evaluation Course Team Martha Oruku (Developer/Writer) - NOUN David Kayode Oyedepo (Editor) - NOUN Dr. O. J Onwe (Programme Leader) - NOUN Martha Oruku (Coordinator) - NOUN N ATIONAL OPEN UNIVERSITY OF NIGERIA BHM768 POLICY IMPLEMENTATION & EVALUATION National Open University of Nigeria Headquarters 14/16 Ahmadu Bello Way Victoria Island Lagos Abuja Office No.
5 Dar es Salaam Street, Off Aminu Kano Crescent Wuse II, Abuja Nigeria e-mail: centralinfo@nou.edu.ng URL: www.nou.edu.ng Published By: National Open University of Nigeria First Printed 2010 ISBN: 978-058-835-3 All Rights Reserved BHM768 POLICY IMPLEMENTATION & EVALUATION CONTENTS PAGE Module 1 ……………………………………………………….… 1 Unit 1 The Concept of Public Policy……………..….…... 1 Unit 2 Approaches to the Study of Public Policy…..….… 9 Unit 3 The Public Policy-Making Process…………....….. 16 Unit 4 Functionaries in the Policy-Making Process……… 23 Unit 5 Policy Implementation………………………..….….
29 Module 2 ……………………….……………………………….... 36 Unit 1 Policy Evaluation……………………………….….
36 Unit 2 Public Policy and Decision Making Styles…….….. 42 Unit 3 Theories and Models of Decision Making………... 50 Unit 4 Interest Groups and Political Parties in Policy Making Process............................................................ 57 Unit 5 Government Policies and Local Government Administration in Nigeria……………………..…… 64 Module 3……………………………………………………….. 72 Unit 1 Policy Planning and Design……………………..….
72 Unit 2 Public Policy Process……………………….....….
78 Unit 3 Politics of Evaluation………………………….….... 86 Unit 4 Evaluation Research…………………………..…… 90 Unit 5 Policy Evaluation Techniques…………………..… 95 Unit 6 Programme Evaluation: A Practical Approach…….
99 NoneBHM768 POLICY IMPLEMENTATION & EVALUATION MODULE 1 Unit 1 The Concept of Public Policy Unit 2 Approaches to the Study of Public Policy Unit 3 The Public Policy Making Process Unit 4 Functionaries in the Policy Making Process Unit 5 Policy Implementation UNIT 1 THE CONCEPT OF PUBLIC POLICY CONTENTS 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objectives 3.0 Main Content 3.1 Policy Analysis and Political Science Compared 3.1.1 The Concept of Public Policy 3.1.2 The Concept of Policy Analysis 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutor-Marked Assignment 7.0 References/Further Reading 1.0 INTRODUCTION In this unit, you will learn that political science is the systematic study of politics.
This will enable you to understand that political science, like psychology, entails the study of human behaviours and their interactions or relationships with other people.
However, as a result of interpersonal relationship, decision-making to solve group or societal problems becomes inevitable.
However, your choice as to who to relate with and to what extent, marks the beginning of the study of public policy.
Consequently, the dichotomy between political science and public policy is very thin.
Hence, the study of one leads to the other.
This is how the study of political science leads us to the study of public policy.
In other words, public policy is a field of study in political science.
You should therefore note that as political animals, we use our knowledge of public policy analysis in making our political choices: in our choice of which of the political parties to join, who to vote for and the type of government policy to support.
BHM768 POLICY IMPLEMENTATION & EVALUATION 2.0 OBJECTIVES At the end of this unit, you should be able to: • define political science operationally • distinguish between “private policy” and “public policy” • understand the concept of policy analysis • itemise the common grounds in the definition of public policy by various authors.
3.0 MAIN CONTENT 3.1 Policy Analysis and Political Science Compared Earlier in the introductory part of this unit, we explained that Political Science is a subset of Public Policy Analysis.
That is, public panoalilcyys is is an offspring of political science.
Historically, and like most other disciplines in the social spcoileinticcea,l s cience only focused on the institutions of government.
This is the traditional historical approach to the study of political science.
However, it is instructive to note that as a result of research, there was a radical revolution in this field of study, when authors started to interpret studies from the scientific point of view.
This was the post-world war era and with modernisation, a revolution in the study of administration came when Herbert Simon proposed that the “focus of study of Public Administration should be the dynamics of the decision-making process”.
That is, how policy actors decide on “who will get what, when ahnodw ?
” Furthermore, you should note that political science enables people to understand individual human behaviour as a unit of political analysis on one hand and his interaction with other members of the society on the other hand.
Consequently, the inter-personal relationship that ensues from there, calls for decision-making.
As a result, an individual decides on his own, the type of friends to keep and the level of such relationship.
But the moment a rapport graduates from individual to group relationship, public policy comes in.
What informs this viewpoint is that the decision is no longer personal since it affects a larger audience or “second party” as Olaniyi (1998) asserted.
Hence it has become a public decision involving interpersonal relationships.
BHM768 POLICY IMPLEMENTATION & EVALUATION Public policy is related to interpersonal or inter-group relationships.
As a result, there is a thin line of demarcation between the two (political science and public policy).
You can now see that both of them focus on the study of human behaviour which is of public interest.
Coming nearer home for example, we are all political animals and there is a constitutional provision that even as public officers, we reserve the right to vote for a political party or candidate of our choice in aenleyc t ion.
Based on our analysis too, we, as citizens have the choice to belong to any of the existing political parties and finally, we reserve the right to our personal opinion on any policy of government.
3.1.1 The Concept of Public Policy As you would recall, we said earlier that where political science stops, policy analysis begins from there.
We equally said that the moment a decision involves two or more people, the issue, out-grows personal or private decision to become public interest or public policy for a common good.
We shall now proceed to examine the concept critically.
There is no society that is crisis-free.
Even the ‘family’, which is often regarded as the smallest social unit has to undergo one problem or another in its life cycle.
It ranges from problems of getting a life-partner, bringing-up children and fending for the children.
As a spinster or a bachelor or a married man/woman, can you pause a while and itemise your problems?
Of course, you will discover that these problems are many and they vary from one individual to the other.
When we now take a cursory look at the larger society, we sdhisacllo v er that the society is beset with various political, economic and social problems.
But ironically, as we attempt to solve one problem, there is a multiplier effect from the initial problem.
So as problems rear their ugly heads, efforts are made to find solutions to them.
This is usually through the decision-making process, whereby a policy option is made to halt a named political, educational or socio-economic problem.
A policy option you proffer to a given family or individual problem is known as “Private Policy “, whereas when you offer solutions to a societal problem (say a Nigerian social problem), this is known as public policy.
According to Barrett and Fudge (1981: V), public policy “emanates from the “public sector”, including both the institutions of central, local government and state created agencies such as water or health authorities, commissions, and corporations.
It may be implemented through and directed at a wide variety of individuals and organisations, BHM768 POLICY IMPLEMENTATION & EVALUATION which may not be part of the state apparatuses, and which, to a greater or lesser degree, be independent of state influence or control”.
From the foregoing, the implication of this definition is that a public policy is designed to affect a particular “target population” in a state or geo-politically defined entity.
According to Dror (1973, p14), “public policy, in most case, lays down general directives, rather than detailed instructions, on the main lines of action to be followed.
It is thus not identical with the Games theory definition of ‘strategy’ as a detailed set of decisions covering aplol ss ible situations.
The military definition of strategy as a general guide for action in contrast to tactics is closer to what we mean by ‘policy’.
From this definition too, we see that not all decisions are p‘paortl ic y o’.f But the key or strategic aspect, which is like a guideline in nature, represents policy.
Furthermore, Rose (1969), says that, “Policy making involves a long series of more or less related activities rather than single, ddeisccirseioten .
It thus covers far more than the term decision-making.
The study of policy making usually involves analysing the intentions opof l icy-makers up to and including the point at which binding action is taken.
Outcomes may be affected less by a conscious decision to act than by conscious or unconscious preferences for inaction.
The sense of continuous activity and adjustment involved in policy-making is conveyed by describing it as a process, rather than a single once–for all acts”.
From the above, you will note that policy-making embraces implementation feedback and evaluation, as well as policy formulation.
Similarly, we should not sit on the fence by using phrases s“udcehc is i oanss ” , “preferences” and outcomes” as independent variables but as exercises in power, in the manipulation of dependent relationships as much as in rationality.
You should equally understand that ‘policy’ is not merely a continuous process of decisions and activities – its usage, though variable, can be pinned down rather more closely.
For example, it takes place principally (though not exclusively) within definite organisational structures.
Indeed, it is an association with formal organisational structures of a specific legal type– agencies of the state –, which supports the distinction between public policy and policies whose originators leiles e where (such as the policies of private sector, multinational company etc).
Note, however, there is seldom a one-for–one correspondence between a specific policy and a particular state institution.
It is much BHM768 POLICY IMPLEMENTATION & EVALUATION more common for several state institutions, simultaneously, to have a hand in any given policy, even if one is formally charged with co- ordination.
A further defining characteristic of policy is that it is directed at the future.
Thus, it is constantly concerned with probabilities and uncertainties, not only in relation to what physical, technological and economic conditions will prevail, but also about how values, norms and tastes may (or may not) change.
Policies are exercises in power and rationality in an attempt to anticipate the future.
You should be aware too, that a feature of public policy is that its articulated aims are the consolidation or furtherance of public interest.
This may be true of almost all policies pursued by almost all political regimes, at least in advanced industrial societies.
Although a closer examination may reveal self-seeking or sectional motives behind many policies, or when the notion of a public interest turns out to bpeh il osophically flawed.
But the fact remains that most public policies are in the society’s general interest.
Again, public policy has as its hallmarks an effective planning.
According to Chandler and Plano (1988): • Conceiving meaningful goals and developing alternative choices for future action to achieve these goals.
Planning involves a systematic procedure for the reduction of many alternatives to an approved course of action.
It determines not only goals but also the sequential order in which they are pursued, the need for co-ordination and the standard for maintaining control.
Hence, their view is that public policy involves planning, which invariably has a goal to achieve.
Their viewpoint and those of others is that society is beset with various problems as earlier mentioned.
It is however, the responsibility of the political authors to decide which of them can be tackled at any point in time and how to achieve them within a specified period of time.
This is where the relevance of planning comes in.
On the whole, you should understand some common characteristics of public policy as explained by the above-mentioned authors.
They include: 1.
Most of the authors perceive the concept from goal-attainment point of view.
2.
They view it mostly as an interplay of politics (games) BHM768 POLICY IMPLEMENTATION & EVALUATION 3.
They all consider planning as an essential ingredient of public policy.
4.
A policy is tied to a particular societal problem.
5.
Policy as a concept has a target population in view 6.
Policies commonly involve exchanges of information, resources, and bargaining between and within agencies.
7.
Policy is directed at increasing the probability of occurrence of a desired state of the world in the future.
8.
The state institutions which claim responsibility for public policies almost invariably legitimise their activities by claiming that their policies are in the general (public) interest rather than for any group, section or individual.
From the foregoing, we would agree that public policy is the effective management of human and material resources by governments to redress a societal problem identified in an area at a given point in time.
3.1.2 The Concept of Policy Analysis We have examined policy analysis with political science on the ohnaned and public policy on the other.
Much of what we will be explaining here is what we have not said prevoiusly.
This will make the teaching to be rather brief and concise.
Of particular interest for our purpose is the definition offered by Shafriz (1968:409), where he said that “Policy Analysis is a set of techniques that seek to answer the question of what the probable effect of a policy will be before they actually occur”.
This is what has been t“ebremfoerde the fact” analysis of public policy by Olaniyi (1988 op cTiht)e.r e fore, a policy analysis undertaken on a programme that is already being implemented can be properly called a programme evaluation.
Equally, Chandler and Plano (op cit: 96), says policy analysis iisn te nded for three major activities: i.
For problems assessment and monitoring ii.
As a “before the fact” decision tool; and iii.
For evaluation.
In his own view, Roberts and Edwards (1991: 98), argue that Policy Analysis is the study of the formulation, implementation and evaluation of public policy, the values of policy makers, the environment of the policy, the environment of the policy making system, the cost of policy alternatives (i. e. the use of pp BS, Game theory, normative economics etc) and meta policy (the study of policies for improving pmoalkiciyn-g ).
BHM768 POLICY IMPLEMENTATION & EVALUATION SELF ASSESSMENT EXERCISE 1 1.
(a) Define the concept “Public Policy”.
(b) In your own words distinguish “Political Science” from “Policy Analysis” 2.
Identify and explain five characteristics of public policy.
4.0 CONCLUSION Public policy is an important concept that is generated as a result of observed or perceived problems in the society.
In this wise, and in offering solutions to societal problems, other issues could crop up.
But generally speaking, most policies are goals directed and are futuristic in orientation.
Policy analysis has to do with an evaluation of policy options in terms of cost, policy contents and policy beneficiaries.
This review or evaluation should be a continuous process for extensive policy analysis to take place.
5.0 SUMMARY In this unit, we have tried to explain political science as a systematic study of politics with a focus on the study of individual behaviour.
But public policy starts by trying to focus on relationship between the individual and other members of the society.
Again, we have tried to examine the characteristics of public policy.
Public policy as we have seen in this unit, is goal directed and is intended to solve cperortbalienm s in the society.
It is the effective management of resources to redress societal problems.
Its concern is the formulation of a decision, its implementation and evaluation.
6.0 TUTOR-MARKED ASSIGNMENT 1.
What do you understand by the term Public Policy?
2.
Differentiate between Political Science and Policy Analysis?
3.
Mention five characteristic of Public Policy?
7.0 REFERENCES/FURTHER READING BHM768 POLICY IMPLEMENTATION & EVALUATION Barrett S. and Fudge, C (1981).
‘Examine the Policy Action Relationship’.
Barrett, S. and Fudge (eds) Policy Action: Essays on the Implementation of Public Policy.
London and New York: Methuen.
Chandler R. C. Plano, J. C. (1988).
The Public Administration Dictionary: England: ABC-CLIO Christopher Plitt, Lew Lewis, et al: (1979).
Public Policy in Theory and Practice.
The Open University Press, London.
UNIT 2 APPROACHES TO THE STUDY OF PUBLIC POLICY BHM768 POLICY IMPLEMENTATION & EVALUATION CONTENTS 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objectives 3.0 Main Content 3.1 Public Policy Study 3.1.1 Systems Analysis Approach 3.1.2 Institutional Approach 3.1.3 Elite Theory Approach 3.1.4 Group Theory Approach 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutor-Marked Assignment 7.0 References/Further Reading 1.0 INTRODUCTION You will recall that in the first unit, an attempt was made to define Public Policy and Political Science as a study.
We explained to you how public policy represents an outgrowth of political science and the thin lines of demarcation between the two studies.
In unit two, we want to take a step further to examine the efforts of some political theorists, who attempted to explain the nature of Public Policy.
But it is very relevant to point out to you that the authors’ perception or view represents a distinct approach we want to look at.
In explaining some concepts in the social sciences, writers have always expressed their views using approach-method.
For example, our elders have always told us the story of some four boys who went to the forest on a hunting expedition.
From their various positions, these children, saw a big animal.
Out of fear, they ran home; inform their elders the type of animal they had seen.
None of them knew the name of the animal but it was from the various descriptions of the parts they saw that the elders pieced together before they concluded that indeed it was an elephant the children saw.
2.0 OBJECTIVES At the end of this unit, you should be able to: BHM768 POLICY IMPLEMENTATION & EVALUATION • identify the four approaches to the study of public policy • explain the four approaches of public policy • distinguish between the various approaches – using some common characteristics • have a proper understanding of public policy from different approaches.
3.0 MAIN CONTENT 3.1 Public Policy Study There are four (4) main approaches to the study of public policy.
These are discussed bellow: 3.1.1 System Analysis Approach A system approach simply has as its main feature; input, process and output (A feedback loop).
The human body is made–up of different parts or organs.
But all these parts are inter-related and they function together otherwise, a breakdown of one part may render the whole body useless.
Look at yourself, identify the various organs that make-up your body.
Assuming that your digestive system is non-functional (God forbid), what is likely to happen?
Your guess is as good as mine.
Conversely, look at a motorcar; assuming the brake system (unit) fails on motion, an accident, of course, is inevitable.
The degree of which only God can tell.
Coming nearer home, therefore, systems are made-up of many parts or units, which according to Olaniyi (op cit) has three elements viz: i.
Parts ii.
The parts must be related to the whole and iii.
Each part makes certain contributions towards the survival of the whole.
This third element is called the functions.
This is tehses e nce of “functionalism”.
For any living or organic system to maintain a balance or survive, each of the component units must be functional.
Equally, in the hsoucmieatny , any named Political system is made up of several sub-groups- economic, political, cultural, educational, social etc.
These sub–groups perform different functions that keep the entire social system moving (Olaniyi, 1997:71-74).
BHM768 POLICY IMPLEMENTATION & EVALUATION Consequently, the political system takes inputs from society which makes demands for particular policies.
This is an expression of support for the regime which converts these demands into outputs (authoritative policies and divisions).
The quality of output will determine whether to effect a policy change or introduce new methods to get the desired results.
Here, let us take a pause and think of contemporary government policy that gave negative (feedback) signals?
What did the government do to refocus the policy?
Here, a good case in point is the FGeodveerranl m ent National Poverty Eradication Programme (NAPEP).
Output represents the result of the services rendered, which when tested, was found to be deficient in many respects.
This new policy is going through another cycle and the feedback so far, has been more successful than the earlier one.
The main impact of the system approach to the study of public policy is that society does not operate in a vacuum.
Rather, it has many components and interrelated parts.
Each functions properly for the well- being of the whole.
Any deficiency in any of the results falls short of expectation.
This is the crux of the systems theory.
Any successful government policy elicits support for government, particularly when the needs of the people are being met.
But people will automatically withdraw support when the reverse is the case.
3.1.2 Institutional Approach Institutional approach to the study of politics focuses on the normal institutions of government – Legislature, Executive and Judiciary.
Oye (1978) says that, “Institutions may be so structured as to facilitate certain policy outcomes.
They may give advantage to certain interest in the society and withhold advantage from other interest”.
This is relevant to our contemporary politics in Nigeria and the local government in particular.
There is often a situation where some individuals or groups enjoy comparative advantages of patronage or benefits more than others.
In most cases, the relative advantage of such groups usually stem from the way the organisation/institution is structured.
For example, where a new organisation is established by the government of a state, and the governor appoints, say, the Chief Executive and locates the organisation in his hometown, one would not be too surprised if 90% of the employees are from the home town of the Governor – the result of the appointment of the head and the location is already predetermined – which will invariably result in employment opportunities for his community in most cases through a provisional BHM768 POLICY IMPLEMENTATION & EVALUATION law/edict allowing for higher percentage employment/admission of catchment area.
3.1.3 Elites Theory Approach Geraint Parry in his Political Elites (1977), explained that ‘elites’ could be regarded as “decision makers of the society whose power is nsuobt je ct to control by any other body in the society”.
He, tdheefrinefeodr e , ‘ elites’ as “the small minority who appear to play an exceptionally influential part in political and social affairs of tghraotu p ”.
In the field of Political Science, the elite theory is basically a class analysis approach to the understanding of public policy analysis (Olaniyi, op cit: 91) According to Olaniyi (1998), two classes of elite can be identified thus: i.
Government elite and ii.
Non-governed elite.
He went further to identify the hypothesis underlying the elite theory such as: a) That in every society, there exists a minority of the population, which takes major decisions.
Such decisions are usually referred to as political decision b) Those elites include those who occupy political power or seek to influence governmental decisions.
c) That there is a circulation of elites d) That there are no changes in the society about the composition or structure of the elites.
Consequently, a major feature of the elite theory is that it believes that the structure of elites remains the same.
However, the central contention of the elite theory is the issue of “government by the people”.
Tthheiosr y is of the view that it is a fallacy to say that everybody takes part in decision-making.
Instead, what we have in practice is government by a minority or clique, protecting the individual or group interest of the ruling class.
Indeed, in public policy analysis, decision-making is by a small group who struggle to ensure that their interest is protected.
On their part, the ruling elites always argue that they are not amnatis-s e s, but that they are the leaders of their various communities who have the right to determine the direction of public policy.
3.1.4 Group Theory BHM768 POLICY IMPLEMENTATION & EVALUATION Simply put, the argument of this theory presupposes a significant role of the group as opposed to the individual in public policy analysis.
For example, prominence is given to a cabinet and not a Minister.
Another important input to the Group Theory is that man cannot live alone.
As a gregarious ‘animal’, he tends to live and work in a group.
It is in line with this assertion that Roberts and Edwards (1991) explained a group as “a relatively persistent pattern of human activity and interaction or an aggregate of persons who share some set of characteristics”.
Through the study of groups in society, one should be able to have a picture of the entire society.
In policy analysis, we need to study the activities of a group and with the mindset that the individuals in the groups are rational and self – interested.
However, this premise has attracted criticisms from other scholars.
For example, Marcus Oslon Jr., argued that it is wrong for the Group Theorists to assume that individuals who are rational and self-centered will pursue group interest.
According to him, individuals will rather pursue individual interest under three conditions viz: i.
If the group is small ii.
If the individuals are offered incentives iii.
If the individuals are coerced.
Another assumption of the Group Theory is that it centers on the Zero – sum game.
The theory also assumes “criss-cutting membership” and “cross cutting cleavages”.
By ‘criss-cutting membership’, we mean a situation in which an individual member of the group belongs to two or more associations.
On the other hand, ‘criss-cutting cleavages’ mean that members of a group often have divergent interests.
In summary, in policy-making, decisions of policy makers can be regarded as group decisions, but during the process of policy formulation, each policy maker will be out to ensure that his interest or those of his constituents/cleavages are protected.
Therefore, in the final analysis, what is often desired as “group decision” may be a decision taken to satisfy just a section of the community or local government.
This further confirms the opinion that there are countless numbers of interests not represented in a society at any point in time.
SELF ASSESSMENT EXERCISE 1 BHM768 POLICY IMPLEMENTATION & EVALUATION Mention four approaches to the study of public policy.
Explain any three of them in detail.
4.0 CONCLUSION The four approaches mentioned above represent the viewpoints of political theorists at explaining the nature of public analysis.
With this study, your knowledge of public policy would have been further broadened.
The concept of public policy analysis would have bbeeettne r focused in your mind as well.
A major link that needs be observed here is the erroneous impression, commonly given by our elites, that they are fighting for the masses.
Consequently and more often than not, most political agitators, usually hide under the group or nationalist toga to further their own nests when given the mandate to rule.
This is why most government policies often fail to achieve its desired objectives.
5.0 SUMMARY In this unit, we have dealt with the four approaches to public policy analysis in order to have a proper grasp of the concept.
First, we discussed the systems approach which views the psyoslitteimca la s being made up of other sub-systems of economic, political, cultural, educational, and social units.
These sub-groups perform different functions and it is a combination of these functions that keep the entire system moving.
Secondly, we discussed the institutional approach.
Here we looked at formal institutions like the legislature, executive and judiciary.
We also discussed why less premium is given to organisations such as pressure groups or the mass media etc.
However, the elite theory is basically a class analysis approach to the understanding of public analysis.
To them, not everybody takes part in the act of governance, as being regularly drummed up.
Rather, what we have in practice is government by a minority.
And of course tihneteirr e st is their priority which is often protected.
Finally, we examined the Group Public Policy.
The theory believes that in the policy process, we need to study the activities of a group and that individuals in the groups are rational and self-interested.
6.0 TUTOR-MARKED ASSIGNMENT BHM768 POLICY IMPLEMENTATION & EVALUATION 1.
Mention the four approaches to the nature of policy?
2.
Explain any two of them in detail.
7.0 REFERENCES/FURTHER READING Olaniyi, J. O.
(1995).
‘Democratizing Public Policy Making Process in Nigeria’.
Danmole, H. O. et al.
Contemporary Issues in Nigeria Affairs.
Ibadan: SUNAD Publishers Ltd. Oye T. R. (1976).
Policy Analysis.
Alabama: United States of America.
Parry G. (1977).
Political Elites.
London: George Allen.
Roberts and Edwards A.
(1991).
A Dictionary of Political Analysis.
London: Edward Arnold.
BHM768 POLICY IMPLEMENTATION & EVALUATION UNIT 3 THE PUBLIC POLICY MAKING PROCESS CONTENTS 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objectives 3.0 Main Content 3.1 The Stages of Public Policy Making Process 3.1.1 What is a Public Policy Problem?
3.1.2 The Policy Formulation Stage 3.1.3 Policy Agenda 3.1.4 Factors that Influence Policy Agenda Government 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutor-Marked Assignment 7.0 References/Further Reading 1.0 INTRODUCTION Recall that in unit two, we discussed in detail the various approaches to public policy analysis.
Do not forget that we explained the Sapypsrteomacsh , Institutional approach, the Elite Theory and Group Theory approaches.
In this segment, attempt would be made to explain to you the processes involved in the policy-making.
In particular, we shall see the stages of policy making and discuss certain constraints to the success of even a good policy.
2.0 OBJECTIVES At the end of this unit, you should be able to: • understand public policy making process • list the major constraints to the success of a good policy • identify a public policy problem • list the processes involved in policy formulation.
3.0 MAIN CONTENT 3.1 The Stages of Public Policy Making Process Public policy making begins with the setting of realisable goals.
The setting of goals will as you know, give direction and focus to tghoev e rnment on the one hand and the policy implementers on the other.
However, when the goals are unrealistic, the policy will eventually fail.
In most developing countries and Nigeria in particular, it has bdeisecno v ered that unrealistic goals are set, which eventually lead to policy BHM768 POLICY IMPLEMENTATION & EVALUATION failure.
A number of reasons for poor goal setting are pertinent to mention at this juncture: 1.
Failure of politicians to write and campaign on realistic programmes.
For this reason, at the implementation stage, problem of how to satisfy every segment of the country emerges; more so in a country of diverse language, religion and culture.
2.
Lack of or total absence of relevant information and data for adequate planning and forecasting.
3.
Trivialisation or outright rejection of constructive criticism, particularly from the opposition party.
Consequently, many errors that could have been avoided are set as goals by policy makers and government 4.
The social environment of the policy makers which includes political culture and socio-economic conditions.
3.1.1 What is a Public Policy Problem Smith (1964), defined a policy problem as “a condition or situation of dissatisfaction, self-identified or identified by others for which relief is sought”.
Thinking along the same line, Egonmwn (1991), also asserted that a policy problem is a “social situation, which many people considered adverse or intolerable in its effects on a large number of people over a long period of time.
Therefore, people consider such situation to need a constructive change”.
A lot of problems happen to individuals, groups or some communities.
These problems will elicit private solutions before they can be solved.
But before a social problem can become a “public problem” Egonmwan (op.
cit) opined that, “all or some of the following conditions need to occur: i.
That a large number of people are in unfortunate conditions, suffer deprivation, and are dissatisfied with an undesirable situation.
ii.
These adverse conditions are recognised by some or a large number of people.
iii.
In addition to those who suffered the unsatisfactory situation, the government is aware of the situation as they have responsibilities for coping with it.
iv.
People outside the immediate social problems (third party) and the number of people who think that something should be done about the situation apart from merely recognising the undesirable situation.
v. Conflicting interest and cognitive disagreements should be presented by different groups.
This will motivate the government to step in and make necessary investigation and take appropriate action.
BHM768 POLICY IMPLEMENTATION & EVALUATION vi.
Apart from objective situations, the values and perception of people also determine what a public problem is.
The value and perception of policy makers is one of the problems confronting policy making in any nation.
What is allowed in a society may be forbidden in another.
You should, however, note that policy makers coming from these two communities would have different approaches to the problems.
What may be regarded as public problem therefore varies from place to place and it is also determined by time and mood of the people?
3.1.2 The Policy Formulation Stage With the above preamble, it is now necessary to proceed to tfhoerm ulation stage proper, which of course is the first step in the policy making processes.
Graphically, these three stages are represented thus: Form u lati on Policy Feedback Implementation And E valution Fig.
3.1.
The Policy Making Process.
Source: Egonmwan At this stage and having been faced with the problem, the policy actors would now decide what is to be done and how to achieve the goal.
Of course, this can adequately be done after receiving inputs or information on the subject matter.
However, Lindblorn (1963) has given a typical format of how a policy formulation should look like.
1.
Faced with a given problem 2.
A rational man first clarifies his goals, values or objectives, and then ranks or otherwise organises them in his mind; 3.
He then lists all important possible ways or policies for achieving his goals; 4.
And investigates all the important consequences that would follow from each of the alternative policies; BHM768 POLICY IMPLEMENTATION & EVALUATION 5.
At which point is he in a position to compare consequences of each policy with goals?
(this is necessary to ensure that the result to be realised does not contradict the original aim); 6.
And so choose the policy whose consequences most closely match his goal.
Another author who shares a similar view was Dimock, et al (1983: 141).
They noted that policy analysis involves the following: It starts with a problem or situation.
Then there is a collection of all the relevant facts, followed by an analysis of the alternative solutions or explanations, then a choice of the alternatives that appear to have the maximum chance of success and the largest amount of rationality behind it.
Then there is an indication, with varying degrees of explicitness, how the particular objectives may best be achieved.
From these two views, you would realise that both authors step into the analysis of policies, based on an objective and candid standpoint of the actors in policy formulation.
This, Lindblom called the “rational man”.
These steps in my own opinion are the steps any problem-solver should take.
These steps as explained represent a classical model of rational decision.
Note too that the output of this process of policy formulation stage is usually expressed in legislative Acts, Decrees, Policy Statements, Directives, Circulars, Council Conclusions, Laws and Guidelines etc.
The policy formulation process can be represented diagrammatically like this: Identify problem Set goals Determine Objectives Select the best Estimate costs of alternative each alternative Identify alternative process Fig 3.2: The policy Formulation process Source: Olaniyi BHM768 POLICY IMPLEMENTATION & EVALUATION 3.1.3 Policy Agenda As you are aware, policy makers always receive many demands from the public.
Government usually details the public servants to compile such requests for council consideration and deliberation.
These are always in the form of policy agenda.
The next question then, is “What is a policy agenda?” Put simply, they are the policies that are selected for consideration and adoption.
In a country like Nigeria, particularly with diverse religion, ceuthlntuirce , and social problems, you are bound to see different pgrreosuspusr;e interest groups, associations and individuals with diverse demands.
They are mainly organs to articulate and redress one problem or the other.
Towards this end, they make representations to pmoalkiceyr s and they seek redress to these myriads of problems employing different methods.
However, the available resources (finance), to tackle these problems are meager.
Hence, government selects a few surmountable problems at a time, particularly problems from the most vocal and powerful groups.
Consequently, “those demands that are chosen or those on which decision makers are compelled to acoctn s titute policy agenda” (Egonmwan op cit.).
You should however be careful not to confuse policy agenda w“piothli c y priority”.
The latter entails ranking of agenda items with some regarded as more important or pressing than the others.
You could see that policy priority is similar to the notion of scale of preference you did in economics in your secondary school days, which is a swithuearteiobny you rank your preferences in order of your needs or requirements.
3.1.4 Factors that Influence Choices of Policy Agenda by Government Next, we want to identify some factors that influence government to adopt certain policies while others are outrightly rejected.
This, it is hoped, will aid our proper understanding of what is policy agenda in particular and policy formulation in general.
These are: i Special interest which political leadership develops in them.
This may arise from various influences – political, economic, religions, sociological etc.
ii Emergency or crisis, which could trigger-off wide reactions, which attracts the attention of a large number of people i.e.
BHM768 POLICY IMPLEMENTATION & EVALUATION menace of armed robbery, flood disasters, outbreak of epidemic, war etc.
iii Outbreak of violence, riots and disturbance of public peace.
Riots could be employed by groups having failed to attain their demands through peaceful means.
vi The role of the press (Fourth estate of the realm).
Through this medium, government’s attention is drawn to public demand, thereby influencing the choice of policy agenda.
v International interventionist conditionalities.
Particularly relevant here are Third World countries who are beneficiaries of donor agencies like WHO (World Health Organisation), World Bank, IMF (International Monetary Fund), International Labour Organisation (ILO) etc.
They impose conditionalities before such beneficiary countries could enjoy loans and aids.
vi The role of interest groups which exists to influence government policies either in their favour or that of a particularly defined group.
vii Availability of human and material resources.
This is often done in relation to the planning proposals.
viii Interests of the policy actors who are people of diverse socio- cultural background.
ix Party programme.
A problem that falls within the framework of the ruling party’s manifesto is bound to receive the attention of the political executive.
SELF ASSESSMENT EXERCISE 1 1.
(a) What is a policy problem?
(b) What are the circumstances that can warrant a public policy formulation?
2.
Enumerate a typical format of how a public policy formulation should look like 3.
(a) Define policy agenda?
(b) What are the factors that influence policy agenda by government?
4.0 CONCLUSION We have explained that policy making process begins with appropriate goal setting.
But a policy may be distorted, the moment such policies are unattainable or unrealisable.
But on the whole, decision makers and authors must be objective and rational for a policy to be realisable.
BHM768 POLICY IMPLEMENTATION & EVALUATION 5.0 SUMMARY Recall that we discussed the issue of public problem.
These are those situations that we can rightly call public problem.
Furthermore, aantt e mpt was made to explain the policy formulation stages.
Panoalilcyys is entails setting of goals, listing of all possible solutions, and choosing the best option that has the highest chance of success.
Note too that the output of a policy process is usually expressed tlhegroisulgahti v e acts.
Finally, do not forget that because of financial constraints and myriads of other problems that daily confront policy makers, few policies could be slated for consideration and possible deliberation – this is policy agenda.
We concluded this unit by identifying factors that influence the choice of policy agenda.
The role of the news media, vibrant pressure groups and political party manifesto and other international conditionalities are some of the factors that influence choices of policy agenda.
6.0 TUTOR-MARKED ASSIGNMENT 1.
Mention 5 steps in public policy formulation stage.
2.
What is policy agenda?
What are the factors that can influence the choice of a policy agenda?
7.0 REFERENCES/FURTHER READING Dimock, M. E. et al.
(1983).
Public Administration.
New York; Sounders College Publishing.
Egonmwan J.
A (1991).
Public Policy Analysis: Concept and Applications.
Benin City: S. M. O. Aka and Brothers Press.
Lindblom, C. E. (1963).
The Policy Making Process.
New Jersey: Prentice-hall, Inc. Englewood Cliffs.
Smith G. D. (1964).
‘Pragmatism and the Group Theory of politics’.
American Political Science Review LVIII (September).
BHM768 POLICY IMPLEMENTATION & EVALUATION UNIT 4 FUNCTIONATIRES IN POLICY MAKING PROCESS CONTENTS 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objectives 3.0 Main Content 3.1 Principal Actors in the Policy Making Process 3.1.1 The Political Executives 3.1.2 Council Legislators 3.1.3 Administrators (Public Servant) 3.1.4 Judicial Functionaries 3.1.5 Interest Group 3.1.6 Special Commissions/Panels 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutor-Marked Assignment 7.0 References/Further Reading 1.0 INTRODUCTION We have seen in the previous units how policy actors are involved in the formulation of public policy up to the level of policy agenda.
Here, we shall look at the real actors in the policy process.
Here, also, we shall touch on the political executives, and legislators in the Local Government Councils and Judicial Officers.
2.0 OBJECTIVES At the end of this unit, you should be able to: • identify the various actors in the policy making process • enumerate factors why public servants are becoming more prominent in the policy making process • list the areas where bureaucrats are involved in the policy making process.
BHM768 POLICY IMPLEMENTATION & EVALUATION 3.0 MAIN CONTENT 3.1 Principal Actors in the Policy Making Process The principal actors in the policy making process are hereunder discussed: 3.1.1 The Political Executives Policy making, as we have come to know it today, is not the exclusive preserve of one arm of government alone.
All arms of government are involved.
These include the executive, legislators, (law makers), administrators, judges, interest groups and commissions of enquiry and panels.
Looking at what determines the membership of the political executive, it depends largely on the type of government in place.
The type ogof v ernment a nation adopts, determines the composition of the political executives.
For example, remember that in the first republic, at tnhaet io nal level, the political executives included the President (ceremonial head of state), the Prime Minister, who wielded executive powers and the Parliamentarians.
At various times under the military, we have had the Supreme Military Council (SMC), the Armed Forces Ruling Council (AFRC) and at another time we had the PRruolvinisgi oCnoaul n cil (PRC).
Coming nearer home at the local government level in the fourth republic today, those that constitute the political executives are the chairman, the legislative council members and the political secretary of the lgoocvael rn ment.
Recall too that in the second republic under President Shehu Shagari, when Nigeria adopted the executive presidential system of government, the political executive participated in decision-making process in the following ways: 1.
Bills could be initiated by the presidency or from a partMiciunliasrt r y.
2.
The president was given the constitutional powers to sign any bill properly passed by the National Assembly into law.
3.
The political executives used to mandate the appropriate quarters to implement any policy without involving other agencies.
BHM768 POLICY IMPLEMENTATION & EVALUATION Comparatively, the executive exercises more influence in the developing countries than in the developed states, because aggregating structures like political parties, professional associations, labour unions are said to be weak.
Also, the executive is also more involved on policy making in plural society than in homogeneous societies.
3.1.2 Council Legislators The Legislative Council performs the more crucial roles of policy making than the other arms of Government.
This is because, as you already know, legislators pass bills or laws for the executive to implement.
They also have the right to delegate legislation to other bodies or organs of government.
You should note also that in a democratic government, as we have it in Nigeria today, Legislators are involved in the task of policy making in the following ways.
1.
Legislators at the state level, pass bills such as Appropriation Bill that may be passed into a law before the executive could begin to spend (budget).
2.
They adopt motions in the form of private observations or observations from the public.
3.
They determine major policy issues; for example local government conducts local government elections or approval of major state appointments.
At the Local Government level, we have similar pattern of function by the councilors.
The local government legislative councils pass bye– laws or edicts as the case may be.
They equally approve estimates submitted to them by the council chairman.
3.1.3 Administrators/Public Servants Administrators here could be regarded as the career civil/public servants or those appointed.
These people, as you are aware, could be found in various government ministries, departments, extra-ministerial departments and parastatals.
In most governments, the public servants are ‘permanent’ because when the elected and appointed executives go, it is the public servants that remain.
Consequently, no incoming government can do without them either in policy formulation or in its implementation.
BHM768 POLICY IMPLEMENTATION & EVALUATION So, you can see that most governments, past or present, mciviliiltiaarny, c a onr d o without them.
This is so because of political instability and because most ministers or commissioners that are usually appointed at the federal or state levels respectively, lack the experience and their educational qualification are often times low.
Furthermore, public administrators are more involved in the pmoalkiciyn-g process because most political appointees are always too involved in partisan politics, that they do not even have time for the process of policy making.
The public administrators are often involved in the collection of data and information about policy proposals, and in fact, they are called upon to draft policy proposals.
For example, I think you know that at both federal, state and of course, local governments, it is the civil servants that are called upon to draft estimates of trheespire c tive ministries.
They then collate the estimates to the president or governor or the chairman of the Local Government before it is taken to the legislative council.
The public servants are the ones usually called upon to draft laws, which are designed to execute a programme and assess or evaluate the policy.
They could be called upon to recommend how to improve the quality of the policy.
Briefly put, we can summarise the ways bureaucrats are involved in the policy making process thus: 1.
They can be called upon to assist in the collection of data (facts) and information about policy proposals.
2.
They assist in the preparation of the drafts of policy proposals.
That is they help to define policy before the legislative stage is reached.
3.
They assist in drafting the law, which is designed to carry out the progrmme.
4.
They assist in the evaluation of the success of any policy implemented and recommended.
They assist on how to iumpopnro tvhee q uality (contents) of a policy.
3.1.4 Judiciary Functionaries Next, we want to see the role of the judiciary in the policy process.
In Nigeria, as you are aware, judicial functionaries are involved in the policy making process in the following areas: 1.
They are involved through appointments as chairmen of special commissions, panels and other related judicial enquiries.
Their findings, recommendations and solutions are often adopted by government.
BHM768 POLICY IMPLEMENTATION & EVALUATION 2.
Judicial officers are equally involved in the policy process through constitutional interpretations to resolve crisis or impasse between the executive and the legislature.
A relevant example is the Supreme Court verdict/ruling in the local government elections or the electoral bill 2002.
The other is the popular judgment on resource control between governors and the federal government.
3.
Court judgment in respect of power–sharing between the two arms of government.
This helps to define the constitutional limits of each arm.
The two examples cited above are equally relevant.
3.1.5 Interest Groups Interest groups can be discussed as those associations, which are out to influence government policies to the advantage of either their members or a policy (ideology) they seek to promote.
The latter part of this definition shows that the activities of interest groups can be in the form of political, economic, cultural, and educational associations.
For example, whenever any policy is to be formulated by the political executives, or any other author, an interest group will be out to ensure that such a policy does not contradict its interest.
On the other hand, an interest group can even initiate the formulation of a particular policy, which will be in its interest.
This it does through the lawmakers or appropriate agents.
Towards this end, an interest group adopts methods like lobbying, making representation, submitting memoranda etc., to drive home its demands.
3.1.6 Special Commissions/Panels These are the bodies always constituted by the government to investigate certain policy issues or make proposals on certain policy issues.
At the expiration of their sittings, they always make a number of suggestions, which are usually included in their reports submitted to the government.
Such suggestions always influence the policy actions of government in future.
This is often reflected in the form of legislations, which are often prohibitory (regulatory) in nature.
For example, some decrees are promulgated on the bases of the findings of special Military Tribunals constituted to try certain category of people in the society.
SELF ASSESSMENT EXERCISE 1 Identify five principal actors in the policy making process.
Discuss any three of them in detail.
4.0 CONCLUSION BHM768 POLICY IMPLEMENTATION & EVALUATION From the foregoing, you would see that the policy-making pinrvoocelvses s all the three arms of government.
The actors in the pporolicceys s could be political executives, bureaucrats or legislators and interest groups.
But nowadays, public administrators or public servants are becoming more prominent in this process than the other abremcasu s e of the incompetence and lack of requisite experience by the legislators and the politicians.
Indeed, political appointees are minovroelv ed in political activities than being in policy formulation.
5.0 SUMMARY Don not forget that we have tried to enumerate the areas where political executives participate in the policy process.
We equally pointed out the reasons why bureaucrats are more visible in the policy process than the political class.
We pointed out areas where legislators are involved in the policy making process [i.e.
passing appropriation bills, adopting motions and determining major issues of state].
Most importantly, public servants are more visible in areas of dcoatlale c tions, preparation of draft bills, and evaluation of policies and programmes of government.
6.0 TUTOR-MARKED ASSIGNMENT 1.
Mention five actors in the policy making process?
Discuss any three of them in detail?
2.
In what ways are the bureaucrats involved in the policy making process?
7.0 REFERENCES/FURTHER READING Olaniyi, J. O.
(1995).
‘Democratizing Public Policy Making Process in Nigeria’.
Danmole, H. O. et al.
Contemporary Issues in Nigeria Affairs.
Ibadan: Sunad Publishers Limited.
Sharkansky, I.
(1978).
Public Administration: Policy Making in Government Agencies.
Chicago: and McNally College Publishing Company.
Wade, L. L. (1972).
The Elements of Public Policy.
Columbus Ohio: Charles E. Merrill Publishing Company.
UNIT 5 POLICY IMPLEMENTATION BHM768 POLICY IMPLEMENTATION & EVALUATION CONTENTS 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objectives 3.0 Main Content 3.1 Policy Implementation stage 3.1.1 Approaches to Policy Implementation 3.1.2 Standard Operating Procedures of Policy Implementation 3.1.3 The General Problems of Policy Implementation 3.1.4 Problems of Policy Implementation in Developing Countries 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutor-Marked Assignment 7.0 References/Further Reading 1.0 INTRODUCTION The policy implementation stage starts after a policy becomes operational through the passing of legislation and after financial resources have been committed.
Consequently, what we shall be discussing in this unit has to do with faithful implementation of a policy by agencies concerned, so as to achieve the set goal of the policy.
At this point, we shall examine some likely problems in policy implementation with a view to avoiding them.
Finally, using Nigeria as a case study, we shall examine the problems of policy implementation in developing countries.
2.0 OBJECTIVES At the end of this unit, you should be able to: • identify certain assumptions under which the implementation stage operates • list the factors under which implementation come into effect • enumerate some of the problems of policy implementation.
BHM768 POLICY IMPLEMENTATION & EVALUATION 3.0 MAIN CONTENT 3.1 Policy Implementation Stage As I said in the introductory part of this unit, you should be aware that the policy implementation stage begins with the passage of required legislation and commitment of financial resources.
Of course you know that having committed the resources, human and material needs will be harnessed for the actualisation of the policy content and attainment of policy objectives.
Pressman and Wildavsy, in their study initially defined it thus: “Implementation may be viewed as a process of interaction between the setting of goals and actions geared to achieving them”.
From this definition, they have tried to explain that implementation does not refer to creating the initial conditions.
Legislation has to be passed and funds committed before implementation takes place to secure the predicted outcome.
To further bring the point to you, it is essential to say that there is a difference between programme and policy.
A programme exists when the initial conditions – the ‘if’ stage of the policy hypothesis – have been met.
The world programme signifies the conversation of a hypothesis into governmental action.
The initial premises of the hypothesis have been authorised.
Therefore the degree to which the predicted consequences (the ‘than’ stage) takes place we will call implementation.
It is the ability to forge subsequent links in the casual chain so as to obtain the desired results.
From these definitions certain points or assumptions become pertinent: 1.
That implementation is a series of logical steps – a progression from intention through decision to action – implementation starts where policy stops.
2.
Policymaking represents the initial conditions and creating of programmes which form the input to their implementation process.
3.
They see implementation as putting policy or programmes into effect, coordinating and managing the various elements required to achieve the desired goal.
You can now see that policy implementation encompasses those public and private individuals (or groups) that are directed at the achievement of objectives set forth in prior policy decisions.
3.1.1 Approaches to Policy Implementation BHM768 POLICY IMPLEMENTATION & EVALUATION Here, you should note that the previous definitions of implementation can be categorised as: policy-centered and action-centered approaches.
Policy-centered approach or the policy makers’ perspective represents what policy makers are trying to do to put a policy into effect.
Bpoyl ic y-centered approach, it is assumed that policy is the starting point, the trigger for action, and implementation as logical step-by step progression from policy intention to action.
As noted earlier, this perspective tends to be associated with the hierarchical concept of organisation.
A policy emanates from the ‘top’ (or center) and is transmitted down the hierarchy (or to the periphery), and translated into more specific rules and procedures as it goes to guide or control action at the bottom (or on the ground).
However, in our view, this perspective is open to question.
It assumes that policy comes from the top and is the starting point for implementation and action.
This, we would argue, is not necessarily the case.
Policy may be a response to pressures and problem experienced on the ground.
Equally, policy may be developed from specific innovations.
Not all action relates to a specific or explicit policy.
The hierarchical view of implementation also implies that implementers are agents for policy-makers and are therefore, in a complex relationship to policy makers.
But in many instances, especially in the public policy field, those upon whom action depends are not in any hierarchical association with those making policy.
By definition, public policy is often aimed at directing in many instances, be it autonomous or semi- autonomous, with their own interests and priorities to pursue and their own policy –making role.
We would thus argue that, it is essential to look at implementation, not solely in terms of putting policy into effect, but also in terms oobf s erving what actually happens or gets done and seeking to understand how and why.
This kind of action perspective takes ‘what is done’ as central, focuses attention on the behaviour or actions of groups and individuals and the determinants of that behaviour and seeks to examine the degree to which action relates to policy, rather than assuming it to follow from policy.
From this perspective, implementation or action may be regarded as services of responses: to ideological commitment, to environmental pressures, or to pressure from other agencies (groups) seeking to influence or control action.
3.1.1 Standard Operating Procedures of Policy Implementation BHM768 POLICY IMPLEMENTATION & EVALUATION If we agree that implementation is putting action into effect, we can equally ask what is involved in putting policy into effect.
All answer will reveal more on the meaning of implementation.
For example, take the building of a house extension, the job will require money, material, skills and time; it will also involve obtaining town planning authority approval.
Most people would hire a builder, deciding how much discretion will be left to him or her in the control pTehrefroerfmoraen cpeu.t t ing a policy into effect according to Barrett and Fudge is basically dependent on: 1.
Knowing what to do 2.
The availability of the required resources.
3.
The ability to marshal and control these resources to achieve the desired end.
4.
If others are to carry out the task, communicating what is wanted and controlling their performance.
3.1.2 The General Problems of Policy Implementation Many of the problems of putting policy into effect stem from tmheu lt iplicity of agencies involved in implementation.
Such problems have been well illustrated in Pressman and Wildarsky’s study earlier mentioned.
1.
One of the key reasons for policy failure is that policy makgeernse r ally underestimate the complexity and difficulty of co- coordinating the tasks and agencies involved in implementing programmes.
2.
Another problem is lack of coordination or inadequate communication can hinder effective implementation.
If intentions are not well spelt-out clearly through the right channels established for the transmission of policy to those involved in policy formulation, then the policy will not be put into effect.
3.
A policy or a programme may be implemented by agencies whose interests do not necessarily coincide with those of the policy makers.
This is often the case during the era of party-politics, when finosr ta nces, top bureaucrats with diverse political interests are saddled with the responsibility of implementing policies.
Their inactions may frustrate the intentions of the policy makers.
4.
Implementations will not automatically follow from policy decisions but needs to be treated as a ‘positive purposive process in itself’.
Consequently, substantial effort and continuity of efforts is required to follow policy from intention to action.
3.1.4 Problems of Policy Implementation in Developing BHM768 POLICY IMPLEMENTATION & EVALUATION Countries 1.
Administrative problems Numerous problems are connected with the administration of development plans and specific development.
These includes long delays in execution of the plan, increased costs over the projected costs because of delays and inflation, inferior construction, low yields on investments, unnecessary disposal of resources among a number of small and uncoordinated job.
There are three other sources of administrative confusion and incompetence.
a.
The lack of trained experts to administer the complex programme and projects so vital to economic development.
b.
Lack of political support for civil servants and bureaucrats.
c. The casual way in which third world bureaucrats manipulate or alter statistical data to conform to political requirements.
2.
The problem of the world economy The serious lack or inadequate funds to finance projects or programmes that all third world governments would like to establish.
It is argued that although they can depend on foreign assistance for loans or grants, but these sources attach stringent conditions to these loans.
Most often, they infringe on the political power of developing countries.
3.
Political constraints.
Political and economic constraints in the third world countries can alter the quality of lives in many ways.
When government makes laws, however, it turns round to aid and abet the non- compliance of such laws by the public.
Corruption can be traced to the administrative styles of many countries.
For example, the ridiculously low salary of civil servant makes them easily vulnerable to receiving bribes.
Added to this is the highly unequal distribution of political power or lopsidedness of political power, which is often the case in plural societies.
SELF ASSESSMENT EXERCISE 1 Discuss the peculiar problems of policy implementation in developing countries, using Nigeria as an example.
BHM768 POLICY IMPLEMENTATION & EVALUATION 4.0 CONCLUSION We have seen from this discussion that implementation begins from where policy stops.
It is also important that the implementation stage is related to the release of the enabling legislation, edict or decree with the concomitant release of funds and resources for its execution.
However, it is one thing to conceive an idea or policy; it is another to implement it so as to accomplish the desired result.
To be able to accomplish the desired result, there is the need to know what to do.
All the required resources should be available and we should be able to control these resources.
Communication is essential to the overall success of the programme.
But, particularly in developing countries, certain constraints impede the successful realisation of even a lofty policy.
These constraints include political, economic and administrative bottlenecks.
5.0 SUMMARY In this unit, we have seen that implementation is a set of logical steps which commences with the passage of required legislation, then the commitment of financial resources required for putting a policy oprr o gramme into effect.
Central to this process is the effective coordination and management of the various elements required to achieve the desired goals.
The obvious problems of implementation in developing countries include administration and the state of the economy.
6.0 TUTOR-MARKED ASSIGNMENT 1) (a) Define the concept, ‘implementation’ (b) Identify four steps involved in the implementation process?
2) Discuss five constraints to implementation in Nigeria.
7.0 REFERENCES/FURTHER READING Barrett, S and Fudge, C. (1981).
‘Examining the Policy–Action Relationship’.
Barrett, S and Fudge, C (eds) Policy and Action: BHM768 POLICY IMPLEMENTATION & EVALUATION Essays on the Implementation of Public Policy.
London and New York: Methuen.
BHM768 POLICY IMPLEMENTATION & EVALUATION MODUL E 2 U n i t 1 P o l i c y E v a l u a t i o n U n i t 2 P u b l i c P o l i c y a n d De c i s i o n - M a k i n g S t yl e s U n i t 3 T h e o r i e s a n d Mo d e l s o f De ci sU in oit n4 - M a Ikn tie nre gs t Groups and Political Parties in Policy-Making Process Unit 5 Government Policies and Local Government Administration in Nigeria UNIT 1 POLICY EVALUATION CONTENTS 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objectives 3.0 Main Content 3.1 Principle of Public Policy Evaluation 3.1.1 Definition of Evaluation 3.1.2 Approaches to Policy Evaluation 3.1.3 Advantages and Problems of Policy Evaluation 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutor-Marked Assignment 7.0 References/Further Reading 1.0 INTRODUCTION Policy Evaluation can be regarded as a way of achieving grersepaotenrs i veness to environmental realities and needs.
It is an activity which appraises the worth of a programme.
In this unit, we shall look at the approaches to the study of pevoalilcuya t ion and the problems of public policy evaluation.
We shall also examine the advantages of policy evaluation.
2.0 OBJECTIVES At the end of this unit, you should be able to: • define public evaluation BHM768 POLICY IMPLEMENTATION & EVALUATION • explain the various approaches to evaluation • identify the problems of policy evaluation • identify the advantages of policy evaluation.
3.0 MAIN CONTENT 3.1 Principle of Public Policy Evaluation The basic principles of public policy evaluation are hereunder discussed.
3.1.1 Definition of Evaluation You will recall that at the introductory part of this course, we attempted to give you a glimpse of the definition of policy evaluation, further to this, we want to tell you that the term ‘evaluation’ embraces a wide range of activities.
Joseph Wholly, from the programme evaluation group of the Urban Institute in Washington, has commended that the word ‘seems to cover everything from multi-million dollar social experiments to one-day site visits’.
Evaluation as an activity can be briefly described as a procedure which appraises the worthiness of an activity, while ‘evaluation research is distinctive in so far as it uses the tools of social science research to undertake the appraisal.
Evaluation therefore, refers to judgments about the effectiveness of past actions, not appraisal of possible future alternative strategies.
Coming nearer home, Olaniyi (1998), declares that evaluation is the stage of comparison between the intended outcome of policy and actual achievements on the basis of experience gained during the implementation stage.
When there are so many discrepancies between expected and actual effects of policies, this could lead to a reformation of policy based on evaluation or assessment of the solution.
Consequently, he described evaluation as “the ability to locate mistakes and to remedy those errors to avoid serious or adverse consequences.
On the other hand, feedback in political context means any information about the impact of past and present policy choices to make new discussion about future policy decisions.
The essence of feedback is to ensure modifications.
Therefore, when feedback is lacking, policy actor cannot respond to mistakes quickly enough to avoid their adverse consequences.
Most new states lack facilities for evaluating policy outcomes.
Also, the limited communication media available in less developed systems inhibit the free flow of information that is so vital to policy makers in attempting to understand their own societies (Robert and Clark: 1982:130) BHM768 POLICY IMPLEMENTATION & EVALUATION 3.1.2 Approaches to Policy Evaluation In a review of the aims and approaches of evaluation research in social policy, Grant and Gallagher, listed five approaches, while pointing out that they are not mutually exclusive.
Most research in social policy calls for a mixed strategy, drawing together elements of each to meet the particular problems under consideration.
The five approaches are: 1 The experimental or quasi-experimental approach, which attempts to qualify success in achieving initial policy objectives, based on some form of before and after study, of those involved in the experiment in comparison with a control group.
2 The purely comparative study of success in achieving policy objectives, using quantitative measures and based on a comparison between those who have not been involved.
3 A social indicator approval based on the regular collection of quantitative indices, which demonstrate the success in achieving policy objectives over time.
4 A process evaluation, which is concerned with recording and Interpreting programmes and policies as they unfold, and employing a mixture of qualitative and quantitative data.
5 Cost–benefit analysis and similar less comprehensiveness approaches (e.g.
cost effectiveness, cost minimisation), which involve the use of economic concepts to identify and measure the costs and benefits of policies and programmes.
One important aspect in the various approaches is that we must be aware exactly what is being evaluated.
It might be the quality of pfoorlmicuyl a tion, the procedures for decision-making, the quality and quantity of information sought and used, for example; it might be the out-put of policy-making, the viability of a particular policy or set of policies, or their appropriateness to the ‘problem to which they adriere c ted; or it might be the policy outcome, what really happens on the ground when the policy is applied.
Furthermore, Rossi and Wright (1977), are of the opinion that there are various criteria according to which policies may be evaluated.
Tcrhitee r ion of public approval is concerned (as distinct from studying what it actually does).
In this case, ‘public’ might mean those at whom the policy is directed, or the electorate as a whole, party mmeemmbbeerrss, o f soorm e other group(s) BHM768 POLICY IMPLEMENTATION & EVALUATION Another criterion is that of fairness, the distribution of the burdens imposed by a policy, or of the benefits it confers.
Policies are also judged in terms of effectiveness, the extent to which they achieve the effect for which they are designed.
The criterion of efficiency, measures the cost-of effort or money – at which policies achieve their effect.
Thus, each criterion is concerned with different aspects of the policy measure, and an attempt, to use them are likely to raise questions about which particular blend of criteria to use in any evaluation exercise and whether to give them all equal weight, or to value one or some more highly than others.
3.1.3 Advantages and Problems of Policy Evaluation The essence of feedback in policy evaluation is to ensure modifications when policy errors are detected.
However, where feedback is lacking, policy actors cannot respond positively to mistakes quickly enough to avoid adverse consequences.
However, most new and developing states lack facilities for evaluating policy outcomes.
Also, the limited communication media available in less developed systems inhibit the free flow of information that is so vital to policy makers in attempting to understand their own societies (Robert and Clark: 1982).
Furthermore, lack or absence of press freedom also plays a key role in undermining their own self-analysis efforts.
Also, there is the problem of non-response from beneficiaries of government policies.
No government can evaluate its own policies as long as the supposed beneficiaries of these policies remain mute about policy defects.
Another problem of policy evaluation, particularly in the Third World countries is the “institutional flow in developing political systems”.
There are not enough autonomous associations and institutions at work in the Third World societies to obtain information about the impact of policies on their members or to assess the cost – benefits.
Various policy evaluation institutions that are available in developed communities like Think-Tanks, University Research Institutes, Laboratories and other Opinion polls usually conduct investigations in most developing countries.
Also, “the more conventional feedback mechanisms such as political parties and interest groups are either fragmented, not trusted by their constituencies or controlled or ignored by the government” (Robert and Clark) BHM768 POLICY IMPLEMENTATION & EVALUATION SELF ASSESMENT EXERCISE 1 1.
What is “Policy Evaluation”?
2.
Mention and discuss in detail, the various approaches to Policy Evaluation?
4.0 CONCLUSION Evaluation as the concept implies, is a review, assessment or examination of a policy impact on the targeted population it is meant to serve.
In this respect, many tools are used in social research.
Also, the many approaches used have been given earlier.
All these are meant to bring rationality into the policy making process, through a monitoring system which is designed to provide data on the operations of ap ro gramme.
Other forms of evaluation are designed to serve the operational needs of programme personnel.
Such evaluations known variously as process evaluation, developmental evaluation or formative evaluation are useful, primarily, for alerting the staff to incipient weakness or unintended fairness of a programme and for epnrosupreirn ogp eration by those responsible for its administration.
5.0 SUMMARY Be reminded that we said that evaluation is a stage of cboemtwpeaernis tohne intended outcome of a policy and actual achievements on the basis of experience gained during the implementation stage.
Evaluation is therefore an attempt to locate mistakes, so as to remedy those errors and avoid adverse consequences between the initial objectives of a policy and the outcome of the policy.
Towards this end, we identified five approaches to policy evaluation, experimental or quasi-experimental approach, comparative study and social indicator approach.
Others are cost-benefit analysis, and process evaluation approach.
Further, we examined the problems of evaluation, particularly, in developing countries.
There is a dearth of facilities for evaluating policy outcomes.
Also, there is limited communication media available, thereby inhibiting the free-flow of needed information by policy analysis.
Finally, various policy evaluation institutions that are available in developed societies are lacking or are non-existent in the Third World countries.
BHM768 POLICY IMPLEMENTATION & EVALUATION 6.0 TUTOR-MARKED ASSIGNMENT Think of a current public policy.
Explain, in detail, policy implementation and evaluation using the policy of your choice as basis.
7.0 REFERENCES/FURTHER READING Grant and Gallagher.
(1979).
‘Paper Presented at a Conference of the Scottish Branch of the Social Services Research Group at Pitlochry’.
Peter H. Rossi and Sonia R. Wright.
(1977).
‘Evaluation Research: Assessment of Theory, Practice and Politics’ An Evaluation Quarterly, February, Sage publications Inc. Roberts and Clark.
(1982).
Power and Politics in the Third Word: New York Santa Barbara: John Wiley and company.
BHM768 POLICY IMPLEMENTATION & EVALUATION UNIT 2 PUBLIC POLICY AND DECISION MAKING STYLES CONTENTS 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objectives 3.0 Main Content 3.1 Styles of Public Policy and Decision-Making 3.1.1 What is Policy Style?
3.1.2 Styles of Decision-Making and Public Policy 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutor-Marked Assignment 7.0 References/Further Reading 1.0 INTRODUCTION In this unit, we shall examine styles of decision making or a policy style, which as we know, is an aspect of policy science which is dynamic in nature.
Therefore, policy styles differ from individual to individual and from state to state.
In short, as policy actors differ, so does the psyoslitteimca lu n der which the system operates.
In this unit, attempt will be made to identify three styles of decision- making, with a view to recommending a suitable model of decision- making.
In conclusion, we shall highlight some pertinent limitations of public-decision making.
2.0 OBJECTIVES At the end of this unit, you should be able to: • define styles of decision making • identify the different styles of decision making • explain the limitations to policy styles • recommend a policy–style model for a developing country like Nigeria.
BHM768 POLICY IMPLEMENTATION & EVALUATION 3.0 MAIN CONTENT 3.1 Styles of Public Policy and Decision Making The public policy and decision making styles are hereunder discussed.
3.1.1 What is Policy Style?
In a general sense, policy style refers to the policy methods adopted by a policy actor at any point in time.
In the same vein, Richardson (ed.)
(1982: 20) explained policy style as “different systems of decision making, different procedures for making societal decision”.
He is of the view that policy styles embrace policy formulation and implementation and that an analyst will be interested in whether or not the societies develop “standard operating procedures” for making and implementing policies.
It is argued that most societies develop legitimising norms for policy activity, sometimes in form of constitutional and legal rules, or consultative committees or go through long and wide-ranging consultation processes.
A careful look at this definition will reveal a weakness that appears to be utopian.
However, in practice, in most societies, what often dictates policy styles are the nature of government and the peculiar characteristics of the person in power.
Therefore, the problem with the analysis of policy styles or style of decision making, is seen in the fact that political scientists are often confronted with the problem of identifying the main characteristics of the ways in which a given society formulates and implements its policies.
Studies in styles of decision making or policy styles represent an aspect of policy science which like its parent discipline, is dynamic in nature.
It means that policy styles differ from individual policy maker (actor) to another, issues to issues and political system to political system.
In all the cases, it is often the concern of a policy analyst to probe into the circumstances surrounding the adoption of a particular style at any point in time.
It may also be a form of comparative study involving two different intervals.
3.1.2 Styles of Decision Making and Public Policy According to Anderson (1975), three styles of decision making are easily identifiable.
These are: • Decision-making through bargaining • Decision-making through persuasion.
BHM768 POLICY IMPLEMENTATION & EVALUATION • Decision-making through command.
As can be seen from these three styles, the first two styles of decision making, are often adopted by democratic leaders, while the third one is characteristic of autocratic or military dictatorial policy makers.
However, there can be situations when either two or all can be blended in a decisional situation.
This is often the case when the adoption of one is not leading to a desired result.
Decision-Making through Bargaining According to Anderson (1975), bargaining is the “process in which two or more persons in position of power or authority adjust their partially inconsistent goals in order to formulate a course of action that iasc c eptable but not necessarily ideal to the participants”.
In essence, it involves negotiation and compromise among persons and groups in order to reach mutually acceptable agreement.
On the other hand, Lindbolm (1963), considered bargaining as one of “the specific forms of informal mutual influence in the play of power among proximate policy-makers”.
It is his view that “many pscoileintitciaslt s see bargaining as a fundamental political process …and that skill in bargaining is the definitive skill of politicians”.
Furthermore, bargaining involves a reflection of existing but conflicting interests between the two parties.
The intrinsic intention of each party is to convince the other of the betterment of its interest.
For bargaining to take place, the following conditions are necessary; a) Willingness to negotiate by bargainers b) Presence of what to negotiate about c) Possession of resources by each bargainer with other wants or needs.
Basically speaking, there are two types of bargaining.
These are: i.
Explicit bargaining – (overt), which is characteristics of states.
ii.
Implicit bargaining – (covert), which is characteristics of individuals.
Using Nigeria as a case study, the above mentioned conditions have made bargaining an ideal model of decision-making because of: i.
The heterogeneous nature of Nigerian society; and ii.
The constitution requirement that says all appointments must take cognisance of the “Geographical–spread” principle.
This has been explicitly stated in section 14 (3) of the 1979 constitution BHM768 POLICY IMPLEMENTATION & EVALUATION and section 15 (3) of the 1989 constitution.
Also, the establishment of the Federal Character Commission in December 1995, by the federal government is to ensure equal representation of all the states in the country into the public service.
Decision-making through Persuasion Decision-making through persuasion as the words imply, involves an attempt to convince others of the reasonableness of one’s positions and therefore force them to accept such positions as their own.
Do not forget that unlike bargaining, the one persuading needs not modify his position.
For example, you will recall that General Yakubu Gowon (rtd) adopted this strategy between 1966 and1975, during the civil war years, in an attempt to unite the country.
He only resorted to the use of force to bring the people together when persuasion failed.
Recall also that General Babangida (rtd), also adopted the option of persuasion strategy before his introduction of the Structural Adjustment Programme (SAP).
He persuaded Nigerians to endure the hardship they faced as a result of the introduction of the policy.
In both instances, you will observe the use of ‘cajoling’ or ‘lobbying’ which represents the main instrument of persuasion.
Decision-making through Command Typical of bureaucratic organisation, that is structurally hierarchical in its power relations, decision-making through command involves the hierarchical relationship between and amongst a superior and the subordinate.
It therefore means the ability of those under their jurisdiction, even against their will, backed-up by rewards and punishments.
For example, in Nigeria, command is more characteristic of the military than the civilian government, because of the greater hierarchical nature of the military.
The following example, particularly under the military will suffice here.
The promulgation of Decree 34 (Unification Decree), under general Ironsi in 1966, severing of Diplomatic relations with Israel in 1973, the Revenue Sharing Formula adopted by President Shehu Shagari regime in 1981 and the promulgation of miscellaneous offences Decree of 1985, to mention but a few.
BHM768 POLICY IMPLEMENTATION & EVALUATION In any decision-making process, the following factors can serve alism itations: 1.
Information Reliable and up-to-date information is a necessary ingredient for effective and reliable decision – making.
A major source oinff o rmation available to public policy makers includes administrative intelligence (special services), newspaper reports, and findings of judicial panels.
2.
Communication There may be a break in communication between policy formulators and the implementation agencies.
When for instance, cooperation is lacking between specialists, there will be no room for sharing ideals.
3.
Precedence Previous actions and policy rules may automatically narrow the deliberations of the decision makers.
This is often the case in situations where there are specific standard operating procedures.
4.
Perception The selective discrimination of the policy issues which is often dependent on the policy makers perception of the policy problem may be regarded as private problem by the policy actors acnodn fe rence reports (particularly government sponsored ones).
Consequently, policy makers often than more not their assessment on the information they receive which more often than not end up in the formulation of wrong policies that will not lead to the achievement of the derived result.
5.
Procedural Rules When there is a standard operating procedure, it becomes extremely difficult for policy actors to deviate from the established thought pattern.
BHM768 POLICY IMPLEMENTATION & EVALUATION 6.
Scarce Resources It is a fact that any unit could be limited by time, energy and skill.
7.
Public Opinion Expression of views by members of the public in matters of public questions may serve as a limiting factor to decision making.
This action often changes the trend of events in public policy-making process.
A very pertinent question at this juncture is to ask you to link any of the styles discussed above with any form of government or head of government in Nigeria.
Recall that we have hinted at some decision-making models, with some previous regimes in Nigeria.
In all, Nigeria has experienced all the three models of decision making.
But common to military regimes is that they all started with command decision-making process (i.e.
imposition of curfews and suspension of some parts of the constitution), before deciding on whether to remain so or adopt both bargaining and persuasion methods.
But Anderson conceded, in practice, that bargaining, persuasion and command, often become blended in a given decisional situation.
For example in the circumstances that led to the Nigeria civil war 1967-1970, the Aburi Accord (bargaining), and state creation (persuasion), preceded the war.
The failure of bargaining and persuasion in the Nigeria civil war 1967-1970, the Aburi Accord (bargaining) and state creation (persuasion), preceded the war.
The last question then is, which of these models is best suited tNoi g eria?
According to Egonmwan (1991) • There cannot be any one style of decision making that can be prescribed for all times.
Some policy decisions are bound to be delivered through command and others through persuasion and bargaining.
It is also possible that a combination of the three types can be adopted in one single policy decision-making situation.
Therefore, no one model is ideal or better than the others.
But relevant to our situation and the study is the utility of a model in explaining a given phenomenon and or its applicability to real life situation.
BHM768 POLICY IMPLEMENTATION & EVALUATION SELF ASSESSMENT EXERCISE 1 Using a contemporary policy example in Nigeria, discuss three policy styles that you know.
Which one would you recommended for ad e mocratic Nigeria 4.0 CONCLUSION The decision making style is crucial to public perception and the success of the policy.
The styles adopted vary from bargaining, persuasion to command, with each having its weak and strong points.
Care must be taken in selecting appropriate style for a particular situation.
It is observed that whatever style is eventually adopted, one mcounssti d er factors such as information, communication, precedence, perception, procedural rules, scarce resources and public opinion.
Imt u st be remembered that, “decision making should be seen to befef i cient, effective and acceptable for the public administrator to breel e vant in the scheme of things”.
5.0 SUMMARY Do not forget that we said that policy styles refer to policy methods adopted by a policy actor at any given time, which embraces policy formulation and implementation.
We also identified decision making styles like, bargaining, persuasion and command.
All these we tried to pin-down to specific periods and regimes as examples.
This, it is hoped, will enable you to understand the concepts more vividly.
But all these decision making styles have their limitations.
Among them are the need for adequate information, communication and precedence.
Others are the perception of the policy actors, procedural rules and scarce resources.
Lastly, we discussed public opinion which to a large extent determines the trend of events in the public policy process.
6.0 TUTOR-MARKED ASSIGNMENT 1.
Explain the term, ‘policy styles or decision marking styles’ 2.
Mention and explain three policy styles you know.
3.
What are the limitations to decision making?
BHM768 POLICY IMPLEMENTATION & EVALUATION 7.0 REFERENCES/FURTHER READING Anderson, J.
(1975).
Public Policy Making.
Thomas Nelson and Son Ltd. Egonmwan, J.A.
(1991).
Public Policy Analysis: Concepts and Application.
Benin City: S.M.O.
Aka and Brothers Press.
Lindblom, C. E (1993).
The Policy Making Process.
New Jersey: Princeton, Inc. Englewood Cliffs.
BHM768 POLICY IMPLEMENTATION & EVALUATION UNIT 3 THEORIES AND MODELS OF DECISION MAKING CONTENTS 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objectives 3.0 Main Content 3.1 Decision Making Models 3.1.1 The Rational-Comprehensive Model 3.1.2 The Satisfying Model 3.1.3 Incremental Model 3.1.4 The Mixed-Scanning Model 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutor-Marked Assignment 7.0 References/Further Reading 1.0 INTRODUCTION Recall that we discussed the various approaches to the study of public policy in unit two.
However in this unit, spirited effort be mexaadme in e t oa n umber of theories or models of public policy analysis, which will equally serve as a guide to a proper understanding of panoalilcyys is .
Attempt would be made to look at each model or the view of proponents of each model and relate it to contemporary idea of decision making process.
Briefly, for example, the rational model challenges every rational decision-maker, not to allow his self–interest (private goals) to jeopardise the social needs of the society.
Hence, as policy actors, we should always look at ourselves as individuals in the society and that our preference(s) might be disliked by others.
2.0 OBJECTIVES At the end of this unit, you should be able to: • identify the four models of public policy analysis • explain briefly the models of policy analysis • say the weaknesses of each model.
BHM768 POLICY IMPLEMENTATION & EVALUATION 3.0 MAIN CONTENT 3.1 Decision Making Models The decision making models are hereunder discussed.
3.1.1 The Rational-Comprehensive Model Chandler and Plano (1988), described this model as “a system analysis approach based on principle of scientific investigation and scientific problem solving’’.
On the other hand Charles E. Lindblem (1959), identified five features of the rational model: a) Clarification of values b) Means- ends analysis c) Choice of most appropriate means to achieve desired ends d) Comprehensive analysis: and e) Analysis that is theory: based .
Rational–comprehensive model tries to define the problem, develops alternative solutions, places values on the consequences of various alternatives, assesses the probability that they will occur, and makes a decision based on logical rules.
You will agree with me that this view point has a lot of similarity with the ideas of Marx Webber’s view on bureaucracy, in which decisions are on impersonal rules and techniques.
It also shares some similarity with the rational-economic-man-models in decision making.
Furthermore, the rational comprehensive analysis assumes a static situation in which relevant conditions do not change and no new information becomes available during the period of analysis and decision.
With this theoretical foundation, we can now relate it to contemporary ideas of decision-making process.
This conceptual analysis presented above shows that the rational comprehensive model to the study of public policy making process, stresses the relationship between ‘social news` and ‘self interest’ of individual decision maker.
Communities, interest groups and institutions do make various requests from government.
Much as government would like to meet all the demands of these organisations, it is however handicapped due to government scare resources.
Government, therefore, has to device which policy will meet the need of a vast majority of the populace.
This it does by weighing the advantage of the various options.
BHM768 POLICY IMPLEMENTATION & EVALUATION However, the problem confronting the decision makers at this stage, is how to make a choice that will be acceptable to the generality of people?
This is because there may be no agreement in the community on the general need to be pursued.
Those whose needs have been met wapiplll a ud government’s action while those who have not benefited from governments action will rebuff it.
Apart from the competing demands coming from the community, individual decision maker also has his own values to protect wmhakilien g decision.
However, a rational decision maker should not allow his self-interest (private goal) to jeopardise the social needs of tshoec ie ty.
He should always remember that he is just an individual in the society and that his preference might be disliked by others.
According to Thomas J. Anton (1968:25), the behaviour of decision makers can be modulated by the organisation within which they act.
Most organisations have procedural rules which must be strictly adhered to by the policy maker while formulating or implementing policies.
Also considered important are the assumptions, practices and ideologies of the institution within which decision is made.
He concluded by saying that the relationship between organisation and community may be as weak as between values of individual and decision maker.
Similarly, Lindblom (op.
cit) is of the view that analysis of a rational policy maker is always influenced by the biases of the analysts and by their competencies.
He argued further that because most analysis takes place in organisations, it will always be marred by organisational biases, rigidities and other incompetence.
3.1.2 The Satisfying Model Chandler and Plano (op.cit.
154), explained it as “the process of finding a decision alternative that meets the decision maker’s minimum standard of satisfaction ’’.
“A behavioral model of rational choice”.
However, it was fduervtheleorp ed by James G. March and Herbert A Simon in their 1958 book, Organisation.
They argued that while economic man selects the best alternatives, man-statistics-looks for a course action that is satisfactory.
Thus, it is argued: • If maximising means getting the most of something, satisfying means, getting only Enough to meet the immediate need or selecting the solution that is least upsetting to stability (Chandler and Plano cop.
Cit) BHM768 POLICY IMPLEMENTATION & EVALUATION The discussion above shows that satisfying model does not follow the economic principle of ‘‘rational choice’’.
In the conventional ideal of rational decision, a decision maker maximises something.
However, it is argued that ‘‘an exhausted search for the maximum, for the best of all possible policies is not usually worth what it costs and may in fact be impossible of accomplishment ’’ (Lindbolm, 1968:24).
By implication, one ‘‘satisfies’’ instead of ‘‘maximising’’.
NB.
The three fundamental tenants of ‘‘satisfies’’ instead of ‘‘maximising’’.
The three fundamental tenets of satisfying model as enunciated by March and Simon (1958) are: 1.
Use only existing agency resources that one’s superior would expect to be used in the process of making decisions; 2.
Arrange compromises among the various affected elements of the organisation; and 3.
Avoid formulating explicit goals and policies in order to avoid the unnecessary conflict that such explicitness may generate.
3.1.3 Incremental Model The underlying person of incremental model is that: it presumes that public choices arise out of the interplay of “partisans” and that administrative decision making, usually involves a continuation of past policies with the least possible modification to suit changing circumstance.
Therefore, it aims at meeting new “challenges slowly and progressively”.
In essence, instrumentalism prefers only minimal departures from the status quo and decision maker, who may lack the intellectual capacity or the time to make a wise search for alternative solution” (Chandler and plane, 1988: 128).
All these go a long way to show that incremental model has political undertone.
This position is further reflected in ‘instrumentalist decision making’.
Sequence calls upon the decision maker to: i.
Identify the problem; ii.
Investigate how similar problem have been handled in the past.
iii.
Analyse and evaluate a few solutions that appear to be plausible and iv.
Choose one that makes some contribution to solving the problem without drastically altering existing processes institutions.
BHM768 POLICY IMPLEMENTATION & EVALUATION Lindblom, the main proponent of this model described this process as “the science of muddling through”.
He argued that “administrators muddle through in response to current events and circumstance rather than by the will of those in policy-making g positions”.
He therefore concludes that the mode helps to raise the competence of policy in the following way: 1.
It concentrates the policy maker’s analysis on familiar, better known experience; 2.
It sharply reduces the number of different alternative policies to be explored; and 3.
It sharply reduces the number of and complexity of factors he has to analyse.
.
3.1.4 The Mixed-Scanning Model Amitai Etsioni, (1967), is the author who advanced this model to the study of policy-making.
He considered the model to be superior to both the rational-comprehensive and incremental models.
The purpose of mixed-scanning is to permit the simultaneous utilisation of the rational comprehensive and incremental models in deferent situations.
While in some cases, incremental will be adequate, in others, the “rational comprehensive” will be needed.
Therefore, descriptively, mixed–scanning can incorporate when they occur, both incremental and fundamental policy decision.
Mixed-scanning, therefore, recognises the limited human capability to secure purely rational decisions.
The decision-making process, followed by a mixed scanner, begins with a systematic review at set interval, of their entire areas of responsibility.
However, since detailed comprehensive coverage may be impossible, mixed scanner only invest selected resources of the agency in detailed analysis of only “important decision” defined as those with the broadest impact.
Most scanning therefore improves on incremental by being less concerned with how similar problems were solved previously, leading to a more creative search for alternatives.
In conclusion, mixed scanning is meant to correct the shortcomings of the incremental model.
BHM768 POLICY IMPLEMENTATION & EVALUATION SELF ASSESMENT EXERCISE 1 1) Discuss five factors that can hinder effective decision making process 2) Identify four (4) models of decision making.
As a Public Administrator, which one of them would you recommend?
4.0 CONCLUSION Several theories and models abound in public policy analysis.
We have examined the rational-comprehensive model, the satisfying model, the incremental model, and the mixed scanning model.
Each of the theories recognises the difficultly in attaining the usual mathematical optimal solution in most decision making and policy analysis.
At best, what is realised is a near optimal result based on the background, experience and exposure of the policy analyst.
The policy analysts also draw from known theories and other knowledge.
5.0 SUMMARY Each of these models appears to have developed stages in order to improve the quality of the policy or decision making process.
As the name implies, the rational comprehensive requires a logical and systematic reasoning to arrive at a credible decision.
While this model “maximises”, the satisfying model “satisfies”.
On the other hand, the incremental model is conservative in nature, which is in response to current events and circumstances, rather than by the will of those in policy making decisions.
Mixed scanning improves on incrementalism, by being less concerned with how a similar problem was solved previously, leading to more creative search for alternatives.
6.0 TUTOR-MARKED ASSIGNMENT 1) Mention four types of models in public decision making process.
Explain them in your own words.
2) What are the weakness (if any) of each of these models?
BHM768 POLICY IMPLEMENTATION & EVALUATION 7.0 REFERENCES/FURTHER READING Anton, J. J.
(1968).
The Politics of State Expenditure in Illinois-Urbana, Chandler, and Plano, J.
C (1968).
The Public Administration Dictionary, England: ABC-CLIO Etsioini, A (1967).
Mixed Scanning: A Third Approach to Decision- Making.
Public administration reviews Voc 27 vol.
5.
March, J. G. and Simon, H. A.
(1958).
Organisations University of Illinois press.
BHM768 POLICY IMPLEMENTATION & EVALUATION UNIT 4 INTEREST GROUPS AND POLITICAL PARTIES IN THE POLICY MAKING PROCESS CONTENTS 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objectives 3.0 Main Content 3.1 Role of Interest Groups and Political Parties in the Policy Making Process 3.1.1 What is an Interest Group?
3.1.2 Types of Interest or Pressure Groups 3.1.3 General Features of Interest Groups 3.1.4 Interest Groups Role in Public Policy Making Process 3.1.5 Political Parties Role in Public Policy Making Process 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutor-Marked Assignment 7.0 References/Further Reading 1.0 INTRODUCTION In this unit, we shall examine the roles of interest groups in the policy making process.
Both interest groups and political parties are different forms of associations.
These associations are formed by individuals in a community, to pursue certain goals, which they all share.
In these two associations, there is a common bond that binds them together.
It could be cultural, religious or ideology.
However, either of them have some influences on the public making process, particularly, on the political system especially in Nigeria.
2.0 OBJECTIVES At the end of this unit, you should be able to: • define an Interest Group • identify types of Interest Groups • mention the role of Interest Groups in public policy making process.
BHM768 POLICY IMPLEMENTATION & EVALUATION 3.0 MAIN CONTENT 3.1 The Role of Interest Groups and Political Parties in the Policy Making Process The role of interest groups and political parties in the policy making process are here under discussed.
3.1.1 What is an Interest Group?
Whether ‘pressure’ or “interest” groups, the words are often used inter- changeably.
However, ‘Interest Groups’ is often used more than “Pressure Groups”.
But perhaps, the word ‘Pressure’ is used to reflect its activities.
‘Pressure’ is used to reflect its activities of exerting “pressure on agencies of Government”.
Note also that as we said earlier, “interest or pressure” groups are associations formed to pursue certain interests – political, economic, religious, cultural, educational etc.
In training, the origin of interest groups represent persons with aanca d emic or social stake in society which requires protection, hence they are designed to serve the interests of their members alone.
Others exist to promote a particular group’s causes that extend beyond the private and personal interests of the members.
Others, yet, seek to combine both functions.
However, the aims of an interest group may be narrower than the range of interests of the membership or much broader.
Examples of such interest groups are Association of Local Government of Nigeria (ALGON), Amnesty International, Nigeria Chambers of Commerce and Industry, Nigerian Medical Association (NMA), National Association of Nigerian Students (NANS) etc.
These examples show that most pressure groups are either professional bodies or religious bodies.
This explains why their memberships are usually restricted to the practitioners of such professions or religions.
From the foregoing, we can now attempt a definition of pressure or interest groups.
According to Edward and Robert, an interest group is; • An organised group which has as one of its principal purposes, that of exercise of influence on political institutions, in order to secure decisions favourable to the interests of the group, or to discourage decisions from being taken which would be unfavourable to those interests.
BHM768 POLICY IMPLEMENTATION & EVALUATION Here, as you can see, interest groups are organised to secure favourable decisions or discourage unfavourable decision being foisted on them.
On the other hand, Mechan et al says that pressure groups are “those associations that attempt systematically, to influence legislation and administration, particularly on a national scale…” They are directed to some stakes their members have in particular political policies.
The authors further assert that pressure groups should not only be out to influence legislation but also any illegal attempts to bribe them.
From these definitions we can summarise that pressure/interest groups, exist to influence policy makers.
Some pressure groups are ad-hoc in nature.
The moment the objective is accomplished, they disband.
Also, we should not forget that some interest groups have restricted membership, yet some others have membership cutting across national boundaries, i.e.
Amnesty International, International Labour Organisation (ILO) etc.
3.1.2 Types of Interest or Pressure Groups Interest groups can be classified into two groups: 1.
‘Promotional’ or ‘attitude’ group – This promotes a cause by appealing to everybody.
Such cause may not necessarily bring direct benefits to its members.
Consequently, the group has unselfish cause to promote.
For example, Civil Liberties Organisation (CLO), Amnesty International, Lions Club etc.
These associations seek to protect and advance the welfare of human rights globally.
2.
‘Protective’ or ‘cause’ group – This exists for the ‘selfish’ reason of improving some material aspect of the lives of its member.
For example, the activities of the Nigerian Chamber of Commerce and Industry.
Furthermore, Almond and Powell made a more precise classification of interest groups under four headings, namely – a) Associational Interest groups b) Non-associational Interest groups c) Institutional Interest groups d) Anomic Interest groups.
BHM768 POLICY IMPLEMENTATION & EVALUATION 3.1.3 General Features of Interest Groups The main features of most of these interest groups include: 1.
They are usually formed by those who seek to promote particular interest, which may be prohibitive, regulatory or promotional in nature.
2.
In most cases, they have restricted (or limited) membership, for example, practitioners of a certain profession.
i.e.
Nigeria Union of Teachers (NUT), Nigerian Medical Association (NMA) etc.
3.
Their activities may be restricted.
4.
They are usually financed by their members 5.
They only seek to affect major legislations or policies.
3.1.4 Interest Groups Role in Public Policy Making Process From our discussion, we have seen that interest groups are formed to influence policies in a desired direction.
However, interest groups influence policy makers through any or a combination of the following ways: 1.
Interest groups use method of persuasion to influence policy m akers.
This is the ability of an individual or group to convince another person to change his mind or a course of his action.
This is rampant under the new political era.
This is usually dthornoeu g h solidarity message, political rallies, Township Meeting Days – all in an attempt to persuade the civilian government in power, either at the local, state or federal levels.
2.
Pressure groups could also employ non-conventional means like offering bribes to relevant government officials.
The bribes could be in form of cash or promise of a higher-paying job orent ir ement from present government job.
3.
Interest groups do employ lobbying tactics to put pressure on government for a favour.
They often lobby policy makers either directly or through professional lobbyists.
This they often do with money.
Indeed, no well-meaning interest group can achieve remarkable success without the use of money.
4.
Interest groups can influence policy-makers, by putting pressure on proximate policy makers, through high-powered and constant representations.
BHM768 POLICY IMPLEMENTATION & EVALUATION 5.
Interest groups also influence policy makers by supplying information to policy makers.
However, the information they provide is often distorted; they do not represent the larger societal interest but the selected ones that will only meet their aspirations.
6.
At times, to stamp their political clout, interest groups often sponsor candidates for elections– the underlying principle is to have an elected representative, who will articulate and directly influence the decision made either at the Legislature or Executive levels.
Here, the interest group, is rest-assured that its interest will be protected.
7.
Interest groups could also form political parties that will project their ideologies.
The party that wins the elections will have its members dominating the executive.
In this type of situation, they will give support to the preferences of their interest groups.
8.
Finally, interest groups could influence policy makers through civil disobedience, by disallowing outsiders from buying their products and refusing to pay their taxes.
Through these actions, government can meet their demands, 3.1.5 Political Parties Role in Public Policy Making Process According to Rose (1976:2-3), a “political party is an organisation concerned with the expression of popular preferences and contesting the control of the chief policy making office of government”.
On the other hand Espein (1967), feels that a political party is “any group, however loosely organised, seeking to elect government office holders under a given label”.
Therefore, apart from providing a credible platform for recruiting public office holders – President, Governors, and Legislators – they also perform the crucial role of “national integration”.
Little wonder, Edmund Burke (1929-97), defined a political party as: • A body of men united for promoting their joint endeavors, the national interest upon some particular principle in which they are agreed.
Other functions of political parties in public policy making process are, that they help to give political education (political socialisation to the electorate).
This involves educating them on the need to register as voters, how to vote and why they should exercise their civic responsibility as a whole.
BHM768 POLICY IMPLEMENTATION & EVALUATION Furthermore, they serve as a channel of political communication i.e.
they provide the link between the government and citizens.
They are also actively involved in policy formulation.
This is usually dthornoeu g h an articulate preparation of party manifestoes, which later form the bedrock of the governments’ policies and programmes.
Finally, political parties can be credible agents of social change, reform or modernisation.
Each party wins an election based on reliable and responsible leadership.
Through healthy competition, the lot of the people is improved through the provision of essential social infrastructure.
Indeed, the re-election of any candidate is dependent on his performance in the first term (tenure).
Through this, accelerated development is maintained and sustained.
SELF ASSESSMENT EXERCISE 1 1.
(a) Define the concept “Pressure Group” (b) Assess the features of Pressure Groups” 2.
In what ways do pressure groups influence policy makers?
4.0 CONCLUSION Pressure or interest groups of whatever shape or dimension is established to achieve a goal.
The goal could be selfish, group ocor l lective.
This could be accomplished by influencing relevant policy makers.
Interest groups have been known to metamorphosise into political parties because of the circumstances of their origin, the task and the leadership and of course the size of the association.
Be that as it may, whether interest group or political party, they have been founded by the people desirous of a social change in their favours.
And they employ every available legitimate means to achieve their goal.
5.0 SUMMARY In this unit, we have examined the definition of interest gasrosoucpisa t io anss whose intention is to serve favourable decisions for themselves.
At a higher level, it is their intention to influence legislation or administration in their favour.
To some extent, the scope of membership will determine the level of their agitation.
For instance, if it is a professional group, the goal will be limited to, say, the recognition of that association as the lmegoiutitmh-aptiee c e of practitioners.
However, if it is an international body, the BHM768 POLICY IMPLEMENTATION & EVALUATION degree of the pressure it will exert, will be more than a national orerg ional body.
Whatever form it takes, you should be aware that pressure groups employ diverse tactics to influence public policy process.
It could take the form of persuasion, lobbying, offering bribes and making persistent representations.
On a more articulate dimension, such interest groups could sponsor candidates, transform into political parties and at times embark on the extreme of causing mass civil disobedience, to attract government attention, thereby influencing policy makers to curry their favour policy.
Political parties, invariably too, are pressure groups whose role in influencing policy process is more potent, because it enjoys constitutional recognition.
It therefore provides a very credible platform for the recruitment of political office holders, and at the same time performing the crucial role of national integration.
Finally, political parties serve as useful avenues for the formulation of policies in party manifestoes and consequently, they are agents of social change or transformation of our rural populace.
6.0 TUTOR-MARKED ASSIGNMENT 1.
What are pressure/interest Groups?
2.
What are main features of Pressure Groups?
3.
How does Pressure Group influence policy-makers?
7.0 REFERECES/FURTHER READING Meechan et al (1966).
The Dynamic of Modern Government.
McGraw Hill: Kogashua Ltd. Robert and Clark (1982).
Power and Politics in the Third world: New York: Santa Barbara John Wiley and company.
Rose R. (1976).
The Problem of Party Government.
Harmondsworth: Penguin Book BHM768 POLICY IMPLEMENTATION & EVALUATION UNIT 5 GOVERNMENT POLICIES AND LOCAL GOVERNMENT ADMINISTRATION IN NIGERIA CONTENTS 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objectives 3.0 Main Content 3.1 The Effect of Government Policies on Local Government Administration 3.1.1 The National Youth Service Corps Scheme (NYSC) 3.1.2 Universal Basic Education Programme (UBE) 3.1.3 National Poverty Eradication Programme (NAPEP) 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutor-Marked Assignment 7.0 References/Further Reading 1.0 INTRODUTION Since the course title is “Public Policy Formulation, Implementation and Evaluation”, it is only reasonable and proper to remind you of some of these public policies, so that you can properly relate them to tthheeo retical framework we have explained in the preceding units.
This, we intend to do, particularly at the local government level, so that we can appraise such policies.
At the end, we shall be able to soebej e c titvhees of such policies and evaluate them, since they are contemporary issues in our polity.
Examples of such public policies are the National Youth Service Corp scheme (NYSC), the Universal Basic Education (UBE) and the recently introduced National Poverty Eradication Programme (NPEP), to mention but a few.
2.0 OBJECTIVES At the end of the unit, you should be able to: • explain why public policies are formulated • understand why there is need for re-focus (evaluate) public policy • identify policy formulation processes.
3.0 MAIN CONTENT BHM768 POLICY IMPLEMENTATION & EVALUATION 3.1 The Effect of Government Policies on Local Government Administration The effect of government policies on local government in Nigeria is hereunder discussed.
3.1.1 The National Youth Service Corps Scheme (NYSC) The National Youth Service Corps Scheme, (NYSC), was introduced via Decree No 24 of May 22, 1973 by the Yakubu Gowon Administration.
We would recall too that the Nigerian civil war has just ended and the then Federal Government was quickly desirous to heal the wounds of the war amongst the diverse people of the country.
Consequently, the target of the Federal Government was the Youth, particularly, the University, Polytechnic and College of Education graduates.
It was believed that this target population could easily put the civil war behind them and be the bedrock for the integration of the country once again.
As a result, the Federal Government introduced the three R’s of Reconstruction, Rehabilitation and Reintegration.
To put bite to the re-integration policy, the NYSC is to serve as a credible platform for the realisation of this dream.
Each graduate is to be posted to a state, other than his state of origin, to serve the nation for (12) twelve calendar months.
The high expectation of the government is that while there, the youth corper will interact with members of the new community in which he or she finds himself or herself, study their ways of life, learn their language, eat their local delicacies, make friends and if possible, government encourages inter-marriage among our young graduates.
Other benefits inherent in the NYSC policy as contained in the objectives establishing the scheme in Decree No 24 of 1973 includes the following: i.
As far as possible, youths are assigned to jobs in states other than their states of origin.
ii.
Each group, is assigned to work together as representative of the country as possible.
iii.
The youths are exposed to the models of living of the people in different parts of the country, with a view to removing prejudices, eliminating ignorance and confirming at first hand, the many similarities among Nigerians of all ethnic groups.
BHM768 POLICY IMPLEMENTATION & EVALUATION To encourage members of the corps to seek, at the end of their service,, career employment all over the country, thus promoting the free movement of labour.
To induce employers, partly through their experience with corps members, to employ more readily qualified Nigerians irrespective of their states of origin (NYSC Handbook, 1980).
As far as the National Youth Service Corps Programme is concerned, all tiers of Government have been involved from its inception.
For example, the Community Development programme was introduced and made compulsory for all Corps members to participate in fully.
Each community or local government is to identify a developmental need and for one month, in every local government nation-wide, corps members embark on a community development programme.
For its proper co-ordination and administrative convenience, a Corp Liaison Officer (CLO), is appointed in every local government among the corpers.
He is also to act as a link between the community and the local government on one hand and the NYSC secretariat on the other.
Besides, he is to see to the welfare of corps members within his local government.
From its inception, the Federal Government made it mandatory feovre r y organisation requesting for the services of the NYSC members, to retain some of them on full employment after the service year.
But for some time now, most organisations have not been doing so.
Instead, they have yearly depended on the corpers for their source of employment, without retaining any of them.
This is not again tihnete n tion of the founding fathers of the scheme.
Furthermore, in appreciation of the role of the youths in ndaevtieolnoaplm ent and to cement the bond of national unity, the FGeodveerranl m ent established a “National Award” scheme, whereby, outstanding Corps Members are rewarded every year.
Those finally selected are always given National Awards and automatic employment.
Similarly, states equally retain an outstanding corp member in tdhoemira in every service year.
Local Governments are not left out.
They do retain corpers who have put in their best in the service of their father land.
This will go a long way to promote national unity and integration among the diverse people of the country.
BHM768 POLICY IMPLEMENTATION & EVALUATION You will recall too that, presently, after a thorough evaluation of the scheme and detection of various corrupt practices in the programme, the Federal Government has established a Technical Committee to restructure the NYSC scheme as a whole.
This is with a view troe fo cusing the scheme so as to be more result-oriented.
After almost thirty years of its existence, it has become imperative to embark on a general policy evaluation.
3.1.2 Universal Basic Education Programme (UBE) As reflected in section 1 (1) of the National Policy on Education, the scheme is Government’s way of achieving that part of its national objectives, using education as a tool.
As the preamble says “no policy on education can be formulated without first identifying the over-all philosophy and objectives of the Nation”.
However, the policy reiterated the five main national objectives of Nigeria as stated in the second National Development plan as: • A free and democratic society; • A just and egalitarian society; • A united, strong and self-reliant nation; • A great and dynamic economy; • A hand of bright and full opportunities for all citizens.
Section 1 (5) went further to state the national aims and objectives to which the philosophy (of education) is linked.
These are: 1) The inculcation of national consciousness and national unity; 2) The inculcation of the right type of values and attitudes for the survival of the individual and the Nigerian society; 3) The training of the mind in the understanding of the world around; and 4) The acquisition of appropriate skills, abilities and competencies, both mental and physical, for the individual to live and contribute to the development of his society.
Before the policy was introduced, most of the country’s educational infrastructures were in a state of decay and neglect, partly because of long years of neglect.
Besides, donor bodies had withdrawn their educational assistance to Nigeria, particularly under the unpopular Sani Abacha regime.
All these contributed in one way or another to the decay Nigeria went through until 1999 when a new democratic regime under Chief Olusegun Obasanjo was sworn-in.
To put our education policy in its proper perspective, as enunciated in the National Policy on Education, the new Government introduced the BHM768 POLICY IMPLEMENTATION & EVALUATION Universal Basic Education (UBE), particularly at the primary slecvheolo.
l This new policy is to replace the National Primary ECdoumcmatiisosni o n (NPEC).This has been done in conformity with s3e(c1t3io) no f the policy, which defined primary education thus: “education given in an institution, for children aged between 6 to 11.
It went further to state that “since the rest of the education is built upon it, the primary level is the key to success or to failure of the whole system”.
Section 3(14) gave the following as the general objectives of primary education: a) the inculcation of literacy and numeracy, and the ability to communicate effectively; b) the laying of a sound basis for effective participation and contribution to the society; c) citizenship education as a basis for effective participation and contribution to the society; d) characters and moral training and the development of attitudes; e) developing in the child the ability to adapt to the changing environment; f) giving the children the opportunities for developing manipulative skills that will enable them function effectively in the society, within the limits of his capacity; g) providing basic tools for further educational advancement including preparation for trades and craft of the locality.
However, the Universal Basic Education programme is to extend to junior secondary schools three levels To bring basic education to the doorstep of every Nigerian, the State Primary Education Boards (SPEB), are to revert to State Basic Education board, while those of the Local Government Education Authorities (LGEAS) will equally give way for the new basic education programme.
Towards the effective take-off of the program, all dilapidated buildings and infrastructural facilities were renovated to meet the needs of tmhea ss enrolment of new primary intakes.
Besides, more teachers are being trained and retrained to meet tpheer s onnel needs of the new programme.
Local Government councils are actively involved in this scheme, in the area of construction arenndo v ation of classrooms, provision of writing materials and recruitment of trained teachers.
BHM768 POLICY IMPLEMENTATION & EVALUATION 3.1.3 National Poverty Eradication Programme (NAPEP) At the inception of the civilian Government under former President Olusegun Obasanjo, it was discovered to his dismay, the high level of poverty, unemployment and under-employment.
This manifested quite early in the regime through violent riots, formation of various ethnic militia and various ethnic riots, in which thousands die and property worth billions were vandalised, destroyed or stolen.
Such violent riots took place in different locations in Nigeria.
For example, the Shagamu riots, Kaduna riots and of recent the Jos riots.
Others of monumental proportions were Odi riots, Tiv riots (in Benue, Taraba, and Narsarawa states) to mention a few of such instances.
Some perpetrators were arrested and on a closer observation, new naira notes were found on the rioters, whose age ranged between 15 and 20 years.
A ridiculous amount of #50.00 to #100.00 were given to the rioters by their perceived sponsors which were all they needed to cause mayhem on innocent citizens.
All these are vivid indication of the level of poverty ravaging the length and breadth of Nigeria.
To eradicate poverty, offer of gainful employment can stem the unfavourable and ugly trend of ethnic- violence in Nigeria.
Hence, the Federal Government introduced the Poverty Alleriation Programme (PAP) in 1999.
This is with a view to stabilise the polity and protect the nascent democratic dispensation.
The programme involved the appointment of a National, State and Local Government co-coordinators.
The Government therefore employed a large number of unemployed graduates nation-wide.
Secondary school certificate holders were equally employed to learn a trade.
But all of them were to earn a stated amount as monthly stipend and attached to either state or federal ministries.
At the end of three years, they could be granted permanent employment by the Federal Civil Service.
However, in 2001, a review of the policy was carried out.
Through the policy evaluation, it was discovered that some powerful individuals succeeded in compiling fake names and were collecting same for their personal use.
Hence, the money was being misappropriated.
Also, it was discovered that the policy lacked necessary focus in actually “alleviating poverty”, rather, it was increasing the level of poverty and armed banditry was increasing at an alarming rate.
Other stake-holders like states and local governments were lukewarm to the laudable programme.
Consequently, the poverty alleviation programme was changed to National Poverty Eradication Programme.
This was with the aim of BHM768 POLICY IMPLEMENTATION & EVALUATION wiping-out poverty completely on the one hand and making it minoclrues i ve so that state and local governments combine the ideas apnridn c iple behind the programme.
Consequently, states and local governments employed various categories of unemployed youths.
Besides, the federal government now employs graduates and HND holders on apprenticeship training.
They are attached to reputable companies and private organisation for necessary skills acquisition programme, for about three years.
At the end of the two-three ytreaainrsin g, they are free to establish and be on their own.
The graduates and HND holders thereafter, are fully employed/absorbed into the federal government service.
With a properly re-focused NAPEP, the federal government is able to achieve greater reduction in violence and other related criminal tendencies that characterise the polity.
Added to this is that the populace now applaud the programme as one of the major dividends of democracy.
SELF ASSESSMENT EXERCISE 1 1.
(a) Mention the three current government policies.
(b) Explain any two of them in detail.
2.
Critically examine the effect of government policies on Local Government Administration in Nigeria.
4.0 CONCLUSION From the foregoing, you will observe that policies (public policies) are formulated by government to address certain perceived problems.
For example, the NYSC was introduced to re- integrate the diverse people of Nigeria together again after the three years civil war.
The best acnredd i ble age group being the youths and fresh graduates.
Modelled after the American people corps, it has succeeded in promoting national unity and peace.
Equally, the introduction of UBE programme of education has succeeded in putting Nigeria back to greatness after long years of decay in the educational sector.
More importantly, you will agree that the level of violence, unemployment and civil unrests that gripped the nation hitherto, has drastically reduced.
The NAPEP programme has been embraced by all levels of government and it has empowered our youths economically.
BHM768 POLICY IMPLEMENTATION & EVALUATION 5.0 SUMMARY Using these three National public policies as examples you can successfully position all the concepts used in the preceding units to properly understand all about policy formulation, implementation and evaluation.
6.0 TUTOR-MARKED ASSIGNMENT 1) What were the factors that informed the establishment of the NYSC programme in 1973?
2) What were the factors that influenced the swapping of the PAP programme during its policy evaluation?
7.0 REFERENCES/FURTHER READING NYSC Handbook, 1980.
Olaniyi, J.O.
(1998).
Foundation of Public Policy Analysis Foundations of Public Policy Analysis.
Ibadan: Sunad Publishers Ltd. Olaniyi, J.O.
(1959).
Democratising Public Making Process in Nigeria; in Danmole, H.O.
et al .Contemporary Issues in Nigeria Affairs.
Ibadan; Sunad Publishers Ltd. BHM768 POLICY IMPLEMENTATION & EVALUATION MODULE 3 U n i t 1 P o l i c y P l a n n i n g a n d D e s i g n U n i t 2 P u b l i c P o l i c y P r o c e s s U n i t 3 P o l i t i c s o f E v aU nl iut 4a t Ei voa nlu ation Research Unit 5 Policy Evaluation: Techniques Unit 6 Programme Evaluation: A Practical Approach UNIT 1 POLICY PLANNING AND DESIGN CONTENTS 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objectives 3.0 Main Content 3.1 Policy Planning and Design 3.1.1 Comprehensive – Rational Model 3.1.2 Disjointed Incrementalism 3.1.3 Mixed Scanning Model 3.2 Public Policy Design 3.2.1 Structure of a Design 3.2.2 Policy Content 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutor-Marked Assignment 7.0 References/Further Reading 1.0 INTRODUCTION The corporate policies of an organization are not just aimed at, but once carefully planned and designed, they are formulated through some processes.
This unit will explain how policies are put together, and the elements that are crucial to policy planning.
It will also explain what a programme is and how it is related to planning.
2.0 OBJECTIVES At the end of this unit, you should be able to: • define policy planning and design BHM768 POLICY IMPLEMENTATION & EVALUATION • enumerate models of policy planning • explain and discuss the structure of a policy • give the details of the content of a policy.
3.0 MAIN CONTENT 3.1 Policy Planning and Design Policy is recognized as a decision.
The process of recognising the decision is called policy process.
Policy planning implies an already existing policy that is only awaiting planning and implementation.
There are six explanatory attempts on policy training.
These are pure rationing, the economic rational model, the sequential decision model, the incremental change model, the satisfying model.
All of these, except the first and fifth, fall within the rational and non-rational.
But the enumerated six models can be compressed into three major models.
1 Comprehensive – Rational Model 2.
Disjointed Incrementalism 3 Mixed Scanning model 3.1.1 Comprehensive – Rational Model This model is based on the need to judiciously use limited resources.
It is grounded on the principle of maximisation of return on resources that are used.
Maximising of resources is an economist’s concern.
Simple macro-economics states that man is a rational economic being, who prefers maximum returns.
How are returns maximised when applied to public policy?
First of all, the demands made on the state resources are numerous.
Secondly, the means to meet these demands are very limited in nature.
Thirdly, consequent upon the second point, decisions have to be made against the background of available resources on to which demands have to be met immediately and which deserves to be postponed.
At this level, a choice has to be made.
The purpose of maximising returns will involve having adequate information on the cost and secondly, the benefit of expending money on something.
The model relies on calculating the alternative to any course of action and then evaluating the benefit derived from each alternative.
Secondly, it assumes that the policy planning process takes place within a stable environment.
BHM768 POLICY IMPLEMENTATION & EVALUATION One major defect of comprehensive rational model is the attempt to take policy making out of political context.
Politics here means pstoruwgegr le , intrigues and competition in pursuit of power, substituting the technical or economic rationality for the political rationality.
Government is a political institution, political consideration rather than economic expediency informs the choice of any particular public policy.
Secondly, policy–making bureaucracies are naturally resistant to rationality in order to achieve efficiency.
Administrative institutions bear complete responsibility for one area of administration and ncoom petency whatsoever outside that area.
Whereas rationality demands some broad consideration of issues facing the society; bureaucratic officers are naturally unable to take this broad view, and because of the possibility goal displacement they are disposed to resist it.
Resistance would also be possible because they possess the expertise and information.
Thirdly, politicians have personal interest which develops independently of the public purpose.
Their effectiveness depends on their constituencies and if they are to remain effective political actions.
They must be protected before the public interest.
3.1.2 Disjointed Incrementalism This model has a number of characteristics: • It is incremental because it permits only small changes over the existing policies, which means that it cannot be completely termed a new policy • It means – oriented, i.e.
the “End” is the purpose of its being sought and those that appropriate to that means.
• It is linear because new dimensions can be identified from the e xisting ones.
• It acts as a remedy because decisions are made to move away from the problem more than towards the objectives.
• It is serial because problems are not solved or attempted to be solved all at once but solved gradually.
3.1.3 Mixed Scanning Model Under this model the fundamental reason for any policy is decisively established.
Secondly, the operationalisation in specific terms of programme element of fundamental decisions, constitutes different points in policy BHM768 POLICY IMPLEMENTATION & EVALUATION decisions.
The different points of operationalisation enable the different forces to impact.
SELF ASSESSMENT EXERCISE 1 1) Why must policies be designed?
2) Explain the different models of planning policies.
3.2 Public Policy Design Under public policy design we have: 3.2.1 The Structure of a Policy 3.2.2 The Content of the Policy The structure of any policy is mainly the design of the policy.
This shows the difference between one level from the other.
The followings can be said to be the elements of policy structure: 1.
Introduction or Preamble – It contains the definition of the problem and explains it as much as possible.
If it is a problem, it has to be characterized in a way that there is need for some actions that need correction.
Usually, the introductory part of the type of action to be carried out is stated.
This characterization is called the purpose or objectives.
2.
Objectives – Objectives are needed in the structuring of a policy for the following reasons: - • In the determination of policy content and direction • In the determination of policy implementation strategies • As a benchmark for the evaluation of policy objectives.
The goals of policy are so important in these three regards.
The purpose which the policy sets out to achieve determines entirely the content of that policy.
i.e., it determines action programme but even then their purposes are derived from the policy.
3.
Implementation Strategies – the implementation strategies must be consistent with the goals of the policy.
There could be many ways of solving the problem, like choosing from alternatives available, which may result in minimising cost.
Nevertheless, what is economically rational may not be politically rational.
BHM768 POLICY IMPLEMENTATION & EVALUATION 4.
The benchmark – this is the impact of evaluation.
Evaluation has to be taken against the objectives of the policy.
Eprvoavluidaetsio an very important tool because it provides information crucial to the policy.
Evaluation gets a concrete data needed for policy formulation which may be incremental and cumulative in nature.
5.
Policy instrument or programme.
By this is meant the partaicctuiloanr p ackages that must be undertaken to realize policy objectives.
What is fashioned out to bring about the achievement of gInosatlrsu?m ent, programmes and projects can be used interchangeably.
Programmes or projects are packages of activities upon which human and material energies can be employed.
The accomplishment of such projects results in some contribution to the achievement of policy objectives.
A programme, though a sub-set structurally, but fundamentally, tmhee a ns by which policy objectives is accentuated.
A programme is a means through which policy objectives are aimed at.
A policy mcoanyt a in several different programmes and is more comprehensive.
Characteristics of Programmes • There is a time-frame.
Since they are all future oriented, there is a time-frame.
The reason for the time-frame is to stimulate actions and enthusiasm in policy implementation.
So time-frame should be a major component of policy objectives.
• Maintenance is an important component of a policy.
It is technical and structural in nature.
It is the identification of rceesnptoernss.i Ebi.lgit.y U niversal Basic Education is the responsibility of the Federal Ministry of Education and Immunization is that of tFheed e ral Ministry of Health.
• Establishment of evaluation framework and evaluation criteria.
This is because public policy has an objective and it has to be sweheent h er the objectives of a particular policy was achieved or not and why if not.
4.0 CONCLUSION BHM768 POLICY IMPLEMENTATION & EVALUATION In this unit, we have been able to explain policy planning, design and the models of policy planning.
5.0 SUMMARY Policy is recognised as a decision and the process of recognizing the decision is called policy process.
The unit was able to explain the theories in policy design and planning.
They include the comprehensive –Rational Model, the Disjointed incrementalism and the Mixed Scanning Model.
6.0 TUTOR-MARKED ASSIGNMENT Briefly explain what is programme structure.
What are the major characteristics of programmes?
7.0 REFERENCES/FUTHER READING Olaniyi J. O.
(1998).
Foundation Public Policy Analysis.
Sunad Publisher Ltd. BHM768 POLICY IMPLEMENTATION & EVALUATION UNIT 2 PUBLIC POLICY PROCESSES CONTENTS 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objectives 3.0 Main Content 3.1 Policy Formation 3.1.1 Policy Agenda (a) Systematic Agenda (b) Institutional Agenda 3.1.2 Policy Enactment 3.1.3 Policy Implementation (a) Direct Implementation (b) Implementation through Contracting 3.1.4 Technique for Feedback 3.2 Policy Impact 3.3 Policy Feedback 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutor-Marked Assignment 7.0 References/Further Reading 1.0 INTRODUCTION Scholars have identified three basic stages of public policy mThaekyin agr.e : policy formation, policy implementation and policy outcome.
The policy formation stage consists of such activities on public problem identification and analysis, agenda setting and policy enactment.
The policy evaluation stage comprises determination or assessment of outcomes, output, performance and impact.
2.0 OBJECTIVES At the end of the unit, you should be able to: • explain what policy formation is • state what policy agenda entails • discuss the importance of policy enactment • explain policy implementation process.
BHM768 POLICY IMPLEMENTATION & EVALUATION 3.0 MAIN CONTENT 3.1 Policy Formation When problems are identified in any given entity, there is a need to look for the solution.
A public problem can be identified as a social need or dissatisfaction which may affect individuals and requires collective action.
It can also be identified as a problem for which a relief is needed from the Government.
A problem is therefore not a public problem until it has effect or consequences on many persons and action is taken in articulating or seeking relief from the public agencies.
But how does the Government get to know the problem confronting the people?
It could be through groups, individuals, political elites, political parties, especially in the advanced world or personalized contacts, petitions and memorandum.
Another potent force that often effectively publishes problems to the attention of Government is crisis.
They include events such as demonstration, violence, and industrial disputes.
They often generate increased awareness and increased governmental attention and responsiveness.
The proper study and analysis of the policy problem is important for: • The determination of the nature of government power.
• The determination and knowledge of the problem is central to the design and prescription of policy solutions.
• The nature of the policy problem determines the nature of the policy process.
• The knowledge of the problem constitutes a basis for the evaluation of the performance for the policy response.
3.1.1 Policy Agenda A policy agenda refers to public problems awaiting response in the present time or the future.
It is therefore a phase in the policy process when government begins to consider it.
There are two types of policy agenda: • Systemic Agenda- Here, all issues that are commonly perceived by members of the political community as desiring public attention, as involving matters within the legitimate jurisdiction of existing government authorities.
• Institutional Agenda: These are items explicitly set up for active and serious consideration by authoritative decision- makers.
The issue of Press Council handled by the Minister of Information during the Babangida regime was an institutional agenda.
BHM768 POLICY IMPLEMENTATION & EVALUATION Policy agenda therefore refers to all issues and problems that receive attention either in discussions, speeches, memoranda, and legislative motions.
The effectiveness of policy problem determines mainly what gets on the agenda.
But some factors account for the reason why some problems do not get to the policy agenda, namely; • If the problem is too sensitive, broad or has high potential for generating conflict e.g.
The demand for a sovereign national conference.
• Also some negative precedence or some dominant beliefs and values may restrict action.
E.g.
The OSU Caste System in the eastern part of Nigeria.
SELF ASSESSMENT EXERCISE 1 1.
What is a policy agenda?
2.
Name and explain the different types.
3.1.2 Policy Enactment The Government may be confronted by a problem or problems and may respond to it in three major ways; • Non-response • Deferred Action • May decide to take quick action.
The nature of action depends on two major factors.
• Nature and circumstance of the problem.
For instance, when the problem touches on the interest of the powerful or demand urgent action.
• The degree of responsiveness of the government.
An irresponsive government may ignore public demands or defer action.
Responsiveness therefore means the seriousness of public authority to respond to policy problems and issues on policy agenda.
This stage, therefore, refers to the consideration of policy alternatives and the recommendation of a policy enactment by legislative bodies of the policy proposal.
Many times, proposals are made involving public institution and the civil service.
The role of the civil service is central because of tshtreaitre g ic location and function.
Recommended responses are often invaluable and they constitute the basis for policy consideration and BHM768 POLICY IMPLEMENTATION & EVALUATION modification by higher authorities and policy-makers.
It gives available option and consequences of alternative, as well as recommends a policy alternative.
Sometimes, proposals submitted by various groups may influence the policy activity for the search of alternative policy option and the study of their consequences.
3.1.3 Policy Implementation Every policy needs to be implemented since its objective is to effect and sustain a change.
It is a statement of fact that the most edleesgigannteldy p olicy can run aground at the level of implementation if it is not properly implemented.
Policy implementation is a complex process operating also in an equally complex and dynamic environment.
Implementation is essentially an exercise and it takes place within the sector of government.
The success of implementation depends on the fulfillment of a number of conditions.
• An adequate and appropriate institutionalized framework.
• An adequately designed operative processes.
• Availability of requisite resources in good quantity and quality • A high commitment to success by the implementation body • A high level of public support • The institution of an adequate and appropriate control measures and mechanism.
All these measures constitute creditable parameters for policy analysis at the implementation stage.
Every policy must be implemented by an agency of government.
Clarity of jurisdictional overlap between the agency and the other agencies in the same project area is essential.
The less the area of jurisdiction the more energy that will be committed to the implementation.
But if two agencies are to implement the policy, there is need to build linkages.
Under resources, we have human materials, legal or jurisdictional process.
It is not possible to make something out of nothing and any responsibility given needs resources.
By control mechanism, is meant a system whose work is carried out in a level with specification and monitoring operation or correct gap in the process, just for the objectives to be achieved.
BHM768 POLICY IMPLEMENTATION & EVALUATION In Nigeria, implementation of government policies takes two principal forms: (A) Direct Implementation This is when government agencies are directly involved in the implementation of the policies.
This responsibility informs the employment of those to carry out policy implementation.
(B) Implementation through Contracting Here, government awards contracts because it has no skills to do it and at this point, the government has the responsibility tmo o nitor the contractors so as to see that they keep tsop e cification.
Jobs contracted out may not at times be wexeelcl u ted due to laxity on the part of the civil servants.
Tbuhree a ucrats implement and the degree of correspondence between the bureaucrats and policy makers says much on how well a policy is.
They are also empowered to even make changes by subsidiary legislation, regulations, rules and established guidelines, for the purpose of relating the general to the specific.
3.1.4 Techniques of Feedback • Periodic meeting – this enables every responsibility to submit a progress report periodically.
The meeting provides opportunity for identification of militating problems and opportunity for collective decisions to be taken.
• Presenting a quarterly report.
• Issuance of memo which is a feedback mechanism and warning.
• Giving general guidelines as a medium of information dissemination.
• Supervision of programmes and observation passed to programme officer.
• Monitoring of laid down rules and guidelines.
The dominant values in most cases determine policies.
Policy is implemented via programmes.
This is to say that the content adnirde c tion of policy is contained in programmes.
Some people refer to programme as a project or policy instrument.
A programme is a package of action upon which resources, both human and material, can be used in pursuing a policy objective.
A programme is smaller in content and scope than policy.
A simple policy may consist of three or four programmes.
BHM768 POLICY IMPLEMENTATION & EVALUATION Programmes themselves are designed, therefore, we can talk of programme elements.
It also means the policy structure and design.
What then constitute a programme design?
• Programme title e.g.
Polio Immunization for children from Age 0 – 5 yrs.
• Aims and objectives of a programme and what it seeks to achieve.
• The clientele system: - for whom is the programme meant, for whom is it addressed, who are the would-be beneficiaries?
• The sub-programme is the element within an element.
It is a smaller programme within the larger one.
For example, under a welfare programme, unemployment benefit and old people’s home are the sub-programmes • Activities refer to the specific activities that need to be undertaken to accomplish sub-programmes.
Programme Structure Programme Title: Social welfare Sub-programmes: 1.
Protection of girls against harmful traditional practices 2.
Protection of widows against brutalization Activities 1.
Set up a monitoring unit 2.
Punishing offenders 3 .
Setting up and staffing Welfare centers meant for woman alone All these activities must be distinguished from one another and all the activities should sum up to be the programme cost.
This is the summation of the individual costs of the constituent programmes, which in effect is the summative of all activities in the programme.
One focus of any policy implementation is the adequacy of programme design.
Policy Performance – Policy performance refers to how well a policy is doing in relation to intended purposes, objectives, targets and intended consequences.
Performance comprises effectiveness and efficiency.
Effectiveness refers to the level of attainment or realisation of a programme goal.
It provides answers to the question of whether stated intentions, plans and projections BHM768 POLICY IMPLEMENTATION & EVALUATION have not been met.
Also, it evaluates activities, efforts and accomplishments.
Efficiency on the other hand refers to input or resources expended and the results obtained.
An efficient programme is the one that achieves high output with minimum input.
A performing programme then is that which achieves efficiently intended targets, output and purpose.
The goal of every policy is performance.
It is very important because of the possibilities of large gaps between policy objective and pooultipcuyt s , policy outcome and policy impact.
This is so because there is no guarantee that public policies, even when all resources required are made available, is implemented as is stated and matches the intentions and expectations of policy makers.
So much factors as poor planning, poor implementation, poor resources and environmental events, turbulence and changes are capable of derailing, aborting and causing policy failures.
The measurement of performance of any policy, depends on important indicators, which relate objectives and targets to programme outcome, output and impact.
Some of the measures in policies that pserorvviicdees to a particular target group could be among others: changes in the traits of clients due to the programme, the availability and frequency of services, the frequency of use by the clientele and the continued or absence of the policy problem.
Performance has to be related also to professional standards where they exist, the quality of services acnliden t satisfaction with services.
3.2 Policy Impact This refers to the “effect of a policy on real world ccoonndseitqiounens c e so or n every facet of the society and includes impact on the target situation or group, impact on unintended group and on the future, as well as, the immediate condition.
But the major concern is on the target group due to policy objectives.
Types of Impact • Primary impact refers to direct measurable effects or changes due to programme activity • Secondary impacts are effects that are not immediately evident but are possible as a result of programme activity.
• Immediate impact may be positive but in the long may turn negative.
• The nature of long-term impact tends to depend on proper planning, design and steering of programmes.
BHM768 POLICY IMPLEMENTATION & EVALUATION Programmes with immediate impact tend to be more attractive to political leaders.
This is because immediate result is a considerable asset, because of the consequences for followership, support and political tenure.
The impact of a policy may be measurable or immeasurable, intended or unintended, tangible or non-tangible.
3.3 Administrative Feedback This is a management tool which refers to all the processes by which the organization’s leaders are informed of subordinate behaviours down to the lowest organizational level.
The importance of feedback system can be seen from the fact that the subordinate compliance does not automatically follow upon the issuance of orders and instructions by leaders.
4.0 CONCLUSION In this unit, we have seen that implementation starts where policy stops.
Policy implementation is a set of logical steps which commence with the commitments of financial resources required for putting policy or programmes into co-ordination.
Central to this process is effective co- ordination and management of various elements required to achieve the desired goals.
The obvious problems of implementation in developing countries include administration and the state of the economy.
5.0 SUMMARY Policy implementation is a set of logical steps which commences with the commitments to policy goals and objectives.
To be able to accomplish the desired result, there is the need to know what to do, and that all the required resources are available.
The unit also touched on the issue of feedback, policy impact and administrative feedback on policy implementation.
6.0 TUTOR-MARKED ASSIGNMENT What is policy Agenda?
Explain systematic and institution Agenda.
7.0 REFERENCES/FURTHER READING Barret S and Fudge, C (1981).
Examining the Policy Anchor Relationship: Essays on Implementation of Public Policy.
London and New York: Metheun.
BHM768 POLICY IMPLEMENTATION & EVALUATION UNIT 3 POLITICS OF EVALUATION CONTENTS 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objectives 3.0 Main content 3.1 Criteria of Evaluation 3.1.1 Types of Evaluation 3.1.2 Problems of Evaluation 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutor-Marked Assignment 7.0 References/Further Reading 1.0 INTRODUCTION Evaluation is used as the basis for allocating funds and assessing ap ro gramme’s success.
Evaluation research is applied research in that it has some utility because the results are meant for positive actions.
The uses of evaluation may vary in type between corporate bodies.
2.0 OBJECTIVES At the end of this unit, you should be able to: • determine evaluation criteria in policy plans and implementation • discuss types of evaluation • explain evaluation problems.
3.0 MAIN CONTENT 3.1 Criteria of Evaluation • Public Approval – this has to do with the way which a policy is received as distinct from what it really does.
The word “public” may mean those at whom the policy is directed.
• Fairness – what is the distribution of burdens imposed by a policy or the benefits it confers.
• Effectiveness – the extent to which a policy achieves the effects for which it is designed.
• Efficiency – this measures the cost of effort or money – at which policies achieve the objectives.
Central among these criteria are effectiveness and efficiency.
BHM768 POLICY IMPLEMENTATION & EVALUATION One important thing an evaluation should do is to find out what decision makers actually want from studies and how the results would be effectively utilized.
What then are the political purposes of evaluation?
• An evaluation may be done to postpone or delay a decision.
Instead of authorities acting quickly on an issue, they can commission an evaluation study which takes even longer.
• An evaluation is done to settle a rift or disagreement between one administration and the other • Evaluation may be commissioned to publicize achievements • For the need to show how a programme is fairing in order to justify the financial grants 3.1.1 Types of Evaluation • Process Evaluation – this explains the implementation of policies and programmes, as to whether it conforms with its stated guidelines, and the extent to which a policy or programme is executed according to its stated guidelines.
• Impact Evaluation – it concerns itself with the extent to which a policy causes a change in the intended directions.
This involves: a. Delineation of operationally defined goals.
b. Specification or development of a set of criteria for success.
c. Measurement of progress towards the goals.
The extent to which people have followed these criteria can be taken as the measurement of the success or failure of the policy.
• Comprehensive Evaluation – this involves both process and impact evaluation and one in which appropriate technique and ideas have been brought to bear so that it is possible to: a.
Define whether a policy or programme is carried out as planned.
b.
To assess whether or not a programme resulted in changes or modification with intended outcomes.
Thus, policy or programme evaluation in Public Administration is not in most cases free from political influence.
The need to score a political point may dictate or warrant evaluation exercise.
SELF ASSESSMENT EXERCISE 1 BHM768 POLICY IMPLEMENTATION & EVALUATION Recount the reasons and types of evaluation in public policies.
3.1.2 Problems of Evaluation • Staffing – this requires adequate technical competence of diverse kinds • Budgets – inadequate budgetary allocation of funds can surely hamper effective evaluation.
• Community Relation – programme officers need rapport with the beneficiaries if success is envisioned or desired.
A programme refers to any activity or group of activities undertaken by a government to produce a service to the public.
There can be as many responsibility centres as possible for a policy.
Programme evaluation is the systematic examination of specific government activities to provide information on the full range of the programme’s short and long term effects on citizen.
A programme evaluation concentrates on identity.
How the conditions of the citizens and the community have changed as a result of specific programmes or set of activities A programme evaluation attempts to determine whether a programme is achieving government’s objectives and considers both its positive and negative impacts.
As a result, the evaluation helps policy odefftiecrimalisn e whether a programme should be continued as it is, expanded, modified, reduced or eliminated.
Policies are evaluated through programmes because the latter is aco mponent of the former.
The aim of evaluation is to know the effect of the policy on the clientele system.
Evaluating a policy therefore is an efficiency question.
Policy evaluation sets out on the proposition that a policy is enacted, and implemented to bring about a change in the society in totality or at most, a segment of the society.
4.0 CONCLUSION Programme evaluation is a means of determining the efficiency of ap ro gramme.
There are two basic strategies of evaluation.
They are the experimental and non – experimental design.
5.0 SUMMARY BHM768 POLICY IMPLEMENTATION & EVALUATION In this unit, we were able to examine the issues involved in programme evaluation, the criteria of evaluation, types of evaluation and the problems confronting evaluation.
6.0 TUTOR-MARKED ASSIGNMENT What are the envisaged problems that confront programme evaluation?
7.0 REFERENCES/FURTHER READING Chrislopia, Plleh, Lew Lems et al (1979).
Public Policy in Theory and Practice.
Olaniyi J. O.
(1998).
Foundation of Public Policy Analysis.
Ibadan: Sunad Publication Ltd. UNIT 4 EVALUATION RESEARCH BHM768 POLICY IMPLEMENTATION & EVALUATION CONTENTS 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objectives 3.0 Main Content 3.1 Scientific Research Methodology 3.1.1 Stages of Scientific Method 3.1.2 Features of Evaluation Research 3.2 Evaluation Research Design 3.2.1 Experimental Design 3.2.2 Quasi – or Non – Experimental Design 3.3 Types of Non- Experimental Design 3.4 Controlled Experimental Design 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutor-Marked Assignment 7.0 References/Further Reading 1.0 INTRODUCTION Evaluation research is any scientifically based activities undertaken to assess the operation and impact of public policy, and the apcrotigorna m mes introduced to implement these policies.
The important distinction between evaluation research and other ways of judging the utility of public policy and associated programmes, is that it draws upon the research techniques of the social sciences.
2.0 OBJECTIVES At the end of this unit, you should be able to: • explain scientific research methodology • state the stages of scientific research methods • explain evaluation design and research design • discuss experimental and non experimental designs.
3.0 MAIN CONTENT 3.1 Scientific Research Methodology Scientific research methodology refers to the stages or phases of conducting an investigation.
Implicit in the concept of a research is the idea that you are looking for something, or you are out to vcearlitdaiante p r e- conceived views.
That is, research is something you want to do or establish in order to come out with a position or tested facts.
BHM768 POLICY IMPLEMENTATION & EVALUATION Scientific research is directed to discovering cause and effect relationship.
Its major function is to generate positive statements about the relationship.
3.1.1 Stages of Scientific Method • Identification of the problem to be researched into.
This is the definition of the problem.
Defining research subject means operationalising it.
This is breaking it up to its various identifiable components.
Operationalisation involves identifying the critical variables and the possible relationship between and among them.
The critical variables are usually in operation – independent and dependent variables.
If the dependent variable is put on the independent, there will be a reaction but for the reaction to take place there must be a third variable referred to as the intervening variable which must be clearly identified.
There must be an establishment of tentative relationships between and among the units.
To do this, you have to go into action by testing aonbdse r ving and this is done through methodology.
The methodology is to determine the type of data that are required.
The second stage is the determination of data collection instruments.
In social research, there are many basic instruments namely: mere observation, questionnaires, and interview guide.
Surely instruments are used to collect original or primary and secondary data.
Secondary data involves getting information from what other people have done from books and journals.
• Processing of data collected.
This is done by categorising the data.
Processing involves analysing and this is done by finding out the relationship between and among categories and drawing out inference.
Inferences can work in two directions, either to confirm the relations or refute them.
The truth established after this can be called theory.
3.1.2 Features of Evaluation Research One basic assumption of evaluation research is the programme itself.
Its goals and the criteria of success are adequately and clearly defined in order to allow an appropriate research plan to be designed.
Secondly, precision is contrived to all evaluation research.
Evaluation research takes place in “action-setting”.
All that the researcher has is limited discretion in deciding how to perform the research, how to design the study to answer the problem at hand and even what varieties are to be BHM768 POLICY IMPLEMENTATION & EVALUATION reckoned with.
The research must be designed to assess the impact of a given programme.
Another important feature is that generally, the target population for a programme and sometimes the sample for the evaluation itself, adreec i ded in advance by the way the policy was designed or constructed.
The evaluation research report is always audience specific.
Fmiunsdti ntagkse a form and style that can easily be understood by the decision- makers and their supporting staff.
This calls for publishing the reports not only in the professional and technical journals but also in special reports.
The last, but by no means the least feature, is that evaluation research should have a time-frame.
These special features affect or influence the condition under which evaluation researchers carry out their work.
3.2 Evaluation Research Design There are two principal categories of evaluation design.
They are the experimental and the non-experimental, with each having sub-divisions.
3.2.1 Experimental Design It is so called because its procedure and process comply completely with the principles of scientific methodology.
Scientific research is conducted in a laboratory situation but with particular reference to policies and programmes.
Experimental design is not without its own advantages.
First, it is based on concrete facts or achieved situations.
Secondly, the results are reliable.
Thirdly, it leads to better policy for programme evaluations.
On the negative side, it is very expensive in terms of inputs and time consuming also.
Secondly, the Random sampling is very tedious.
Thirdly, there is the problem of drop-out.
Lack of response may arise and the few that responded may not adequately reflect the opinion of the people.
Fourthly, it is always difficult to explain cause and affect relationship, because more often than not, the evaluation can only be left with a few BHM768 POLICY IMPLEMENTATION & EVALUATION variables, so that the effect of the other variables, the intervening variables may not often be of any consequence.
Fifthly, essential problems may arise that deal with our value system e.g.
religious beliefs and customs.
SELF ASSESSMENT EXERCISE 1 What is experimental in evaluation research?
State its advantages and disadvantages.
3.2.2 Quasi-or Non-Experimental Designs They are so called because no laboratory situations are created.
The strict principles of scientific research are not strictly observed yet data are needed for programme evaluation.
But the data collected are of impressions, and therefore not subjected to the vigorous scientific research.
Some people may refer to this as largely intuitive, and impressionistic, derived mainly from observations.
The type of conclusion drawn here is that of value judgment.
Non-experimental design has a number of advantages which include: • Simplicity and ease of undertaking the research work.
• Relies heavily on experience.
• It is less expensive in terms of time and cost of materials.
3.3 Types of Non-Experimental Designs • The one-project before and after this is the simplest and cheapest type of evaluation and its focus is only on the programme.
Here, a single programme is evaluated for a single subject, but the mode of evaluation is the establishment of a benchmark (criterion).
It identifies changes brought about by the programme as differences between the variation of the evaluation criteria measured before and an appropriate period after the programme’s introduction.
This design is probably the most utilised in programmes or human services programmes because it is capable of separating the effect of the programme activities from other influences.
The data collected is through observation impressions etc.
• Only design or time trend projection- It is called “after only design”, because the design is being applied after the programme has been implemented.
This, however, has its own problems because operation is not based on any antecedent but just the programme effect.
BHM768 POLICY IMPLEMENTATION & EVALUATION 3.4 Controlled Experimental Design Controlled experimental design is the best, but the most difficult and costly to undertake.
It assesses the effectiveness of a programme bsyys t ematically comparing specific changes in two or more cseapreafrualtleyd groups.
One in which the programme is operating and the other in which it is not.
Secondly, it can also be used to try variations of a programme to determine where it is most effective.
This results in more groups that are to be compared.
4.0 CONCLUSION Evaluation controls judgment.
Judgment in terms of meeting stated targets in policy programmes.
Evaluation here is mainly used in the context of social programme aimed at improving the welfare of tpheeo p le.
5.0 SUMMARY This unit was able to explain what evaluation research is all about.
It examined scientific research methodology, its stages, features of evaluation research and its design.
6.0 TUTOR-MARKED ASSIGNMENT Define the word “Evaluation”.
What are the obstacles to erevsaelauracthio unt i lisation?
7.0 REFERENCES/FURTHER READING Olaniyi, J. O.
(1998).
Foundation of Public Policy Analysis.
Ibadan: Sunad Publishers Ltd. UNIT 5 POLICY EVALUATION TECHNIQUES CONTENTS BHM768 POLICY IMPLEMENTATION & EVALUATION 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objectives 3.0 Main Content 3.1 Policy Evaluation Techniques 3.2 Budget 3.2.1 Purposes of Budgets 3.2.2 Types of Budget used in Programme Evaluation 3.2.2.1 Performance Budget 3.2.2.2 Planning, Programming and Budgeting System (PPBS) 3.2.2.3 Zero-Based Budgeting System (ZBBS) 3.2.3 Programmes Packaged and Structure Package 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutor-Marked Assignment 7.0 References/Further Reading 1.0 INTRODUCTION Policy evaluation is concerned with two important concepts in administration and management which are efficiency and effectiveness.
Efficiency relates to resource allocation to attain desired goals.
2.0 OBJECTIVES At the end of this unit, you should be able to: • explain what a budget is • discuss the purpose of a budget • state the types of budget used in programme evaluation.
3.0 MAIN CONTENT 3.1 Policy Evaluation Techniques Due to the fact that policy evaluation seeks to relate policy objectives to a policy programme, the following techniques are employed: • Performance budgeting, planning, programme and budgeting System • Zero based budgeting • Cost benefit analysis • Cost effectiveness 3.2 Budget BHM768 POLICY IMPLEMENTATION & EVALUATION A budget is a financial plan of operation, embodying the pesrotipmoasteed o f expenditure and income for a given period and a proposed means of financing it.
Used without modification, the term uinsduiaclalyte s a financial plan for a single fiscal year.
The period concerned by a budget could be from one to five years.
A budget contains two interrelated parts: Capital and Expenditure.
Government budget usually begins with the expenditure.
Under programme evaluation, budgeting refers to a process of budget preparation.
This is the process by which decisions are made as to the amount of manpower, material and financial inputs to be used by any government agency for a given period and the allocation of trheesoseu r ces among competing claims and demands.
Determination of manpower, materials and financial inputs are meant for running government organisation.
3.2.1 Purpose of Budgets A budget is an instrument of bringing information for making decisions.
This, the budget does, by bringing about regular renewed operation; facilitating the comparative evaluation of different purposes of activities and in relation to their relative cost, provides a basis for examining the total role of government and discussing it in relation to the psercivtoarte; p roviding a periodic link among the administrative organisation; the executive, legislative, judiciary and the general public.
This serves as an important vessel of democratic information and of dcoenmtoroclr aotfi cg o vernment tax.
• Budget also is an instrument of carrying out government policy legally, honestly and efficiently.
It does this by providing the legal basis for the expenditure, as all money spent needs approval to be functional.
It provides the legal framework for public fiscal accounts and accountability, making systematic re-examination of internal operation from the point of view of efficiency and effectiveness, facilitating the delegation of financial authority or responsibility while providing the basis for financial control.
• Budget is a mechanism of control.
There is also a feedback on any expenditure by means of documentation.
• Budget is policy planning because it is built on the needs of the society.
Therefore, programme planning must precede budgeting.
The cost of the programme is the total cost of all sub-programmes and activities.
• Budget is therefore a means by which government determines a need and the cost implication of such need.
BHM768 POLICY IMPLEMENTATION & EVALUATION 3.2.2 Types of Budgets Used in Programme Evaluation 3.2.2.1 Performance Budget Performance budget concentrates and focuses on what government plans to accomplish over a given period.
It is based on the result, rather than the materials to accomplish it.
Performance budgeting is very tasking because of the engineering nature of the process, for the input has to be derived from the purposes and then cost is related to the projects.
However, performance budget is not without its problems.
• It is prone to corruption.
• It is more demanding.
• The demand in terms of skill needed or expertise is so much.
3.2.2.2 Planning, Programming and Budgeting System (PPBS) This is sometimes referred to as programme planning and budgeting system.
Programme budgeting is different from performance budgeting in terms of kind and objective.
Performance budgeting concentrates on results.
Planning Programming and Budgeting System emphasises costing of the activities to be undertaken.
3.2.2.3 ZERO-Base Budgeting System (ZBBS) It is an American developed system.
Zero-based budgeting is an institutional control which makes the government more accountable.
The political philosophy behind this budgeting system is the need for taxation, as this cannot be levied without the approval of the legislature to make government accountable.
• Zero – based budgeting forces managers to plan, and plan means to look ahead.
The major feature of Zero-based budgeting system is accountability and economy in the use of resources.
It makes the representatives of the people to contribute to public expenditure.
The problem that confronts zero-based budgeting is that the political influence is overwhelming.
3.2.3 Programmes Package and Structure Package The emphasis is on programme as a package of activities, the accomplishment of which will lead to the desired goals of the organisation.
A policy measure is usually directed towards bringing about a desired change.
BHM768 POLICY IMPLEMENTATION & EVALUATION Each policy objective can have as many programmes as possible.
While a programme could be divided into distinct units called sub- programmes, which have activities as its ramification; a structure consists of programmes, sub-programmes and activities.
Each of these is an element.
And for each element we have to identify two important issues which are the purpose/objective and the beneficiary.
The objectives are expressed in more concrete terms which can bpeh y sically evaluated.
4.0 CONCLUSION All the techniques discussed in this unit are used as veritable tools in policy evaluation.
But different programmes may require different techniques and failure to adopt the appropriate ones can lead teov a luation failure.
5.0 SUMMARY The unit enumerated the different policy evaluation techniques.
Timhpe o rtance of budget was also emphasised.
6.0 TUTOR-MARKED ASSIGNMENT What is budgeting?
State the different types of budgets used ipnr o gramme evaluation.
7.0 REFERENCES/FURTHER READING Anderson, A.
B.
(1976).
‘Policy Experiment and Selected Analysis Issues’.I.
N Bernstein (ed) Validity issues in Evaluation Research.
UNIT 6 PROGRAMME EVALUATION: A PRACTICAL APPROACH CONTENTS 1.0 Introduction BHM768 POLICY IMPLEMENTATION & EVALUATION 2.0 Objectives 3.0 Main Content 3.1 Importance of Evaluation to Programme Formation and .
Performance 3.1.1 Purposes of Evaluation 3.1.2 How to Evaluate 3.1.3 Levels of Evaluation 3.1.4 Measuring Effectiveness and Assessing the Impact on the Problem 3.2 Evaluation and Policy Development 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutor-Marked Assignment 7.0 References/Further Reading 1.0 INTRODUCTION Evaluation means an assessment or appraisal.
Policy evaluation involves information gathering.
Evaluation is a systematic analysis of programmes, designed to assess the impact and effectiveness in attaining objectives.
2.0 OBJECTIVES At the end of this unit, you should be able to: • design a policy plan.
• state the importance of evaluation to programme formation and performance • discuss purposes of programme evaluation.
3.0 MAIN CONTENT 3.1 Importance of Evaluation to Programme Formation and Performance BHM768 POLICY IMPLEMENTATION & EVALUATION Programme evaluation is the systematic examination of specific government activities to provide information on the effect of the programme on the citizens.
Evaluation is very central to programme formation and performance.
Therefore, it is important on the basis of impact assessment.
The tax payers would be interested on how their taxes are being utilised.
Programme evaluation acts as a guide to future decision, rceognatrinduinagti o n or modification of an organisation’s activities.
3.1.2 How to Evaluate There are ten procedural steps involved in any good evaluation work.
1.
Examining the programme’s development by placing the programme in a historical, contextual and development perspectives.
This helps to educate and enhance the understanding of the programme issues, intention, problems and hope.
2.
Specify and clarify the programme’s objectives.
Objectives are central because they provide a major criterion of evaluation.
So objectives have to be clearly stated and expressed in order to avoid the problem of ambiguity and vagueness that normally characterise public policy programmes.
3.
Elaborate on critical concepts and determines tools and methods of evaluation, particularly the measures of performance.
4.
Find out the costs and sequences of the programme, impact and performance 5.
Formulate the evaluation problem and appropriate design 6.
Search out and collect relevant programme data and analysis; if the same is based on control evaluation questions and conceptual relationship 7.
Assign values to the programme.
This is a difficult task.
It is hard to estimate programme performance because of numerous objectives, beneficiaries and variations of the effect on various groups.
8.
Determine and explain levels of performance and impact.
9.
Consider crucial evaluation decisions on programme, renew expansion, termination or modification projects, activities and operation.
10.
Consideration of evaluation decisions and the determination of their opportunity costs and future consequences.
3.1.3 Levels of Evaluation BHM768 POLICY IMPLEMENTATION & EVALUATION 1.
The first step in the levels of evaluation is the monitoring of daily task.
At this level, assessments, formal or informal are made in the organisation’s structure and tasks.
Mostly at this level management problems are released and sorted out.
2.
The second step is an assessment of programme improvement, and action taken.
The characteristics of current activities are also identified.
The assessment is on the number and types of programme services, the beneficiaries, the timing and appropriateness of activities and the efficiency with which they are carried out.
Any evaluation done at this level will be subjective because it requires a serious involvement of programme staff members, to whom the judgments are most valuable.
The underlying premise in evaluation is that problems cannot be solved if they are not recognised.
Enumerating Outcome.
At this level, it is possible to determine whether a programme’s objective is in the immediate, or whether the short term outcomes have been achieved.
To ascertain the result of the second level, some measures are necessary to determine changes in the behaviour, attitudes, skills, information level, legal or employment status of the target population and all these must be properly documented.
Changes that occur simultaneously with the programme’s existence cannot, however, be attributed to the programme.
3.
Measuring effectiveness.
This tells whether a programme’s goals have been accomplished.
It is important to identify the other variables that could influence a change in condition.
4.
Assessing impact on the problem.
A good programme should effect an improvement in the situation.
But the reality is that most programmes do not have the necessary resources to carry evaluation achieved at this level.
But an improvement on the problem should be noticeable.
3.2 Evaluation and Policy Development Evaluation makes useful contribution to policy development in the areas of policy development, policy formulation, feasibility studies and experimentation.
Evaluation provides a basis for decision on the set-up programmes, their relevance, the cost and benefits of available alternatives, importance to programme design, formulation and establishment.
With the use of such techniques as cost-benefit analysis and cost-effectiveness, an evaluation is able to recommend programmes.
Evaluation assesses programmes’ potential for implementation and BHM768 POLICY IMPLEMENTATION & EVALUATION provides information and advice on the potentials for successful programmes.
Evaluation also helps to determine a programme’s feasibility and practicability.
Also, the use of experiment and demonstration are central to ppuoblilciyc formation and implementation, because many public policy programmes involve large amount of resources, structure and coverage.
Experiments would therefore be needed to reduce policy performance failure and the attendant cost.
Experiments are also necessary as it hey will enable programme officers know and develop experience that could serve as a potential guide to implementation of programmes.
SELF ASSESSMENT EXERCISE 1 State and discuss the various levels involved in programme evaluation 4.0 CONCLUSION In conclusion, there is no doubt that all the above factors could ensure and, indeed lead to successful practical programme evaluation, if and when all the problems of proper design, formulation and implementation are seriously addressed.
5.0 SUMMARY In this unit, we were able to see the importance of epvroagluraatmiomn e f otorm ation and performance.
We also discussed the purposes of programme evaluation, levels of evaluation and evaluation and policy development.
6.0 TUTOR-MARKED ASSIGNMENT What is the importance of evaluation to programme formulation?
7.0 REFERENCES/FURTHER READING Olaniyi J. O.
(1998).
Foundation of Public Policy Analysis.
Ibadan: Sunad Publication Ltd.
