 NATIONAL OPEN UNIVERSITY OF NIGERIA SCHOOL OF ARTS AND SOCIAL SCIENCE COURSE CODE:-BHM 770 COURSE TITLE:- LOCAL GOVERNMENT ADMINISTRATION AND REVENUE GENERATION BHM 770 LOCAL GOVERNMENT ADMINISTRATION AND REVENUE GENERATION COURSE GUIDE BHM 770 LOCAL GOVERNMENT ADMINISTRATION AND REVENUE GENERATION Adopted from MPA 704 Programme Leader Dr. O. J. Onwe National Open University of Nigeria Course Coordinator Martha Oruku National Open University of Nigeria NATIONAL OPEN UNIVERSITY OF NIGERIA BHM 770 LOCAL GOVERNMENT ADMINISTRATION AND REVENUE GENERATION National Open University of Nigeria Headquarters 14/16 Ahmadu Bello Way Victoria Island Lagos Abuja Office NOUN Building No.
5, Dar es Salaam Street Off Aminu Kano Crescent Wuse II, Abuja Nigeria e-mail: centralinfo@nou.edu.ng URL: www.nou.edu.ng Published by National Open University of Nigeria Printed 2008 ISBN: 978-058-522-2 All Rights Reserved BHM 770 LOCAL GOVERNMENT ADMINISTRATION AND REVENUE GENERATION CONTENTS PAGE Introduction………………………………………………….. 1 What You Will Learn in this Course……………………….. 1 Course Aims………………………………………………… 2 Course Objectives…………………………………………… 2 Working through this Course……………………………….
3 Course Materials…………………………………………….. 3 Study Units………………………………………………….. 4 Textbooks and References…………………………………… 5 Assignment File……………………………………………... 5 Course Assessment………………………………………….. 5 Tutor-Marked Assignment………………………………….. 6 Conclusion…………………………………………………... 6 Introduction Local Government Administration and Revenue Generation is one- semester course for student offering PGD in Local Government Administration.
It is a 2 credit units course consisting of 15 units.
Each unit is supposed to be covered in two hours.
It is also core a course.
The course consists of 6 modules and 15 units.
The units are: theoretical basis of understating local governments, structures and functions olofc al government leadership and personnels of local governments Local Government Finance, Local Government and development Administration appears to be difficult to prepare.
This is because after the theoretical aspect that relates generally to local government, ownoeu l d need a lot of examples to start discussing specific aspects of local government.
There is the danger of falling into a discussion acoromupnadr a tive local government.
This course Guide tells you briefly what the course is about, what course material you will be using and how you can work your way through these materials.
It also highlights issues of timing for going through these units, and explains the Activities and Tutor-Marked Assignment.
There are supposed to be tutorials attached to this course and taking advantage of this will bring you into contact with your teacher which will enhance your understanding of this course.
What You Will Learn in this Course The overall aim of this course on Local Government Administration and Revenue Generation is to expose how public administration takes place in local government.
This is done to broaden your perspective on public administration and stimulate your interest in local government.
It is also to make you appreciate that local government may be small BHM 770 LOCAL GOVERNMENT ADMINISTRATION AND REVENUE GENERATION governments but its administration is a reflection of what takes place in higher government.
During this course, you will learn about theories of local government and structure of local governments.
You will therefore learn the idea behind local government, what they are really created to do and how they are structured to do it, what type of personnel handle such administration, what are their source of finance, what type of expenditure do they engage in and what development do they effect in local communities.
Knowledge of these will lead to the appreciation of the institution and the service they render.
BHM 770 LOCAL GOVERNMENT ADMINISTRATION AND REVENUE GENERATION Course Aims The aim of this course as pointed out earlier is to expose the students of local government administration to the concepts, structure, organization and service delivery capacity.
It is to make you appreciate the scope of local government the way they operate and what they are capable of doing.
This will be achieved by aiming to a) Introduce you to the basic concepts and principles of local b) government c) compare the structures and functions of local government in a number of course d) give an insight into the leadership and personnel systems that operate these structures and translate local resources into service; e) explore the sources of revenue to local governments and also their; expenditure pattern f) appraise the development potentials of local government.
Course Objectives To achieve the aims set out above, the course sets overall objectives.
In addition, each unit also has specific objectives.
The unit objectives are always included at the beginning of a unit.
You are advised to refer to them as you study each unit – both at the beginning and at the end to ensure that you check your progress and that you have done what is required of you by the unit.
Below are wider objectives of the course as a whole.
By meeting these objectives you should achieve the aims of the course as a whole.
On successful completion of the course, you should be able to: 3 Identify and explain the main concepts associated with decentralization.
4 Situate local government in the intergovernmental maze and so, appreciate the level of autonomy, or the control of the institution.
5 Appreciate the philosophy of local government.
BHM 770 LOCAL GOVERNMENT ADMINISTRATION AND REVENUE GENERATION 6 Identify and discuss what leadership system exits in local government and how such leadership relates to the career officers of local government.
7 Discuss the pattern of local government revenue and expenditure and therefore explain the budgets and services provided by local governments.
8 Explain the development potentials of local government, the types of services provided and the factors that militate against development at the local level.
9 Read a set of articles and apply these to the concepts and issues covered in the preceding units of the course.
Working through this Course To complete this course you are required to read the study units and recommended text books and explore more current materials on the internet.
You may also need to visit the local governments around you to observe practically some of the things conveyed in this course, for example, services delivered by local governments.
You could also have a chat with local government staff on a wide array of issues including the problems they face.
Note also that local government is a living subject and there are developments daily about the organization especially in your country, so, you are advised to keep abreast of these in the newspapers and magazines and even the radio.
In this course, each unit consists of exercises or activities to test your understanding from time to time.
At a point in your course, you are required to submit assignments for assessment purposes.
At the end of the course is a final examination.
Below you will find listed all the components of the course, what you have to do and how you should allocate time to each unit in order to complete the course successfully on time.
Course Materials Major component of the course are: a) Course Guide b) Study Units 3.
Further Readings 4.
Activities and Tutor-Marked Assignment Every thing is contained in each unit except the test books which you may have to prepare.
You are advised to source current materials on the BHM 770 LOCAL GOVERNMENT ADMINISTRATION AND REVENUE GENERATION net and avail yourselves of newspaper and magazines and other publications on local government.
You may contact your tutor where you run into problem about text books.
Study Units There are fifteen units in this course as follows: Module 1 Unit 1 The idea of Local Government Unit 2 Theories of Local Government Unit 3 Local Government in Intergovernmental Relations Unit 4 Structure of Local Government Unit 5 Functions of Local Government Module 2 Unit 1 System of Government/Leadership in Local Government Unit 2 The Committee System in Local Government Unit 3 The Personnels of Local Government Unit 4 Local Government as Instrument of Development Unit 5 Local Government and Health Care Delivery Module 3 Unit 1 Structure and Responsibilities of Local Government in Nigeria Unit 2 Some Basic Concepts of Government and their Relevance to Local Government Administration and Revenue Generation Unit 3 Overview of Local Government in Nigeria Unit 4 Local Government Finance (Revenue Sources) Unit 5 Management of Local Government Finance Each module is representing a homogenous body of issues on Local Government Administration and Revenue Generation.
Modules one addresses conceptual or theoretical issues.
Modules two is about structure, functions and responsibilities of local government on a comparative basis.
Module three looks at leadership systems and the personnels of local governments.
Module four takes a looks at finances of local government while module five looks adte v elopment issues.
The last module selects three articles that relates to BHM 770 LOCAL GOVERNMENT ADMINISTRATION AND REVENUE GENERATION what has been covered in terms of concepts, history and departmental organization and services.
You must read each unit carefully.
The basic knowledge on the topic is conveyed here.
An update of the knowledge is in reference materials of currency.
Supplementary reading is advised.
As you work through each unit, the core of the units is at the 3.0 level.
The conclusion (4.0) helps to round up what as been said far while “summary” (5.0) gives a brief summary of the major issues discussed.
This is meant to assist you to remember the key issues and simplify the discussion at the end.
At the end of some issues discussed at the 3.0 level in the unit, you will come across “Activity”.
These are meant to provide simple question to enable you comprehend or remind yourself of the things discussed before the Activity.
Answers are directly provided in most cases.
Do not consult the answers until you have attempted the questions.
You may sometimes observe that the answers provided give you more insight than may have been originally conveyed, (especially with the tutor- marked question.
This is part of the characteristics of essay question) Textbooks and References There is no compulsory textbook for this course.
However, as you go through the course, you will observe that some textbooks are recommended often.
This shows that it is crucial to a number of units.
Please try and consult these.
Moreover, each unit has it own assigned texts and document.
You should also lay your hands on these for further understanding.
Assignment File The major assignment required of you is a tutor-marked assignment (TMA) which you are expected to complete at the end of each unit and mail to your tutor.
Course Assessment Your assessment for this course is made up of two components: g) Tutor-marked assignment h) Final examination The practice exercises (or activity) are not part of your formal assessments but it is important to complete all of them.
If you do the BHM 770 LOCAL GOVERNMENT ADMINISTRATION AND REVENUE GENERATION practice exercise, it will facilitate you understanding of the smuabtjteecrt o r topic and your tutor-marked assignments.
BHM 770 LOCAL GOVERNMENT ADMINISTRATION AND REVENUE GENERATION Tutor-Marked Assignment Each unit in this course has a TMA attached to it.
You can only do this assignment after covering the materials and exercise in each unit.
Normally the TMA are kept in a separate file.
Your tutor will mark and comment on it.
Pay attention to such feedback from your tutor and use it to improve your other assignments.
You can write the assignment by using materials from your study units and from textbooks or other sources.
It is however preferable that as a graduate student, you should demonstrate evidence of wide reading especially from texts and other sources –something to show that you have researched more widely.
But do remember that copying from any sources without acknowledgment is plagiarism and is not acceptable.
You make references properly when you refer to other people’s work.
The assignments are in most cases essay questions.
Examples from your own experience or environment are useful when you answer such questions.
This allows you to apply theory to real life situation.
Conclusion Local Government Administration and Revenue Generation is an interesting course.
It provides you with theoretical, comparative and case study perspective in understanding the subject matter.
It is designed to enable you understand the workings of local government and appreciate its usefulness as a tier of government.
Perhaps those of you who have been ignorant about this institution will after this course start to take interest and start applying yourselves to this institution.
Good Luck and enjoy the course.
BHM 770 LOCAL GOVERNMENT ADMINISTRATION AND REVENUE GENERATION Course Code BHM 770 Course Title Local Government Administration and Revenue Generation Adopted from MPA 704 Programme Leader Dr. O. J. Onwe National Open University of Nigeria Course Coordinator Martha Oruku National Open University of Nigeria NATIONAL OPEN UNIVERSITY OF NIGERIA BHM 770 LOCAL GOVERNMENT ADMINISTRATION AND REVENUE GENERATION National Open University of Nigeria Headquarters 14/16 Ahmadu Bello Way Victoria Island Lagos Abuja Office NOUN Building No.
5, Dar es Salaam Street Off Aminu Kano Crescent Wuse II, Abuja Nigeria e-mail: centralinfo@nou.edu.ng URL: www.nou.edu.ng Published by National Open University of Nigeria Printed 2008 ISBN: 978-058-522-2 All Rights Reserved BHM 770 LOCAL GOVERNMENT ADMINISTRATION AND REVENUE GENERATION CONTENTS PAGE Module 1 ……………………………………………….. 1 Unit 1 The idea of Local Government………………… 1 Unit 2 Theories of Local Government………………... 8 Unit 3 Local Government in Intergovernmental Relations……………………………………….
15 Unit 4 Structure of Local Government……………….. 26 Unit 5 Functions of Local Government……………….
33 Module 2 ………………………………………………… 39 Unit 1 System of Government/Leadership in Local Government…………………………………… 39 Unit 2 The Committee System in Local Government... 48 Unit 3 The Personnels of Local Government………… 59 Unit 4 Local Government as Instrument of Development………………………………….. 70 Unit 5 Local Government and Health Care Delivery... 82 Module 3 ………………………………………………… 91 Unit 1 Structure and Responsibilities of Local Government in Nigeria……………………… 91 Unit 2 Some Basic Concepts of Government and their Relevance to Local Government Administration and Revenue Generation……………………… 99 Unit 3 Overview of Local Government in Nigeria…... 107 Unit 4 Local Government Finance (Revenue Sources) 119 Unit 5 Management of Local Government Finance….. 127 BHM 770 MODULE 1 MODULE 1 Unit 1 The Idea of Local Government Unit 2 Theories of Local Government Unit 3 Local Government in Intergovernmental Relations Unit 4 Structure of Local Government Unit 5 Functions of Local Government UNIT 1 THE IDEA OF LOCAL GOVERNMENT CONTENTS 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objectives 3.0 Main Content 3.1 The Place of Local Government 3.2 The Need for Local Government 3.3 Meaning of Local Government 3.4 Role of Local Government 3.4.1 Political Role 3.4.2 Socio-Economic Role 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutor-Marked Assignment 7.0 References/Further Readings 1.0INTRODUCTION In this unit, attempt is made to present the basic idea about the local government.
This includes the philosophy, need for the institution, definition, and role of local government.
You will need to understand these to be able to appreciate the specific issues you will follow in subsequent units.
These issues here are actually background issues.
The other way of stating all these, is what are local governments?
Why do we need them?
What role do they play in the life of individual and communities?
(What type of development do they facilitate?).
2.0OBJECTIVES At the end of this unit, you should be able to • advance five reasons why local governments are necessary • define local government from the perspectives of two authors • state 5 characteristics of local government • outline the key issues on the political and socio-economic role of local government.
BHM 770 MODULE 1 3.0 MAIN CONTENT 3.1 The Place of Local Government Local Government is the closest tie of government to the people.
In a unitary system, power is shared between the Central Government and local government.
In a Federal system power is shared between Federal- State and Local Governments.
Generally we talk of a creelnattriaoln-lsohcipal.
In a Federal system however, the relationship is largely between the state or regional government and local government because, constitutionally local government are within the constitution mandates of the state or regional governments.
Basically, in any system local governments are created to decongest the functions and burden of central governments and to provide services that are local in character.
The rest of this unit looks at the meaning of local government, tshpee c ific purposes of local government and role of these institutions.
3.2 The Need For Local Government The need for local government may be stated specifically as follows: a) It is more democratic.
This is referring to the fact that it increases the scope for citizenship participation in the government of their locality.
b) It provides valuable political education.
This type of education expose citizens to power and authority – it s acquisition, its use and its risk.
c) It trains people for higher public offices.
Local Government becomes a platform or a springboard for acquiring experiences for hcaigreheerr i n government.
d) Local knowledge is brought to bear on decision by local government.
e) It is more sensitive to local opinion.
Councilors and representatives are closer to the people and respond much easily to their demands or to be voted out.
f) Local initiative can easily be identified and taken on board especially in mobilizing community to gain local support for projects.
g) Power is more widely dispersed which is a safeguard against tyranny.
The local government system protects citizens against this.
BHM 770 MODULE 1 h) Local variations and needs in service provision can better be handled by local government since it understands the needs of its own locality.
SELF ASSESSMENT EXERCISE 1 Now that you have seen the need for local government, identify three contributions local government can make to your community and two negative things it can do to you and your community.
3.3 Meaning of Local Government Local Government is grassroots government recognized by law.
It is defined severally by authors and bodies.
Let us look at the definition of local government from the perspective of one author and two bodies or documents.
Maddick (1963) defines local government as A sub-unit of government controlled by a local council which is authorized by the central government to pass ordinances having a local application, levy taxes or exact labour and within limit specified by the central government varies centrally decided policy in applying it locally.
The United Nations defines local government as a political sub-division of a nation (or in a federal system, a state) which is constituted by a law and has substantial control of local affairs including the power to impose taxes or to exert labour for prescribed purposes.
The governing body of such an entity is elected or otherwise locally selected.
The Reform document (Nigeria 1976) defines local government as: government at local level exercised by representative council, established by law to exercise specific power within define areas From the three definitions above, certain characteristics of local government stand out a) That local government is a subordinate system of government b) It has both legal and constitutional power to perform certain legislative, administrative and quasi judicial functions BHM 770 MODULE 1 c) Has the power to make policies, prepare budgets and a measure of control over its own staff.
d) Its council could be elected or selected.
e) It has legal personality i.e.
can sue and be sued.
f) It exercise authority over a given territory or population.
These definitions, point at local government as having government character within limited powers.
This can be further broken down more specifically as follows: a) Legal entity which can sue and be sued for wrong doing.
b) Power to make its own laws, policies, plans and budgets on what to do, how why, where, when, for who and at what cost.
c) Legislative body called a council composed of elected councilors and a chairman to make laws and policies.
d) Executive body called the Committee composed of appointed or elected officials and the chairman to formulate policies and laws.
e) Administrative body called the local government service composed of career civil servants to assist in formulating and in implementing laws and policies.
f) Power to tap human, financial and material resources for public use within the geographical area.
g) Answerable to a higher level of government (National or state or regional) on certain power and functions it carries out (especially concurrent function).
This is to say that a local government is not absolutely autonomous.
SELF ASSESSMENT EXERCISE 2 From the characteristics of local governments, state 5 power lgoocvael rn ments enjoy.
3.4 Roles of Local Government The roles of local government are in some ways similar to those of central government.
Central government exists to provide for development services to the people and provide security for the citizenry and ensures participation of the citizenry in government.
To some extent local government performs such roles even though with some varying degree of intensity.
For easier understanding such roles could be classified into two viz; political and socio-economic roles.
3.4.1 Political Role BHM 770 MODULE 1 Local governments are veritable and appropriate institutions for promoting democracy at the local level.
They are well placed to mobilization the people politically through political education, political enlightenment and political actions.
Local Government have became very useful tool for the conduct of election at all levels of government.
With such, the process of political recruitment is institutionalized and the institution can then help to train people for higher responsibilities.
Another political role is that of maintenance law and order.
Local governments have the instrumentality of the police at their disposal and therefore work with its leadership at the local level to enforce law and order and maintain security.
Moreover, certain committees such as the Security Committee, the police Committee, facilitate such exercise.
Furthermore, to enhance responsive governance, local governments serve as a two-way channel of communication between the government and the governed.
Just as it transmits the decision of governments to the local people, it also conveys or channels their demands and feedback on policies to governments (local or central).
3.4.2 Socio-Economic Role The exercise of democracy and human rights can only be meaningful if demands and policies can be translated into physical development including the provision of basic socio-economic services.
Services of local government are primary or basic in nature as reflected in their functions.
Some of these are basic health, basic education, agriculture and revenue raising and regulating functions.
People expect such services to be delivered to make any meaning of democracy and bureaucracy at the local level.
The services delivered also depend on the nature of the local government – whether it is a municipal council or a rural council – the complexity may depend on the level of urbanization or the availability of funds.
In providing socio-economic services, local governments have to work with community groups and the citizenry to harness community energies and input into development.
A greater part of the developmental initiatives and effectiveness in local government is a function of community development or self-help groups.
These two roles of local governments will be revisited in another form when in a later unit look at the theories of local government and the argument for each of these roles highlighting the importance of each.
4.0 CONCLUSION BHM 770 MODULE 1 Local government, from the brief discussion on need, definition and roles above can be seen as the government at the grassroots ldeevseigl n ed to decongest the activities of higher tiers, transmit policies and demands and promote democracy.
Very importantly, it is supposed to bring about the development of communities, being urban or rural.
It should be noted that in doing this, they enjoy some powers and at the same time some constraints.
They are not autonomous or independent entities but subordinate governments, subject to various forms of dictates and controls.
Local government becomes indispensable because of what they do to affect the leves of rural communities and how their activities can also contribute to national development.
All these issues of need, role, and meaning will receive expansion in the subsequent units as we discuss powers, structures, functions, personnel and finance etc, 5.0 SUMMARY Let us recall the major things we have talked about in this unit.
Local governments are the closest government administration to communities.
They enjoy political, legal, constitutional, administrative, financial and territorial power.
Local governments help to enforce democracy at the local level while bringing about socio-economic development in rural areas.
ANSWER TO SELF ASSESSMENT EXERCISE 1 Contributions - Mobilize groups for community development in my community - Provide services to my community - Prepare people for political offices - Cause disaffection among community groups as a result of party politics - Marginalize my community by not providing services ANSWER SELF ASSESSMENT EXERCISE 2 - Power to make laws, policies, plans and budgets - Power to tap human, financial and material resources.
- Power to sue - Power to exercise authority over a territory or population 6.0 TUTOR-MARKED ASSIGNMENT BHM 770 MODULE 1 Discuss a political, social and economic reason why you feel your local government is important.
7.0 REFERENCES/FURTHER READINGS H. Maddick (1963).
Democracy, Decentralization & Development.
Asia Bombay Publishing House.
(Introductory Chapter).
P.C.
Akpan.
Modern Local Government Administration in Nigeria.
(Unpublished, 1984 Ch.
1).
M.P.
Barber, (1974).
Local Government.
(Third Edition) London: Macdonald & Evans Ltd. Ch.
1.
BHM 770 MODULE 1 UNIT 2 THEORIES OF LOCAL GOVERNMENT CONTENTS 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objectives 3.0 Main Content 3.1 Utility and Focus of Theories 3.2 Democratic – Participatory School 3.3 Efficiency Services School 3.4 Comments 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutor-Marked Assignment 7.0 References/Further Readings (CONTENDING SCHOOL OF THOUGHT) 1.0 INTRODUCTION In this Unit we are interested in knowing the main purpose of local government.
There has been a debate between two schools of thought (or theories).
This Unit addresses this debate and comes out with views.
Knowledge of those theories will broaden your basic understanding of local government.
2.0 OBJECTIVES At the end of this unit, the student should be able to: • identify the two schools of though on local government • highlight three major points advanced by school • explain the proposition put forward in the “comment” on these schools of thought • apply both theories to the Nigerian situation based on findings from research.
3.0 MAIN CONTENT 3.1 Utility and Focus of Theories Theories deal with explanation.
In this case it is about how tuon d erstand local government or what local governments are meant for.
It is important to understand this so that we become clear in our minds what the institution really stands for and what its priority should be.
BHM 770 MODULE 1 People also from their attitude to the institution based on their knowledge of the institution and what it should be doing.
Furthermore, it will enable us appreciate the problems of institution.
Some scholars argue that local governments exist essentially as democratic institutions and their job is to foster representative and participatory democracy at the local level.
Other scholars feel local governments should focus more on service delivery for those tangible things communities required.
The various arguments are presented below.
3.2 Democratic – Participation School The influence on this school has been largely the work of John Stuart Mills especially with his work on Utilitarianism, Liberty and Representative Government.
In it, he claim that the good form of government was representative government because it promoted liberty, equity, and fraternity, made men look beyond their immediate interest and recognized the just demands of other men; promote political education, participation and communication.
Furthermore, he asserts that local government is a prime element of democracy and demonstrates the intrinsic values of democracy irrespective of the services it provides.
Government is truly representative when all types of people can take part.
The local government level offers the closest thing to widespread consultation and participation.
British and America governments are based on the tenets of democracy and representative government and the local government level is a haven for such activities.
Local governments in such entities and indeed other advanced western countries, function to bring about democracy and to provide opportunities for political participation to the citizenry as well as to educate and socialise them politically.
Politics and indeed development is about making choices through informed opinion, conflict and conflict resolution and these should be the priorities of local government.
According to Panter (1953) participation is vital to democracy since it is the community that people appreciate and tolerate each other’s views and learn the art of practical politics.
Local governments have become the training grounds for political elites or higher level of government.
Studies have been carried out to buttress this position.
For example Keith Lucas in an English study concluded that the number of British members of Parliament who had served on local government demonstrated the importance of local government as a recruiting ground for the British Parliament.
Specifically, David Butter found out in the 1964 general elections that 53% of the labour members of parliament BHM 770 MODULE 1 and 45% of the defeated members had been local government councilors.
The figure is 29% and 40% respectively for the conservative party.
This point on parliamentarians benefiting from political apprenticeship at local government level is replete in these advanced democracies as confirmed by Mackenzie (1954) in his work titled “Local Government in Parliament”.
A very important part of this democratic role is the opportunity it creates for political activity and social interaction.
Such a forum helps tion c ulcate the ideals of democracy like, election or selection of lgoocvael rn ment committees and boards, public debates, pressure and interest group activities, and community mobilization.
Local governments must continue to buttress democracy through these ideas.
3.3 Efficiency Services School The advocates of efficiency services believe that the idea of democracy advocated by Mills and Bricks above do no apply to different political system in the same manner especially in the face of modern realities.
The crux of their theory is that the main purpose of local government is to provide services to the local people.
Foremost among the advocates is the French scholar Langood (1953) who opined that democracy was the affairs of the nation-state as a whole issue of majority rule, equality and uniformity are the norm.
Local self government by contrast was parochial and concerned with local differences and separation.
The two are opposed and it was only a historical accident that they had developed together in the 19th century.
He went on to say that it was equally false to see local government as a setting for political education and democracy.
To him, the local arena has only succeeded in breeding few national leaders.
Local politics is more likely to reinforce narrow sinetcetrioesntasl th an an appreciation of democracy.
The citizen is more likely to learn about democracy from national politics and national issues.
Arguing in the same vein, Moulin points out that local government is so restricted while national goals are wider in scale.
Local experience and knowledge is hardly appropriate to national affairs.
Sharpe (1970) provided a very strong case for local governments on the grounds that it was the most efficient agent for providing those services that aerses e ntially local.
He suggested that the efficient performance of these services is so compelling that if local government doss not esoxmiste,t h ing else will have to be created in its place, meaning tihnest i tution is indispensable.
Even a decentralized form of national government cannot play this role because of the level of coordination BHM 770 MODULE 1 local government can forge cannot be undertaken by such an alternative.
The main functional responsibility of local governments therefore is to efficiently carry out local duties allocated to it, at the highest efficiency rate.
SELF ASSESSMENT EXERCISE 1 List 3 key issues raised by the Democratic school in its argument: 1.
Local Government is about the promotion of democracy 2.
Political participation of citizen is important for quality decisions 3.
Local government is a training ground for political elites who are interested in national politics.
3.4 Comments These two schools of thought on local governments appear to be extremes of the role local governments should play.
Most of the advocates of the democratic theory are from the societies with the strong tradition of democracy i.e.
Britain and America.
A lot of the efficiency school is championed by French scholars with background of strong unitary (centralizing) influences.
(The role of the prefects in France before the 1982 reforms can attest to this).
These arguments look attractive.
The point however is that one argument needs the other.
Even some third world or developing countries have looked at democracy in local government as a luxury and an expensive venture.
They say developing countries need money to carry out services, not paying allowances and entitlements of councilors in local government.
At the same time representative government, which is a hallmark of democracy is not a luxury because various interests within the community have to be represented in government and their views articulated.
Policies and programmes will have to be well debated before they are approved and implemented.
Popular participation has to be mobilised.
These two theories therefore need each other.
In developing societies people are in a hurry to develop but priorities must be set right and people’s interest must be carried along.
The question as Maddick puts it is, “the clash between efficiency and popular control”.
How much of democracy is needed to provide efficiently services at the local level.
This is about “optimum administration”, Maddick sum up the cross- fertilisation between democracy and service delivery when he wrote.
The argument is that there is need in society for civic consciousness and political maturity if programs for both the locality and the state are BHM 770 MODULE 1 going to be carried through adequately, with enthusiasm and in fact in some cases without outbreaks of violence.
The spread of pmoaltiutirciatyl s hould bring with it through political participation responsive governments which translate needs into politics, which can harness local energies, because it is a popular government, and which is acceptable by periodically having so show results for activities.
SELF ASSESSMENT EXERCISE 2 This author adopts what looks like a middle of the road approach.
What is the main argument?
(In one sentence).
4.0 CONCLUSION We would like to conclude by giving an example of what has happened on the Nigeria scene as regards the contending schools of thought since 1976.
In Nigeria, the military paid attention to local governments during their tenure.
There was an attempt at one stage or the other to make tihnest i tution autonomous and therefore viable.
It got to a stage wpehoeprlee started questioning the efficacy of party politics in turning local government around.
In a study carried out in 1989/90, people started having more faith in the performance of local governments umnidlietar ry administration than those under civilians (70%).
To make matter worse for the advocates of local government as a tool fdoerm ocracy, (62%) of the people claimed that party politics was undesirable in local government because of its divisive nature.
To them it creates problems for communities which had lived peacefully before and breaks the peace of communities.
With the results from the military and the opinion of people, scholars and also workers in local government started questioning the unity of democratic leadership in local government with all its cost of maintenance and the patronage system which endangers the lean resources of local government.
To them the sole administrator omra n agement committee systems were more effective for service delivery in local government and they saw no reasons why the democratic leadership should be imposed.
Now that democratic leadership has been back since 1999, the same complaints about iitnsv e rse relationship with service delivery and institutional development plus all the patronage politics have surfaced.
It therefore appears that democratic leadership in local government is a norm, s strong index of devolution and must not therefore be avoided despite public opinion.
The panacea is to educate citizens to learn the virtue of this leadership (which on its own should have no alternative because of its inherent BHM 770 MODULE 1 virtues) Democracy must be the vehicle through which resources should be fairly allocated, policies formulated and implemented in local governments and indeed higher government.
5.0.
SUMMARY You have been taken through two contending schools of thought on what the purpose of local governments should be.
The democratic participatory school says local government is created to promote democracy and in so doing creating the right political culture at the local level, which in turn reinforce what is done at the national level.
The efficiency services school feels, emphasizing democracy at the local level is unnecessary, duplicative and a luxury.
Local resources cannot be channeled to such.
It should be committed to efficiency delivery of services which is of primary important to people at the grassroots.
We have however commented that rather than dispensing energies on the extremes of these theories, we should consider the way these theories need each other.
That is to say efficiency services may be primary but the way these are decided allocated and implemented will require representation and participation for equity and fairness.
We have also found out that for a third world country like Nigeria that is in a hurry to develop, there is bound to be a questioning of the relevance of the democratic theory of local government.
ANSWER TO SELF ASSESSMENT EXERCISE 2 The author says both schools need each other as efficient services cannot be equitably provided without representatives of the people articulating the needs of their communities and how government resources are to be allocated.
6.0 TUTOR-MARKED ASSIGNMENT Maddick came up with a statement that captures the essence of the argument of both school thus “the centre of the problem however is the clash between efficiency and popular control.” 1.
To what extent can we consider the two schools of thought a clash?
2.
To what extent can we blend these schools for a better conception and organisation of local governments?
7.0 REFERENCES/FURTHER READINGS BHM 770 MODULE 1 W.J.M Mackenzie, (1964).
Theories of Local Government.
London, CH5.
D.M.
Hill (1974).
Democracy Theories and Local Government.
Great Britain: Allen & Unwin, especially Pp 20-25.
R.F.
Ola (1984).
Local Government in Nigeria.
London: Keagan Paul International, Ch.
1.
A. Odoh (1990).
Local Government Party Policies and Political Regimes” – Paper presented at Conference on Administration and People in Rural Areas since Independence, Bordeaux: France.
BHM 770 MODULE 1 UNIT 3 LOCAL GOVERNEMTN AND INTER -GOVERNMENTAL RELATIONS CONTENTS 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objectives 3.0 Main Content 3.1 Meaning of Intergovernmental Relations 3.2 Objectives of IGR 3.3 Features of the Relationship 3.4 Comparative Experience 3.4.1 France 3.4.2 Britain 3.4.3 United State 3.5 Justification for Control of Local Government 3.6 The Ministry of Local Government 3.6.1 Role of the Ministry 3.6.2 Specific Ways the Ministry can Assist Local Government 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutor-Marked Assignment 7.0 References/Further Readings 1.0 INTRODUCTION You have been introduced to the concept of decentralization.
What you are about to learn here is how the power decentralized to lgoocvael rn ment is controlled by higher government.
Local Government is a tier of government.
In a Unitary system, it is the second tier while in a Federal system, it is the third tier.
In barortahn g ements, we talk of central local relationship.
In unitary system this will mean relationship between central government and the local government while in a Federal system, this is largely the relationship between the state/regional government and local government.
Such a relationship is basically a power relationship since it deals with the spheres of functional control or competence of each level of government and what happens where these levels of government interact as such functions are performed.
It must be established right away that in a federal arrangement, functions are shared between the federal and state governments.
The federal functions are constitutionally labeled as the Executive List while the BHM 770 MODULE 1 State and the Federal government share the Concurrent List.
In saurrcahn g ement, local government’s residual functions assigned by the State government and determined by the constitution.
(In some federalism however, these functions are listed as the residual list in the constitution.
See for example Schedule 4 of the 1979 and 1C9o9n9s ti tution of Nigeria) Very important in intergovernmental relations is not just the constitutional function but the constitutional powers to perform their functions.
In local governments, such power are manifest as lgoocvael rn ment related with the central government, in the area of politics, law, administration, personnel, finance, budgeting and functions.
These are the areas that interest the discussion under intergovernmental relations as will be seen below.
2.0 OBJECTIVES At the end of this unit, you should be able to do the following • define Intergovernmental relations • identify the models of intergovernmental relations • explain why intergovernmental relations is not as negative to local government in advanced countries as is in development countries • examine the role of the Ministry for Local Government in the control of local government.
3.0 MAIN CONTENT 3.1 Meaning of Intergovernmental Relations The concept of intergovernmental relations is defined by Adamolekun (1982) as follows: … the interactions that take place among the different levels of government within a state.
Usually the concept is associated with States having a Federal administration system where the relationships between the Federal, central or national government and the major subnational units (province, region or state) are formally spelt out in the Constitution.
In particular, the jurisdictional powers of each level of government are spelt out in the constitution and any re-arrangement must be through a constitutional amendment involving both levels of government.
Although the emphasis is the analysis of intergovernmental relations (IGR) is on BHM 770 MODULE 1 Federal-State relations, the full picture also includes how level related to local government units established within each state.
The result then is that a full analyses of IGR within a Federal administration system must cover the following; Federal-State, Federal-State- Local, Federal-Local, Inter-State, State-Local, and Inter-Local relationships.
We also want to add that in a unitary system, it is possible to talk similarly e.g.
central-local central, etc.
The term simply means the relationship between levels of government, how each level relates to or interacts with other.
It should however be pointed out that is it not these offices or structures themselves that matter in IGR but the human beings that operate it i.e.
human relations and human behaviour (See Anderson, 1960).
SELF ASSESSMENT EXERCISE 1 1.
What is Exclusive and Concurrent List?
What is a Residual list?
2.
Refer to the Second Schedule of the Nigeria Constitution of 1999 and familiarize yourself with the Exclusive and Concurrent Functions (especially the list of functions) 3.2 Objectives of IGR The key objectives of IGR are as follows: 1.
To promote peace and harmony among the three levels of government 2.
To enhance the emergence of cooperation rather than competitive Federalism 3.
To ensure effective and efficient utilization of available human and material resources among the various levels of government; 4.
To accelerate the achievement of self reliant economy; 5.
To minimize inter-jurisdictional conflicts among the various levels of government; 6.
To solve the problem of rural and urban poverty, ignorance and suffering of the people and 7.
To foster greater national integration through the activities of the three levels of government.
These objectives address largely political, administrative and developmental issues.
The main objective is to minimize areas of BHM 770 MODULE 1 conflict as these in government carry out their functions or epxoewrceirsse a n d channel resources to issues of socio-economic development.
3.3 Features of the Relationship As pointed out, IGR is the interaction between Federal, State and Local governments.
In a Federal system, the relationship actually emphasizes the Federal and State.
Local governments are under state government.
Because of the peculiarities of Nigerian administration and constitutional development, local government have come to play a role, so this relationship is formalized between State and Local and between Federal and local.
The model of relationship is however as follows: a) Federal…………………………..State b) State……………………………..State c) Federal…………………………..Local d) State…………………………….local e) Federal………………………….State…………….Local f) Local……………………………Local An analysis of this relationship shows that is can be vertical aFse d e rianl - State or horizontal as in State-State or Local-Local.
It can also flow directly from the Federal to Local government which is a predominant type under military administration especially in the area of decrees, direct circulars, administrative reforms and financial matters.
In Nigeria, the horizontal relationship among state governments and among local governments is not as strong as the vertical relationships while that of state-state has been more functional than that of Local- Local.
Interactions between levels of government have a great deal to do with the attitudes and behaviour of the functionaries at each levels.
Usually, in IGR, two types of relationship can be distinguished, namely, superior- subordinate and bargaining and negotiating relationship.
The state government tends to feel superior while local officials assume tshueb o rdinate officials.
Such a relationship is more pronounced in developing countries while the negotiating/bargaining type in countries with rich democratic traditions.
This is a case of control and autonomy.
Where the control or interference of the central government is high in local administration, the outcome is the superior subordinate type.
On the other hand, the situation of partnership describes more of autonomy for local administration.
On paper, the higher the level of devolution for local governments the less state interference and the more the autonomy.
BHM 770 MODULE 1 We should however note that devolution sometimes can be on paper while the actual practice can degenerate into deconcentration.
An example of this is the Nigeria local government system which is constitutionally regarded as third tier and supported by various reforms meant for institution building, but in practice, these local governments are very vulnerable to state control and interference.
It has become more like a master-servant relationship and also dependent in structure.
In this regard, Oladosun (1983) concluded about this relationship in Nigeria when he writes Instead of seeing local government as a political institution for “home rule” or for “democratic participation” in the processes of governance at the grassroots, it is seen and employed by the state government as “an instrument with which to achieve its purposes at the local level and as alternative machinery for the provision of socio-economic services.
We have already pointed out that the real; determinant of state-local government relationship is to be found in the attitude of the central (state) government as manifested in various policy circulars (legislative, administrative, judicial and financial as well as in the behaviour of its field staff towards local government generally.
Commenting further on this relationship, Oladosu (1983) observed that.
Genuine decentralization of governmental powers (i.e.
democratic decentralization as opposed to bureaucratic decentralization), is indeed more an act of political faith than (one of) administrative theory.
It is the absence of this faith in local organs (on part of the functionaries at the state government level) that makes all our efforts at decentralization half-hearted.
It appears there is a basic deep-rooted mistrust of local organs.
Our policy makers seem to be apprehensive of the possibility of power passing to the wrong hands at the local level and as a result of which localism may run riot.
To guide against this dangerous state of affairs, state governments always, as a rule, have a few of their administrative officers posted to the local government areas as their watch-dog, serving as the eyes and ears of the states.
SELF ASSESSMENT EXERCISE 2 Represent the models of inter-governmental relations in a diagrammatic form.
Which of these relationships are horizontal?
What do you think are the benefit to be derived from horizontal relationship?
BHM 770 MODULE 1 3.4 Comparative Experience It is worthy of note that while most African countries exhibit the master- servant relationship; the picture varies in some of the ‘settled’ democracies of the world.
3.4.1 France The French system has been highly centralized before 1982, dwuhriicnhg th e system of Preferences made it possible for the Prefect (who is a central government official) to assume the role of chief executive of the local government.
Part of his excesses then extended to powers to alter local government budgets, appoint officials and even to suspend elected councils officials.
This is a typical case of the superior subordinate relations.
From 1982 however, the Reform of Local Government checked the excesses of the Prefect and the Department and Communes because really subject to their elected executive council.
3.4.3 Britain In England, local authorities are given full discretion to exercise tfhuen c tion allocated to them.
This does not mean they are completely self governing.
They are established by and subject to government.
‘They cannot therefore be regarded as second tier in a system of ugnovitearrnym ent nor third tier in a Federalism”.
The sole reason is that their powers are derived from the government that set them up and not from the constitution.
Government allows these authorities to discharge their functions without interference as long as they do so efficiently ajunsdt ly .
Interference therefore becomes a resort only when local government becomes inefficient or resort to illegality.
Note that in the British system most controls comes through inspections, approvals, returns, audit and grants (Punnet 1971).
3.4.4 United State With a strong democratic tradition like Britain, local government or local-self government is allowed greater autonomy.
Local governments are governed by the state laws, not national laws.
State governments have direct control over the counties which operate as agencies of the state to enforce state laws.
But local governments, because of tdheemiro cratic tradition are respected by the State which hardly interfere.
Sometimes local governments act like big governments in the services they deliver.
They are also the pillars of American democracy.
Because of their successes, an author observed: BHM 770 MODULE 1 “The majority of Americans no longer support the continued extension of Federal services… more and more, they are turning away from the central government to their local and state governments to deal with their local/state problems.
And that is why the Federal and State governments implement some of their programmes by deploying resources, while local governments are still creatures of the centre, the democratic tradition and indeed the competence of local governments have not opened them so much to the high level of interference recorded in a lot of developing polities.
3.5 Justification for Control of Local Government The state (central) control of local government is usually justified on the following grounds (Barber, 1972) a) The modern functions of the state have so much increased from social welfare to the promotion of economic prosperity that a central discretion is necessary.
b) Increasing technicality of present day functions of the state structurally, they are inadequate and are plague by resources disparities so that they cannot maintain common standards in the provision of services.
c) Local governments the world over are increasingly dependent financially or state/central grants and or financial statutory allocation while their own internal sources of revenue are inelastic and inadequate to meet the pressing demands for services.
d) The State/Central government has at its disposal, greater resources – financial, technical, administrative and professional.
e) The desirability of common standards or uniformity in the provision of services cannot be achieved without central direction.
f) Lastly, the need to subordinate sectional or narrow interests to those of a wider public makes state/central control an imperative.
All these boil down to the question of autonomy i.e.
how much power should local government enjoys over its resources or how much liberty should be given to local governments.
This is a t the centre of IGR.
The trend is that in some systems, local governments enjoy more autonomy than others for example, the BHM 770 MODULE 1 autonomy of local governments in a Federal system like tUhne it ed States is higher that that of a unitary system like France.
In developing countries a Federal system like Nigeria also boasts of a higher level of autonomy than a unitary system lTikaen z ania.
Normally the more deconcentrated the system of local government the less autonomy enjoys by local governments.
3.6 The Ministry of Local Government The central government controls local government through a Ministry of Local Government.
There are those who argue that local government affairs be vested in a ministry concerned with other usually technical matters like health, agriculture, education etc.
Such arrangement will only succeed in turning local governments into agencies under each of those ministries.
Yet some other countries may want to vest permanent responsibility for nurturing the local government system in the office of the PPrreimsied e n tM, inister or Governor.
This might be prestigious but the arrangement suffers from volume and variety of business.
Most countries prefer a separate Ministry for Local Government (or as it is located in Britain, Ministry of Environment) to coordinate and control the activities if local government.
3.6.1 Role of the Ministry The role of the Ministry of local Government is captures by Maddick (1963) as follows.
…to ensure that local authorities are stimulated and encouraged to exercise the power given to them, and to correct the tendency of each technical ministry to treat a local authority as its particular agent alone; to secure for the system a reasonable share of national resources of staff; revenue and capital; to ensure that there is a basic unity of approach to local government problems in the country as a whole (although this will require detailed variation of particular areas) and also to ensure that there is a fair chance of every district developing at a reasonable speed; to know the strength and weakness of individual local authorities and thus to be able to recommend or reject proposals for the extension of functions; and finally, to apply sanctions where local authorities are clearly not discharging their functions, or discharging them in a way which is harmful to society.
BHM 770 MODULE 1 3.6.2 Specific Ways the Ministry can Assist the Local Government System The ways in which a Ministry of Local Government can specifically aid the local government system are as follows: a) Stimulate and encourage local authority individual or collectively to improve their services.
b) Secure the cooperation of other ministries in the task.
c) Provide technical, professional, administrative legal and financial advice.
d) Establish a local government system and train staff e) Train councilors – possibly indirect through non-governmental agencies such as local government associations.
f) Secure as appropriate share of taxing powers and grants for local governments.
g) Make available loans for local authorities for public works.
h) Provide expensive equipment or the bulk purchase of stores, if these are not forthcoming form ministries.
i) Carry out inspection, audit and general supervision of local authorities.
The problem with the Ministry for local government in carrying out thee assistance above (especially in developing countries) is that it encroaches into the area of autonomy of local governments and therefore turns out to control rather than coordinate and support these governments.
This is the idea behind the master-servant relationship which is always a criticism of intergovernmental relationship.
4.0 CONCLUSION We have seen in this unit that inter-governmental relations are a necessary fall-out of interactions among various ties of government.
Such relations could be vertical or horizontal, the former being the more pronounced.
Tier of government as it relate to administrative matters, politics, finance, social and economic matter.
The relationship of these tiers with local government is largely supposed to be that of assistance.
In advanced countries this has been positive but in developing countries, this has degenerated into that of exercise of control or master servant relationship especially with the instrumentation of the Ministry of Local Government.
Reforms need to be carried out to address such issues, if local government should enjoy some autonomy and become viable and development oriented institution.
Such reforms have taken place in Nigeria, but not many changes have resulted from it.
BHM 770 MODULE 1 5.0 SUMMARY Having gone through this unit, we can summaries the key issues oinnt e rgovernmental relation as follows: - IGR is interaction that takes place among the different levels of government.
- It is a key issue in the functional and constitutional relationship among these tiers of government.
- These relationship is both vertical and horizontal with greater emphasis on the vertical.
- Intergovernmental relationship is to emphasize positive relations among tiers of government and minimize areas of conflict.
- State/Centre governments need to control local government services have become more complex and technical, standards need to be maintained and monies are increasingly flowing form higher government to local governments.
- The level of control in advanced setting especially in contemporary times is normally subject to the democratic structures of local government and their financial viability.
- Control is most effective in developing countries where the culture of autonomy has not been allowed to freely germinate as in the advanced countries.
- The Ministry for Local Government is vested with the control of local government in a positive manner, but practically, these intentions become perverse as a result of politics or pcoonlittriocal lb y higher government.
ANSWER TO SELF ASSESSMENT EXERCISE 1 1.
Exclusive list spells out the area of jurisdiction of which the Federal government can legislate on.
It is only reserved for the federal government and that is why it is exclusive.
2.
Concurrent list consists of those items on which both the Federal government and the state government can legislate on.
However, where state and federal clash on those items, that of the Federal shall prevail.
3.
Residual list consist of those items that are not mentioned in either the exclusive and concurrent list.
The state government can have complete control over such.
By extension residual power can be extended to local governments too, in addition to the functions mentioned in the Fourth Schedule.
BHM 770 MODULE 1 ANSWER TO SELF ASSESSMENT EXERCISE 2 There are 7 forms of relationship: - (See Page for the diagram - Horizontal relationship brings together governments at the same level i.e.
state-state and local-local.
When these levels of government come together, the benefits could be listed as follows; - behave like a group and therefore stronger in their bargain with superior government (especially state-Federal) - Post resources together to purpose development objective e.g economies of scale and better harnessing of resources - where a group of local governments cooperated or relate, they could do so far the purpose of dealing with problems that are common or cut across boundaries e.g.
common services, erosion, etc - In Nigeria, there is an Association of Local Government of Nigeria which has been its intention to get more concession from the federal government.
So also is the Nigerian Union of Local Government Employees which fights for the interest of local government in the National Assembly.
In Nigeria, states have also come together to fight the issue of resource control.
(Please think of more examples) 6.0 TUTOR-MARKED ASSISGNMENT Why is the Ministry for Local Government important in Local government affairs?
7.0 REFERENCES/FURTHER READINGS G. Jones (ed).
(1980).
New Approach to the Study of Central-Local Government Relationships.
Gower Pub.
Co. Ltd. M. P. Barber (1972).
Public Administration.
Macdonald and Evans Ltd. E. A. Oyeyipo & A. Odoh (eds) (1984).
Local Government as Vehicle for National Development (Pub.
By Department of Local Government Studies A. B.U.
Zaria.
Read especially the six articles in Section A. BHM 770 MODULE 1 UNIT 4 STRUCTURE OF LOCAL GOVERNMENT CONTENTS 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objectives 3.0 Main Content 3.1 Types of Structure 3.1.1 Tiers of Local Government (as structure) 3.1.2 Political Structure 3.1.3 Administrative Structure 3.2 Relationships between the Political and Administrative Structure 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutor-Marked Assignment 7.0 References/Further Readings 1.0 INTRODUCTION Now that you have understood the basic concepts underlying lgoocvael rn ment and what local governments stand for, let us go on to look at the structure of local government.
Understanding the structure of local government will provide the basis on how these institutions operate.
In this unit, two types of structures are presented viz; political aanddm i nistrative.
You will also go on to see the relationship between the political and administrative structures.
A diagram of these structures and their relationships is also presented.
An understanding of this unit will facilitate the subsequent units (7-12) which looks at structures of local government in different countries.
2.0 OBJECTIVES At the end of this unit, you should be able to do the following; • differentiate between single and multi-tier structure of local government • differentiate between politics and administrative structures of local government • describe the composition of the political structure in a few countries • describe how the administrative structure relates to the political structure • present the political and administrative structure in a diagram 3.0 MAIN CONTENT BHM 770 MODULE 1 3.1 Types of Structures Every organization or institution has a structure.
By structure we mean the components of an organization that perform certain functions geared towards the achievements of organizational goals.
In administration, these component or structures are hierarchically organized.
This therefore entail that the structures offer positions that are stratified i.e.
a superior subordinate relationship.
In local government just like in other governments, the administrative structure is patterned along these lines.
Local government also has a political structure.
All elected officials fall into this structure and it is principally made up of the legislature and the executive.
In the local government there are also Committee structures set up to look at issues and take decisions on behalf of the government – a lot of such decisions are subject to ratification by the council or the superior body as the case may be.
The structure of local government can also refer to the status of local government i.e.
whether it is all or multi-purpose or single tier local government or a multi-tier local government with layers of local authorities below the local government structure.
SELF ASSESSMENT EXERCISE 1 State three levels at which we can look at the structure of lgoocvael rn ments.
3.1.1 Tiers of Local Government There are tow types of structure related to the status of lgoocvael rn ments.
First is a single-tier (multi-purpose) structure in which only one authority is recognized by law at the local level.
Any other arrangement under local government is a matter of administrative convenience.
A good example of this is the Nigeria local government system which is described as single tire.
Only this level of authority is recognized by the 1979 and 1999 constitution.
Districts, villages, wards ad even area development authorities are just for administrative purpose and thus varies from state to state.
The multi-tier system is one where the authorities under the local government like Districts, Counties, Borough, Special districts, Home Rule etc.
are recognized by the Law and related with appropriately by the central/state governments.
However, in some countries like Britain, the Lower authorities are not responsible as such to the higher BHM 770 MODULE 1 authorities i.e.
within its own sphere it enjoys a functional independence, meaning that it is responsible for the administration of a group of services or parts of services.
In France on the other hand, the level of decentralization makes the communes subordinate to the Department in certain cases.
So also are the sub-districts to the Districts in India.
SELF ASSESSMENT EXERCISE 2 Would you think there are unique advantages to be enjoyed operating a single tier system as against a multi-tier structure of local government?
(State 2 of these reasons) 3.1.2 Political Structure Local governments are variously politically structured and constituted.
This is also a fall out of the system of leadership in local governments.
(This point on leadership will be discussed in a later unit).
As pointed out earlier, the political structure is responsible for policy making, law making and even policy implementation at the local level.
The major organs of the political structure are the Executive, the Legislature and Committee.
These Committees can be standing Committees (statutory) or House or Executive Committees asset up to study issues and report to the parent body.
The legislature is made up of councilors and in some cases Alderman.
The Executive could be made up of scuopuenrcviilosorsry o r superiors together with the Chairman.
The political structure caries from country to country depending sometimes on the system of leadership.
Some systems advocate a strong chairman while others a weak one.
Some may have a large number of councilors, other small.
The executive may also follow the same pattern.
In the US, the political structure addressed four types of lneaamdeerlsyh tihpe, s trong mayor, the weak mayor, the commission system and the council or city manager system.
Structure can also refer to tmhein i mum population spelt out for the creation of local governments.
In Nigeria, the 1976 Reform spells out a population of 150,000 - 800,000.
This is done in such a way as to respect the issue of viability.
On this basis, 301 local governments were created.
In multi-tier system, the population of the smaller units are bound to be much less.
BHM 770 MODULE 1 3.1.3 Administrative Structure The administrative structure of local government is hierarchical as in any other government.
At the head is a Secretary to the LGoocvaelr n ment (what in France is referred to as the Prefect).
In some local government system, (e.g.
Nigeria) the Secretary is the Chief Executive but through reforms he had come to be answerable to the Chairman.
He is the head of Administration.
Under the Secretary are Departments which are headed by Heads of Departments.
The Departments in local governments are created in such a way that they perform a group of functions.
Normally such dependents are those of Finance, Personnel (Administration).
Agriculture, Education.
Health Works, Social Welfare and Community Development etc.
The number of departments a local government should have would depend on the complexity of the local government (e.g.
urban –rural) or the Laws setting up local governments.
Sometimes these Departments are classified as service and operational departments.
The service departments are normally those that deal with staff and finance both of which support service delivery.
The operational departments deliver the services on the field.
Each department is organized in such a way that there are sections and units or divisions and branches which deal with particular services that add up to the entire services of the department.
The operational departments also have their structure right into the community where they deliver these services.
These are called field or extension workers and they could be of a technical, professional and administrative nature.
The sections and units are answerable to the heads of department while the local government secretary coordinated the activities of the heads of departments.
The Secretary in turn is largely responsible to the chairman in some system, the state expects the Secretary to be the watching dog for effective administrative practice at the local government level.
3.2 Relationships Between the Political Structure and Administration Structure As shown earlier in Unit 3 (i.e.
theories of local government) local authorities are about democracy and service delivery.
The political structure in local governments represents the democratic concern of local government while the bureaucracy or the administrative structure represents the instrument for effective services.
The problem with local government is how the political structure can use the administrative structure for providing efficient service.
BHM 770 MODULE 1 The political structure makes laws and policies for local government including approval of local government’s estimates and budgets.
The chairman works closely with his Secretary and Heads of departments to implement policies agreed at the Executive and Legislative Councils.
To forge a close link between the political and administrative sptorulictitcuarle , heads are attached to each department.
These are called Supervisory Councilors or Supervisors (depending on the system of government).
These supervisors control the activities of heads of departments.
Policies agreed upon in the Executive Council are implemented by the supervisors through their heads of departments.
These Heads also channel the needs and activities of their Department to the Council through their supervisors.
The supervisors are therefore the eyes of the chairman at the level of the department.
In the same way, the Secretary is the chief adviser to the chairman on local government administration.
Such advises are on administrative procedure, planning, financial management, staffing and intergovernmental relations.
The chairman may be eager to ensure the implementation of his programmes but the Secretary is there to make him that this is done through governmental procedure.
In all these there is bound to be friction between the political ohofflidceer s and the key administrative functionaries (i.e.
career officials).
The challenge of administration at the local government level is how to forge more of cordial relationship between the political and administrative group as they perform their roles.
A typical structure of local government looks like this POLITICAL OFFICE HOLERS COMMITTEE STATUTORY COMMITTEE OFFICE SECRETARY DEPT DEPT DEPT DEPT DEPT DEPT UNIT SECTION BHM 770 MODULE 1 SELF ASSESSMENT EXERCISE 3 What is the composition of local government political structures and that of the Administrative Structures?
4.0 CONCLUSION You can now agree that understanding the structure of local government is the basis for understanding the composition and roles and even relationships of actors within this structure.
The political structure is supposed to use administrative structure for translating political promises into services.
How well this takes place depends on the type of relationship between the political and career staff of local government.
Sometimes this relationship is cordial, other times the relationship is strained and conflictual especially as a result of personality clash, and interpretation of guidelines.
Other times, the political office holders are impatient with the regulations governing administrative practices especially financial management.
Such crises slow down the operation of local government and this had become a big source of worry in local governments in developing countries.
This is where qualities of good leadership is called into question.
It may not be structures that create the problem but the people that manage it.
You will read more about the people that manage these structures in a later unit.
5.0 SUMMARY In this Unit, you have learnt about the following 1.
That structures are classified based on the status or system of local government – single tier or multi-tier 2.
Political structures contain the legislature and executive organs of local government 3.
Administrative structures deal with the office of the Secretary and the departments, section and units within the local government.
4.
The political structure uses the administrative structure policies into services and in so doing, actors in both structures must work towards a cordial relationship.
ANSWER TO SELF ASSESSMENT EXERCISE 1 i.
The system of political government – whether single or multi-tier ii.
Political structure iii.
Administrative structure BHM 770 MODULE 1 ANSWER TO SELF ASSESSMENT EXERCISE 2 i.
Units may be longer and more viable ii.
Administration is not complicated e.g.
: Coordination is at the level of field officers or extension worker only.
ANSWER TO SELF ASSESSMENT EXERCISE 3 POLITICAL STRUCTURE ADMINISTRATIVE STRUCTURE - Chairman of Mayor - Secretary - Councillors - Head of Departments - Supervisory Councillors/ - Head of Sections and Supervisors Unit - Local Notables – (aldermen) in some countries) - Communities 6.0 TUTOR-MARKED ASSIGNMENT How do the political and administrative structures relate in the field of the local government 7.0 REFERENCES/FURTHER READINGS M.P Barber.
(1974).
Local Government.
London: Macdonald & Evans Ltd. Ch.
3.
J.H Price.
(1975).
Comparative Local Government.
London: Hutchinson & Co. Ltd. Pp 160-185.
BHM 770 MODULE 1 UNIT 5 FUNCTIONS OF LOCAL GOVERNMENT CONTENTS 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objectives 3.0 Main Content 3.1 Principles 3.2 Comparative Perspective 3.3 The Nigeria Example 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutor-Marked Assignment 7.0 References/Further Readings 1.0 INTRODUCTION By now, you are supposed to be similar with the concept and role of local government.
Whatever way you look at local government, it is the functions they perform and how much of it they perform efficiently at a given point in time that matters.
In this unit, you will be taken through what these functions are, how these functions are allocated and a comparative experiences as to the classification and nature of these functions in a few advanced and developing countries.
The function of Nigerian local government is also presented in full.
Some of the problems associated with these functions are briefly highlighted.
2.0 OBJECTIVES At the end of this Unit, you should be able to: • identify three principles governing the assigning of functional responsibilities to local government • differentiate between the various classification of functions in three countries • list the various functions of local government in Nigeria under two classifications.
BHM 770 MODULE 1 3.0 MAIN CONTENT 3.1 Principles There are certain principles to consider while allocating functions to local government - The nature of such local government – urban or rural.
The functions of rural local government are more mundane and simple than urban ones.
- Viability of the local government.
The question here is whether the local government has the capacity (human and material and financial resources) to discharge these functions.
- The local government will be subjected to the standards required by the central government especially in efficiently services and planning.
In general, the functions which local governments should perform are these: 1. which require detailed local knowledge for efficient performance; 2. in which success depends on community responsiveness with participation; 3. which are of personal nature requiring provision close to where the individual affected live; 4. in which significant use of discretion or understanding of individuals is needed.
3.2 Comparative Perspective Local government at the lowest tier of government performs primary functions.
This is deliberate since the central governments control more funds and has better competence and expertise to handle more secondary or gigantic programmes.
However, city governments, borough and urban or municipal councils take up greater and more sfuonpchtiisotnicsa tthedan rural councils Most constitution or Acts, established functional areas that local governments can engage in.
In such an exercise, some functions are concurrent between the local government and the state or rgeogvieornnaml e nts while others are exclusive to local governments.
The Nigerian constitution makes this distinction.
While exclusive functions include planning, revenue generating related functions, welfare like services like cemeteries, roads, street lighting, the concurrent ones include agriculture, health, education (especially BHM 770 MODULE 1 primary education) and many other functions prescribed from time to time by the State House of Assembly.
(Constitution 1999 – Schedule IV).
In Britain, local authorities perform three broad functions: environmental, protective and personal.
Environmental functions concerns the citizens immediately physical surrounding – road construction, provision and maintenance of street lighting, water supplies, recreation grounds, street cleaning and refuse disposal.
Protective functions are those that deal with safety of citizens i.e, police and fire services.
Personal services – deal with individual well being such as housing, education, libraries and museum, schools and health services.
It should be noted that in Britain today, the most significant complex and cumbersome function of local authorities is Housing.
However, not all local governments can perform these functions.
In Rural Districts, Parish Councils have limited control in matters of local interest such as allotments, burial grounds, lighting, and provision and amenities, such as recreation grounds, bus shelters and Parish halls.
Local authorities can in addition acquire further power through delegated legislation or bye-law.
They also have general powers to acquire land by agreement by means of purchase, lease or exchange.
In the United State, special districts are created to carry on specific functions or projects.
The most numerous of such is the school with its main functions as management of the public school system.
Other functions performed by local government is the US are police and fire protection, public works, libraries and recreation, public utilities, city planning, public health, airports, harbour and housing.
These are indeed gigantic functions which municipal especially city governments can take on.
In India, the functions of the Panchayati Raj (i.e.
local government) Perform follow a similar pattern like the above except for police and the gigantic function of harbours and airports.
Functions here are similar to the Nigerian situation.
Briefly the functions can also be classified as obligatory and discretionary.
Such functions include agricultural programmes, animal husbandry, buildings and communications, education administration, fishery, forestry, small scale industries, irrigation, medical services, etc.
BHM 770 MODULE 1 The Urban councils could perform obligatory functions like conservation, street lighting drainage and construction and maintenance of roads.
Larger ones could also engage in water supply, street cleaning refuse and disposal, fire service and primary schools.
SELF ASSESSMENT EXERCISE 1 Urban local government performs more complex functions than rural ones.
Please list 5 of such function.
3.3 The Nigerian Example To celebrate on this functional responsibility of local government a run down of the functions of local government in Nigeria is done below as contained in the 1999 constitution (fourth Schedule) FUNCTIONS OF A LOCAL GOVERNMENT COUNCIL - Main functions of local government councils are as follows: a) the consideration and the making of recommendations to a state commission on economic planning or any similar body on - the economic development of the state, particularly in so far as the area of authority of the council and of the state are affected, and proposals made by the said commission or body; b) collection of rate, radio and television licenses; c) establishment and maintenance of cemeteries, burial grounds and homes for the destitute or infirm; d) licensing of bicycle, trucks (other than mechanically propelled trucks) canoe, wheel barrow and carts; e) establishment, maintenance and regulation of laughter houses, slaughter slabs markets, motor parks and public conveniences; f) construction and maintenance of roads, street, street lightings, drains and other public highways, parks, gardens, open spaces, or such public facilities as may be prescribed from time to time by the House of Assembly of a State.
g) naming of road and street and numbering of houses; h) provision and maintenance of public conveniences, sewage and refuse disposal; i) registration of all births, deaths and marriages; j) assessment of privately-owned houses or tenements for the purpose of levying such rates as may be prescribed by the House of Assembly of a State; and k) control and regulation of: a) out-door advertising and hoarding BHM 770 MODULE 1 b) movement and keeping of pets of all description, c) shops and kiosks, d) restaurants, bakeries and other places for sale of food to the public, e) laundries, and f) licensing regulation and control of the sale of liquor, l) The functions of a local government council shall include participation of such councils in the Government of a State in respects of the following matters- • the provision and maintenance of primary – adult and vocational education; • the development of agriculture and natural resources, other than minerals resources • the provision and maintenance of the health services, and • such other functions as may be conferred on a local government council by the House of Assembly of the State.
SELF ASSESSMENT EXERCISE 2 List 5 mandatory and 3 concurrent functions of local government in Nigeria.
4.0 CONCLUSION Local Government can be seen to be saddled with a lot of functions from the trivial to the gigantic.
The problem in performing these functions is with the resources available to do this.
Such resources may include financial and manpower.
In the advanced countries, these worries are not as acute as developing countries.
Most developing countries depend on grant from the central governments to run these function.
To reduce such problem of funding, a lot of functions especially the exclusive or mandatory functions have revenue attached to them, In lot cases these functions can be referred to as extractive functions because in performing them, local government is indirectly raising revenue for it services.
In Nigeria, the experience has been that the tax base of the rcuormalm unity is very low and therefore local government experiences great difficulty in performing this function.
At times it neglects such extractive functions and wait for grants to carry out the other functions.
The implication had been low viability and low level of autonomy since these units are largely dependent on statutory allocation to function.
This issue is raised again in subsequent unit under local government finance and Problems of Local Government.
BHM 770 MODULE 1 5.0 SUMMARY You have come across different types of functions local government perform.
On the one hand, they have been classified as e(mxcalnudsiavtoe ry ) and concurrent.
The India to classification of Obligation and discretionary is similar to the Nigeria classification above.
In Britain, the classification is on the bases of environmental, protective and personal.
The US classification is close to this.
Some of tfhuenscet io ns irrespective of countries are mundane while others are complex (e.g harbour, airports etc.)
Performance of functions requires lots of money.
In developing countries, functions that ought to generate funds for local government are not as attractive as the advanced countries because of the law taxable capacity of individuals, communities and their economies.
However, the best way to judge a local government is through its functional performance.
ANSWER TO SELF ASSESSMENT EXERCISE 1 a) Water supplies b) Police services c) Fire services d) Libraries and museums e) Airports ANSWER TO SELF ASSESSMENT EXERCISE 2 Please check the list under 3.3.
6.0 TUTOR-MARKED ASSIGNMENT What do you understand by Executive (mandatory) and concurrent functions of local government (in Nigeria) and why are they scola s sified?
7.0 REFERENCES/FURTHER READINGS M.P.
Barber.
(1974).
Local Government.
London: Macdonald & Evans Ltd.Ch.3.
J. H. Price (1975).
Comparative Local Government.
London: Hutchinson & Co. Ltd. Pp 160-185.
Constitution of the Federal Republic of Nigeria.
(1999) Federal Government Press.
Federal Government Press, Guidelines for Local Government Reform, 1976).
BHM 770 MODULE 1 MODULE 2 Unit 1 System of Government/Leadership in Local Government Unit 2 The Committee System in Local Government Unit 3 The Personnels of Local Government Unit 4 Local Government as an Instrument of Development Unit 5 Local Government and Health Care Delivery UNIT 1 SYSTEM OF GOVERNMENT/LEADERSHIP IN LOCAL GOVERNMENT CONTENTS 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objectives 3.0 Main Content 3.1 Parliamentary System (Features) 3.1.1 Application to Local Government 3.2 Presidential System 3.2.1 Separation of Powers 3.3 Some Comparative Comments 3.4 Other Systems 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutor Marked Assignment 7.0 References/Further Readings 1.0 INTRODUCTION Local Governments run their administration similar to what obtains at the level of central government.
There are different forms of leadership or system of government available to them.
These include Parliamentary system and Presidential system.
The parliamentary system is modeled after the British systems while the Presidential system after the American model.
Other systems are the non-democratic types like developing and communist systems put in place.
Such could include ‘sole administrator’ system, management committee system.
For the purpose of this unit, we shall dwell more on the features and the merits and demerits of both the Parliamentary and Presidential system in local government, while highlighting some of the features of the other systems.
You are required to do some additional readings to understand the theoretical basis of these systems and other classifications generally.
BHM 770 MODULE 1 2.0 OBJECTIVES At the end of this unit you should be able to • list 5 characteristics of the Parliamentary system generally • describe how the Presidential system applies to local government • explain the other systems of leadership in local government • compare the Parliamentary and Presidential systems in local government 3.0 MAIN CONTENT 3.1 Parliamentary System (Features) The Parliamentary system of government is characterized by the following: a) Election of members of parliament by the entire electorate b) The Prime Minister is elected from Parliament normally from the party with the highest majority in Parliament c) The Prime Minister appoints his Minister from his party members in parliament.
This means one has to be a parliamentarian to be a cabinet minister.
d) There is collective responsibility in the cabinet i.e.
the action of minister is collectively defended by others.
e) The cabinet participates in both law making and execution – this is referred to as fusion of both legislative and executive functions.
The major advantages of this system are that the cost of administration is low since ministers are appointed from parliament.
Secondly, time is saved on both the executive and the legislators as they agree on decision or policies at the same time.
The major disadvantages are that there is the tendency for dictatorship, since there is the fear that the few men in whose hands so much power are concentrated could turn into despots unless effectively checked by the party in the opposition.
3.1.1 Application to Local Governments Local governments run their administration on the model of the Parliamentary system.
British local governments, Japanese and India local governments model their administration after this system understandably because that is what their national and state systems are based on.
Nigeria during the period of decolonization (1950-60) and the first republic largely followed the Parliamentary model.
This was also BHM 770 MODULE 1 practiced on a uniform basis throughout the country between 1977-79 (after the Reform of 1976).
Let us look at the example of the Nigerian case between 1977 and 79.
The main features of the process were: 1.
Election of councilors by the electorates on Zero-party basis 2.
Nomination of the remaining 25% by the state military government 3.
Two to three members of the entire council are nominated and presented before the state governor from which a candidate is appointed as the chairman of the local government.
4.
Selection of three to four members (from within the council) by the chairman to be approved as supervisory councilors by the state government.
5.
The chairman and the Councillors became both members of the (Local Government Council i.e.
the Legislature) while the Chairman and his Supervisory Councillors constitute the cabinet or what is referred to as the Finance and General Purpose Committee (F&GPC) The problem with this system was the overbearing personality of the chairman who doubled as the chairman of both the executive and legislative councils.
He became less accountable to the people because he was not directly elected by them and also that the ratification of his choice rested with the state government.
Another problem was with the quality of the councilors.
The less educated and politically informed they were, the easier it was for the chairman to override them.
The fusion of powers therefore made the chairman too powerful as the only check on his administration was external to the local government.
However, the system was cheaper to maintain and decisions were reached very fast.
The idea of a check against the powers of the chairman necessitates the option of a system that emphasizes separation of powers, which is the presidential system.
SELF ASSESSMENT EXERCISE 1 List 5 characteristics of the Parliamentary System.
3.2.1 Separation of Powers The powers of modern day governments are usually expressed in three forms – the Legislature, the Executive and the Judiciary.
Separation of powers is essential for the good running of government.
Accumulation or fusion of powers in one hand has the tendency of leading to tyranny.
BHM 770 MODULE 1 We may interpret the theory of separation of powers as a different body of persons administering each of the three arms of government i.e.
the executive, the legislature and the judiciary.
Each of these arms should be independent of and from the other in performing their roles.
Under separation of powers, the legislature which is the supreme law making body is elected by the people for a fixed term.
The executive which is the implementing body is headed by the President who idsi r ected by the people.
The President in turn appoints his emxeemcubteivrse from outside Parliament.
The judiciary is independent and their conditions of service are managed by a Judicial Service Commission.
They interpret the law.
The note of caution here is that there is no absolute speopwaerarsti,o n w hoaf t exist is some checks and balance.
For example, tPhree s ident ratifies the appointment of judges and releases funds for the management of the judiciary and even the legislature.
He also has to assent to a bill passed by the legislature.
The legislature vets tahpep r opriation bill and can tamper with the President’s budget.
They also have to approve the President’s nominees for some positions eM.gin.
i sters and Ambassadors.
At the local government level, the Presidential system is also applicable.
The strong mayor system in the Unites States and the experience iNni g eria in 1991 are evidence of this.
In the Nigeria situation, tfhoell o wing features were observable: a) Separation of the executive arm from the legislature arm of government.
There was a separation legislative council and a separate executive council.
b) elected councilors constituted the legislature with its own speaker or council leader whose role was synonymous with speaker of the state house of assembly.
c) The Executive Chairman was elected by the whole constituency of the local government as one.
He is designated as the “Head of the Executive Arm of Local Government”.
He seized to be a member of the legislative council.
The executive comprised not less than three and not more than five persons to be known as supervisor (instead of supervisor.
He needed to resign).
d) The relationship between the executive and legislative arm was to be synonymous with that of the State House of Assembly on the one hand the State Governor and his Commissioners on the other.
e) A simple majority of the council in session was needed to ratify the appointment of supervisors by the local government chairman.
BHM 770 MODULE 1 The idea of the Presidential system in local government was to make it uniform with the Presidential institution at State and Federal levels.
It was meant to check the excesses of some overbearing chairmen who abused the cabinet system by usurping the powers of the council.
The new separate legislative council was meant to serve as a watch-dog against the substantive and procedure abuses of the chairman.
However, the system did not record any appreciable success even as it still applies in some states that have opted for the system today largely because of the low qualification, age, experience and poor economic background of councilors.
They were and are still easily bought over by the chairman and this chief executive still had his way.
People are now advocating for more experienced hands in the councillorship business at local government level, to encourage quality legislation and more prudent management of scarce resources.
Experienced councilors are more likely to earn the chairman’s respect than most of the present crop or those of the past.
SELF ASSESSMENT EXERCISE 2 How is the Presidential system applied to local government?
3.3 Some Comparative Comments In most Western democracies, the system of leadership of government in local government is either of these.
Some local governments have strong mayor as in the US, while others have largely ceremonial mayor as in the British experience.
In the US, the strong mayor system which is a feature of city governments and the city manager leadership are good examples of strong leadership in the mould of the Presidential system.
Even though the legislatures here are vibrant as independent units, the strong mayor is subject to a tenure and can not be moved on flimsy excuse.
In the British system, the influence of the council over the mayor is high since the chairman does not have much power of veto.
It is rather a chairman and council rather that a chairman in council system.
The power of the chairman here falls below that of the Prime Minister at the centre even though the local government level ought to be reflecting the parliamentary system at the centre.
3.4Other Systems In developing countries especially in Africa, and Latin America, councils may not be democratically constituted when the military is in power.
Therefore, other forms of government exist at the local government level.
This may be referred to as Sole Administrator system and Caretaker/Management Committee system.
These two system have BHM 770 MODULE 1 been practiced in Nigeria since independence.
The sole administrator system is modeled after the colonial District or Divisional Officer who was given absolute control of local government.
It is so called because of the fusion of powers he enjoys.
This means he does not have any executive or legislative council to report to.
He is all in all – the sole.
He makes Laws and policies and executes them.
He is appointed by the military governor at the state level and his allegiance and accountability goes to him.
He does not owe any accountability to the people and so he implements policies that are not necessarily pro-masses.
Normally such appointments are a stop-gap measure pending when elections are conducted into local governments.
Such leadership has its advantages and disadvantages and this is what you should be pondering on in the next exercise.
The variant of this leadership is the Management or Caretaker Committee.
It is made up of 4-6 members selected from the lcoocmalm unity with some spread over the local government.
This selection is made by the state governor.
This is an improvement over the sole administrator because the selection process even though not elective yet presents some semblance of representation of the local community.
The Committee constitutes both the legislature and executive arms of government.
The chairman assigns duties to the other members who behave like councilors.
Since they are not accountable to the people, there are bolder in implementing even principal policies like revenue collection.
Like the sole administrator system, the Management or Caretaker Committee is there largely to implement the policies of the state government in local governments.
In Nigeria, the irony has been that both leadership systems have become more progressive and developmental than that of the democratic ones.
(Odoh, 1990).
It should also be noted that in Nigeria such system of ccoarmetmakitetre e is not peculiar to military rule.
The civilian administration of 1979-83 never conducted any local government election between 1980-83 but continued to constitute the caretakers system in lgoocvael rn ment every 3-6 months.
The irony in Nigeria too is that tmheil it ary has conducted more elections into local governments than the civilian government.
SELF ASSESSMENT EXERCISE 3 Why do you think the Sole Administrator and Caretaker/Management Committee leadership systems are inferior to the Parliamentary aPnreds i dential leadership?
BHM 770 MODULE 1 4.0 CONCLUSION Leadership in local government is patterned along the lines of the federal and state governments.
The leadership is guided by the form of government or system of government adopted for local government.
Such forms of government are either a cabinet (i.e.
Parliamentary) or Presidential.
While the principle of the parliamentary system is governed by collective responsibility, that of the presidential system is governed by separation of powers.
While the mayor is a member in the legislature in parliamentary system, the mayor is independent of the council in presidential.
The British system operates the parliamentary and so are its local governments.
Most local governments in the U.S. operated the presidential system while the weak mayor and commission plan operate in between the parliamentary and presidential system.
In Nigeria, local governments have operated both of these systems at varying times.
The presidential experience was in 1991-92.
Nigeria has however operated other systems like the sole administrator system and the caretaker or management committee system.
Both systems are non- democratic with the sole administrator the most dictatorial.
The focus of government discussed in this unit represents the theoretical focus of leadership that range from a confusion of powers to a fusion of powers to a separation of powers.
5.0 SUMMARY We can now summarize the unit as follows: - The forms or system of government in local government ranges from the democratic to the dictatorial.
The democratic forms are the parliamentary and presidential types while the dictatorial are the sole administrator and caretaker/management committee.
Theoretically, they range from a separation of powers to a fusion of powers and to a confusion of powers.
- The Parliamentary system in local government makes the chairman a member of both the legislative and executive councils.
Actually supervisory councilors are also members of council.
The chairman is elected by the councilors while he in turn appoints his supervisory councilors.
- The Presidential system in Local government separates the executive from the council.
Council checks the activities of the executive and vise versa.
Chairman is elected directly by the BHM 770 MODULE 1 electorate and he appoints supervisors for outside the legislative council.
- The Sole Administrator and Caretaker/Management Committee system is a feature of military regimes and unstable third world political especially African countries.
They are undemocratic leadership systems or forms of government because they are appointed by the chief executives of state or central governments.
They are accountable to them rather than the electorate athnedr e fore end up implementing policies of the state or central government in local governments.
The leadership form turns local government into mere field agents.
ANSWER TO SELF ASSESSMENT EXERCISE 1 1.
Parliamentarian are elected by the electorate 2.
Prime Minister is elected by the members of parliament from among the majority party in parliament.
3.
Prime minister appoint his cabinet from parliament 4.
Collective responsibility in the executive council 5.
Cabinet Ministers participate in both executive and law-making business.
ANSWER TO SELF ASSESSMENT EXERCISE 2 Mention the following: 1.
Separation of the executive arm from the legislative arm.
2.
Elected councilors make up the council.
The speaker or council leadership is the leader.
3.
The chairman is appointed by the whole local government and he is head of the executive of the local government.
4.
His appointed of his executive (supervisors) is ratified by a majority in council.
ANSWER TO SELF ASSESSMENT EXERCISE 3 Mention the following 1.
They are not based on democratic election.
2.
Leadership is not answerable to either parliamentary (council) or the people since they are not elected by the people.
3.
Participation at the community level cannot be properly solicited since these leaderships are divorced from the people.
BHM 770 MODULE 1 4.
Because they are politically accountable to state or central governments, they merely implement superior government’s policies in local governments.
5.
Community feedback to government is low since the leadership is not the true representation of the people.
6.
Local government becomes a burden to the community since there is the tendency for dictatorship.
6.0 TUTOR-MARKED ASSIGNMENT Why would you refer a parliamentary system to a Presidential one for local government in your country?
7.0 REFERENCES/FURTHER READINGS O. Oyediran (1998).
Introduction to Political Science.
Ibadan: Oyediran Consultants International, read especially ch.
5.
F. Adigwe (1974).
Essentials of Government for West Africa.
Ibadan: University of Ibadan Press Ltd., & London: Oxford University Press.
See especially ch.
8.
A. Odoh (1990).
Local Government Party Policies and Political Regimes” – Paper presented at Conference on Administration and People in Rural Areas since Independence, Bordeaux: France.
BHM 770 MODULE 1 UNIT 2 THE COMMITTEE SYSTEM IN LOCAL GOVERNMENT CONTENTS 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objectives 3.0 Main Content 3.1 Importance of Committee 3.2 What is a Committee?
3.3 Sorts/Types of Committee 3.4 Membership 3.5 Chairmanship 3.6 Powers 3.7 The Finance Committee 3.8 Committee of Council 3.9 Advantages and Disadvantage 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutor Marked Assignment 7.0 References/Further Readings 1.0 INTRODUCTION An important structure in the administration of local government is the Committee System.
If you refer back to the diagram on the structure of local government, you will see Committee as part of the structure.
The function of a Committee is to decongest the business of p(meoepmleb e r) sorting, perusing an issue and reporting back to the whole body makes administration work foster.
Furthermore, Committee attends to specialized issue or problems at the local government level.
Some of these issues might require specialized knowledge and tshhaotu ld reflect the membership of the Committee.
In most local government system, especially those influenced by English practice, there is a committee system.
Some committees are statutory or mandatory while others are standing, special or adhoc.
The statutory ones are backed by law while the adhoc or special ones are sdeetp e nudpi n g on the exigencies of administration.
The main committee of the local government system is the GPuernpeorsael Committee, Finance Committee, Establishment Committee, Primary Education Committee.
BHM 770 MODULE 1 The notes you are going to go through on the Committee system tells you what a Committee is, types of Committee membership, chairman of committees, powers, the relationship of the committee to council and the advantages of committees.
2.0 OBJECTIVES By the end of this unit, you should be able to • classify and explain committee according to types • explain the role of the chairman in the committee system • describe the features and role of the Finance Committee • state 4 advantages and disadvantages of the Committee System.
3.0 MAIN CONTENT 3.1 Importance Of Committee As important and characteristic feature of local government in some countries, committees have variety of purposes, including to advice, to co-ordinate to require or to negotiate.
They also work at different levels.
Procedures may therefore differ for one committee to another.
In any system of local government, there exists one type of committee system or another.
An important and characteristic feature of local government in some countries especially those influenced by English practice, is the committee system.
As A.H Marshall wrote in Financial administration in Local Government (p.38) “… a local authority is an assemblage of quasi-independent committee coming together only at the very highest level, the council itself…” The statement underlines the fundamental importance attached to committee in the work of English and Welsh Councils.
A research finding is that councillors in England and Wales spend an average of 29 hours a month on committee work MAUD REPORT vol.
II p. 133.
SELF ASSESSMENT EXERCISE 1 Why is the committee system important in local government?
3.2 What is a Committee?
BHM 770 MODULE 1 Sir Kenneth Wheare attempted a short answer at p. 5 of his Government by Committee.
“It is important to have some idea of what is meant by a committee, if only because there are some bodies called committee which are not really such, and there are many committee called by other names.
The essence of a committee is, surely, that it is a body to which some task has breefeenrr e d or committed by some other person or body.
It may be asked or required or permitted to carry out this task.
But that is the idea of a body being in some manner or degree responsible or subordinate or answerable in the last resort to the body or person who set it up or committed a power or duty to it”.
What this means in local government practice will become clearer as we consider what sort of committee exists, how they work and trheelairti o ns with one another and, more especially, with the parent council.
3.3 Sorts Of Committee There are several ways of classifying committees.
1.
(a) Statutory of Mandatory.
These must be set up either under some enactment which lays duty upon a council.
For example, in England and Wales county councils are required to have a Finance Committee by the Local Government Act 1933, and their Fire Brigade Committee is a requirement of the Fire Services Act, 1947.
(b) Permissive or Non-Statutory.
The Local government law stated such other committee as are necessary to carry out their functions.
2.
(a) Standing These are committee which continue in existence to deal with the routine business of the council.
All statutory committees are of this sort.
(b) Special or Ad Hoc These are temporarily established to deal with a short-lived problem e.g.
to organize centenary celebration.
3.
(a) Vertical These are the ‘functional’ committee which deal with a particular part of the council’s work.
Education, Public Health and Children’s Committees are example.
BHM 770 MODULE 1 (b) Horizontal Committee which ‘serves’ the work of vertical committees, such as Finance and Establishment Committee.
3.4 Membership In some countries the law restricts membership to councillors, but others allows for co-optation to enable the experience and interest of other qualified – often better qualified – and concerned persons to be used.
In England and Whales co-optation is limited persons to not permitted on Finance committees and may not exceed on third of membership in most others.
Planning and education committee must have a majority of elected members on them, but no proportion is laid down.
Where co- opted members are councillors of other local authorities e.g.
District councillors co-opted into a county council committee – some acts allow a higher proportion of co-optees.
Person co-opted into children’s and Education Committee must have relevant experience, and this last committee provides the only example in English and Wales local government law of a council employee being a member of the employing council’s committee, for teachers may be co-opted.
In Sweden co-optation is much more extensive; in some authorities there may be a total of 300 to 400 co-opted members on committees of a council of 60 elected members.
Political affiliation, where councils run on party lines, is often a factor in the composition of membership.
Some attempts may be made to reflect relative strengths or it may be that the dominant party may take disproportionate representation on certain committees.
But such considerations are modified where the ethos of good government prevails over power-politics.
Though elections have been fought on party lines, the working council and its committees may largely ignore such considerations, and the interest of members in certain subjects often plays a major part in their appointment to particular committee.
3.5 Chairmanship It is likely to be in the appointment of chairmen that party will play a decisive part, for the dominant party may insist on filling all of the places.
Instead, the minority may refuse to occupy any.
In one U.K. country borough an astute majority leader once manoeuvred the opposition into the chairmanships of all the committees which might have to approach the council for supplementary funds during the year, and much was made in debate in council of alleged incompetent management.
BHM 770 MODULE 1 Although a number of external factors – such as finance, pattern of mayoralty, party considerations – must affect the manner in which any committee works, it is no exaggeration to claim that the quality alenadd e rship-style of the chairman is a major – perhaps the most important – elements in its performance.
The following quotation from the MAUD REPORT (Vol.
p. 136) refers to England and Wales, but in most respects it is equally aeplspelwichaebrlee: “Since the committee system is a basic feature of local government, the characteristics of an authority’s committee chairman are obviously of considerable interest.
As will be shown … the extent of their functions and therefore of their power and influence varies considerable from one authority to another.
They are, however, always of some significance – and sometimes of very great significance – in setting the tone for the conduct of business and often in formulating policy.
The choice of chairman is therefore of particular importance.
They are normally elected, or re-elected, annually by their committees and it is usual for there to be at least tahpep e arance of unanimity.
There is number of general factors which may condition the choice of committee chairman in an authority – the political parties, limitations (if any) imposed by the council on the number of chairmanships which may be held by an individual and on the length of tenure, tchoen v ention affecting the position of vice-chairmen, the extent to which chairmanships are sought after by members and the status of different committees in an authority’s committee hierarchy”.
So much for the statement of its importance.
Why is he importance?
Sir Kenneth Wheare gave some reasons in why the committee.
“The function of the office of chairman, put at its irreducible minimum, is to promotes and maintain order.
To this end it is agreed that, in a numerous body like a committee, the chaos that would come if members address each other at will or at random can be averted by providing that all remarks will be addressed to one person.
Simply and obvious as it appears, this is the very foundation of order.
The most elementary and elemental form of being ‘out of order’ is to direct one’s remarks to someone other than the chairman.
‘Please address the chair’ is the cry both of those who love freedom of speech and of those who love order.
BHM 770 MODULE 1 It is from this primary function of being responsible for order and from this unique position of being the target of all remarks in the course of a committee’s work that a chairman’s opportunities of leadership spring.
To begin with, all questions are addressed to or through him.
Soon he may find himself answering the questions, justifying the actions of the committee, perhaps justifying the actions of its officials, if it is an administrative committee.
Soon the officials are supplying him with the answers to questions and criticisms and he may find himself acting almost like a minister defending actions which chairman can feel are his responsibility.
Now it need not work in this way of course.
A chairman can treat himself as no more than a channel through which questions pass to chief officials.
But he wishes to influence his committee, the opportunity often presents itself when questions are asked”.
The qualities and attributes just referred to mainly concern his role at meetings, but this is but a part of work.
Some other tasks are: 1.
Spokesmen and Advocates – he must make his committee’s needs and views known in council to justify their recommendations.
2.
Policy Maker – in theory perhaps not, but in reality his role is likely to be a significant one.
In most cases he will be in the chair because he represents a party with a policy he has helped shape, or is considered a ‘specialist’ in the field.
If neither of these apply, he may have shape, have had long experience and so he sensitive to what is practicable and what might be unacceptable.
3.
Co-ordinator and Organizer – even a matter like drawing up an agenda involves decisions of policy.
What is the right order?
The correct timing?
4.
Protector and Mediator – does he make efforts to ensure the undoubted right of all members express their views.
Does he make sure that all views are expressed?
Does he make sure that the expert knowledge of officers receive due weight yet is not allowed to overwhelm committee members so that they become mere ‘rubber stamps, of what are virtually officer-made decisions?
Perhaps the hallmark of a really good chairman is the way in which he protects officers from attack to which they have no right of reply.
He may himself be critical of an oacfftiicoenr.’ s General performance or attitude, but he is an inferior chairman if he abandons him to understrained attack on committees.
There are proper disciplinary procedures where the use of such is appropriate, but even more important is the private BHM 770 MODULE 1 word, the informal influence which he, as chairman, may only count, but also has a right and duty to , apply.
3.6 Powers In England and Wales DELEGATION was admitted in local government practice as a general principle by the local government Act 1929.
The 1929 Act only permitted delegation to statutory committees.
But tghoev e rnment Act 1933 extended it to all committees.
In general, however, while delegation allows the committee to act in the council’s name it only does so up to the specific limit decided by the council.
In other words, delegation is no wider or more general that the council decides.
It may not include the levying of a rate of issue of precepts.
Delegation creates ‘AGENCY’.
The acts of the servants are those of the master; the acts of the committee are the acts of the council.
Certain U.K enactments – e.g.
town and county planning Act 1962 – allows further delegation from a committee to a sub-committee, but there is no general provision.
3.7 The Finance Committee For a number of reasons – some more worthy than others – Finance Committees in Local government tends to regard themselves as senior to other committee, more powerful and more responsible.
The research findings of the MAUD COMMITTEE summed up tphreo b lem and the role of the Finance Committee: “These is a temptation, where the finance committee has a strong composition (an especially it is has a power of veto), to use it as a weapon of control.
One objection to such a course is that it may result in a great deal of misapplied effort by the committees, and pressure for financial stringency and undue weight.
The problem of making issues comprehensive to members in sufficient depth appeared to us especially acute in this committee.
In general we do not, therefore, think that the finance cwoomrkminitgte e , a s a kind of second-stage policy review body, has a predominant role to play in policy co-ordination.
In the allocation of priorities, in matters of financial regulation, in the raising and management of funds, to some general level of expenditure, however, it plays a vital part which, unless there is a radical change in gcoenmemrailt t ee management structure which appears to be irreplaceable”.
BHM 770 MODULE 1 The Finance Committee’s main duty is to report to the Council on the financial implications of any proposal, making sure that these are fully understood.
It must be admitted that it is difficult to do this without at times at least straying into policy judgments.
Dr. Marshall sums it up thus “Wise finance committee keep as near to pure finance as they can, carefully refraining from giving opportunities for their actions to be constructed as meddling with other people’s affairs.
But in practice the pure milk of the theory become watered down, first because the distinction between financial considerations and others, and hence the line of demarcation between the finance and other committees, is not always clear, and secondly because there are important occasions when the finance committee can hardly refrain from expressing, if only by implication, judgment on durability as well as on financial feasibility.
Whenever the finance committee recommends an order of priority, or suggests what rate should be levied or how it should be allocated, it is, in effect, exercising a judgment on relative merits if not on absolute merits.
There if of course no escape from this position, for as has already been explained, there comes a stage at which some group smaller in size than the council must sift complicated proposals and conflicting claims and make firm recommendations, the council itself being much too unwholly a body for the task.
Even so, the finance committee should recognize that the less it becomes involved in the merits of scheme, the better”.
(p. 45) SELF ASSESSMENT EXERCISE 2 Get in touch with the “Guidelines for Local Government Reform” in Nigeria (1976).
Look at Section 29, 30, and 31.
3.8 Committee and Council There is no virtue in the Council re-doing the work of a body it has set up to relieve it of mush of the task, but it must be remembered that a committee’s acts are those of the council and that the responsibility of the latter for these acts is to the electorate.
Thus, scrutiny of committee doings is a duty.
It is one which can be adequately discharged without undue and inhibiting interference?
In view of the volume of work undertaken by modern local government and the attendant increase in council business it is difficult for councillors to study and consider all the details provided in committee’s work needs extra scrutiny and which can be relied upon for soundness.
The whole system breaks down where this trust is not found and does not develop.
3.9 Disadvantages BHM 770 MODULE 1 What are the merits and demerits of the committee system?
The latter first: 1.
It may cause delay.
The law or standing orders may provide that business must go first to committees and in some authorities this could mean up to three months delay in business, even isft ra igah t-forward passage is assured.
2.
It may ‘water’ down’ strong and effective leadership in the council 3.
Where there are sitting allowances it may add to the expense of council business.
4.
It may encourage dabbling in the routines and trivialities of administration which ought to be left to officers.
ADVANTAGES 1.
It permits specialization among councillors.
2.
It can save a lot of time for councils so that the latter may concentrate on major issues.
3.
It permits frank discussion, where the public sessions of Council inhibit it or even encourage speech-making for reporting in the press.
4.
It provided a sort of second chamber so that business is considered a second time-usually so in theory; occasionally so in practice.
Most important of all – it must widely diffuse effective sdheacrisiniogn - m inak ing and it is thus the hand-maiden of democracy.
4.0 CONCLUSION You may have learnt about the importance and other characteristics of committee system from going through the material above.
Once again committee is meant to simplify the work of the council and even the administration.
You have also seen that there are standing and adhoc committees and even statutory committees.
Committee has powers to issue meticulously and bring to the council for approval.
It also helps to sort out departmental needs and prepares this for policy acceptance.
The chairman of a committee must be active in his committee job and vocal and articulate in council for council to appreciate the committee’s needs and recommendations.
You may want to apply the committee principle to your local tuonwionn meeting and see how it works.
BHM 770 MODULE 1 5.0 SUMAMRY A few points can be raised in summing up this unit a) Committee is important in that it lessens or simplifies local government councils complex activities.
b) Committees are classified according to whether they are statutory or non-statutory.
c) Committee is made up of council members and in some cases co- opted members.
d) Chairmanship of Committee is largely dominated by the ruling party but in some cases opposition parties may claim some.
e) The chairman of a committee is a spokesman and advocate, a policy maker, a coordinator and an organizer and a protector or mediator.
f) The powers enjoyed by committees are powers of delegation.
g) Committee reports to council even though a lot of trust is placed on these committees by council.
ANSWER TO SELF ASSESSMENT EXERCISE 1 Answer should include the following - decongest business of the council - saves time - brings to bear specialized knowledge on issue sometimes - can look at details of a particular issue – brings scrutiny to bear and advices accordingly.
- avoids mistake in decision and policies as these are meticulously dealt with by committees.
ANSWER TO SELF ASSESSMENT EXERCISE 2 a) (i) A Finance and General Purpose Committee (ii) An Education Committee b) There are Small Committees of the Local government: - Chairmen of these are political heads of departments - F & GPC becomes the “Cabinet” of the local government - Members of Committee should be appointed by council unless where otherwise stated by law.
6.0 TUTOR MARKED ASSIGNMENT BHM 770 MODULE 1 Discuss the advantages and disadvantages of committee system.
7.0 REFERENCES/FURTHER READINGS R. M. Punett.
(1977).
British Government & Politics.
London: Heinemann Ltd. J. H. Price.
(1975).
Political Institutions of West Africa Hutchinson & Co. Ltd. Kaduna State Local Government Edict, 1977.
UNIT 17 BHM 770 MODULE 1 UNIT 3 THE PERSONNEL OF LOCAL GOVERNMENT CONTENTS 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objectives 3.0 Main Content 3.1 Qualification and Role 3.1.1 Political Staff 1 Chairman 2 Councilors 3 Alderman 3.1.2 Local Government Officers 1 The Secretary 2 Other Administrative Staff 3.2 Institutions Representatives for Personnel Matters 3.2.1 Local Government Service Commission 3.2.2 Junior Staff Management Commissions 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutor-Marked Assignment 7.0 References/Further Readings 1.0 INTRODUCTION The personnel of local government comprise both administrative and political personnel.
These are people who together manage local government and achieve results.
While the political personnel or staff of local government is recruited through election, or selection, or nomination depending on how democratic the system is, the administrative personnel are recruited or selected basically on merit.
There are specific qualifications or guidelines on which both of these personnel are recruited and there are roles assigned to their offices.
Each structure office has its own role or responsibilities and each actor has his or her own role.
Both the selection or recruitment process and the roles they play in office are the issues that concern you in this unit.
This will enable you to appreciate these offices especially as regards what it takes to get there and what is expected of one as a staff.
The political personnel to be considered are the Councilors, Chairman, Alderman while the administrative personnel are the principal administrative officers like the secretary, the prefect and the heads of department.
BHM 770 MODULE 1 As we discuss these, examples will be drawn on a comparative basis mainly from Britain and Nigeria.
2.0 OBJECTIVES At the end of the unit you will be able to • state guidelines or qualifications governing appointment or recruitment into the major political and administrative position in local government • identify the roles and responsibilities of these key personnel.
3.0 MAIN CONTENT 3.1 Qualifications and Roles 3.1.1 Political Staff 1.
Chairman The Chairman is the number one citizens of the local government.
He is entrusted with the political leadership of the council.
In Britain, the first business of the Council is the election of a mayor or chairman which, as pointed out, is by indirect election.
He is usually a Council member and so the qualification and disqualification discussed under councilors (below) apply to him.
In most cases, his term of office is one year.
He presides over council but this is largely one of ceremony and prestige.
He is not a chief executive as in the Nigerian case or the strong Mayor of the US.
Yet he is the chief representative and the number one citizen of the Borough.
Other system, which follow the British system do not exactly behave the same way.
The tenure of chairman in India and Nigeria is between 2-3 years.
The age requirement in Nigeria is specified (30 years and above).
In Presidential system like America and Nigeria, chairmen are more of Chief Executives of their local government.
The chairman in this system is directly elected by the people and not by council.
There are aqlusaol i fication and disqualification clauses guiding his election and tenure.
2.
Councillors Councilors could be elected as part time or full time.
In the Nigerian case, Councilors must not be less than 25 years, and must have obtained at least a secondary school certificate or its equivalent.
They must not be BHM 770 MODULE 1 declared bankrupt, as ex-convict and must not suffer from infirmity of the mind.
They must also be sponsored by a political party.
In Britain, Councilors are elected on part time basis.
To get elected as a councilor, a member must be of “full age” and be a British citizen and at least must satisfy one of the following requirements laid down on the Local Authority (Qualifications of members) Act 1971.
1.
He must be on the register of local government election for the area; 2.
He must own freehold or leasehold land in the area of the authority; 3.
He must reside in the area during the whole of the twelve months preceding the election; 4.
He must have had main employment in the area for the twelve months preceding the election.
Disqualification of membership arises if: 1. the member holds a paid office 2. a person is bankrupt 3. a person has committed an offence within five years\ provision to the election, involving imprisonment for these months or more.
4. a member fails to attend council meeting without reasonable excuse for a period of six months.
3.
Alderman This is specific feature of the British local government especially at the level of Counties and Boroughs.
They are elected by the Councilor from among council members or from strong persons qualified to serve on the council.
They equal in number one-third of the council.
Their appointment stemmed from many motives including personality, security, long service reward, and consideration of party politics.
They provide continuity, for council word as they continue to remain in council even when councilors are re-elected periodically.
SELF ASSESSMENT EXERCISE 1 List electoral qualification of a Councilor in Britain.
3.1.2 Local Government Officers (Career Staff) Harold Laski, has pointed out that “while the difference between efficient and inefficient administration lies in the creative use of officials by elected persons”.
Another author observes that “only skilled and BHM 770 MODULE 1 trained officials can be relied upon for continuity, in the simysptearmti,a l interpretation, and tradition and disinterested impetus.
Local government officials are therefore important from constitutional, functional and from the standpoint of their effective role in laodcmali n istration.
They implement policy as professionals and could therefore determine the effectiveness and success of the political actors.
The key staff (official) in government is the Secretary and the Heads of Department.
These manage both the administrative, professional and technical skills and competences in the local government.
In some systems like in Britain and the US, councils are responsible for their internal administrative structure and appoint officers who can discharge these efficiently.
Approval is however necessary by central governments for certain appointments.
In Britain the following appointments are mandatory: chief education officers, chief fire brigade officers, inspectors of units and measures, directors of social services and distinct surveyors.
In terms of qualification (in Britain) no qualification are prescribed for offices in the case of medical officers of health, and public hinesaplethc to rs.
The clerks, treasurers and surveyors are merely required to be “fit” persons.
For the clerk however, people of high administrative ability and in some cases legal qualifications are preferred.
1.
The Secretary The Secretary is usually the head of the Administration and the key point man of the chairman.
He is the coordinator of the dTehpearret mareen t.t w o types of secretaries in the local government system, an administrative secretary and (career secretary) and a secretary who is politically appointed.
Local government in Britain, India and in Nigeria (before the 1991 Reform) parades this type of secretary.
It is aeqlsuoi v alent of French Prefect.
The qualification of the career secretary in Nigeria is based on years of service, an educational qualification comparable to people in spiomsiitliaorn in the central governments (preferably a degree or its equivalent).
In some systems the secretary is elected especially in some countries in the United States where such election does not detract from qualification.
Another dimension to the political nature of Secretaries is the fact that in some system they are appointed by the central sgtoavtee r nment through the local government service commission or the ministry.
This makes it a sensitive position.
BHM 770 MODULE 1 In other systems like Nigeria, especially during the Presidential experiment in local government and presently too, most of the states allow the chairman of local governments to appoint their secretaries.
(These are not technically heads of administration but secretary to the council).
Some qualification or guidelines governing the appointment of such secretaries in Nigeria require any person to be appointed to be: “A serving or retired personality of outstanding merit with demonstrated track record of performance and administrative experience, preferably in the pu8blic service”.
We should not forget that in France, as we have seen in previous unit, the Prefect of the Department (i.e.
the main tier of local government) who is the equivalent of the secretary, is appointed by the central government especially to serve as the eye of the central government in the local councils.
He is a person of high administrative ability comparable to staff of the central government.
Technically he is a central government staff.
2.
Other Administrative Staff The other administrative staff are based on the departmental structure of the local government.
The Heads of Departments are the Principal departmental staff as well as the Principal Officers of the local government.
In Britain like many other countries, local government is organized around departments, with each department administering a service or group of interrelated services.
In Britain there are two service departments i.e.
the Clerk’s department and the Treasurers department that service the other departments.
The other principal departments are Engineer and Surveyor’s department.
Chief education officer’s department medical officer of health, Housing, Public-heal, Planning department.
In Nigeria the Reform of 1988 has approved six departments of Personnel Management, Finance, Health, Agriculture, Primary Education and Works.
Today, Primary education is replaced by Education and Social Services.
(Primary education is managed by a separate intergovernmental outfit).
In terms of qualification and recruitment.
In the Nigerian local government system) the minimum entry requirements are specified in documents like staff regulations or Approved Scheme of Service for BHM 770 MODULE 1 Local Government Employees.
A post of the Head of Department is available to those who rise through the ranks or those who phoigshseesr s qualification or on secondment.
In the Nigerian setting feoxra m ple, the scheme of service accepts a Higher Diploma in LGoocvaelr n ment or an advanced diploma in local government.
So also the position is open to those with first degree or a higher degree.
However, it also stipulates the years of experience necessary to qualify for the job.
Such could also be filled by promotion in most cases.
It must however be noted that in local governments, all positions of heads of department up to the secretary are not filled purely on merit but pcoonlistiidcaelr a tion comes to play.
In Nigeria for example, local governments that are under-represented in position at the local government level are considered so long as their candidates have the minimum qualification – some form of quota criterion.
In local government, the role of officers is as simple as looking at the relationship between the officer and the council i.e.
career and political officers.
The paid official carries out the work, while the council decides and controls policy and holds the purse strings.
Sometimes the demarcation between these roles is not clear.
An earlier has thrown light on the roles and role relationships (as in duties and responsibilities).
SELF ASSESSMENT EXERCISE 2 On what basis is a Head of Department appointed and promoted iNni g erian local government?
3.2 Institutions Personnel For Personnel Matters We may start with this observation in respect of Appointment oOff f icers in the British Councils (Barber, 1974).
In general, councils are responsible for their internal astdrmucitnuirsetr a t ivane d may appoint “such officers as they think fit for tehfefi c ient discharge of the functions of the council”.
In addition, certain statutory appointments are mandatory and the central government possesses the power and the duty to approve of certain appointments and a degree of interference over such matters and the dismissal of certain officers.
This shows that local governments in Britain have considerable control over the appointments of their staff, but there is central government control over some of the way senior staff.
Such control is vested on the Ministry for the Environment.
BHM 770 MODULE 1 In Nigeria however, the situation does not confer much over local governments in recruitment of staff.
The Nigeria local government service is a unified service where a central body at the state level, known as the Local Government Service Commission, is responsible for the appointment, promotion, transfer, training and discipline of staff on salary grade level 07 and above (i.e.
07 – 16).
The unit lgoocvael rn ments are charged with responsibility over staff of level 01-06.
This they do through the Junior Staff Management Committee.
Two systems are therefore in vogue viz the unified and separate system.
Let us look more closely at the unified system (especially in duties) performed.
3.1.1 The Local Government Service Commission Roles and Responsibilities Appoint post, promote and discipline local government employees on grade levels 07 and above; Set up general uniform guidelines for appointment, posting, promotion and discipline; Monitor the activities of each local government, discipline and promotion of local government employees on grade levels 01-06, to ensure the guidelines are uniformly applied; Serve as appellate body for petition from aggrieved local government staff on levels 01 – 06 as regards promotion while levels 07 an d above could appeal as far as to the Governor; Maintain comprehensive and up to date seniority lists and nominal role of local government staff; Submit annual report of its activities to: all chairmen of local government in the state the office of the state Governor the state House of Assembly Maintain a monthly local government gazette or newsletter to convey information in particular, The bye-laws passed by local government in the state Staff movements including new appointments, confirmations, promotions and retirements/dismissals.
BHM 770 MODULE 1 Assume responsibilities for manpower planning development and training the senior cards (GL 07 and above) of the local government service; Keep the 1% allocation for Training Fund for training of members of the unified staff; The Chairman of the Service Commission staff chair the Pension Board; Restructure and strengthen the Department of Personnel Management (in the local government) and propose modification from time to time in the structure and operations of the local government service.
The danger with saddling the Commission with so much function is that it has come to pay attention to some functions and neglected others.
For example, training and recruitment, promotion and transfer have dominated its function.
Others have taken a back seat.
As can be seen from the functions, the key issues in pmearnsoangnemel e nt viz.
recruitment, promotion, transfer, training discipline are the responsibilities of the Local Government Service Commission.
There are procedures guiding the administration of each of these.
3.1.2 Junior Staff Management Committee For staff of local government of level 06 and below, their staff matters are handled by a Junior Staff Management Committee whose composition and function are spelt out in the 1988 Civil SReerfvoircme s for Local Government.
It should be noted that in handling these personnel matters, this committee will have to notify the Service Commission on major decisions affecting staff.
The Ministry for local government is in charge of political staff iNni g eria.
It is responsible for their documentation, training and issues guidelines on their allowances and welfare.
SELF ASSESSMENT EXERCISE 3 Complete the following statements: 1.
Another name for local government administrative staff is------------------------------------- staff.
2.
The coordinator of departmental administration is------------------------------------------------- 3.
Apart from experience, two other criteria for appointment as head of department are------------------------ and---------------- BHM 770 MODULE 1 4.
The appointment of a career Secretary to a local government is done by the --------------------------- while that of a political Secretary is done by the ------------------------.
4.0 CONCLUSION The personnel of local government are either political or administrative.
Political personnel are largely politicians or local government representatives comprising the chairman and councilors.
Career or administrative officers are the paid staff of local government who translates policy into action.
Key Career officers of local governments are mainly the Secretary and Heads of Departments.
Council makes policy, the executive implement policy by making use of the career officers who provide the administrative professional and technical expertise to do this.
The degree, to which political personnel succeed, will depend on what level of operations and support they get from career staff.
This brings in the critical question of how each officer political or career understands his roles and the relationships that exist between these.
The dividing line between administrative and politics may be difficult but each category of staff must try to stick to its role as much as possible to reduce conflictual relationships and promote cordial relationship.
Nevertheless certain state institutions cater for the personnel matters of these staffs.
While the Ministry for Local Government deal with political staff, the Local Government Service Commission deal with career staff especially in the Nigerian setting.
5.0 SUMMARY At the end of this unit we can highlight the main points as follows: The major political actions in the local government council are the chairman and the councilors.
These political actors have qualifications and guidelines attached to their appointment and tenure.
This could range from educational qualification to experience and are, residency, citizenship, etc.
The chairman is the number one officer of the local government and provides political leadership.
Councilors make laws and formulate policies for the council.
BHM 770 MODULE 1 The Career or administrative staff of local governments are the Secretary (Clerk) AND THE Heads of Departments.
Various departments in the local government are organized around a group of functions and the head of department provides leadership for these departments in the execution of these functions.
The Secretary is the administrative head of the local government and the coordinator of departments.
In some systems he is chief executive (as in the British).
The position of the local government secretary varies in that in some systems like the present Nigerian local government system, the secretary is appointed politically by the chairman.
Qualification of local government administrative staff is based on merit and some personnel matters relating to these key administrative staff are handled by the local government service commission (in Nigeria).
ANSWER TO SELF ASSESSMENT EXERCISE 1 1.
Must be registered voter 2.
Must own land in one form or the other in the area 3.
Residency qualification for one year 4.
12 months of employment (in the area) preceding the election.
ANSWER TO SELF ASSESSMENT EXERCISE 2 1.
Rising through the ranks/promotion 2.
Qualification especially higher and further qualifications.
Basically a Higher or Advanced Diploma or a first and higher degree.
3.
On secondment from the state government.
4.
Years of experience/seniority.
5.
Political measures like quota i.e.
distribution of Heads of Department to ensure no local government is under represented.
6.
Interviews.
6.0 TUTOR MARKED ASSIGNMENT 1.
Mention the following: a.
What the personnel matters of local government are included?
b. Definitions of the Unified and Separate Services.
BHM 770 MODULE 1 c. State the responsibilities or roles of the Local Government Service Commission as contained on page 5 of the unit (11 of them).
d. Describe the role of the Junior Staff Management Committee.
e. Comment on the relationship between these two bodies.
(To get more on this question, see reference 3 on “further readings”).
2.
What are the two major institutions responsible for staff matters in local government?
What are their personnel mandates?
7.0 REFERNCES/FURTHER READINGS M.P.
Barber.
(1974).
Local Government.
Macdonald & Evans Limited, Ch.
V. Federal Republic of Nigeria.
National Orientation Workshop for Local Government Councilors, Training Manual (Office of the Vice President, and Department of Local Government Affairs, July, 1999), See especially.
“Local Government under the 1999 Constitution” by Oyelakin.
Federal Republic of Nigeria.
(1988).
Implementation Guidelines on the Application of Civil Service Reforms in the Local Government Service.
Lagos: Federal Government Printer.
BHM 770 MODULE 1 UNIT 4 LOCAL GOVERNMENT AS AN INSTRUMENT OF DEVELOPMENT CONTENTS 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objectives 3.0 Main Content 3.1 The Meaning of Development in Local Government.
3.2 Development Potentials of Local Government 3.3 Planning and the Development Process in Local Government 3.4 Achievements of Performance 3.4.1 General Assessment of Performance 3.4.2 Specific Examples 1.
Dambata Local Government 2.
Some Local Government in Rivers State 3.
Rating of Local Government Functions in the North (1977) 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutor-Marked Assignment 7.0 References/Further Readings 1.0 INTRODUCTION You may cast your mind back to unit 3 where we discussed the “theories of local government”.
You may recall that local government play two important role and people assess them from those perspectives.
These are democratic– participatory and service delivery.
At the grassroots level, people are more interested in imperial development i.e.
what they can use in institution doing, and that is why the service delivery argument is compelling.
In assessing the role of local government in development, we ainrete r ested in physical development especially of a socio-economic nature.
Likely, this bail down to the projects which their gfuenncetriaoln s can be broken down into, or those programs and pcoronjteacintse d in their plans and budgets which they had hoped to deliver to communities within a given period of time.
The question is what have they been able to deliver and what have been the obstacles in the attempt to deliver those.
These are the concerns of this unit, but the latter’s properly discussed in the next unit.
BHM 770 MODULE 1 2.0 OBJECTIVES At the end of this unit, you should be able to: • identify what constitutes development at the local government level • describe the planning and development process in local government • identify the nature of projects associated with various section in the budget • give examples of what services have been actually delivered by local governments.
3.0 MAIN CONTENT 3.1 The Meaning of Development in Local Government The meaning of development may be difficult to pin-down but it points at some qualitative and quantitative advancement in structures, values and skills in a society.
It talks about growth, modernization, urbanization, etc.
It also talks about advancement, progress, increase, transformation, etc.
Development therefore is movement to a much more desirable stage than the one presently experienced.
This is why scholars like Seen will ask of development questions like, what is happening to poverty?
What is happening to unemployment?
Development is therefore supposed to tackle the obstacles by the human and physical environment.
Conquering this means making progress.
Overall, development should be improving the content and quality of life of individuals or groups or the community as a whole.
In local government, such areas where such improvement is required are infrastructures like roads, markets, water, health and service areas like education, health, sanitation, works, etc.
These are breakdown of local government functions.
The question is how have local governments gone ahead to handle these projects and services and what has actually be delivered and at what cost.
The question of the impact of these services does not constitute part of this write-up.
3.2 Development Potentials of Local Government You are very much aware of the capabilities of local government to bring about development in local communities.
These capabilities are based on their potentials.
Such potentials are sourced from their BHM 770 MODULE 1 constitutional basis, their financial wherewithal their quality of personnel, the quality of leadership and the support they get from the local communities.
When these variables are rolled together in some optimum mix, there should be no reason for performing its role of socio- economic development.
What is required of local government is how to plan for rmesoobuilriczeast io n (both funds and community resources) and translate these into services.
Planning becomes the key instrument here but as we said, it must be backed up by good or dynamic leadership and a good human and capital resource base.
Let us look at the planning process in local government and how this facilitates development.
SELF ASSESSMENT EXERCISE 1 What constitutes the development potentials of local government?
3.3 Planning and the Development Process in Local Government Planning is considered as: A proposal course of action of a person, group or government within a given environment, providing obstacles and opportunities which the policy was proposed to utilize and overcome in an effort to reach a goal or realize its objective or a purpose (Fredrick, 1963).
Simply put it brings to focus, the need to efficient allocation of scarce resources in any society or by every organization.
It therefore refers to the process of preparing a set of decisions for future action directed at achieving goals by some means.
The key elements in a plan therefore are: - it has to do with the future - it is goal oriented - it is prescriptive (i.e.
based on existing order, it prescribe steps to table for the future) Planning is an administrative and management ability undertaken by governments, organization and groups.
BHM 770 MODULE 1 In planning or a planning document at the local government level, goes through the following process: a) The statement of goals (or objectives) b) As analysis of system structure i.e.
components of the problem and how they are interrelated.
c) Evaluation and selection of possible solution to problems d) The design of the implementation procedure i.e.
how these solutions are to be translated into concrete actions.
In local governments, there are both short term plans (rolling plan, 3 years period) and (perspective plans for much longer).
All the national level, the perspective plan is between 15 – 20 years.
The importance of planning for development therefore is that the plan states its objectives in relation to development, the activities to be engaged in and how they are arrived at, the cost of the apcrotijveictites,s a nd the strategies for implementing the activities.
It is these activities that translate into policies, programmes, sub- programmes, and projects in local governments.
These are concretely conveyed or elaborated on by the local government budget where concrete plan for the year is drawn and concrete projects and services are itemized including their costs.
The approval of this, kick-starts their implementation.
Remember that such projects are largely contained in the capital estimates of the local government.
It is the implementation of these that translate into infrastructural and other socio-economic development in the local government.
When particular projects in the plan cannot be implemented in a given year, it is rolled over into the following year.
(This is indeed the principle of the rolling plan).
The question still remains – what have local government been able to do with all their developmental capabilities and potential so far.
SELF ASSESSMENT EXERCISE 2 What is the presence of development in a local government?
3.4 Achievements or Performance It is very difficult to put the achievements of local government in a project form.
There are however different ways of assessing achievements or physical performance.
One way is to look at the functional schedule of local government and measure to what extent each has been performed.
Another way is to look BHM 770 MODULE 1 at the plans of local government and assess them in term of implementation according to the time frame and the projects.
Yet another way is to look at a local government capital budget and assess how much of the projects and services that are targeted have been implemented.
One can also look at the chairman’s annual address on achievements in his local government and get a feel of what the local government has been able to do.
There are various sources aynadrd s ticks, and many studies and evaluations carried out in local government’s physical performance drawn from these sources.
The rest of this section comments on this and brings out some examples tsou p port achievements.
3.4.1 General Assessment of Performance In Nigeria the exclusive or mandatory function of local government have lagged behind concurrent functions.
Remember the first function under the mandatory is planning.
Local governments have not taken the issue of planning very seriously.
They engage in perfunctory planning but they sooner or later jettison the document partly because of tihnest a bility in local government leadership.
The incoming executive does not always believe in the efficacy or relevance of the plan he meets on the ground so he avoids it.
Some chief executives do not even believe in plans as they feel the straight jackets of plan do not support their own attitude to development.
The other mandatory functions which are largely revenue generation do not receive considerable attention either.
Apart from markets and motor parks.
Community tax and collection of rates on shops.
Kiosk abnudsi n ess premises, the very lucrative ones like radio and tleicleevnissiniogn a nd property rating do not appear to be exploited.
Infact most local governments in rural area rely on markets as their major source of internal revenue.
In the same vein, services like roads, naming of streets, street lighting, recreation, sanitation and burial grounds and cemeteries are not given the right priorities.
On the other hand, local governments concentrate on the concurrent functions agriculture, health, and education where the tendency for expenditure is higher.
They do not emphasis revenue generation because it is a ‘painful’ exercise.
They prefer to wait for the monthly grant from federation account to pay salaries and pay contractors for project.
Local governments do more of expending than generating.
This is one of the biggest problems of local government in development today.
Wpohlietinc i an campaign, nobody asks them about where they are going to get money to deliver on their campaign promises.
The answers are of course from the federation account.
There is almost a zero initiative BHM 770 MODULE 1 about transforming the rural economy in order to expand the wealth and tax base which in turn will provide adequate funds for local administration.
So, the vibrant departments in the local government are primary health care, education until recently and agriculture.
Primary health care is implementing the national primary health care policy and therefore it receives additional funding or assistance from the federal and state governments and even international donors from time to time.
In local governments, the UNICEF assisted programmes on capacity building and service delivery are evidenct The Bamako initiative has also been a big project of the International agencies and the Federal government.
Local government builds rural; health facilities equip and staff them.
The problem has been the sustainability of the drug flow.
Primary education was hitherto a programme of local government but the national primary education commission has taken this over.
Remember, local governments still control this because deductions over teachers’ salaries are made at source from their account.
This has thrown many local governments into debts (This is the source from their account.
This has thrown many local governments into debt.
(This is the source of the ‘zero allocation’ you have come to hear theses days) The Commission builds schools, so do local governments.
Both bodies also equip them.
The local inspection and coordination however rests with the local authority education committee of which the chairman of the local government still head.
Agriculture is not as vibrant as the other two sectors.
Most of tahceti v ities associated with agriculture are fertilizer procurement and distribution, farm inputs, seed multiplication, tractor hiring and forestry.
Serious moneys are not committed to this sector.
Fertiliser appears to be the most vibrant activity in a lot of councils especially in the North.
Animal husbandry is also activity that is promoted.
Tractor hiring is important especially for populations in the North because of the suitability of the land for mechanical ploughing.
In terms of rural works, local governments can boast of attempts to provide trunk C roads, culverts, drains, building of markets, and motor parks, small scale irrigation works, boreholes and well, television viewing centres, staff houses, district head house, latrines, and a few demonstration.
BHM 770 MODULE 1 3.4.2 Specific Examples To throw more light on the type of projects and expenditure lgoocvael rn ments engage in, the Dambatta experience (in Kano State) obef tw een 1987-97 is presented.
So also the River State example featuring a few local governments is also presented.
1.
Dambatta Local Government The table below shows the capital estimate of Dambatta local government between 1987-1991 Table 1: Sectorial expenditure on projects Year and expenditures S/ N SECTOR 1987 1988 1989 1990 1991 N905,850 N351,469 N679.94 (43.54% N154,085 (26.64 % OF OF N389.02 (9.11% OF 1.
ECONOMIC OF TOTAL TOTAL (13.79%) TOTAL TOTAL CAP.
CAPITAL EXPEN.)
EXPEN.)
EXP.
EXP) N37.888 308,025 N201,040 N164,307 N252,134 (18.21% (23.34% (7.12% OF ( 9.71% OF (14,65% OF OF 2.
SOCIAL DEVT.
TOTAL TOTAL TOTAL TOTAL TOTAL CAPITAL CAPITAL CAPITAL CAPITAL CAPITAL EXP.)
EXP.)
EXP.)
EXP.)
EXP.)
N714.397 N724,766 N361,345 800,000 (34.34% (61.15% (27.38% N510.876 47.2% OF OF OF OF (29.69% 3.
ENVIRONMENTAL TOTAL DEVT.
TOTAL TOTAL TOTAL TOTAL CAPITAL CAPITAL CAPITAL CAPITAL EXP.)
EXP.)
EXP.)
EXP.)
EXP.)
N573,868 N81,416 N505,497 (33.91% N298,725 N260,000 (3.91% (17.92% OF (22.64% (15.10% (17.92% OF TOTAL OF OF 4.
ADMINISTRATIVE OF TOTAL CAPITAL TOTAL TOTAL TOTAL CAPITAL EXP.
CAPITAL CAPITAL CAPITAL EXP EXP.
EXP EXP.
N2,820,334 N1,692,250 N1,319504 N1,720,9 5.
TOTAL CAP.
EXP N2,080,550 (100%) (100%) (100%) (100%) (100%) Considering the above calculations on capital expenditure of the local government for the period 1987-1991, it can be deducted that the local government focused it attention more on environmental department (area development) and economic sectors.
In 1987, economic sector BHM 770 MODULE 1 alone gulped 43.54% on the total capital expenditure, when some lock- up shops and market stalls were constructed at different places in the local government area, as well as the walling of Dambatta cattle market.
As for environmental development which attracted 34.43% of the total capital expenditure of 1987, this was due to the construction of culverts, feeder roads, drainage, boreholes and local wells were constructed at different places in the local government and administrative sector because the year witnessed the construction of drainage, culverts, and water supply as part of area development as well as the extension of local government secretariat, improvement of Dambatta and Babura village heads official residences, purchase of 4 Nos.
new official vehicles and sets of office furniture.
In 1990 and 1991, economic and environmental; development sectors were on the lead when more lock- up shops/markets stalls, open sells, drainage and culverts were constructed.
2.
Some Local Governments in Rivers State The following is the outcome of a research done by Ogban UIyam, in 1983 where he looked at projects undertaken by local governments, those abandoned and reasons for their abandonment.
The main thing here is to expose you to what type of projects local governments engage in.
Even though no reason were given for abandoning projects, here, in the other states, reasons range from lack of funds, to interest by the local governments.
Below is the report and the table: Some local governments in the Rivers state undertook the construction of waterways and floating jetties, besides the usual areas of activity and expenditure, such as untarred road, markets, culverts, office equipment and staff quarters.
Public toilets were other unique items of expenditure in some of the local governments.
Contractors default and the unwillingness of the; local governments to account for many cases of non-completion-abandonment of projects.
Some projects in a local government could not be completed due to land dispute.
See Table 2 for a summary of the state of affairs in the local government areas.
BHM 770 MODULE 1 Table 2 relations between physical projects started and those completed in rivers state L.G.A PROJECT PROJECTS MAJOR YEAR STARTED IN ABANDONED REASON ORDER OF S FREQUENCY YENOGOA “Untarred” roads 1 markets (8 0N o reason 1 980 (300 km) 2 motosrt a lls) given parks (1) markets (80 2 Sewage & stalls) Sewage & garbage Garbage disposal (D1)i s posal (1) New office Block/extension (1) Floating Jetties (3) Public Latrines (45) Bridges & Culverts (25) DEGEMA 1 Untarred roads NIL 1980 (80km0 2 markets (25 stalls) 3 Water wells (154) 4 Drainage/construction (10) 5 Slaughter House (5) 6 New Office Blocks/ Ext.
(6) IKEWERRE/ 1 Markets (240 stalls) NIL NIL 1980 ETCHE 2 Mono Pumps (13) 3 Slaughter House (3) 4 New Office Blocks/ Ext (1) 5 Staff quarters (2) 1 Motor park (2) !
Motor Park (1) 3.
Rating of Local Government Functions in the North 1977 In 1977 research was also conducted into local government’s functions and how people asses their performance.
The following tables rated these functions as per the 1979 Reforms and their performance.
BHM 770 MODULE 1 TABLE 3 Functions Required To Be One Of The Five Receiving Most Important Attention By Local Governments: 1979 (=N=138) FUNCTION %of All LGs where Ranked in Top Five Education 88 Agriculture Service 74 Collection of local taxes 61 Medical services 48 Rural and semi-urban eater supply 46 Community development 33 Road construction and maintenance 31 Maintenance of law and order 28 Markets and motor vehicle parks 21 As pointed out in the general performance above, you can easily discover that the concurrent functions are high on the list.
These are Education, Agriculture and Medical and health services.
Collection of taxes was pursued then became community and cattle taxes were still very viable sources of revenue and the statutory factor had not yet been institutionalized in local government.
Note however, that a great percentage of the local governments rate the first three services high among the services they provide.
SELF ASSESSMENT EXERCISE 3 In what ways can we assess development at the local level?
4.0 CONCLUSION Development in local government may not be straight forward to report.
This can however be done by looking at functions, projects in plans and budgets and the physical or actual projects on the ground.
To be meaningful, the financial allocation to these project and services will allow the reader appreciate the nature and quality of such projects.
The clue to understanding development at the local level is the capital budget.
The amount allocated to this vis a vis the recurrent expenditure is indicative of the development potentials and attention.
Local governments tend to perform more of the concurrent functions than the exclusive ones.
This is because it is less painful to spend than to generate revenue.
The statutory allocation encourages them to spend BHM 770 MODULE 1 without recourse to their internal source which leads to their lack of attention to these sources.
The items of expenditure of local governments remain very basic yet local government find it difficult to implement these.
The difficulty in providing services is a important as the level osef rv ices that has been delivered.
The next unit looks at such difficulties.
5.0 SUMMARY Having gone this unit we can summarise the main issues s follows: a) Developing a local level especially as contained in the functional schedule of local governments in mainly a socio-economic thing.
These consist of projects, infrastructures and services.
b) Local government’s development potential lie in its revenue base, leadership quality and personnel quality, and support from local communities.
c) General achievements or performance of local governments lie in the concurrent functions and a few items under exclusive functions.
This is also confirmed by a study in 1979. d) Local governments spend more than they generate.
The statutory allocation has been responsible for this.
e) The examples from Dambatta local government of Kano State and some local governments in Rivers State show the pattern of expenditure and the items of expenditure.
Expenditures are more “environment” in nature followed by economic, as confined by the Dambatta experience.
ANSWER TO SELF ASSESSMENT EXERCISE 1 1.
Constitutional guarantee 2.
Financial wherewithal 3.
Quality of personnel (including executive and technical capabilities).
5.
Quality of leadership 6.
Community resources and support.
ANSWER TO SELF ASSESSMENT EXERCISE 2 Plan------------Policies----------Programme-----------Projects Plan------------Budget----------Programme-----------Projects and services Plan------------Budget----------Implementation-------Development ANSWER TO SELF ASSESSMENT EXERCISE 3 a) Analyzing how well functions are performed BHM 770 MODULE 1 b) How much of the capital budgets of a local government has been implemented and can be observed on the ground c) How much of the plan has been implemented and can be observed in the ground.
6.0 TUTOR-MARKED ASSIGNMENT In what ways can we describe local government as an instrument of development at the community level?
7.0 REFERENCES/FURTHER READINGS A. Y. Aliyu (ed) (1980).
The Role of Local Government in Social, Political and Economic Development in Nigeria, 1976-79.
(Published by Department of Local Govt.
Studies, A.
B. U. Zaria,).
E.A.
Oyeyipo & A. Odoh (eds.)
Local Government as Vehicle for National Development (Publish by Department of Local Govt.
Studies, A.B.U.
Zaria).
See especially, Pp.
94-126.
D. Galadiam.
“The Role of Local Government in National Development: The case of Dambatta Lcoal Government” (Unpublished MPS Thesis., Development of Local Govt Studies, July 2002) Ch.
5.
BHM 770 MODULE 1 UNIT 5 LOCAL GOVERNMENT & HEALTH–CARE DELIVERY STRUCTURE, ORGANIZATION AND STRATEGIES CONTENTS 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objectives 3.0 Main Content 3.1 Structure and Organization of the Health Department 3.2 Activities and Strategies 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutor-Marked Assignment 7.0 References/Further Readings 1.0 INTRODUCTION One of the concurrent functions of local government among others is provision of health care service to local communities.
Local government is supposed to do this in conjunction with state and Federal governments.
This has always been a traditional function of lgoocvael rn ment even right from colonial times.
Very modest showing was made in areas like dispensing, drugs and treatment though auxiliary staff involvement I health education and immunization.
From 1988 however, the responsibilities of local government has expanded with the Federal Government redefining the focus of local government in health care delivery.
Local governments were now to focus more on primary health care whose is content is dominated by preventive health services.
This was to include: 1.
Food and Nutrition Services 2.
Material and child Health Planning Services 3.
Provision of Essential Drugs 4.
Environmental Health services (water & food hygiene) 5.
Immunization 6.
Health Education 7.
Control of local endemic Diseases 8.
Treatment of Common Diseases Local Governments have tried to grapple with these services since 1986 when the national Health Policy articulated these services and tshtreu c tured and resources that would aim in delivering such services.
BHM 770 MODULE 1 The aim of this unit therefore is to look at how local governments are structures and organized to carry out these services and what activities and strategies they adopt in doing so.
At the end, this will form an attempt to give you an insight into how one of the Departments in the local government works in term of services.
2.0 OBJECTIVES At the end of this unit, you should be able to do the following: • present an organizational structure of the Health Department of local government • state the roles and functions of the PHC Coordinator, and the Health Committees of the Local Government • identify the Preventive and Curative Health activities of local government and which units are associated with these.
3.0 MAIN CONTENT 3.1 Structure and Organization of the Health Department According to National Health Policy (NHP) the specific roles of local government or the Health Department among others are: Motivating the community and devising local strategy for health in terms of the best approach for implementation of each element of the PHC, the activities involved, the support system, involvement of the communities, mobilizing resources,, ensuring the availability of essential infrastructures for health delivery and collection of relevant data on community health.
In pursuit of these and the PHC programme itemized earlier on the PHC Department, is structure and organized in such a way as to meet these requirements.
BHM 770 MODULE 1 STRUCTURE OF THE PHC DEPARTMENT Local Government C hairman LCPHC MC Supervisory C ouncillor for Health PHC Coordinator (H.O.D) Assistant Coordination Monitorin E ssentia Immunizatio MCH/Family g l n Health Planning & Drugs & Disease Education (medical E valuation Control Unit) Staff Staff Staff Staff Staff As can be seen from the diagram, the Health Department (DPeHpCar t ment) is divided into five units, each unit being manned by an Assistant PHC Coordinator, all reporting to the PHC Coordinator.
There are staff under them who carry out daily activities directed at the realization of the objectives of the specific unit.
Prior to this arrangement, and even indeed in some local government presently, two broad classifications of the Health Department is visible viz: the Medical Unit and the Health Unit.
These five categories can be better identified under these two units.
The truth however is that the health Unit is getting larger and wider in responsibility and services, i.e preventive services.
Curative health, which is done by the medical until is still represented by clinics or health facilities and distinct to basic or common diseases, which is being complemented by a system of referrals at district, local and state levels depending on the severity of the ailment and perhaps convenience of the referral facility: The PHC Coordinator is the effective head of Department.
He ensures that the activities of these units and service are running and wcoeolrl d inated.
He reports to the Supervisor and the Chairman.
Iand d ition to these roles the Approved Scheme of Service states that as the head of Department: BHM 770 MODULE 1 i) he takes charge of a local government medical and health departments; ii) assists in the formulation of medical and health programmes; iii) coordinating the preventive and curative services; iv) giving professional advice to the local government; v) liaison with the state and federal medical/health agents in the local government area, The head of department is in constant dialogue with the chairman of the local government, often times through his supervisory councilor.
This is because the health department has come to control enormous resources and responsibilities over the year.
Organization and planning of health care also take place at COMMITTEE level.
In local government, three of these committees are visible, operating at the level of the community (village) district and local government.
The organization is also incidental to the conception of the PHC and other subsequent health programmes in local governments.
The committees at village and district levels are composed of the traditional ruler, school teacher, local business elites, some elders.
Groups, relining leaders, head of health facility make up the district health committees while from there, representatives are also sent to the local government to serve on the local government Health Management committee (LGHMC) together with the Local government chairman, the PHC Coordinator as secretary, the Supervisor councillor for Health, and professional interests.
The major functions of the LGHMC are: a) formulation of project proposals: b) delivering comprehensive Health services through community participation and inter-sectoral collaboration, c) collection of basic data for service and resources d) mobilization of resources for health programmes and implementation in the spirit of self reliance.
The District health committee assists in policy formulation of health activities in their respective districts.
So also, they monitor evaluate health programmes and coordinate health activities of villages under them.
BHM 770 MODULE 1 The functions of the Village Health Communities include: 1.
The identification of health and health related needs of the community; 2. planning for health and welfare of the community; 3. supervising the implementation and development of health plans; 4. monitoring and evaluating the process and impact of the implementation of health activities: 5. supervising the activities of health workers and providing them with necessary support; 6. liaising with officials (health or otherwise)living in the village to provide health care and other developmental activities; All theses committees are supposed to meet once in a month and the local government should promote good communication between these committees.
SELF ASSESSMENT EXERCISE 1 List 8 Programmes of PHC.
3.2 Activities and Strategies As pointed out earlier, activities of the Health Department raervooulnvde s the programmes of the PHC.
To do this, each Acososridstiannatt o r is charged with implementing these programmes.
For example, the Monitoring and Evaluation (M&E) Officer either alone or in company of other principal officers visit local health facilities (especially district health facility) at least once in a month.
On such visits, he looks out for: • the state of drugs • drug revolving funds, where in operation • monitoring of accounts • stores, and • staff In doing this, he however faces problems of availability of vehicle for trips, equipments, inadequate forms especially on immunization, and fund support for travels.
Furthermore, on preventive health, local government for children and mothers.
In recent past this has been given a boost by the National Immunization Days (NID).
In the 1990s, both the Oral Rehydration Therapy (ORT) and the Expanded Progrmme on Immunization (EPI) now NPI, dominated the preventive health activities of local BHM 770 MODULE 1 governments especially as far as maternal and child health is was concerned.
Coupled with this health education with antenatal and post-natal services available in clinics.
Health talks are arranged against these.
Moreover, community visits and public enlightenment t on health care are undertaken from time to time, emphasizing the issue of sanitation and personal hygiene, common ailments and where to refer these to nutrition etc.
At the curative level, local; government, even before the NHP of 1988 have been most active in the area.
In a typical local government for example, one could have comprehensive Health Centres, primary Health Centre, Health Centres/Clinics, Mobile Health clinic, Village Health Clinics.. A summary of these could be General Hospitals, Health Clinics and Dispensaries.
The picture in Akwanga Local Government as at May, 1990 depicts he health institutions above thus: With the awareness and patronage given to scientific medicine by the citizens of Akwanga Local government Area and indeed he whole country.
Akwanga local government can boast of several health institutions in the area at present.
The Akwanga local government has as at May 1990 twenty five dispensaries scattered all over the area of its jurisdiction which are operational.
The maternal and child Welfare Clinic in Akwanga town which formally has two beds for delivery has to be extended to meet the volume of case admitted in the centre.
The Clinic formally has two beds as mentioned has been expanded to accommodate with more beds making en (10) and the commissioning was performed by the wife of Plateau State Military Governor.
Hajiya Asabe Kama on the 31st October, 1989.
Nursing and expectant mothers interviewed responded that it is cheaper to register with the centre than any other private clinic and that the advises given by the centre during one week health talks makes those who made use of the apply their (staff) instructions and that is saves their money in many occasions that they might go to clinic if left ignorance of the talks.
There is no General Hospital in Akwanga local government area.
The only government hospital is the Cottage Hospital at Nasarawa Eggon.
Apart from the cottage hospital there is also other state government health institutions in Akwanga local government area these include the Rural Health Clinic Nasarawa Eggon.
Basic Health Clinic.
Gudi Station, Health Clinic Andaha and Wamba.
The Health Clinic at Langalanga and Mada Station has not been operational although construction works has been completed and are ready to be put to use.
The General Hospital BHM 770 MODULE 1 proposed for Akwanga during the second republic is still under construction.
There are also hospitals established by voluntary organizations and private individual.
Like Our Ladies of Apostles Hospital Akwanga, Nawarke Hospital, Imani Hospital; Church of Christ in Central Nigeria Hospital Alushi to mention a few.
The interesting time things to note here is that the Church of Christ in Central Nigeria has a Leprosy settlement in which they admit patients for treatment.
There are numerous dispensaries owned by private individuals not to make mention of chemists.
Table showing some health institutions in Akwanga local government area as at 1990 PRIVATE STATE LOCAL GOVT.
ORG.
Hospital 5 2 - Material & Child Welfare - - 1 Clinic - 1 Rural Health Centre - 1 Basic Health Clinics - 4 - Health Clinics 15 - 24 Dispensaries TOTAL 8 25 20 The Hospital is under construction There are four health clinics constructed but only two are as at may, 1990 functioning The picture must have changed tremendously between 1990 and the present.
However, the effectiveness of these institutions would depend on the quality if staff, financial backing, availability of drugs and other medical supplies, and facilities, and the mobilization of people tpoa t ronize modern medicine.
SELF ASSESSMENT EXERCISE 2 Give the full meaning of these acronyms: PHC, NHP, M&E, NID, EPI, NGOS, UNICEF, DFID, LGPHCMC.
4.0 CONCLUSION Health care delivery at the local government level only received a boost the 1988 NHP.
Since then a lot of people responsibilities have bsheiefnte d to local governments.
At a point in 1991/92, State governments BHM 770 MODULE 1 had to transfer some health institutions and health staff without adequate financial backing.
Over the years, foreign donor and local NGOS have played an important part in redefining the implementation and financing of the PHC.
Notable among these are UNICEF, UNDP, DFID, etc.
Looking at the department now, it sometimes appears to be the most effective field department.
The question is whether local governments will seize the opportunity of improved attention and funding to health, especially with foreign partners and donors, to effect major changes in health care dispositions and well-being of the rural people.
Another challenge is the level of involvement of the local population in both formulation and implementation of health policies.
This, the foreign partners know how to do very well and it is high time local government moved beyond the traditional approach of Medicare to a more progressive community health approach as enunciated in the NHP.
5.0 SUMMARY The summary of this unit can be made as follows: • The Health Department is an operational department with its main activities in local communities.
• Its activities can be divided into Preventive and Curative aspects.
• Most units in the Health Department are designed to implement the Primary Health care (PHC) aspect of the NHP.
There are 6 units.
• The PHC Coordinator is the Head of Department and ensures overall planning and delivery of health activities with the active support of his supervisory councilor and chairman.
• There are three vital committee viz: the LGPHCMC and the Community- Based ones like the District Health Committee and Village Health Committees.
• Health services will become effective given adequate quantity and quality of staff, sound financial backing, availability of drugs and other medical supplies and facilities and effective mobilization of the community.
ANSWER TO SELF ASSESSMENT EXERCISE 1 They include: 1.
Food and nutrition 2.
Material and child health/Family planning service 3.
Provision of Essential Drugs 4.
Environmental Health Services (water and sanitation) 5.
Immunization 6.
Health Education BHM 770 MODULE 1 7.
Control of local endemic diseases 8.
Treatment of common diseases ANSWER TO SELF ASSESSMENT EXERCISE 2 PHC - Primary Health Care NHP - National Health Policy M & E - Monitoring and Evaluation NID - national Immunization Days EPI - Expanded Programme on Immunization NGOS - Non- Governmental Organizations UNICEF - United Nations Children Emergency Fund DFID - Department For International Development LGPHCMC - Local Government Primary Care Management Committee 6.0 TUTOR-MARKED ASSIGNMENT What are the strategies adopted for effective health care delivery at the local government level?
7.0 REFERENCES/FURTHER READINGS A.G. Onokerhoraye, Social Sciences in Nigeria: An introduction (Keagan Paul International, Boston) Ch.
4.
The National Health Policy and Strategy for Achieving Health for All Nigerians (Federal Ministry of Health, Lagos, Nigeria, 1988.)
A. Odoh (1989).
Financing Health Services in Local Government.
In E. A. Oyeyipo et.
Al., Leading Issues in Territorial Administration in Nigeria and France.
Ahmadu Bello: University Press Nigeria.
BHM 770 MODULE 1 MODULE 3 Unit 1 Structure and Responsibilities of Local Government in Nigeria Unit 2 Some Basic Concepts of Government and their Relevance to Local Government Administration and Revenue Generation Unit 3 Overview of Local Government in Nigeria Unit 4 Local Government Finance (Revenue Sources) Unit 5 Management of Local Government Finance UNIT 1 STRUCTURE AND FUNCTIONS OF LOCAL GOVERNMENT IN NIGERIA CONTENTS 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objectives 3.0 Main Content 3.1 Single Tier Structure 3.2 Political and Administrative Structure 3.3 Functions 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutor Marked Assignment 7.0 References/Further Readings 1.0 INTRODUCTION A third of the Federal system to be considered after US and India is Nigeria.
We expect the level of decentralization to be high.
In Nigeria it has been a vicillation between deconcentration and devolution, but since the landmark 1976 Reform of local government, these units have become more of a devolution especially and ironically even though military administration.
In this unit, you will be introduced to the structure of local government especially since 1976.
Both political and administrative measures will be given attention.
Functions are elaborately presented, classified and discussed.
At the end of the unit, you will have a further chance to consider the pattern that still emerges from a federal structure.
BHM 770 MODULE 1 2.0 OBJECTIVES At the end of this unit, you should be able to do the following.
• explain the single tier structure of local government in the Nigeria local government system • present the administrative structure of Nigeria local governments in a diagram (both for the 1976 structure and the 1998 structure) • compare the political structure of 1976 to that of 1991 • state the mandatory and concurrent functions of local government in Nigeria and comment on what differentiates them.
9.0 MAIN CONTENT 9.1 Single Structure The 1976 Reforms explain this as follows.
All the statutory and public service functions of local government in Nigeria should be concentrated in multipurpose single tier institution called local governments with complete and self-contained budgets so that the whole system of local government within any area cidaenn t i fbieed , costed and coordinated.
It also went to say this: “The term “tier” is used in this context as meaning a set of local government with their own identity, powers and sources of revenue established under State legislation and with functions for which they are responsible to the State.
Subordinate Councils which are created by them and derive their funds by allocations from the “present” local governments do not comprise a separate tier but are part of the tier comprised of the parent local government Such local government should serve populations of between 150,000 and 800,000.
The idea about the single tier structure here is that no unit created under the basic local government structure is recognized legally.
They are just for administrative convenience.
SELF ASSESSMENT EXERCISE 1 Identify 5 main features of the single-tier structure of Nigeria lgoocvael rn ment as defined by the 1976 Reform: BHM 770 MODULE 1 9.2 Political And Administrative Structure Local governments have come to have similar structure and perform similar functions since the 1976 Reforms.
This is because the Reforms emphasized and standardization throughout the federation.
The 1976 structure, which endured up to early 1991 with (little modification) can be divided into two, viz political and administrative structures.
At the top is the political structure consisting of the Local Government Council and Chairman followed by the Committees and Supervisory Councillors, them the Office of the secretary to the Local Government and the various Departments.
Normally, the departments operated in sections and units in 1988 there was a Reform that broke them down into Divisions, Branches and Sections.
Under the 1976 Reform, the parliamentary system was the vogue but even then the Chairman of the local government was picked out of 3 nominees of Council by the State Governor.
He presided over Council in both legislative and executive capacity.
He was responsible to Council but accountable to the Governor who appointed him.
The Secretary was however the chief executive and act like a Prefect.
In 1991, with the operation of the Presidential system in local government (and its attendant principles of separation of powers) there was a plurality in the political structure, with even the office of the Secretary becoming political.
So, there was the Executive Council, the Legislative Council; Office of the Chairman, Office of the Secretary, Departments (with the Personnel Department exalted among the others because of additional responsibilities.
The chairman nominated his supervisors outside Council (3-5 of them).
He depended on the Council to approve his budget.
Council also made laws for local government.
The Secretary as a political figure never enjoyed the power of the former secretaries.
The power passed down to the Director of Personnel or administration Department (Such powers include signatory to cheques).
Hitherto, the Secretary was part of this.
BHM 770 MODULE 1 A diagrammatic representation of both structure are as follows.
Local Government Council Chairman Supervisory Standing Councillor Committee Office of the Secretary W orks Medical A dmin Treas ury Education A gric.
& N.R This structure is typical of a Cabinet system with the Chairman and Coucillors belonging to the same Council with a Strong Secretary as Chief Executive.
In 1988 the Civil services reform, changed the nomenclature of the two service Departments of Administration and Treasury to personnel Management and Finance and Supplies respectively.
In the 1991 structure below, the Executive Council which is headed by the Chairman operates separately but interdependently with the Legislature Council.
This is a President type of structure.
The 1991 Structure Executive Council Legislative Council Office of the Chairman Office of the Secretary Departments Agric .
P/MgWt .o Frkinsa nc e Medic al Education BHM 770 MODULE 1 SELF ASSESSMENT EXERCISE 2 Draw the structure of Local Government 3.3 Functions Local Governments can be said to perform both mandatory and concurrent functions.
The mandatory ones are the ones they have to perform without necessary assistance from higher governments.
The concurrent once are shared with the other tiers of government especially the State Government.
Before commencing on these functions, let itemize them below.
3.3.1 Mandatory Functions a) Economic Planning of the Local Government b) Collection of rates, radio and T.V.
licenses; c) Establishment and maintenance of cemeteries, burial grounds and homes for destitute or the reform.
d) Licensing of bicycles, trucks, (Other than mechanically propelled trucks) canoes, wheel barrows and carts: e) Markets, motor-parks and public conveniences; f) Roads, streets, drains, public highways, parks, open spaces.
g) Naming of roads and streets: h) Provisions and maintenance of public conveniences and refuse disposal: i) Registration of births, deaths and marriage.
j) Tenement rates or property tax.
k) Control and regulation of: i) Out-door advertising and hoarding; ii) Movement and keeping of pets of all description iii) Shops and kiosks iv) Restaurants and other places for sale of food to the public iv) Laundries.
3.2.2 Concurrent Functions The functions which a local government can perform with other government especially State is in respect of: a) “Provisions and maintenance of Primary Education b) the development of agriculture and natural resources other that the exploitations of minerals: c) the provision and maintenance of health services; BHM 770 MODULE 1 d) such other functions as may be conferred on a local government council by the House of Assembly of the State”.
Looking at the mandatory functions, there appears to be a wide range of such functions.
Nevertheless, they look very mundane and residual.
Of course, this is why local government should perform such functions.
Moreover , apart from the functions of economic planning, all other functional items carry a financial implication with it, with the further exception of function (f) on the list, but even then, good roads encourage the opening up of rural areas and markets and hence ability to generate revenue.
The key and major functional area that could generate revenue are rates and T.V.
licenses, market and parks and property rating.
In the raureraals , markets are the dominant sources of internal revenue while for urban, property rating and markets and parks contribute the most.
While the mandatory functions carry revenue implication with it, the concurrent functions emphasize provisions of certain costly social services.
These are services that do not raise revenue directly.
They are rather investment in human capital.
Except for agriculture that produce food on the short run all others produce results that may be more than short term.
A lot of money is invested in primary education and health care.
It is because of such expenditure implication that these functions are shared with other governments.
Of course, if we take a look at local government capital estimates, most of the money goes into these areas especially primary education until very recently.
Finally on functions, we should note that certain changes have taken place between 1991 and the present, especially in the area of concurrent functions.
For example, a Commission for Primary Education has been set up.
The Commission is now responsible for the funding amnadn a gement of primary education in the country.
4.0 CONCLUSION Structures of local government in Nigeria have remained fairly stable since the 1976 Reform.
More changes have been experienced at tphoel it ical level because of the different stands of political leadership that run local government administration.
At a point it is the parliamentary type, at other point it is the Presidential type.
In between, there has been appointment of sole administrators and what is referred to as Caretaker or Management Committees.
These to a large extent are undemocratic especially the sole administrator system.
Their administration of local government has been least responsive even through they record success at breathing organization and efficiency services into local governments.
BHM 770 MODULE 1 The administrative structure was only modified by the 1988 civil service reforms and the Presidential System.
The single tier structure is still in vogue even though by 1984, the Dasuki Report on local government had recommended establishment of development area which was just for administrative purposes.
Functions have however remained more stable with primary education as the knotty problem area.
5.0 SUMMARY We give a summary of the unit as follows: 1.
Local government in Nigeria is a tier structure 2.
Leadership and political structure have taken on several forms as the Parliamentary system, the Presidential system, Sole administrator system and the Caretaker/Management Committee system.
3.
The Secretary was the chief executive of local government between 1976 up to the 1988 civil service reforms.
After this, the Local Government Chairman took total charge.
4.
The administrative structure of local governments have remained fairly stable with changes coming at the level of the changes in nomenclature of two Departments is 1988 to Personnel and Finance.
The Director of Personnel took effective charge of the functions of the administrative secretary when the latter became politically appointed.
5.
Functions of local governments have remained stable since the 1976 reform with only education serving as the knotty problem area.
The medical department has also changed to Primary Health Care Department and taken up enormous basic health activities.
ANSWER TO SELF ASSESSMENT EXERCISE 1 1.
To perform in a concentrated manner statutory public service functions 2.
Complete and self contained budgets 3.
Subject to State legislation 4.
Subordinate Councils created by them are for the purpose of administrative convenience and not a tier 5.
Should range between a population of 150,000-800,000 ANSWER TO SELF ASSESSMENT EXERCISE 2 - See structure under 3.2 BHM 770 MODULE 1 6.0 TUTOR-MARKED ASSIGNMENT Identify mandatory functions that are revenue raising and those that are service providing and those that are administrative?
7.0 REFERENCES/FURTHER READINGS J.H.
Price.
(1975).
Political Institutions of West Africa.
London: Hutchinson & Co. Publications.
A. Gboyega.
(1987).
Political Values and Local Government in Nigeria.
Malthouse Press Ltd. BHM 770 MODULE 1 UNIT 2 SOME BASIC CONCEPTS OF GOVERNMENT AND THEIR RELEVANCE TO LOCAL GOVERNMENT ADMINISTRATION CONTENTS 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objectives 3.0 Main Content 3.1 Democracy 3.2 Separation of Powers 3.3 The Rule of law 3.4 Fundamental Human Rights 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutor-Marked Assignment 7.0 References/Further Readings 1.0 INTRODUCTION This unit rounds up the course.
We seize this opportunity to take a look at some concepts of “Government” and their relevance to local government administration.
This paper was presented in 1988 to Chairman and Councillor of Local Government Councils as part of a Political Education Workshop organized by the Directorate for Social Mobilization.
In the paper the author discuss the concepts of democracy, separation of powers, fundamental human rights and the rule of law.
Such concepts are very relevant in understanding local government as a tier of government.
These are widely accepted concepts in government administration.
The understanding and application of such concepts is important for the student of local government administration.
More importantly will be the application of these concepts at the local level.
You may be reminded that you have come across the concept of separation of power already but further light is thrown on it here.
Note also that these four concepts are not just political but legal especially the last three.
2.0 OBJECTIVES At the end of this unit, you should be able to • define each of these four concepts • identify the principles or feature of each concept • apply these concepts to local governments.
BHM 770 MODULE 1 3.0 MAIN CONTENT 3.1 Democracy Democracy is widely accepted to refer to system of government which is representative of all people and interests within state or community, and open because it permits freedom of idea, allows people’ choice of leaders and programmes, and encourages criticism and comments.
The term ‘democracy’ is derived from two Greek words “mdeeamnoinsg” ‘ people’ and ‘Kratia’ signifying, ‘rule by or of’.
Thus it means ‘rule of or by the people’.
But the term ‘rule of the people’ conveys very little, because immediately the questions arise: who are the people and how o they rule?
In this contest we could refer to democracy as popular control, or control by the vast majority of the inhabitants of a country or community.
Perhaps to understand this proportion better we could refer to tfhaem o us definition of democracy by the late American President, Abraham Lincoln.
He once defined democracy as “government of the people, by the people, for the people”.
Let us now look at this definition more closely and relate it to its modern usage.
It is of course possible to have government ‘of the people’, because all governments need the support of the people to give it legitimate status.
The whole essence of election for example is that they enable electors to choose their representatives.
Yet even when elections are badly adnisdh o nestly conducted, the government that emerges still tends to describe itself as having support of the people.
The issue to be noted here is the importance of free and fair elections.
People that are freely and fairly elected, are more likely to be supported and trusted by the people than those who rigged themselves into office.
The legitimacy of many leadership is therefore dependent among other thins on how it gets into power.
Similarly, the idea of “government by the people” seems to be aimn p ortant proportion in modern times because the ‘people’ cannot actually ‘rule’ at least not the about 100 million Nigerian.
Hence, the people have to rule by means of their representatives.
The igdoevae r n mofe n t by the people was only possible in small Greek City-States where it was possible for all the citizens to meet together in one place to govern the state.
However, it is so some extent still desirable to have similar opportunities.
It is possible for example, for Chairman and Councillors to organize public forums in their various constituencies periodically to discuss BHM 770 MODULE 1 issues of common interest with the view to arriving at some consensus on priority areas.
This will encourage and promote participatory democracy.
It is particularly important now that there are no political parties that could have provided avenues for such direct participation.
The forum could also be used as a platform for explaining reasons for certain governmental decisions and appeals for co-operation and support.
This would create in the electorate a sense of belonging and give them the opportunity to make some input into the decision-making process.
The gap between the rulers and the ruled must be narrowed in the new dispensation.
A situation where one elected, representatives lose touch with electorates, just to surface when looking for re-election should not be allowed in our search for a new political culture.
The culture of apathy and cynism should also not be allowed to be permanent feature of our political culture.
Furthermore, the idea of ‘government of the people’ is government in the best interest of the people.
This brings us to the question of public accountability.
One of the major problems of our past leadership has been the question of probity and accountability.
Often times, people elected quickly abandoned their campaign promises and instead begin to promote individual or sectional interests to the detriment of the overall development of the area they are representing.
Some of them saw public offices as an instrument for personal enrichment and political or sectional patronage.
It must be appreciated that leadership is a public trust and must therefore be treated and respected as such.
Leadership must lead by example and public interest rather than personal or sectional interest must always guide their decision and actions.
Your election should be seen as a call to serve and not to rule.
You must all endeavour to have constant touch with your electorates to acquaint yourselves with their problems, aspirations and interests and to pursue same as you seek to serve them.
To sum up Lincoln’s definition of democracy therefore, we could say the government of the people really means government on behalf of the people, while government by the people really means representative government, and government for the people suggests that government should be carried on by persons of high principles.
BHM 770 MODULE 1 SELF ASSESSMENT EXERCISE 1 Identify 3 features of democracy.
SEPARATION OF POWERS Simply stated, separation of powers means that different kinds ogof v ernmental power are allocated to different organs or branches of government.
It means in effect the all the powers of government will not be concentrated in one person, or one group of persons, or one office, or one department.
Rather kinds of governmental powers will be held and exercised by different people in different branches of government.
Thus separation of powers means the allocation of legislative, executive and judicial powers respectively, to three different branches of government.
The essence of the doctrine is that, as a general rule, each branches of government is prohibited from exercising the powers of the other branches.
This is however, not an absolute rule.
Separation of powers does not confine the different branches exclusively to the power formally assigned by the constitution in all circumstances.
They at times perform roles outside their traditional jurisdiction.
Similarly, the doctrine does not preclude some control by one branch over the others.
The primary function of separation of powers is the prevention otyfr a nny and protection of individual liberty.
It does this by avoiding the concentration of too much power in the hands of a few, and by enabling checks or limits to places on the powers of government.
The assumption here is that if those who make the laws are also vested with the power of executing them, they could and probably would, manipulate their powers to advance personal; interests ad exempt themselves from the laws.
For the purpose of this discussion, we shall concentrate on LGoocvaelr n ment Administration.
Here there is separation of powers and some fusion as well.
The chairman and his Supervisory Councillors, Secretary, Heads oDfe p artments and other administrative and professional staff constitute the executive arm of the local government administration.
They are responsible for implementing council decisions as well as for the day to day running of the local government activities.
They can in addition initiate policies and programmes for council consideration and approval.
On the other hand, the chairman and the supervisory councilor together with the remaining councillors constitute the council (the legislative arm).
The chairman and the supervisory councillors therefore perform BHM 770 MODULE 1 both executive and legislative roles.
The council is responsible for the formulation of policies as well as ensuring the power execution of such policies including approval of all expenditures.
Although the secretaries are now the accounting officers of the councils, contrary to previous practice where the chairman, it is hoped that such secretaries should not create unnecessary bottlenecks for the councils.
Such a practice will no doubt handicap the speedy and smooth execution of council decisions.
It must be appreciated that once decisions are reached by councils, they become binding and must therefore be implemented by those concerned.
It is therefore clear from the above discussion that separation of powers is not absolute in the local government system as operated currently.
The chairman has power to appoint his supervisory councillors who are to be the political heads of the specialized departments of the local government and can therefore change them all at will.
However, for peaceful co-existence, the Chairman should not abuse his power because doing so could jeopardize the relationship between his and the council.
Similarly, although the council has the ultimate power of decision- making and the approval of budget and other sensitive policies.
It must be borne in mind that public rather than selfish or sectional interests should always guide their decisions.
Unnecessary antagonism to executive requirements and proposals will not be in the interest of the local government.
It must be pointed out here that although the councillors were elected to represent various areas and interests, they should not allow sectional interests, to ride the overall interest of the local government.
At the end of the day, the success or otherwise of the local government would depend on the type of policies formulated by the council and the manner in which they were implemented by the executive arms of government.
You must therefore works as a team irrespective of your various backgrounds, constituencies and interests.
Your policies, decisions, and actions must be seen by your electorate to be fair, equitable and just.
You should not spend, but also generate revenue for sustained growth and development of your local governments.
3.3 The Rule of Law The rule of Law recognizes that man as a human being entitled to request, rights and freedom which are his fundamental rights.
Ii infers that rules and their officials should not possess power which is unlimited and uncontrolled.
Similarly it acknowledges the supremacy of the ordinary court.
BHM 770 MODULE 1 The Rule of Law entails three basic principles which we suhnoduelrds ta nd and uphold we prepare to serve our communities.
First, the Rule of Law entails absolute supremacy of the law.
This means that holders of positions of authority should use it in accordance with the laws of the country.
There should be arbitrary or discretionary powers.
Fair play should always be the guiding principle.
We should therefore not abuse the powers vested in us.
We should treat everybody equally and not to use double standards for judgment or action.
Always bgeu id ed by rules and regulations of your establishment.
Secondly, Rule of Law implies equality before the law.
In essence, all men irrespectively of positions held are subjected to the ordinary law of the state and there should be no preferential treatment.
Laws made by the council are equally binding on the councillors and everybody else in the local government.
Thirdly, the Rule of Law implies the guarantee of fundamental rights of the individuals.
These rights are inherent that can only be curtailed by law.
The point of emphasis here is that as leaders you must respect the dignity of people and give honour to whom honour is due and don’t abuse your powers by encroaching on the fights of other less privilege people.
Remember, the electorates elected you to serve and represent them and not to treat them as second class citizens.
Social justice has no meaning in a situation where some of people break the law with impunity and go free while others are maltreated at the slightest breach of the law.
Justice demands that everybody should be treated equally without fear or favour.
The law enforcement agencies must therefore be up and doing so that people can maintain confidence in them.
As leaders, you must avoid creating a situation as if you are above the day.
3.4 Fundamental Human Rights The need to incorporate some of ‘Bill of Rights” in the Constitution of countries all over the world had arisen primarily as a result of competing claims between the individual and the state.
If on the one hinadnidv,i d uals are allowed absolute freedom of speech and action there would be chaos and anarchy (lawlessness).
On the other hand, if the state is allowed to exercise absolute powers, the result would be tyranny (reign of terror).
The problem thus becomes one of how to adjust these competing claims in the interest of peace, order and government in the state and political, social and economic advancement of the people of the state.
BHM 770 MODULE 1 The types of rights enjoyed by the citizen vary considerably from one sate to another.
These rights could however, be classified as follow.
1.
POLITICAL RIGHTS: - These are rights which entitle the adult citizen to vote and qualify for direct participation in the political process of the country.
Every adult citizen has thus the right to vote and be voted for.
Such a broad franchise is aimed at limiting the influence of privilege and to enlarge the opportunities of holding officers available in the state.
2.
CIVIL RIGHTS: - These are rights and privilege which protect the individual against interference in the private sphere of life.
These include right to life, freedom of the person, freedom of religion, freedom of expression and press and freedom of peaceful assembly and association.
As leaders you must seek to uphold and protect these rights of the individual.
You should also give room for constructive criticism and make amends where necessary.
3 SOCIAL RIGHTS: - These refer to those benefits and privileges which individual receive for consenting to be governed.
The three most important social rights are right to education, employment and property.
The first two are highly important and relevant to local governments.
In the past, primary education suffered a great deal.
As the foundation of education, the welfare of primary school teachers, class room facilitates and structures should be given the desired priority by all local governments.
Unemployment has also become a major problem in the country.
Effort should therefore be made by local government, to promote employment generation programme to give opportunities to the teaming unemployed youth in out midst.
By so doing, the right to property would also be upheld.
The major people are gainfully employed, the better their chances of owning property.
The direct labour system adopted by the state government and most local government should be maintained and encouraged.
In this way, the financial benefit accruing from such projects will be more equitably distributed.
SELF ASSESSMENT EXERCISE 2 1.
What are the three rights identified in the paper?
2.
Define each of them 4.0 CONCLUSION BHM 770 MODULE 1 The central theme in all the four concepts discussed is the protection of the rights of the individual against the likely excesses of the state or powerful individuals.
It emphasizes particularly democracy at the grassroots level.
As elected representatives of the people, it becomes apparent that their interests should be the important factor in ydoecuirs i on, policies and action.
You were elected to serve them and so you should have constant touch with the people and give them eevnecroyu r agement to feel as being part of the government.
By so doing, you would assist in creating a solid foundation for participatory democracy at the grassroots level.
With all hand on deck we shall together succeed in creating a conductive atmosphere for economic productivity, social integration, stability and a sound foundation for the the republic.
5.0 SUMMARY You must agree with me that this paper has been exciting.
Wsume m arise it as follows.
• Four concepts: democracy, separation of powers, fundamental human rights and rule of law has been treated in this paper.
• Democracy was defined from the point of view of Abraham Lincoln as government of the people, by the people and for the pLeeoapdleer.s h ip therefore is a public trust and part of democracy demands accountability.
• Separation of power deals with allocation of power among the three arms of government.
This takes place at local government where power is shared largely between the Executive and Legislative arm only • Rule of Law talks about check on the power of leaders and the fact that both the rulers and citizens must recognize and respect other’s rights.
Everybody therefore is subjected to the laws of a county.
So also at the local government level.
• Fundamental human rights refer to protection by government.
These rights could be political, civil and social.
If well guaranteed apnrodt e cted it will reduce lawlessness and tyranny.
ANSWER TO SELF ASSESSMENT EXERCISE 1 1.
Elections - People vote into office those to represent their interest.
2.
Constant dialogue between the rulers and the ruled (Feedback).
3.
Accountability - Political office as public trust – not to be abused BHM 770 MODULE 1 Leaders should deliver their own promises to the electorate or stand the risk of being voted out.
ANSWER TO SELF ASSESSMENT EXERCISE 2 They are – Political Rights 1.
Civil Rights 2.
Social Rights Political Rights - Right to vote and to be voted for.
This is another description of franchise.
Civil Rights - These are the basic individual rights of life, religion, conscience, property, peaceful assembly etc.
Social Rights - Rights or privileges enjoyed by individuals they consent to be overmanned.
Three most important ones are right to education, employment and property.
6.0 TUTOR-MARKED ASSIGNMENT What is the rule of law?
Discuss the major features with example from local government.
4.0 REFERENCES/FURTHER READINGS D. H. Hill.
(1974).
Democratic Theory and Local Government.
Great Britain: Allen & Unwin.
V. Ayeni K., Soremekun (eds).
(1988).
Nigeria’s Second Republic (Daily) Time Publications.
See especially Cha II and XI.
BHM 770 MODULE 1 UNIT 3 OVERVIEW OF LOCAL GOVERNMENT IN NIGERIA CONTENTS 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objectives 3.0 Main Content 3.1 History, Development and Structure of Local Government Since 1914 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutor-Marked Assignment 7.0 References/Further Readings 1.0 INTRODUCTION This unit is presenting an overview of Nigeria Local GSyosvteermn mase notn e of the round up presentation for this course.
It is called the Local Government Year Book of 1988.
The paper traces the history of local government very briefly from 1914 to 1998, almost the eve of the exit of the military.
One should tehxepne c t to see more of the exploits of the military with local government in Nigeria since they have dominated the political scene in Nigeria since 1990.
The landmarks in the paper are the policies of the colonial government especially with the Native Authority Ordinance of 1933, and the Native Authority Laws of 1950 and 1954 in the various regions.
Others are the reforms by the military on 1966, the Local Government Reform of 1976, Revenue Allocation Act of 1981, the Dasuki Committee Reform o19f 8 4, the 1991 and 1997 Decrees on Local Government and the various Constitutions and the local government systems.
As you go through this, flash back to some of the things you halarveea d y learnt on Nigerian Local Governments in the previous units.
This will also serve as a synthesis.
2.0 OBJECTIVES At the end of this, you should be able to do the following: • highlight the main developments in local government under the following: colonial government, military government and civilian government BHM 770 MODULE 1 • highlight the key features of the 1976 and 1984 Reforms • comment on the recurring local government creation in Nigeria • comment on the fluctuating revenue allocation to local governments.
3.0 MAIN CONTENT 3.1 History, Development and Structure of Local Government Since 1914 Although Nigeria was amalgamated in 1914, the first national legislation on local government administration was enacted two years later.
The Native Authority Ordinance, 1916, empowered the Governor-General, Sir Fredick Lugard, to appoint a Native Authority for any area for local administration.
This colonial legislation replaced all pre-colonial, indigenous system of local administration.
Such systems varied from the hierarchical emirate system of the north through the monarchy system of the west and the republican system of the east to the diffused systems of other areas.
However, because of necessity, the British could not do away entirely with the traditional authorities where they existed.
Instead, the colonial administration incorporated them into the new system of local administration.
Indirect rule, as the system was called, revolved around the traditional rulers who, alone or in concert with others, were defined as a native authority.
The Primary function of a Native Authority under this Ordinance was the maintenance of law and order.
Consequently, the Native Authorities were empowered to check or prohibit behaviour that the Colonial authorities considered offensive.
These include the manufacture and distribution of local liquors, the holding of drinking bouts, cultivation and supply of noxious plants and carrying of arms.
In addition, they had power to regulate the cutting of timber and to prevent water pollution, tax evasion and any conduct likely to disturb the peace.
They could also make it compulsory the people under their authority should report the outbreak of infections diseases or the presence of stolen goods in the community.
The focus of the Colonial Government on law and order at this time was understandable.
British colonial authority over Nigeria was an imposition.
Without a reliable system of enforcing its authority, the colonial enterprises would collapse.
Thus, the Native Authorities were subject to the directives of colonial Administrative Officers.
A Native Authorities was liable to a fine if it did nor carry out the instruction of an Administrative Officer.
By 1933, most of the Native Authorities had fairly effective Treasuries and native Courts.
Consequently, the native Authority Ordinance, 1933, extended the regulative powers of the BHM 770 MODULE 1 Native Authorities to cover the migration of people from, or innattoiv ea authority area, bush burning, movement of livestock, the registration of births and deaths and the cultivation of food crops.
In addition, the Native authorities could, subject to the approval of tGhoe v ernor, organize to provide public services and charge rates for their maintenance.
Native authorities that had the means, therefore, began to provide services to their people.
The Richards Constitution of 1946 restructured Nigeria into three regions which assumed responsibility for the reorganization of local governments.
Thus, the country abandoned a national local government system.
Exercising her autonomy over local government policy granted by the Richards Constitution, the Eastern Region set in motion tmhea c hinery for reforming the Native Authority system in 1948.
Trehpeo r t of the Eastern House of Assembly’s select Committee appoint to advise the Regional Government on the reform of local gcuolvmerinnamteedn t in the Passage of the Local Government Law, 1950.
TLhawe introduced a three-tier representative local government system in the Eastern Region.
Similarly, the Western Region adopted the representative local government system when it passed the Local Government Law, 1952 in the Northern Region also, the process of reforming the native authority system began in 1950 when the House of Assembly established aco mmission of inquiry into the native authority system.
The resultant Native Authority Law, 1954, however, made only moderate changes in the system of local government administration.
The adoption of the federal system in 1954 meant that each Region kept trying separately to revamp her system of local government administration in the face of severe shortcoming and criticism.
Tlahrge e r local authorities had ample financial resources, reasonable level of staffing and the capability to provide basic services.
Smaller authorities lacked adequate finance and quality personnel: therefore, they provide few services.
Because the regions themselves needed investment badly, they could not affect to give grants at a level twhoatu l d change positively the finance of the local authorities.
The military take-over of political power in 1966 led to radical changes in the system of local government administration in the regions and the states that later replaces them.
The initial reforms focused mainly on correcting the political abuses perpetrated by local officials.
Therefore, the local constabulary, courts and prison were taken over and integrated into the national police, judicial and prison services.
In 1967, following the creation of twelve state out of the four regions.
All the states began to carry out reforms of their local government system.
The six northern BHM 770 MODULE 1 states expanded the scope for popular participation in local government administration.
The southern states also tried new measures to improve their system of local governance.
The East Central, South Eastern, Rivers and Mid-West States adopted system of local administration (Development Administration) which merely deconcentrated powers of the state government to the localities.
Under this system of deconcentration, It was the Resident or Divisional Officer who represented the state government in the locality that was vested with the powers of a local government.
He consulted and often acted on the advise of a local representative council but he could also ignore it.
The Western State adopted the Council Manager system under which the Council confined its role to policy formulation only but appointed a Manager for day-to-day management.
These reforms did not, however, effectively address the most fundamental problems of the local authorities which was poverty.
This was tackled by the 1976 local government reform.
The 1976 reform was remarkable for many reasons.
It was initiated and coordinated by the Federal Government.
From the national consultations carried out at various levels, the Government produced a document that spelt out the reform philosophy – the Guidelines for Local Government Reform.
All the states edicts on local government had to conform to the guidelines.
Therefore, a national system of local government administration was estores.
Consequently, all local governments in the country had a common structure, sources of revenue and personnel management system.
The new system of local government administration was democratic.
Each local government council was the local authority for its area and, at least, seventy-five per cent of its members were elected, while the rest were made up of nominated members.
The councillors elected their chairman subject to the approval of the state governor.
Supervisory councillors were elected from among the councillors who served as the political heads of departments of the local government.
Together with the chairman and at least two elected members, they formed the finance and General Purpose Committee of the local government.
This was the coordinating committee or cabinet of the local government council.
However, the reform designated the local government’s secretary as the Chief executive officers of the local government.
Even more significant, the reform set out to establish local government as an effective third-tier government, in particular, since Nigerians perceive government as the most important agent of development, local governments should effectively play a developmental role.
This goal shaped key aspects of the reform.
It meant that the local governments had to have a definite role defined for them by law that was respected by BHM 770 MODULE 1 higher tiers of government.
The implied autonomy of local governments would be allowed if it was not backed by adequate financial resources, legislative authority and competent personnel to carry out their functions.
Thus, the responsibility for local governance was placed on the elected council.
The 1976 Local Government Edicts of the sctoanteta i ned a mandatory list that was immediately developed to lgoocvael rn ments and permissive list to be developed to them as they acquire the financial and other capabilities to carry them out.
The Government made an attempt to improve the staffing of lgoocvael rn ments through the establishment of a Local Government Service Board.
Its main duty was to recruit qualified staff for the lgoocvael rn ments and to deploy them appropriately.
The establishment of the Local Government Service Board which recruited the senior staff olofc al government unifies each state’s local government services.
A senior staff in the Unified Local Government Service could be transferred to any local government where he or she was needed.
The advantage to the local governments was obvious.
The system ensured that each local government received a reasonable number of qualified staff.
To the staff, on the other hand, the Board guaranteed job security, brighter promotion prospects and protection against arbitrary termination of appointment.
The personnel management aspects of the reform were attractive but not inadequate to ensure that the local governments had all the qualified staff that they needed.
The Government had to go further to iqnudaulicfeie d people to go into local government service by introducing equal salaries for equivalent positions in the three tiers of government.
With pay parity, local government service ceased to be viewed anse c essarily inferior.
In addition, in 1979, the Federal Government started training programmes for local government staff at the Ahmadu Bello University, Zaria, Obafemi Awolowo University, Ile-Ife, and University of Nigeria, Nsukka, to boost the quality of local government staff in these institutions.
To enhance local governments’ manpower development, one per cent of the local governments’ allocation from the Federation Account is deducted at source into a training fund administered by the Local Government Service Commission, as it is now known.
The reform also tries to revamp the finance of the local governments.
First, all the debts of the local governments were written off to give them a clean financial slate to take off from.
Second, the government decided that the local governments in each state should receive statutory allocations from their revenue and from the Federation Account.
I1n9 7 6, the Federal Government allocated N250 million top the local governments to start off the scheme.
Similar huge sums were allocated BHM 770 MODULE 1 experimentally from the Federation Accounts until 1981 when the Revenue Allocation Act, 1981 provided that the allocation should be ten per cent respectively of the Federation Account and a state’s total revenue.
Traditional rulers were organized into an Emirate or traditional Council under the reform.
The law empowered them to advise the local government councils or the state government on matters pertaining to local governance.
Religion, arts, and culture, chieftaincy and customs with their areas.
Where it was the tradition, they could also assists with assessment and collection of local taxes.
The goal; was to shield the traditional rulers from the unpleasant effects of imminent party politics while at the same time guaranteeing that they had respectable involvement in local affairs.
For a while, these reforms put local government administration in Nigeria on a sound footing.
All the main features of the 1976 reform, therefore, were incorporated into the 1976 Constitution which guaranteed a system of democratically elected local governments and provided for the statutory allocation of revenue to the local governments.
The list of functions of the local government was written into the Constitution.
During the second republic (1979-1983), however, many of the features of the 1976 reform were violated because of the pressure of party politics.
The state government suspended the elected local governments that were already in office when they were elected.
They replaced them with their nominees and created new local governments without, in many cases, following the due processes of the law.
Consequently, the number of local governments rose dramatically from 301 to over 900.
The state governments also did not regularly transfer ten per cent of their revenues to their local government.
This was due to their own impoverishment as to their willful desire not to make transfers.
Many state governments even encroached on the revenue resources of the local governments by taking over taxes or executing revenue yielding projects that the law had made exclusive to local governments.
Because of these violations of what appeared to be a national consensus on local government administration, the Federal Military Government appointed a 20-man Committee to review the system of local government administration after sacking the elected politicians of the second republic.
In the meantime it abolished all the new local governments created during the second republic.
The committee on the Review of Local Government Administration in Nigeria headed by Alhaja Ibrahim Dasuki in its report affirmed the soundness of the 1976 BHM 770 MODULE 1 reform.
In the Committee’s view, whatever problems there were arose from the attitudes and behaviour of the operators of the system.
Therefore, its major recommendations concerned how to restore tmhea in features of the 1976 reform that had been violated.
The committee endorsed the main functions assigned to local governments in 1976 but recommended that, given the resources available, local governments should concentrate their efforts on a limited range of basic services.
It frowned on state governments’ encroachment on revenue sources olofc al governments and denounced their failure to make statutory contributions to their local governments.
Acting on these recommendations, the government began reforms that initially concentrated on correcting past abuses.
The government started to transfer allocations from the Federation Account directly to the local governments and states were enjoined to desist from encroachment upon the revenue sources of local governments.
To enhance the autonomy of local governments, in 1988 the Federal Military Government announced the abolition of the States’ Ministries of Local Government.
They were replaced by a Department of Local Government in the Governor’s offices.
In the same year, the CSeivrvili c e Reform was extended to local government.
This reform designated the chairman as his local government’s chief executive and accounting officer.
The local government administration was restructured into six department of coordinate status.
This further enhanced the authority of elected officials compared to the local government’s secretary whose role and authority became correspondingly reduced.
Before then, in 1987, the Federal Government has asked all state governments to establish a Pensions Fund and tsou p port a Board to administer it to ensure that staff pensions could be paid on time.
In June 1991, the Local Government (Basic Constitutional and Transitional Provisions) (Amendment) (No.23) Decree extended the presidential system to local government administration.
The local government’s council acquired full autonomy to approve the local budget and to pass bye-laws.
Thus, the local governments’ autonomy was further enhanced.
The financial autonomy of the local governments was underscored by a circular from the Chief of General Staff iAnu gust, 1992 (Ref.
No.
VP/925/Vol.
II) which removed the spending limits above which the local governments needed to obtain the approval of the authorities.
The changes were reinforced by enhanced revenue allocations from the Federation Account.
In 1990, the allocation to local government was increased from 10% to 15%.
This was further raised to 20% in 1992.
BHM 770 MODULE 1 Therefore, local governments not only had expanded autonomy, they also gained substantially bigger revenues.
To ensure that citizen derived full benefits for the enhanced revenue allocations, the government tried to revamp the systems of internal checks and balances inherent in the presidential system.
An Audit Alarm System was introduced with the application of the civil service reforms to local government administration.
In addition, each state appointed an Auditor-General of Local Government to carry out regular audit of local governments’ accounts to deter and detect abuses.
However, the government also eroded some of the benefits from these policies by substantially increasing the number of local governments from 301 to 449 in 1989 and 589 in 1991.
The exuberance of some local government chairmen in exercising their newly won autonomy led to flagrant violations of the system of checks and balances and financial abuse.
This raised doubts about the wisdom of granting them so much autonomy and provoked fresh restrictions on the powers of local governments.
In 1995, new guidelines were issued that required local governments to submit to stricter control of the state governments as in earlier years.
The inspectorate role of the state governments was also enhanced to check abuses.
Since most abuses came in the wake of the introduction of the presidential system to local government administration, that was abandoned for the council form adopted in 1976.
1997 which regulates the operation of the local governments has once again fused the council and executive.
Consequently, Local Government Chairmen have again appointed Supervisory Councillors from among elected councillors to provide political leadership to the Local Governments’ departments.
However, the decree preserves the legislative autonomy of the local Governments to make appropriate laws.
The Federal Government’s initial role of coordinating local government reforms has progressively expanded because of the inertia of the states.
Because all reforms since 1976 have been initiated by the Federal Governments, It became necessary to upgrade the administrative machinery for coordinating local reform policies.
Therefore, in 1993, the Federal Government established the Ministry of States and Local Government Affairs to manage inter governmental relations.
In 1995, it was transformed into the State and Local Government Affairs Office and moved to the Presidency.
It is the governments’ main agency for monitoring developments in local government administration, designing necessary reforms and steering the, through the various stages of approval at the local, state and federal levels.
Also, in 1995, the Federal Military Government appointed a committee on the creation of States and Local Governments on the BHM 770 MODULE 1 recommendation of the Constitutional Conference of 1994-95.
Following receipt of the recommendations, the government again increased the number of local governments to 774.
With the revenue to local governments still at 20% of the Federation Account, the greatest challenges facing them as we approach the Twenty-First Century are inadequate finances and low executive capacity.
SELF ASSESSMENT EXERCISE 1 List 5 major epochs or reform of local governments in Nigerian local government system since independence.
SELF ASSESSMENT EXERCISE 2 1.
When were local governments first created on a native authority basis 2.
What have been the changes since then?
4.0 CONCLUSION Local governments have gone through difficult phases and reforms in Nigeria.
There was the colonial phase which was governed by tchoelo nial ordinance, the decolonization phase when the regime becomes self governing enough to come out with their Native authority Laws, the major changes after the first military take over of 1966 (which introduced a system of development administration and development areas.)
The 1976 Reform which introduced modern local governments in Nigeria, the Revenue Allocation Formula in 1981 and subsequent reviews, the extension of the civil service reforms into local governments, the Presidential reforms in local government, the various transition decrees on local governments (1991 and 1997), and the third tier status of local governments spelt out by the 1979, 89 acnodn st i t9u9ti o n. These are real landmarks that can be used to write the history, structure and development of local government in Nigeria.
Major changes in local government administration have been more of the handiwork of tmheil it ary especially with the local government Reform of 1976.
However, the problems of local governments and its third tier status have remained those of proliferation of these entities their fcianpaanbciilaitli e s the quality of leadership and administration in these councils.
BHM 770 MODULE 1 5.0 SUMMARY We can sumarise the unit or paper as follows: a) Local governments started as native authorities under colonial rule.
b) The use to which local government was initially put was “extractive” i.e.
law and order institution and collection of taxes and revenues.
c) Local governments started tasting some democratization when the regions started experiencing some self government between 1950 and 1956 leading to the enactment of various native authority laws in the regions.
d) The military take over of 1966 effected serious changes in the federal structure as the Federal government abrogated the native authority police and prisons and split the regions into 12 states to reduce the dominance of traditional authority and the sphere of influence of the former regions.
e) The 1976 Reform brought the idea of third tier and modern local governments.
The councils were democratized and local governments were guaranteed funding for the provision of basic service to communities.
The 1979 constitution guaranteed the third tier status of local governments for the first time.
f) Local government could not function as normal councils between 1979-83 because the elected councils were just replaced by caretaker committees which were deprived of funds.
Worse still, state governments were interested in proliferating local governments.
g) The other Reforms of the eighties were invigorating the democratic and administrative capacities of local government.
h) In 1991, the Presidential system of local government was first introduced into the Nigeria local government system.
i) Between 1993-1998, local governments operated under decree.
Elections were conducted from time to time as test run for transition.
ANSWER TO SELF ASSESSMENT EXERCISE 1 1.
The 1966 coup and the dismantling and take over of the native authority policies and prison 2.
The 1976 Reform 3.
The Dasuki Reform of 1984 4.
The Application of the Civil Service Reform to Local Government (1988) 5.
The Presidential Reform of 1991 BHM 770 MODULE 1 ANSWER TO SELF ASSESSMENT EXERCISE 2 1.
1976 - 301 local governments 2.
1989 - 449 local governments 3.
1991 - 589 local governments 4.
1996 - 774 local governments 6.0 TUTOR-MARKED ASSIGNMENT What were the major contributions of the military to local government between 1984-1991 7.0 REFERENCES/FURTHER READINGS J. H. Price.
(1975).
Political Institutions of West Africa.
LondonH: u tchinson and Co. Pub Ltd. A. Gboyega.
(1987).
Political Valves and Local Government in Nigeria.
Malthouse Press Ltd. G. Orewa & J.B Adewunmi.
(1983).
Local Government in NigeriaB.
e nin: The Changing Phase Benin: Ethiope Pub.
Co.
Guideline for Local Government Reforms in Nigeria.
(1976).
Kaduna: Government Printer.
BHM 770 MODULE 1 UNIT 4 LOCAL GOVERNMENT FINANCE (REVENUE SOURCES) CONTENTS 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objectives 3.0 Main Content 3.1 Sources of Local Government Revenue 3.1.1 Internal Sources 1.
Property Tax 2.
Under Charges 3.
Sales Tax 4.
General/Administrative Revenues 3.1.2 External Sources 1.
External Sources 2.
Loans 3.1.3 Revenue Patterns in Nigerian Local Government (Summary) 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutor-Marked Assignment 7.0 References/Further Readings 1.0 INTRODUCTION Local government needs adequate funding to service the functions assigned to it by the central government.
You have been introduced to these functions.
Remember that those functions are classified into two viz: Mandatory and Government.
The Mandatory ones are said to be those that have revenue sources attached to them.
In short, these functions have to do with revenue generation.
The Concurrent functions are more or less social functions which do not have revenue attached to them and which local governments require a lot of funds to carry out.
They are in a lot of cases heavily subsidised and are not profit oriented as such.
Proper funding is therefore required to perform such functions.
Local government funds are raised in different ways.
This unit looks at what the sources of such funds (revenue) are the role of both central and local government in such funding arrangement and the problems associated with such arrangements.
In doing this, examples will be cited from a few countries but with greater emphasis in Nigeria.
BHM 770 MODULE 1 2.0 OBJECTIVES At the end of this unit, you should be able to: • identify both internal and external sources of local government revenue • compare both sources in terms of contribution and reliability • identify the viable internal sources of local government revenue • begin to appreciate why local government in some countries are more buoyant and development oriented than in others • examine the problems of internal sources of local government revenue.
3.0 MAIN CONTENT 3.1 Sources of Local Government Revenue Local governments derive their revenues from two major sources viz internal and external sources.
Internal sources are the revenue iltoecmals g overnments have control over.
External sources come from grants and loans.
Let us take each of these sources one by one.
3.1.1 Internal Sources Internal sources or local revenues are those within the tax jurisdiction of local government.
As pointed out earlier such jurisdictions are constitutional in some systems and conventional on others.
The Nigerian case specifies both function and tax jurisdictions in the cTohnessteit u tairoen .
a lso tax laws to support revenue generation.
You may also recollect that the Fourth Schedule of the Nigerian Constitution specifies the functions of local government in which our earlier analysis found out that a lot of these exclusive (mandatory) functions have revenue sources attached to them.
Generally local government internal revenue can be classified as: Local tax revenues, user charges and administrative revenues.
The dominant and most promising of this three is tax revenue.
The principles of taxation are efficiency, equity and revenue productivity.
Tax administration may be much easier to manage at the city or urban level than the rural.
Some taxes are however suitable for urban lgoocvael rn ment than rural ones.
These include sales tax, and tax opnro p erty.
In rural areas, community taxes may be very suitable.
Note generally that the tax system or structure is such that relates to either person, property or transactions.
This is why we talk of community tax and personal income tax (personal) property tax (property tenement) and BHM 770 MODULE 1 sales tax (transactions).
These are the types of taxes paramount at the local government level.
You should remember the point made that the tax on property and transactions are more applicable for urban local governments.
(However in rural local governments taxes on transactions are evident in local markets, specially) in bulk purchases of local commodities like grains.
Let us look at some of those taxes more closely.
1.
Property Tax Property tax is a highly productive tax in terms of revenue.
Property taxation remains the most general kind of local tax throughout the world, developed and underdeveloped.
Local Governments in Canada and Great Britain depend on it.
It is levied in Ghana, the Middle East and In Tanzania.
Local Governments in the United States derive about 8% of their locally raised revenue from this source.
Several urban local governments in Nigeria, Lagos being in the forefront, collect property taxes.
The types of urban property taxes are discernable, namely; Site Value Tax on vacant or unimproved vacant land; (tenement).
A tax on urban housing or building not subject to the site tax.
Despite the promising nature of this tax, it is bedeviled with problems.
The problems are largely administrative, technical and political.
Technically, there is the problem of valuation i.e.
good data and classification of property and putting in place, machinery for its collection.
Part of this machinery for collection is the administrative problem of attitude and efficiency of revenue collection at the local government level.
Another problem are is the strong political forces opposed to property rating, since the owners of the property are those with political connection.
Furthermore, this tax has become a futile exercise in Nigeria for example, to rate property in rural areas.
While the yardstick may be mundane and unscientific, it at the same time an unusual tax to the rural dweller.
(This is why we say it is an urban tax.
2.
User Charges Most of the exclusive and concurrent functions assigned to local government as earlier noted should be considered as sources of revenues.
These could be classified as user charges and administrative or general revenues, They involve the sale of economic goods or resources by the government, for a specific charge or price.
An example is charges made for the position of markets and motor parka.
These BHM 770 MODULE 1 publicly produced services having the characteristics of private goods may be financed according to the benefit principle.
This means that the services with high welfare aspects such as education and health cannot fall into the category as they cannot be financed by user charges.
Note the funds for such services by more in the external sources.
3.
General/Administrative Revenues Local Government powers over revenue are largely residual.
The case cited below is the Nigerian case.
In Nigeria these revenue items are codified under the following local government revenue heads: 1000 Taxes 1002 Rates 1003 Local Licenses, fees and fines 1004 Earnings from commercial undertaking 1005 Rent in Local Government Property 1006 Internal payments and dividends.
Part of what has been treated under Property tax and user charges fall under 1001 and 1004 respectively.
In Nigeria local governments, Heads 1003 – 1004 continue the mainstay of local government revenue.
A few revenue items like markets and motor parks, licenses and fees oterl e vision and radio, have shown to be visible sources if well handled.
In the same vein and as discussed earlier, property rates have the tendency to be the more preferred and promising in urban areas, despite its own problems.
On the other hand, most items of internal revenue in Nigeria lgoocvael rn ments are ‘dry’ and inelastic.
This means that the administrative cost of collecting them could exceed the benefits.
Furthermore, are v enue head like Head 1003 alone covers a range of items or subhead of 101 items.
(These may include dog license, pet licenses, bliicceyncslee a nd other minor permits which may add up to little).
In the lights of the nature of these internal sources, only urban areas are likely to raise any reasonable percentage of their revenues.
Hardly do rural governments in Nigeria go beyond the 10% mark in rgeevneenruatei o n as percentage of total local government revenue.
The modal distribution may even be less than 5% urban local government mgeanye r ate up to 15-20%.
Even then some urban ones do not differ from rural local governments.
Revenue effort is rather low.
The survival of local governments rest largely with external sources.
BHM 770 MODULE 1 SELF ASSESSMENT EXERCISE 1 List the General/Administrative Revenues of Local Government.
Situate both Property and User Charges under these.
3.1.2 External Sources 1.
Grants The major external source available to local government is generally classified as grants.
(As pointed out earlier, external sources are the mainstay of most local governments in developimg countries).
There are two basic types of grants: 1. general revenue or unconditional grants; 2. specific or conditional grants; As the name suggests, the first is a grant to aid local governments in general while second is tied to specific functions, services, programmes or projects.
General revenue grants when consistent and stable or even increasing, enables local government to plan their budgets effectively.
In Nigeria, for example, this is referred to as statutory allocation (from the Federation account).
This proportion for sharing grants to local governments has changed overtime.
It has changed from 10 – 20% in the past.
Presently, local governments enjoy 20% of revenue accruing from the Federation Account as its share of statutory allocation while state governments are to pay to local government 10% of their own internally generated revenue.
Such revenues are supposed to fund more especially the concurrent functions of local government and very importantly personnel and overhead costs.
Without such, local government in Nigeria would have been on-existent especially as a third tier, Specific grants were a prominent phenomena in the Nigerian local government system up till 1979.
Much of these were given by the colonial government, the regional government and the federal and state governments.
They were either in form of marching grants, equalization grants or “specific grants”.
Marching grants were motivational while specific grants were for special projects of which the federal or state government had interest e.g.
the Universal Primary Education of the mid-seventies.
Note that the grants system is a main feature of local governments in advanced countries too.
BHM 770 MODULE 1 Normally, the arguments in favour of grants are: a) to augment the resources of local authorities b) to meet the exceptional needs or the limited means of particular areas; c) to assist central control of particular services, and d) to influence aggregate local government expenditure as part of the process of controlling the national economy.
2.
Loans Borrowing is external to local governments and in doing so, loans need to be guaranteed.
In the Nigerian case, the state edicts make the state government as the guarantor.
Therefore local governments do not go into loan transactions for capital projects with state approval.
This may not however apply to overdraft especially that their statutory allocation goes straight into their account for now.
Local governments every where need credit.
1. to provide infrastructure services such as health, road, etc 2. for productive investments.
As pointed out, local governments in Nigeria have access to loan funds largely for the latter.
Urban local governments require such loan than rural ones.
Most of such loans in the rural areas will go into construction or expansion and motor parks or mass transit ventures and even rural small scale ventures.
In some countries, these could be urban development bank or ad e velopment bank which can provide loans for local government e.g.
in India.
3.1.3 Revenue Patterns in Nigerian Local Government (Summary) The following table shows the revenue profile of local governments in terms of the internal and external sources discussed above.
You can now compare the relationship between these two sources at a glance.
BHM 770 MODULE 1 Table 1: Revenue Sources of Local Government in the Federation, 1993 – 1997 Distribution % % % % % SOURCES 1003 1994 1995 1996 1997 Federal Account 92.2 90.1 73.2 59.2 1997 State Allocation 1.3 2.4 2.6 2.9 2.2 Viable Added 0.0 0.0 14.6 19.1 24.3 Tax 5.2 6.3 8.6 8.5 8.1 Internal Sources 1.3 1.3 1.0 4.0 0.7 Others Total 100.0 100.0 100.0 100.0 100.0 Source: Compiled from CBN Annual Report & Statement of Accounts, 1997, P.7.
The point made about internal revenue structure is succinctly shown by the distributions.
Local Government altogether do not raise up to 10% of their revenues.
With the introduction of the Value Added Tax it has become the second most important external sources of revenue to local government.
The state government contribution has in almost all cases fallen behind that of local effort.
This has also been a source of worry for lgoocvael rn ment finances because state allocation is supposed to register a higher level than this.
There has been always accumulation of state government shortchanging local government while some have even refused to contribute.
SELF ASSESSMENT EXERCISE 2 Fill in the blank spaces.
a) External sources of local government revenue can come from--------------- and----------------- b) Grants received in respect of taking REWARDS can be referred to as ------------------------ grants.
c) Another name for statutory allocation to local government (in Nigeria) is--------------- grant.
d) Loans are authorized for--------------------------projects.
4.0 CONCLUSION You may agree with me that local governments are also busy levels of government that finance projects and services like other tiers of government.
Their functions even though primary attract a lot of BHM 770 MODULE 1 financial resources.
On their own, they cannot generate much funds.
Their sources of revenue are not as attractive as higher governments.
The personnel and machinery for revenue collection are not sophisticated.
The tax or wealth of local society is very low athnedr e fore there is a limit to which this can be stretched.
Lgoovcearln ments therefore generate a minute package of their total revenue.
In Nigeria, their viability is threatened by their low internal revenue base.
External sources in form of grant such as statutory allocation and other forms of grants constitute the mainstay of their functions.
In some cases they constitute more than 95% of their revenue.
In advanced countries they could contribute as much as 60%.
Loans are also available to local governments but these are hneigghlelyc te d and directed at activities that are profit generating rather than of a primarily social service nature.
You can therefore see that local governments are not viable as other levels of government because their finances may not be able to support their operations and they cannot stand on their own financially.
5.0 SUMMARY What we have tried to put across so far can be summarized as follows: 1.
Finance is the nerve centre of local government activity.
Functions can only be meaningful if appropriate financial devolution is made.
2.
Local government derive their finances from two sources viz.
internal and external sources.
3.
Internal sources include tax, rates, fines, local licenses, commercial undertakings and rent or local government property.
4.
The most reliable local sources are property tax, user charge, and when possible sales tax.
5.
External sources are made up of grants, both general and specific.
In Nigeria, statutory allocation is an example of general grant.
6.
External source provides the more reliable sources of funding for local government sometimes accounting for 90 – 95% of total finance.
7.
Loan are available but tied to capital projects and investments of an economic nature.
BHM 770 MODULE 1 ANSWER TO SELF ASSESSMENT EXERCISE 1 1.
Taxes 2.
Rates 3.
Local Licenses, fees and fines 4.
Earnings from Commercial Undertakings 5.
Rent on Local Government Property.
6.
Interest Payment on Dividends.
Property and User Charges can be situated under Nos.
1 – 4 above.
(Note these are serial numbers.
The code for each head is different).
ANSWER TO SELF ASSESSMENT EXERCISE 2 a) grants and loans b) specific grants c) general grant d) capital 6.0 TUTOR MARKED ASSIGNEMENT What is Property Tax or Rate?
Why is it a promising source of local government internal source of revenue?
What are the problems with Property tax?
7.0 REFERENCES/FURTHER READINGS A. Y. Aliyu (ed).
The Role of Local Government in Social Political and Economic Development in Nigeria, 1976 – 79 (Published by Department of Local Govt.
Studies, A.B.U.
Zaria) See especially pp.
165 – 175.
Adedeji, A & Rowlands I: (eds).
(1999).
(Local Government Finance in Nigeria: Problems & Prospects.
Nigeria, Ile-Ife: University of Ife Press M. P. Barber.
(1974).
Local Government.
Macdonald & Evans Ltd. See specially Pp.
121 – 123.
BHM 770 MODULE 1 UNIT 5 MANAGEMENT OF LOCAL GOVERNMENT FINANCE CONTENTS 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objectives 3.0 Main Content 3.1 Expenditure Pattern in Local Government 3.2 The Local Government Budget 3.2.1 Purpose and Objectives of Budgets 3.2.2 Procedure for Preparing Annual Estimate in Local Governments 3.2.3 The Budget Document 3.3 Expenditure Control and Accountability 3.3.1 Audit 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutor-Marked Assignment 7.0 References/Further Readings 1.0 INTRODUCTION In the outgoing unit you were introduced to the sources of lgoocvael rn ment revenue.
The whole gamut of local government includes revenue generation, expenditure accountability and perhaps auditing.
Because this is an introduction to local government administration, we can only take both revenue and expenditure aspects.
A little bacitc o u onft a bility will also come into focus in the expenditure aspect.
This unit identifies which services attract expenditure by local governments, the process of arriving at the decision to aeuxptheonrdizitiunrge (budget) and the control of expenditure itself.
The issue of accountability will also feature as it is inseparable from expenditure.
At the end of the unit, you will also be able to appreciate the financial relationships between some key actors of the local government.
2.0 OBJECTIVES By the time you go through this unit, you should be able to do tfhoell o wing: • differentia what major items local governments spend money on • describe the administrative political process involved in budgeting BHM 770 MODULE 1 • identify the major sources of expenditure control in local government • describe the financial relationship between principal actors in local government.
3.0 MAIN CONTENT 3.1 Expenditure Patterns in Local Government Local government performs basic functions.
The services delivered by local governments are based on these functions.
A good source to appreciate the pattern of expenditure and services is the local government estimates (budget).
The estimate itself is based on the Financial Memoranda (FM) for local governments.
(At the eve of independence most Anglophone countries had an FM bequeathed to them by the retreating colonialists).
The FM provides guidelines for budgeting expenditure control and accounting framework for local government.
An estimate covers both revenue and expenditure patterns of local government.
Under expenditures, two types are considered viz: recurrent and capital expenditures, recurrent expenditures are expenditures on services and structure that continue to feature in loc al government administration from year to year.
Examples of this are personnel costs (salaries, allowances, etc of works) and overhead costs (maintenance of vehicles, stationeries, telephones & postal services, etc).
Capital projects are new or on-going projects or purchases that will require fresh capital outlays and which could last over a period of time.
Examples of these are infrastructures like boreholes, construction of roads, fertilizer procurement, vehicle purchase, etc.
In the Nigerian local government system, recurrent expenditure ranges from head 2001 – 2013 (i.e.
13 items).
They include office of tchhea i rman, office of the secretary, the council, all the 6 departments, traditional rulers (where applicable) miscellaneous, contributions to local government and transfer to reserve funds.
In each case, they include personnel costs and overhead costs for each of these units.
Capital expenditure is much more elaborate because it covers projects, purchases and services.
Normally these are also based on the units considered under the recurrent expenditure items especially the departmental units.
Moreover, capital expenditures are divided into a number of sections namely: economic, social services sector, area development sector, administration sector and “repayment of capital loans” sector.
BHM 770 MODULE 1 The type of expenditure items under these sectors are stated bbreileofwly: 1.
Economic Sector - e.g.
Agric and rural development, livestock, forestry, fisheries, manufacturing, rural electrification, etc.
2.
Area Development Sector - Water resources and water supply, environment, sewage and drainage, town and country planning, community development.
3.
Administration Sector - General Administration (Office building) Staff housing, workshops, etc.
4.
Social Sector - This includes, Health, Education, Social Welfare.
A breakdown of these into projects will make for better appreciation of the type of projects local governments engage in.
Under L(wivheisctho cisk u nder the Economic Sector) a capital estimate may include: 1.
Fencing of cattle market - N485,000 2.
Special purchase of vet, dogs - N300,000 3.
Construction of 15 No.
slaughter - N435,000 at various locations Under social services sector, activities or projects in the Primary Health Care Department may include: 1.
Construction of health clinic - N700,000 2.
Construction of VIP latrines - N180,000 3.
Construction of 5 refuse collection bins - N200,000.
These are the types of expenditures local government engage in.
Larger expenditure could be in the areas of construction of clinics or roads (which may run into millions).
Some projects can be as small as BHM 770 MODULE 1 N65,000 (as in purchase of chemicals for a semi-urban local government).
We can however say that the type of expenditure and the amount expanded depend on the size of the local government, the location (either urban or rural), the complexity of the job and as in community development, the contribution to be made by the community.
Note also that in local governments, those projects are contracted out.
You may now begin to appreciate that expenditure and expenditure items in local governments especially services are rather mundane and basic and therefore any tendency for corruption or mismanagement is capable of denying local communities appropriate and adequate services.
SELF ASSESSMENT EXERCISE 1 State the four main sectors of capital expenditure budget plan in local governments (in Nigeria) giving two examples inn each case.
3.2 The Local Government Budget The local government budget is an instrument of expenditure control.
It is like a plan of action for a given period of time in local governments, normally for a period of a year.
It contains the statement of revenue and expenditure to be undertaken by the local government over a period.
According to the Committee on budgeting of the Municipal Officers Association (in the USA) a budget is.
A comprehensive plan, expressed in financial terms by which an operating program is effective for a given period of time which includes estimates of (a) the services, activities and projects comprising the programs, (b) the resultant expenditure requirements, and (c) the resources usable for their support.
This definition captures what has been said earlier that the budget contains the expenditure items and the sources of funds to prosecute such items within a given period and we may add, with some given standards.
Nigerian local governments prepare budgets (popularly referred to as estimates because of the lack of details and input required of budgets).
These estimates serve a function by serving as a guide for incurring expenditure at the local government level (management) planning legislation and control.
BHM 770 MODULE 1 3.2.1 Purpose and Objectives Of Budgets These can be briefly stated as follows: 1.
To provide a financial plan of action – Estimates are actually the financial objectives of the local government for the year including all the activities.
2.
To promote legal authority for incurring expenditure.
Every estimate must be formally approved i.e.
a legal sanction.
For every expenditure provision must be made and approved.
3.
To provide a mechanism for ensuring that adequate controls are maintained over expenditure and revenues.
This is because local government accounting system is directly related to the heads and subheads in the estimate, and therefore the estimate will ensure that no amount committed to the head or subheads iosv e rspent or illegally spent.
4.
To establish the financial position of the local government.
Estimates should be able to tell us such position at the beginning and at the end of the year.
3.2.2 Procedure For Preparing Annual Estimates In Local Governments Estimates are based on sound information or data generated either by local government officials or the political actors or the demands of the local community.
Local government staff are supposed to generate empirical and more professional data base on local governments and the demands of the community sometimes through their field or extension workers.
These types of information network play an important role in the type and quality of estimates and plans that come out of lgoocvael rn ments.
One other reason why budgets are referred to as estimates in the Nigerian setting is that such data-base is not present and even where available, the plans and budgets do not depend so much on such but the subjective preferences of politicians and officials.
Procedure The Nigerian experience is cited here 1.
The budget process begins with a call circular by the executive to the treasurer, calling for preparation of estimate for the ensuring year.
In a lot of cases, the call circular originates from tMhein istry for Local Government, giving guidelines to the departments which local government should follow including the timing.
BHM 770 MODULE 1 2.
Treasurer’s call circulars – This goes to the Department based on that from the Executive Ministry detailing out the interpretation of such circulars and any council decision reached on departments and past experiences.
3.
Preparation and submission of Departmental Estimates Proposal is their Treasurer.
This will be done by heads of departments and their supervision detailing out estimates for each of the services proposed.
This shall be supported by explanatory notes.
4.
Treasurer’s summary of Departmental Estimates Proposal.
This should be done in the format of the FM and should be submitted through the Secretary for consideration by the Estimate Committee (sometimes referred to as the Finance and General Purposes Committee).
5.
Consideration of Departmental Estimates Proposals by Executive Committee and the Council.
The Executive Committee looks at the Estimate together with the Treasurer’s summary confers with the relevant heads of department and agree on the document to be sent to the Local Government Council (i.e.
Legislature).
Council then considers, debates and approves the Estimates through the use of is Committees and the whole House.
6.
Forwarding of Approved Estimates to the State Government.
The typical practice is that the budget is actually defended by the local government before Ministry officials who finally make amendment and approve it before expenditure can be incurred).
3.2.3 The Budget Document The budget document itself consists of revenue and expenditure items according to the provision of the FM.
Part of what to expect in the budget is already highlighted at the beginning of this unit already highlighted at the beginning of this unit under expenditure patterns.
A typical budget document will include: 1.
Consolidated Financial Statement.
2.
Summary of Estimates of Recurrent Revenue 3.
Summary of Estimates of Recurrent Expenditures 4.
Capital Receipts 5.
Summary of Estimates of Capital Expenditure 6.
The rest are breakdown of each of the above into their different heads and subheads or into their different units.
Pick a typical local government budget or estimates and study this structure.
BHM 770 MODULE 1 3.3 Expenditure Control and Accountability The approval of a budget signifies the authority to incur expenditure.
Authorization of expenditure is largely an executive affair.
Once the council or legislature approves the budget, it is like giving the mandate to the executive to go ahead and spend appropriately.
This is why the legislature does not rush into such approval but instead the bcoumdgeest u nder meticulous scrutiny.
By the legislature and the appropriate committee asking numerous questions and ascertaining the rationale and importance of every expenditure from time to time through a monitoring committee and to await for chairman’s monthly progress report on the financial situation of the local government which by implication analyses the revenue and expenditure situation in the local government.
The chairman is the accounting officer of the local government.
In the Nigerian local government system he authorizes major expenditures of local government especially capital expenditure.
He has a slipmenitd.
in Ign 1988, the spending limit of the chairman was N50,000 pmeor n th while the FGPC could approved N100,000 and the Cexopuenncdili tu re was not more than N250,000 per month.
This formula has however gone through many revisions over the years and such reviews have been upward.
All expenditures made by Heads of Departments (who are referred to as Officers Controlling Votes (OCVs) are done on behalf of the chairman and under the supervision of their supervisors or supervisory councilors.
They too had a spending limits of N2,000 to N5,000 as at the 1R9e8fo8r m s (depending on the classification of the local government).
Any expenditure approved is normally reported to the next higher owfiftihcienr a given period.
The chairman is more a signatory to local government cheque.
Hapep r oves all expenditures but does not do this clerical job, just like chief executives of state and federal governments.
Once the voucher iasp p roved by the chairman, the cheque is raised and signed by tsheec re tary and the treasurer of the local government.
Since 1991 however, when secretaries become political appointees, the function was taken away from them and vested in the Head of Personnel Management, together with the Treasurer.
Local government jobs are to a large degree contracted out.
Tenders are supported to follow laid down regulations as in higher governments.
The works department becomes very useful in such an activity.
Because of their technical nature, they are at the centre of budget implementation or project implementation.
They liaise with the appropriate Head of Department together with the secretary, the Head of Personnel and the BHM 770 MODULE 1 chairman in matters of project feasibility, costing implementation and monitoring.
They also supervise contract or project implementation together with the department concerned.
The Works Department must advice the key department even in the certification of the contract execution before payment is effected.
All such progress report on contract and amounts paid should be tabled before the executive council by the affected department periodically, as such will form the basis for periods reports to the council.
SELF ASSESSMENT EXERCISE 2 Who are the main officers controlling the Votes (OCVs) in local government?
Why are they so called?
How is this related to spending limits”?
3.3.1 Audit The function of the audits in local government is to promote accountability by ensuring that the operations of the executives and the administration agree with procedure and guidelines.
In the local government system, there are two types of audit – the internal and the external audit.
The internal audit is meant to do pre-payment or pre- expenditure audit in local governments.
The internal audit is supposed to ensure that the regulations governing expenditure and payments are followed.
The major problem he faces is that he is part of the staff under the chairman and therefore his advice can be discountenanced.
Sometimes, the executive perceives the internal auditors as trying to show down their own political programmes since they are impatient with procedure.
This also happens with advice from the secretary and the treasurer.
The External Auditor does post payment or post expenditure checks (audit).
At the state level, there is the State Auditors General for local government.
He has a compliment of staffs who are organized into zones and who periodically conduct audit check on local government accounts.
There is also an annual auditing of local government account.
His report eventually goes to the state executive who in turn submit this to the State House of Assembly.
Erring local governments are sanctioned.
The State House of Assembly also has its own Committee that visits local government to ascertain their financial management of projects especially and financial administration generally.
BHM 770 MODULE 1 Furthermore at the state level there operate an Audit Alarm Committee.
This is a feature of the 1998 Civil Service Reform in Nigeria.
The alarm committee is charged with raising an alarm when some principal career officers in the local government catch wind of breach of feixnpaenncdiaitlu re or a fraud that is about to be committed.
They raise an alarm to the committee at the state level which is supposed to meet and stop such act of fraud.
The members at the local government level are the Secretary or Head of Personnel Management (as the case may be), the Treasurer and the Internal Auditor.
At the state level the composition is the Director or Local Government (as chairman) and a representative of the State Governor.
Finally, routine inspections of local governments by the inspections from the Ministry is an important instrument of control.
Inspectors have the right to call for the books of accounts and other records of local government for purposes of ensuring that these books are kept apnrodc e dure are well followed.
They can sit in council meetings from time to time to ensure procedure and advise on the conduct of mInespeteicntgosr.’ s reports are always sent to headquarters are actually the eyes of the Ministry at the local level.
4.0 CONCLUSION You have been taken through the issues of expenditure and accountability in local government.
You have found out the expenditure items in local governments may be similar to those of big governments but are smaller and much more basic as in their functions.
Expenditure items are actually services or projects or supplies which in turn are a breakdown of the financial items.
The budget is the major instrument of expenditure control in lgoocvael rn ment.
It contains the types of activities and their cost, including recurrent and capital expenditures.
The budget goes through a process of formation and approval and even implementation.
At the level of implementation, certain control measures are applied.
All payments are authorized by the chairman and his heads of departments.
The chairman is the accounting officer and chief executive.
The chairman and the officers controlling the votes (OCVs) are financially accountable.
Other measures of accountability are the internal audit, the external audit and local government inspectorate in the Ministry.
The Nigerian example has helped to illuminate on this subject oexf p enditure in local government.
Other countries do not deviate sharply BHM 770 MODULE 1 from this except that when local governments are more autonomous, budgets are formulated and approved locally.
Any submission to a higher government is for information only.
In a multi-tier structure, the structure below may have to submit their budgets to the superior tier for approval.
For example in France, the budgets of Committee are subject to approvals by Departments.
In Tanzania the budgets of Districts are approved at the central level.
You may want to consult relevant literature on local government expenditure and budgeting for a comparative perspective.
5.0 SUMMARY Having gone through this unit, we may examine the main issues as follows: 1.
The items of expenditure in local governments are contained in the budgets of these organization and they range from projects, services to purchases.
2.
Budgets are instruments of financial control in local governments.
They contain recurrent and capital expenditures.
While recurrent expenditures refer to personal emoluments and overhead costs, capital expenditure refer to programmes and projects to be implemented by local government for a given year.
3.
Budget preparation kicks off with call circulars from the Ministry Executive of local government and ends with approval by the Council (legislature) Ministry of Local Government.
4.
The Chairman is the Chief Executive and Account Officer.
He approves all expenditures but does not sign cheques.
5.
Council and accountability in local government is done by the internal audits, the external audit and the inspectorate staff of the Ministry of local government.
ANSWER TO SELF ASSESSMENT EXERCISE 1 Economic Sector e.g.
Agric and Livestock Social services Sector e.g.
Primary Health Care, Adult education Area Development Sector e.g.
Water supply and environment.
Administration Sector e.g.
staff housing workshops.
ANSWER TO SELF ASSESSMENT EXERCISE 2 a) Chairman b) Secretary c) All Heads of Department BHM 770 MODULE 1 They are so-called because they take responsibility for disbursing moneys to their “votes” or departments or the local government as they case may be and also accounting for how such Moneys are spent.
This is why the spending limits affect these officers.
Where the spending affects the F&GPC and the local government council, it only stops at approving expenditure or expenditure limits.
The officers who actually control or implement the expenditure are those listed above.
6.0 TUTOR MARKED ASSIGNMENT Discuss two instruments of managing expenditure and ensure accountability at the local government level.
7.0 REFERENCES/FURTHER READINGS H. I. Abubakar Local Government Finance, Sources, Management and Stewardship in Operations and Problems of the Presidential System in Local Government (Department of Local Government Studies, A.B.U, Zaria, May 6, 1993.
Financial Memoranda in Local Government (Revered Edition), Dec. 1991.
Local Government Annual Estimates for any State of the Federation.
Federal Government of Nigeria Implementation Guidelines on the Application of the Civil Service Reform in Local Government Services, Lagos, 1988.
